Henry Walter Bates

life . bates was born in leicester to a literate middle-class family . however , like wallace , t.h . huxley and herbert spencer , he had a normal education to the age of about 13 when he became apprenticed to a hosiery manufacturer . he joined the mechanics ' institute ( which had a library ) , studied in his spare time and collected insects in charnwood forest . in 1843 he had a short paper on beetles published in the journal zoologist . bates became friends with wallace when the latter took a teaching post in the leicester collegiate school . wallace also became a keen entomologist , ( his first interest had been plants ) and he read the same kind of books as bates and as darwin , huxley and no doubt many others had . these included thomas robert malthus on population , james hutton and charles lyell on geology , darwin 's the voyage of the beagle , and above all , the anonymous vestiges of the natural history of creation ( by robert chambers ) , which put evolution into everyday discussion amongst literate folk . they also read william h . edwards 's voyage up the river amazons on his amazon expedition , edwards w.h . voyage up the river amazons , including a residence at pará . london , 1847 . and this started them thinking that a visit to the region would be exciting , and might launch their careers . moon h.p . 1976 . henry walter bates frs 1825–1892 : explorer , scientist and darwinian . leicestershire museums , leicester . . the great adventure . in 1847 wallace and bates discussed the idea of an expedition to the amazon rainforest , the plan being to cover expenses by sending specimens back to london . there an agent would sell them for a commission . ( the often repeated statement that the main purpose was for the travellers to '' gather facts towards solving the problem of the origin of species '' , and that wallace put this in a letter to bates , is almost certainly a myth , originating in a convenient adjustment of history by bates in the naturalist on the river amazons of 1863 . van wyhe j . ( 2014 ) '' a delicate adjustment : wallace and bates on the amazon and 'the problem of the origin of species journal of the history of biology 47 : 627-659 ) the two friends , who were both by now experienced amateur entomologists , met in london to prepare themselves . they did this by viewing south american plants and animals in the main collections . bates h.w . 1863 . the naturalist on the river amazons . 2 vols , murray , london . preface also they collected '' wants lists '' of the desires of museums and collectors . all known letters exchanged between wallace and bates are available in wallace letters online . image : naturalist on the river amazons figure 32.png thumb 230px bates in amazonia : '' adventure with curl-crested toucans '' bates and wallace sailed from liverpool in april 1848 , arriving in pará ( now belém ) at the end of may . for the first year they settled in a villa near the city , collecting birds and insects . after that they agreed to collect independently , bates travelling to cametá on the tocantins river . he then moved up the amazon , to óbidos , manaus and finally to the solimões . tefé was his base camp for four and a half years . his health eventually deteriorated and he returned to britain in 1859 , after spending nearly eleven years on the amazon . he sent his collection on three different ships to avoid the fate of his colleague wallace , who lost his entire collection when his ship sank . bates spent the next three years writing his account of the trip , the naturalist on the river amazons , widely regarded as one of the finest reports of natural history travels . home at last . in 1863 he married sarah ann mason . crawforth , anthony ( 2009 ) . the butterfly hunter : the life of henry walter bates . buckingham , england : university of buckingham press . from 1864 onwards , he worked as assistant secretary of the royal geographical society ( effectively , he was the secretary , since the senior post was occupied by a noble figurehead ) . he sold his personal lepidoptera collection to frederick ducane godman and osbert salvin and began to work mostly on beetles ( cerambycids , carabids , and cicindelids ) . from 1868 to 1869 and in 1878 he was president of the entomological society of london . in 1871 he was elected a fellow of the linnaean society , and in 1881 he was elected a fellow of the royal society . he died of bronchitis in 1892 ( in modern terms , that may mean emphysema ) . a large part of his collections are in the natural history museum ( see the field , london , 20 february 1892 ) . specimens he collected went to the natural history museum , at that time called the british museum ( natural history ) , and to private collectors ; yet bates still retained a huge reference collection and was often consulted on difficult identifications . this , and the disposal of the collection after his death , are mentioned in edward clodd 's memories . clodd , edward ( 1916 ) . memories . london : chapman & hall . wallace wrote an obituary of bates in nature . he describes bates 's 1861 paper on mimicry in heliconiidae butterflies as '' remarkable and epoch-making '' , with '' a clear and intelligible explanation '' , briefly addressing its attackers as '' persons who are more or less ignorant of the facts '' . he then praises bates 's contributions to entomology , before regretting , in remarkably bitter words for an official obituary , that the '' confinement and constant strain '' of '' mere drudgery of office work '' for the royal geographical society had with '' little doubt . weakened his constitution and shortened a valuable life '' . . his work . left henry bates was one of a group of outstanding naturalist-explorers who were supporters of the theory of evolution by natural selection ( charles darwin and alfred russel wallace 1858 ) . other members of this group included joseph dalton hooker , fritz müller , richard spruce and thomas henry huxley . bates ' work on amazonian butterflies led him to develop the first scientific account of mimicry , especially the kind of mimicry which bears his name : batesian mimicry . carpenter gdh and ford eb 1933 . mimicry . methuen , london . this is the mimicry by a palatable species of an unpalatable or noxious species . a common example seen in temperate gardens is the hover-fly , many of which – though bearing no sting – mimic the aposematism of hymenoptera ( wasps and bees ) . such mimicry does not need to be perfect to improve the survival of the palatable species . wickler w . 1968 . mimicry in plants and animals . world university library , london . image : grave of henry walter bates.jpg thumb bates ' grave in east finchley cemetery bates noted of the heliconids ( long-wings ) that they were forest dwellers which were : :1 . abundant 2 . conspicuous and slow-flying . 3 . gregarious ; and also 4 . the adults frequented flowers . 5 . the larvae fed together . and yet , said bates '' i never saw the flocks of slow-flying heliconidae in the woods persecuted by birds or dragonfly . nor when at rest did they appear to be molested by lizards , or predacious flies of the family asilidae robber-flies which were very often seen pouncing on butterflies of other families . in contrast , the pieridae ( sulfur butterflies ) , to which leptalis belongs now called dismorphia are much persecuted . '' bates observed that many heliconid species are accompanied by other species ( pierids ) , which mimic them , and often can not be distinguished from them in flight . they fly in the same parts of the forest as the model ( heliconid ) and often in company with them . local races of the model are accompanied by corresponding races or species of the mimic . so a scarce , edible species takes on the appearance of an abundant , noxious species . predators , bates supposed , learn to avoid the noxious species , and a degree of protection covers the edible species , no doubt proportional to its degree of likeness to the model . these testable hypotheses about warning signals and mimicry helped to create the field of evolutionary ecology . ruxton gd , sherratt tn and speed mp 2004 . avoiding attack : the evolutionary ecology of crypsis , warning signals and mimicry . oxford . bates , wallace and müller believed that batesian and müllerian mimicry provided evidence for the action of natural selection , a view which is now standard amongst biologists . moon h.p . 1976 . henry walter bates frs 1825–1892 : explorer , scientist and darwinian . leicestershire museums , leicester . field and experimental work on these ideas continues to this day ; the topic connects strongly to speciation , genetics and development . . ega . bates spent the best part of a year at ega ( now tefé ) in the upper amazon ( solimões ) , ega/tefé is on the smaller tributary tefé , nearly opposite the junction of the large tributary japurá with the main amazon . where he reported that turtle was eaten regularly , and insect catches were especially abundant . he found upwards of 7,000 species of insects in the area , including 550 distinct species of butterfly . bates h.w . 1892 . the naturalist on the river amazons , with a memoir of the author by edward clodd . murray , london . chapters 10–12 , esp . p . & nbsp ; 349–353 . bates nursed a sick toucan back to health . tocáno ( the indian name , after its cries ) proved to be an intelligent and amusing companion , with a voracious appetite . mainly a fruit eater , he learnt the meal times '' to a nicety '' , and would eat flesh and fish as well as fruit . bates 1892 , p . & nbsp ; 350 . . taxonomy . bates ' original work was done on a group of conspicuous butterflies always spelled by bates as heliconidae . he divided this assemblage into two groups , the danaoid heliconids , having affinities with the tribe danaini ( see also danainae ) ; and the acraeoid heliconids related to the acraeini . the former are now known as ithomiini , closely related to the milkweed butterflies , and were named after the genus danaus in the danainae . the latter are now known as the tribe heliconiini , or longwings , named after the genus heliconius . both group within the family nymphalidae , and both groups tend to feed on poisonous plants . the milkweed plant supplies poisonous glycosides which render both caterpillar and adult danaines noxious . ithomiines , in contrast gain their toxicity from their adult nectar sources . heliconiine caterpillars feed on poisonous passiflora vines . however , ithomiines gain their toxicity from their adult food plants . legacy . henry walter bates is commemorated in the scientific name of a species of south american boa , corallus batesii beolens , bo ; watkins , michael ; grayson , michael ( 2011 ) . the eponym dictionary of reptiles . baltimore : johns hopkins university press . xiii + 296 pp . ( '' bates , h . w . '' , p . 19 ) . and in the name of his theory of mimicry , batesian mimicry . notes . references . before bates . edwards w.h . 1847 . voyage up the river amazons , including a residence at pará . london . ( the book that sparked wallace and bates to travel to the amazon ; scanned copy of us edition at cornell university library website ) . by bates . bates h.w . 1863 . the naturalist on the river amazons . 2 vols , murray , london . volume 1 ; volume 2 . bates h.w . 1864 . the naturalist on the river amazons . 2nd ed as one vol , murray , london . ( this is an abridged edition with much of the natural history cut out ; and it is this truncated edition which is usually reprinted . advice : use the 1863 or 1892 editions for professional purposes ) ( reissued by cambridge university press , 2009 ; bates h.w . 1892 . the naturalist on the river amazons , with a memoir of the author by edward clodd . ( this edition , published after bates ' death , is valuable for two reasons : it is the only time since 1863 that murray published the full text , and it includes a good short biography by clodd ) bates h.w . 1878 . central america , the west indies and south america , with ethnological notes by a . h . keane . stanford , london ; second and revised edition 1882 . ( based on von hellwald 's die erde und ihre volker ; the natural history and geographical relations of fauna and flora are wholly written by bates ; the other aspects he extensively revised and updated ) bates h.w . 1881-4 . biologia centrali-americana : insecta coleoptera . volume i , part 1 . bates h.w . 1886–90 . biologia centrali-americana : insecta coleoptera : pectinicornia and lamellicornia . volume ii , part 2 . bates h.w . and d . sharp . 1879–86 . biologia centrali-americana : insecta coleoptera : phytophaga ( part ) . volume v . about bates . bedall b.g . ( ed ) 1969 . wallace and bates in the tropics : an introduction to the theory of natural selection . macmillan , london . ( includes excerpts from bates ' river amazons ) clodd , edward 1892 . memoir ( of henry walter bates ) 70 pages plus coloured plate 'illustrations of mimicry between butterflies ' , xvii–lxxxvii in bates 1892 . crawforth , anthony . 2009 . the butterfly hunter : the life of henry walter bates , university of buckingham press , . dickenson , john . 1992 . '' the naturalist on the river amazons and a wider world : reflections on the centenary of henry walter bates '' . the geographical journal , 158 ( 2 ) : 207–214 . ( fine tribute to bates on the centenary of his death ) moon h.p . 1976 . henry walter bates frs 1825–1892 : explorer , scientist and darwinian . leicestershire museums , leicester . ( this booklet of about 100 pages by an emeritus professor of zoology can be strongly recommended ) woodcock g 1969 . henry walter bates , naturalist of the amazons . faber & faber , london . ( this , the only book-length biography , is by an author who was not a biologist . it gives a weak account of bates ' work on mimicry , says nothing about müller , and remarks about wallace are undistinguished . it is good on bates ' early life and his marriage , and on the travel aspects of the amazon . the author dismisses bates ' later life too abruptly . ) . further reading . . external links . insecta . coleoptera links to three volumes authored or co-authored by bates obituary , proceedings of the royal geographical society , volume 14 , 1892 , pp , 245–257 bragg p.e . 2007 . biographies of phasmatologists – 1 . henry walter bates