Fedayeen

etymology . the term fedayi is derived from arabic : fidā'īyūn , literally meaning : '' those who sacrifice themselves '' . middle east glossary - the israel project : fedayee . armenia . armenian fedayi groups acted as irregular militia troops to defend their lands during the hamidian massacres and the cup 's armenian genocide . egypt . during the 1940s , a group of civilians volunteered to fight the british control of egyptian land around the suez canal . the british had deployed military bases along the coast of the suez canal under the claim of protection . many egyptians viewed this as an invasion against their sovereign power over their country . while the egyptian government did n't refuse the action , the people 's leaders organized groups of fedayeen who were trained to combat and kill british soldiers everywhere in egypt , including the military bases . those groups were viewed very highly among the egyptian population . in 1951 '' mobs of '' irregular self-sacrificers , or fedayeen '' some '' armed by the muslim brotherhood '' , attacked the british military base defending the suez canal zone . . eritrea . known by the same name , they operated inside the capital city , asmara , during the last 15–20 years of the armed struggle in eritrea against ethiopia . they operated secretly and eliminated people who were considered dangerous to the struggle to free eritrea , which lasted from 1961 to 1991 . iran . two very different groups used the name fedayeen in recent iranian history . fadayan-e islam has been described as '' one of the first real islamic fundamentalist organizations in the muslim world '' . it was founded by navab safavi in 1946 for the purpose of demanding strict application of the sharia and assassinating those it believed to be apostates and enemies of islam . abrahamian , ervand , a modern history of iran , cambridge university press , 2008 , p.116 after several successful assassinations it was suppressed in 1956 and several leading members were executed . a marxism-leaning activist group known as the fedayeen ( fedayân in persian language ) was founded in 1971 and based in tehran . operating between 1971 and 1983 , the fedayeen carried out a number of political assassinations in the course of the struggle against the shah , after which the group was suppressed . in 1979 the iranian people 's fedâi guerrillas split from the organization of iranian people 's fedaian ( majority ) . iraq . beginning in 1995 , iraq established a paramilitary group known as the fedayeen saddam , loyal to the then president saddam hussein and the ba'athist government . the name was chosen to imply a connection with the palestinian fedayeen . in july 2003 , personnel records for the fedayeen organization in iraq were discovered in the basement of the former fedayeen headquarters in east baghdad near the rasheed air base . at the time of the discovery , an iraqi political party occupied the building ; after an extensive cataloging process , an operation was conducted in baghdad resulting in several individuals being detained . nizari ismaili state . hassan-i-sabbah ( circa 1050–1124 ) , who founded the nizari ismaili state in persia and syria , first coined the term to refer to the hashshashins . fidāʼīyīn is the plural of fidāʼī , which means '' sacrifice . '' it is widely understood as '' those willing to sacrifice themselves for god '' . the group carried out an armed struggle against the seljuk empire . palestinians . palestinian fedayeen are militants of a nationalist orientation from among the palestinian people . the fedayeen made efforts to infiltrate territory in israel in order to strike military as well as civilian four killed in ambush , vancouver sun benny morris , the birth of the palestinian refugee problem revisited , cambridge university press , cambridge , england , 2004 , provides the most up-to-date breakdown of the reasons for the flight targets in the aftermath of the 1948 arab–israeli war . members of these groups were living in the gaza strip and the west bank or in neighboring lebanon and syria . prior to israel 's seizure of the west bank and gaza strip in the six-day war , these areas , originally destined for a palestinian state , were under jordanian and egyptian occupation , respectively . after israel 's operation black arrow in 1955 , the palestinian fedayeen were incorporated into an egyptian army unit . haya regev , dr . avigail oren , the operations in the 1950s , university of tel aviv , 1995 john bagot glubb . a soldier with the arabs . new york : harper & brothers publishers , 1957 . p . 289 . 1948-1967- major terror attacks . mfa.gov.il . retrieved on 2010-09-29 . which came first- terrorism or occupation – major . mfa.gov.il . retrieved on 2010-09-29 . remembrance day background . jafi.org ( 2005-05-15 ) . retrieved on 2012-05-09 . fedayeen attacks 1951–1956 . jafi.org ( 2005-05-15 ) . retrieved on 2012-05-09 . the 1956 sinai campaign . adl.org . retrieved on 2010-09-29 . during this time ( 1948 – c . 1980 ) , the word entered international usage and was frequently used in the arab media as a synonym for great militancy . in the israeli hebrew press of this time the term fada'iun ) had highly negative connotations and was associated with terrorism . since the mid-1960s and the rise of more organized and specific militant groups , such as the palestine liberation organization , the word has fallen out of usage , but not in the historical context . turkey/late ottoman empire . within the context of turkish history , the term fedailer is often associated with the late ottoman or early republican irregular forces , known as : kuva-yi milliye . kurtuluş savaşinda i̇çel – dört ve beşi̇nci̇ bölüm those most committed unionists who would enforce the central committee 's regime were also known as fedailer . in popular culture . in the popular science fiction novel dune , the elite fremen soldiers are known as the '' fedaykin '' , an allusion to the word '' fedayeen . '' in the novel prayers for the assassin , the main character rakkim epps is an ex-fedayeen shadow warrior . altaïr , the main character in the video game assassin 's creed is a fedai , named as an assassin . in assassin 's creed : revelations , he returns from a self-imposed exile to find masyaf is now guarded by fedayeen . fedayeen is the name of an american punk rock band . fedayeen are mentioned in the song '' ashes of the wake '' by the american metal band lamb of god . fedayeen and other types of fighters originating from the middle east have been depicted in large scale iconic paintings by ayman baalbaki . in the freespace 2 campaign blue planet : war in heaven , the fedayeen are a uef black ops group . several ultras groups , especially in italy , are named '' fedayn '' ( first used by the curva sud roma group fedayn founded in 1972 and then by the fedayn 1979 from curva b of napoli 's ultras ) . in the super nintendo video game feda : the emblem of justice , the highest lawful rank the player can obtain is '' fedayeen '' . see also . mujahideen palestinian political violence arab–israeli conflict armenian fedayi – an armenian cognate , describing an irregular armenian self-defense militia in the ottoman empire 1880s–1920s . notes . derives from the word fidāʼ , which means redemption . literally , someone who redeems himself by risking or sacrificing his life . the pronunciation varies for the first vowel , for example , hence the transcription difference . references . external links . armenian fedayeen : armenian history