Green Monster

overview . the wall was part of the original ballpark construction of 1912 , along fenway 's north side facing lansdowne street . it is made of wood and was covered in tin and concrete in 1934 . it was then covered with hard plastic in 1976 . a manual scoreboard is set into the wall , which has been there , in one form or another , at least as far back as 1914 ( see photo at right ) . despite the name , the green monster was not painted green until 1947 ; before that , it was covered with advertisements . the monster designation is relatively new . for most of its history it was simply called '' the wall . '' the green monster is the highest among the walls in current major league baseball fields , and is the second highest among all professional baseball fields ( including minor leagues ) , falling approximately short of the left field wall at the peoplesbank park in york , pennsylvania . ballparks occupied by professional baseball teams have often featured high fences to hide the field from external viewers , particularly behind open areas of the outfield where bleacher seating is low-lying or non-existent . the wall might also reduce the number of '' cheap '' home runs due to the barrier 's relatively close distance to home plate . fenway 's wall serves both purposes . past ballparks of fenway 's era or even later which featured high fences in-play included baker bowl , washington park , ebbets field , league park , griffith stadium , shibe park , and more recently , los angeles memorial coliseum . fenway is the last of the exceptionally high-walled major league ballparks . relatively high walls in modern ballparks have been constructed for their novelty rather than by necessity , as fenway 's wall had been . the green monster is famous for preventing home runs on many line drives that would clear the walls of other ballparks . a side effect of this is to increase the prevalence of doubles , since this is the most common result when the ball is hit off the wall ( often referred to as a '' wallball double '' ) . some left fielders , predominantly those with vast fenway experience , have become adept at fielding caroms off the wall to throw runners out at second base or hold the batter to a single . compared with other current major league parks , the wall 's placement creates a comparatively shallow left field ; the wall falls approximately from the plate along the left-field foul line . with this short distance , many deep fly balls that could be caught by the fielder in a deeper park rebound off the wall for base hits . and while the wall turns many would-be line-drive homers into doubles it also allows some high yet shallow fly balls to clear the field of play for a home run . during 2001 and 2002 , the green monster 's height record was temporarily beaten by the center field wall at riverfront stadium in cincinnati , ohio . during the construction of great american ball park , located right next to riverfront stadium , a large section of seats was removed from the center field area to make room and a black wall was erected as a temporary batter 's eye . the entire wall was in play . this new wall was often called '' the black monster . '' when riverfront stadium was demolished in 2002 , the green monster reclaimed the record . in honor of the famed wall , the red sox mascot is a furry green monster named wally the green monster , joined in 2016 by his younger sister tessie . . features . duffy 's cliff . right from 1912 to 1933 , a mound formed an incline in front of the green monster , extending from the left-field foul pole to the center field flag pole . this earthwork formed a '' terrace '' , a common feature of ballparks of the day ( where a dirt-surfaced warning track would normally be today ) , whose purpose was to make up the difference in grade between street level and field level , as with cincinnati 's crosley field . it also served to double as a seating area to handle overflow crowds , another common practice of that era . as a result of the terrace , when overflow crowds were n't seated atop it , a left fielder in fenway park had to play the territory running uphill . boston 's first star left fielder , duffy lewis , mastered the skill so well that the area became known as '' duffy 's cliff '' . in contrast , rotund outfielder bob fothergill , known by the indelicate nicknames of '' fats '' or '' fatty '' , reportedly once chased a ball up the terrace , slipped and fell , and rolled downhill . in 1934 , red sox owner tom yawkey arranged to flatten the ground in left field so that duffy 's cliff no longer existed , and it became part of the lore of fenway park . scoreboard . long after the much-higher location manual scoreboard from c.1914 existed ( as seen in the 1914 photo ) , the placement of the modern '' ground-level '' manual scoreboard occurred in 1934 . it forms the lower half of the green monster and is still updated by hand from behind the wall throughout the game . the american league scores are also updated from behind the wall . the national league scores need to be updated from the front of the wall between innings . there is also a board which shows the current american league east standings . there are 127 slots in the wall and a team of three score keepers move around , plates to represent the score . yellow numbers are used to represent in-inning scores and white numbers are used to represent final inning tallies . the numbers of the current pitchers weigh and measure . carlton fisk 's '' body english '' when he hit his game-winning home run in game 6 of the 1975 world series , '' waving '' the ball fair , was captured on a tv camera stationed in the scoreboard . morse code . the morse code that appears from top to bottom in the white lines of the american league scoreboard are the initials of former owners tom yawkey and jean r . yawkey . . right field . fenway 's left-field distortion is offset by the odd shape and generous size of right field , which is ( although its actual distance has been disputed over the years ) along the line ( almost the same as in left ) , but at its deepest . the bullpen was added along the right field wall in 1940 to shorten the distance for left-handed slugger ted williams ' home runs to clear the fence . for years afterward , the bullpens were known as '' williamsburg '' . green monster seating . thumb in 1936 , the red sox installed a net above the monster in order to protect the storefronts on adjoining lansdowne street from home run balls . the net remained until the 2002–03 offseason , when the team 's new ownership constructed a new seating section atop the wall to accommodate 274 fans . wildly popular , these '' monster seats '' were part of a larger expansion plan for fenway park seating . the red sox later added a smaller seating section in 2005 , dubbed the '' nation 's nest , '' located between the main seating section and the center field scoreboard . the ladder . comprising yet another quirk , a ladder is attached to the green monster , extending from near the upper-left portion of the scoreboard , above ground , to the top of the wall . previously , members of the grounds crew would use the ladder to retrieve home run balls from the netting hung above the wall . after the net was removed for the addition of the monster seats , the ladder ceased to have any real function , yet it remains in place as a historic relic . the placement of the ladder is noteworthy given the fact that it is in fair territory ; it is the only such ladder in the major leagues . on many occasions , a batted ball has struck the ladder during game play , at least twice leading to an inside-the-park home run . during a 1950s game , red sox outfielders ted williams and jimmy piersall both tracked a fly ball in left center , but the ball struck the ladder and caromed into center field , giving batter jim lemon enough time to round the bases . later , in 1963 , the slow-footed dick stuart hit a high fly that ricocheted first off the ladder , and then the head of outfielder vic davalillo , before rolling far enough away to allow stuart to score . advertisements . after the wall was painted green in 1947 , advertisements did not appear on the wall until 1999 , when the all-star game at fenway was being promoted . various ads have appeared above the scoreboard since then , such as the jimmy fund , w.b . mason , and granite city electric . the coca-cola on the left light tower were a target for power-hitters when they were placed in 1997 . these 3d advertisements were taken down before the 2008 season , when an led sign was built above the new left-field upper deck seats . as a lead up to his 500th career home run , manny ramirez 's home run count was tallied on the bottom of the light tower . ads beside the manual scoreboard were added when the scoreboard was expanded . above the manual scoreboard , where a jimmy fund advertisement had remained for many years , the logo for foxwoods resort casino is now a prominent aspect of fenway park . outside of fenway in kenmore square , but able to be seen in the view above the left-field wall , is the boston citgo sign . similar and related places . the red sox current spring training home , jetblue park at fenway south in fort myers , florida , features a replica of the green monster . jetblue 's green monster even has fenway park 's 1934-vintage , manually operated scoreboard installed in it . fluor field at the west end , home of the greenville drive of the high-single a carolina league , has a '' greenville monster '' as well ; much as jetblue park in florida does , fluor field 's dimensions replicate exactly those of fenway park . the drive is the high-a affiliate of the red sox , having been elevated from single-a in the 2021 reorganization of minor league baseball . hadlock field , home of the portland sea dogs , the aa affiliates of the boston red sox . this stadium boasts a replica of the green monster , nicknamed the '' maine monster '' . griffith stadium in washington , d.c . , the longtime home of the washington senators , had its own version of the green monster -- -in right field . hawkins field , home of the vanderbilt commodores baseball features their own , , version of the green monster with a scoreboard on top . the former ( demolished 2014 ) hubert h . humphrey metrodome , former home of the minnesota golden gophers baseball and the minnesota twins . a -high blue tarp hung over the fold-away football seating in right field and was derisively referred to as the '' hefty bag '' or '' baggie , '' and had been an attractive target for left-handed power hitters . minute maid park , home of the houston astros , has a wall inspired by the green monster in left field , atop which is mounted a train reminiscent of the operating days of the adjacent union station . the wall is deeper and higher than the green monster , but in front of it is a section of stands called the crawford boxes , which are only high and are deeper . hard rock stadium , the former home of the miami marlins , featured a smaller 'teal monster ' in left field from the team 's original 1992 season until 2009 , when the display was replaced by ad hoardings for the remaining 2010 and 2011 seasons before their move to marlins park . the board started out as manual but eventually was converted to a digital eggcrate display with remote control . peoplesbank park , home of the york revolution , has '' the arch nemesis '' that is 6 inches ( 152 & nbsp ; mm ) taller than the green monster . re/max field , home of the edmonton prospects , has a green monster from home plate . fukuoka dome , home of the fukuoka softbank hawks , has a 5.84-meter-high ( 19.2-foot-high ) '' green monster '' in the outfield . the kingdome in seattle , washington had a high right field wall that was dubbed '' the walla-walla '' after walla walla , washington . durham bulls athletic park , home of the durham bulls , aaa affiliate of the tampa bay rays , has a wall in left field named the '' blue monster . '' ogren park at allegiance field , home of the missoula paddleheads of the pioneer league , has a 27-foot wall in right field , located 287 feet from home plate as measured along the foul line . the park has a similar wall that is 309 feet from home plate , but not as tall . pnc park , home of the pittsburgh pirates , has a -high right field wall , paying homage to the pirates ' hall of fame right fielder roberto clemente , who wore 21 . mccormick field , home of the asheville tourists , has a -high right field wall . page stadium , the field for the loyola marymount lions baseball , also boasts a replica of the green monster in left field . john f . fitzgerald expressway , a part of interstate 93 through downtown boston , now underground as a result of the construction project known as the '' big dig '' , was for many years an elevated expressway , held up with green girders , and was derided as '' boston 's other green monster . '' oracle park , home of the san francisco giants , has a high right field wall in honor of willie mays ; the height in feet matches his retired uniform number . progressive field , home of the cleveland indians , has a high left field wall , nicknamed the '' little green monster '' . yale field , home of the class aa new haven ravens from 1994 to 2003 , and now only used by yale bulldogs baseball , features a 35-foot high green metal wall in center field , which not only features a manual scoreboard , but also displays balls , strikes and outs with colored lights , just like fenway 's green monster . . see also . references . external links .