USS Salt Lake City (CA-25)

service history . inter-war period . salt lake city departed philadelphia on 20 january 1930 , for shakedown trials off the maine coast . she began her first extended cruise on 10 february ; visited guantánamo bay , cuba ; culebra , virgin islands ; rio de janeiro and bahia , brazil ; then returned to guantanamo bay where—on 31 march—she joined cruiser division 2 ( crudiv & nbsp ; 2 ) of the scouting force . with this division , she operated along the new england coast until 12 september , when she was reassigned to crudiv & nbsp ; 5 . salt lake city then operated off new york city , cape cod , and chesapeake bay through 1931 . originally cl-25 , effective 1 july 1931 , salt lake city was redesignated ca-25 in accordance with the provisions of the london naval treaty of 1930 . early in 1932 , salt lake city—with and —steamed to the west coast for fleet maneuvers . they arrived at san pedro , california , on 7 march , and following the scheduled exercises , were reassigned to the pacific fleet . salt lake city visited pearl harbor in january–february 1933 ; and , in september , she was attached to crudiv & nbsp ; 4 . from october 1933-january 1934 , she underwent overhaul at the puget sound naval shipyard ; then resumed duty with crudiv & nbsp ; 4 . in may , she sailed for new york to participate in the naval review and returned to san pedro on 18 december . through 1935 , salt lake city ranged the west coast from san diego to seattle . in the first months of 1936 , she conducted extensive gunnery exercises at san clemente island , and on 27 april departed san pedro to participate in combined surface-subsurface operations at balboa , panama canal zone . salt lake city returned to san pedro on 15 june and resumed west coast operations until sailing for hawaii on 25 april 1937 . she returned to the west coast on 20 may . her next extended cruise began on 13 january 1939 , when she departed for the caribbean , via the panama canal . during the next three months , she visited panama , colombia , the virgin islands , trinidad , cuba , and haiti ; returning to san pedro on 7 april . from 12 october 1939 – 25 june 1940 , she cruised between pearl harbor , wake , and guam , utilizing the services of while at pearl harbor . in august 1941 , she visited brisbane , queensland , australia . . world war ii . . after pearl harbor . on 7 december 1941 , when the united states was brought into world war ii by the japanese attack on pearl harbor , salt lake city—under the command of capt . ellis m . zacharias—was with the task group , returning from wake island , west of pearl harbor when they received word of the attack . the group immediately launched scouting planes in hopes of catching possible stragglers from the japanese force , but the search proved fruitless . the ships entered pearl harbor toward sundown on the 8th . after a tedious night refueling , they sortied before dawn to hunt submarines north of the islands . submarines were encountered on the 10th-11th . the first—i-70—was sunk by dive bombers from enterprise ; the second—sighted ahead of the group on the surface—was engaged with gunfire by salt lake city as the ships maneuvered to avoid torpedoes . screening destroyers made numerous depth charge runs , but no kill was confirmed . operations against a third contact brought similar results . the group returned to pearl harbor on 15 december to refuel . salt lake city operated with task force 8 ( tf & nbsp ; 8 ) until 23 december , covering oahu and supporting the task force strike that was planned to relieve beleaguered wake island . after wake fell , salt lake citys group moved to cover the reinforcement of midway and then samoa . in february , enterprises task force carried out air strikes in the eastern marshalls at wotje , maloelap , and kwajalein to reduce enemy seaplane bases . while conducting shore bombardment during those strikes , salt lake city came under air attack and assisted in downing two japanese bombers . in march , she supported air strikes at marcus island . in april , she escorted tf & nbsp ; 16 , which launched the doolittle raid on tokyo and other japanese cities , and returned to pearl harbor on 25 april . orders awaited the ships to sail as soon as possible to join the and forces in the coral sea . although the task force moved fast , it had only reached a point some east of tulagi by 8 may , the day of the battle of the coral sea . what followed was essentially a retirement , and salt lake city operated as cover with her group ; on the 11th off the new hebrides , and from the 12th-16th eastward from efate and santa cruz . on 16 may , she was ordered back to pearl harbor and arrived there 10 days later . the carrier groups began intensive preparations to meet the expected japanese thrust at midway atoll . during the battle , early in june , salt lake city provided rear guard protection for the islands . from august–october 1942 , salt lake city was in the south pacific to support the campaign to seize and hold guadalcanal . she escorted during the landings of 7–8 august and subsequent operations . salt lake city protected as she shuttled planes for and enterprise , and provided combat air patrol ( cap ) and scouting patrols during the landings . salt lake city was with wasp on 15 september when the carrier was torpedoed by japanese submarines and sunk . she assisted in rescue operations for survivors , and took on board others who had been picked up by . . battle of cape esperance . the campaign in the solomons had developed into a grim struggle requiring the us navy to commit heavy and light cruisers to savage night battles . on the night of 11–12 october in the battle of cape esperance . tf 64 was formed around salt lake city , , , and to attack the '' tokyo express '' , a steady flow of japanese vessels maintaining reinforcement and resupply to guadalcanal . the force was not considered large enough to get involved with a major japanese covering force ; they were interested primarily in inflicting maximum damage to the transports . they arrived off espiritu santo on 7 october , and for two days steamed near guadalcanal and waited . land-based search-plane reports came in that an enemy force was steaming down the slot ; that night , tf & nbsp ; 64 moved to the vicinity of savo island to intercept it . search planes were ordered launched from the cruisers , but in the process of launching , salt lake city′s plane caught fire as flares ignited in the cockpit . the plane crashed close to the ship and the pilot managed to get free . he was later found safe on a nearby island . the brilliant fire was seen in the darkness by the japanese flag officers , who assumed that it was a signal flare from the landing force which they were sent to protect . the japanese flagship answered with blinker light . despite receiving no reply , they continued to signal . the american force formed a battle line at right angles to the japanese t-formation , and thus were able to enfilade the enemy ships . the american cruisers opened fire and continued scoring hits for a full seven minutes before the confused japanese realized what was taking place . they had believed that their own forces were taking them under fire . when the japanese warships replied , their fire was too little and too late . the action was over in half an hour . one japanese cruiser , the , sank ; the flagship cruiser was severely damaged and required several months of repairs ; a third cruiser , , was lightly damaged ; and the destroyer was sunk . only a single destroyer of the five-ship force escaped damage . of the american ships , salt lake city sustained three major hits during the action ; boise was severely damaged but managed to rejoin the group under her own power ; and was left gutted off savo island . the ships formed up and steamed to espiritu santo . . battle of the komandorski islands . salt lake city spent the next four months at pearl harbor undergoing repairs and replenishing . late in march 1943 , she departed for the aleutian islands and operated from adak island to prevent the japanese from supporting their garrisons on attu and kiska . operating in tf & nbsp ; 8 , salt lake city was accompanied by and four destroyers when they made contact on 26 march with some japanese transports , escorted by the heavy cruisers and , the light cruisers tama and abukuma , and four destroyers , led by vice admiral boshiro hosogaya d'albas , andrieu , death of a navy : japanese naval action in world war ii , 1957 , pp272-273 leading to the battle of the komandorski islands . believing that easy pickings were in store , the american warships formed up and closed the range . two transports fled for safety as the japanese warships turned to engage . the american group was outgunned and outnumbered , but pressed on and made a course change in hopes of getting a shot at the transports before the escorts could intervene . there was also a possibility that the japanese would split their force and that salt lake city and richmond could tackle a portion of them on more equal terms . the opposing cruisers simultaneously opened fire at a range of . the ensuing battle was a retiring action on the part of the americans , for the japanese foiled their attempt to get to the auxiliaries . salt lake city received most of the attention and soon received two hits , one of them amidships , mortally wounding two men , but she responded with very accurate fire . her rudder stops were carried away , limiting her to 10° course changes . the starboard seaplane caught fire and was jettisoned . another hit soon flooded forward compartments . under cover of a thick smoke screen and aggressive torpedo attacks by the destroyers , the american cruisers were able to make an evasive turn , which for a while allowed the range to open . salt lake city soon began taking hits again and her boiler fires died one by one . salt water had entered the fuel oil feed lines . there was now cause for grave concern ; she lay dead in the water , and the japanese ships were closing fast . luckily , she was hidden in the smoke , and the enemy was not aware of her plight . millsap , ralph h . , cdr usn '' skill or luck ? '' united states naval institute proceedings supplement march 1985 pp.78-87 the destroyers charged the japanese cruisers and began to draw the fire away from the damaged salt lake city . bailey suffered two hits while launching a spread of five torpedoes at long range . in the meantime , salt lake city′s engineers purged the fuel lines and fired the boilers . with fresh oil supplying the fires , she built up steam and gained headway . suddenly , the japanese began to withdraw . this was due to the combination of the japanese having intercepted demands for air support from the american forces , and the mistaken belief that the high explosive shells being fired in desperation by the american cruisers were air-dropped bombs . garfield , brian . the thousand mile war : world war ii in alaska and the aleutians ( new york : ballantine books ) , 1971 . asin : b01felrgwy . the japanese forces were also fast exhausting their ammunition and fuel . they did not suspect that the americans were in far worse shape in terms of both ammunition and fuel . galen roger perras stepping stones to nowhere ( 2003 ) ubc press , vancouver p.124 despite being outnumbered two to one , the americans succeeded in their purpose . the japanese attempt to reinforce their bases in the aleutians had failed and they turned tail and headed home . salt lake city later covered the american liberation of attu and kiska which ended the aleutian campaign . she departed adak on 23 september and sailed , via san francisco , to pearl harbor where she arrived on 14 october . . after the aleutian campaign . the allied offensive strategy in the pacific now focused on the marshall islands . a two-column thrust through micronesia and the bismarck archipelago would force the enemy to disperse his forces , deny him the opportunity for a flanking movement , and provide the allies with the choice of where and when to strike next . to obtain adequate intelligence for planning the marshalls operation , the gilbert islands would have to be secured for use as a staging area and launch point for photographic missions . salt lake city was assigned to task group 50.3 ( tg 50.3 ) of the southern carrier group for the gilbert islands campaign , operation galvanic . salt lake city conducted rigorous gunnery training until 8 november , when she sailed to join , , and which had carried out preliminary strikes on wake , as a diversion on 5–6 october , and at rabaul on 11 november . salt lake city joined on the 13th off funafuti , ellice islands , following the carriers ' fueling rendezvous at espiritu santo . she then saw action on the 19th as she bombarded betio at tarawa atoll , in the gilberts . that day and the next , she fought off repeated torpedo plane attacks aimed for the flattops . tarawa was secured by the 28th . this was the first pacific amphibious operation to be vigorously opposed at the beach , and many lessons were learned here to be applied in the island campaigns to follow . salt lake city was attached to the neutralization group—tg & nbsp ; 50.15—for the long-awaited marshalls campaign . from 29 january-17 february 1944 , she conducted shore bombardment at wotje and taroa islands which were bypassed and cut off from support as the major forces concentrated on majuro , eniwetok , and kwajalein . this leapfrog technique worked well and eliminated the needless casualties that would result in mopping up every japanese-held island . on 30 march–1 april , salt lake city participated in raids on palau , yap , ulithi , and woleai in the western caroline islands archipelago . the cruiser anchored at majuro on 6 april and remained until 25 april , when she sailed—unescorted—for pearl harbor . salt lake city arrived at pearl harbor on 30 april and sailed the next day for mare island naval shipyard . she arrived on 7 may and operated in the san francisco bay area until 1 july . she then proceeded to adak , alaska arriving on the 8th . in the aleutians , her operations , including a scheduled bombardment at paramushiro were curtailed by severe weather , and she returned to pearl harbor on 13 august . salt lake city sortied with and on 29 august to attack wake island . they shelled that island on 3 september , and then proceeded to eniwetok to remain until the 24th . the cruisers then moved to saipan for patrol duty after which , on 6 october , they proceeded to marcus island to create a diversion in connection with raids on formosa . they shelled marcus on 9 september and returned to saipan . in october , during the second battle of the philippine sea , salt lake city returned to screen and support duty with the carrier strike groups against japanese bases and surface craft . based at ulithi , she supported the carriers between 15 and 26 october . from 8 november 1944 – 25 january 1945 , she operated with crudiv & nbsp ; 5 , tf & nbsp ; 54 , in bombardment against the volcano islands to neutralize airfields through which the japanese staged bombing raids on the b-29 superfortresses based at saipan . these raids were coordinated with b-24 liberator strikes . in february , she operated in the gunfire and covering force—task force 54—during the final phases of securing iwo jima and the initial operations in the campaign for the battle of okinawa . salt lake city provided call-fire at iwo jima until 13 march , and then concentrated her activities at okinawa until 28 may , when she put into leyte for repairs and upkeep . she returned to okinawa to cover minesweeping operations and general patrol in the east china sea as part of task force 95 on 6 july . a month later , on 8 august , she sailed for the aleutians via saipan . while en route to adak , she received word on 31 august to proceed to northern honshū , japan , to cover the occupation of ominato naval base . . post-war . like many warships at the close of the war , salt lake city was almost immediately slated for deactivation . she was originally ordered to report to commander , 3rd fleet , upon arrival on the west coast , in october , for deactivation . on 29 october , however , she was diverted to operation magic carpet duty to return veterans of the pacific theater to the u.s . on 14 november , she was added to the list of warships to be used as test vessels for operation crossroads , the atomic bomb experiments and evaluation tests at bikini atoll . she was partially stripped and her crew reduced prior to sailing to pearl harbor in march 1946 . salt lake city was used in evaluating the effects on surface vessels during an initial test with an aerial atomic bomb burst on 1 july and during the second test of a subsurface burst on 25 july . surviving two atomic bomb blasts , she was decommissioned on 29 august and laid up to await ultimate disposal . she was sunk as a target hull on 25 may 1948 , off the coast of southern california and stricken from the naval vessel register on 18 june 1948 . . awards . salt lake city received 11 battle stars for her world war ii service , and a navy unit commendation for her actions during the aleutian campaign . . in fiction . in the 1965 film in harm 's way , a cruiser called old swayback was the cruiser commanded by captain rockwell torrey ( john wayne ) at the time of the attack on pearl harbor . references . . external links . uss salt lake city ca25 association official navy pictures history of the uss salt lake city during ww ii '' fastest cruiser in u.s . navy carries airplane fleet '' popular mechanics , august 1930 , article bottom pg . 189