Abul-Abbas

contemporary accounts . from the orient to europe . abul-abbas was brought from baghdad , the capital city of the abbasid caliphate , by charlemagne 's diplomat isaac the jew , who along with two other emissaries , lantfrid and sigimund , had been sent to the caliph on charlemagne 's orders . that the only surviving member of the group of three , isaac , was being sent back with the elephant was heralded as advance news to charlemagne from two emissaries he met in 801 : one was sent by the caliph harun al-rashid himself , another by abraham ( ibrahim ibn al-aghlab ) , who was governor of africa . , '' . and the envoy of emir abraham , who ruled on the border of africa in fustat '' ; and , quote : '' harun al-rashid , emir al mumenin . appointed ibrahim ibn al'aghlab governor of africa about 800 . fustât , his place of residence is abbasiya near kairwan in southern tunis . '' charlemagne then ordered a man to liguria ( the province around genoa ) to commission a fleet of ships to carry the elephant and other goods . researchers have speculated on isaac and the elephant 's route through africa : isaac and the elephant began the trek back by following the egyptian coast into ifriqiya , ruled by ibrahim ibn al-aghlab who had bought the land from al-rashid for 40,000 dinars annually . possibly with the help of ibrahim in the capital city of kairouan ( now in tunisia ) , isaac set sail from port ( possibly carthage , this reconstructed route ( via carthage ) was mapped in ( part of an exhibition catalog ) , according to , quote : '' the motives for issac 's particular route from baghdad to carthage , via ship from carthage to protovenere ( near genoa , and north via vercelli and st . bernard 's pass to aachen , are illuminated ( i . d . ) 2683 '' now in tunisia ) with abul-abbas and traveled the remaining distance to europe via the mediterranean sea . at any rate , the strict reading of the historic text annales regni francorum is that '' isaac the jew returned from africa with the elephant '' ( isaac iudeus de africa cum elefanto ) and landed in porto venere ( near genoa ) in october 801 . the two spent the winter in vercelli , and in the spring they started the march over the alps to the emperor 's residence in aachen , arriving on 20 july 802 . annales regni francorum anno 802 , monumenta germaniae historica edition ) . death . in the year 810 , charlemagne left his palace and mounted a campaign intending to engage with king gudfred of denmark and his fleet that invaded and plundered friesland . charlemagne had crossed the rhine river and tarried at a place called '' lippeham '' awaiting troops for three days , when his elephant suddenly died . annales regni francorum anno 810 , monumenta germaniae historica edition ) ( eng . tr . of arb royal frankish annals ) on the tacit assumption that the abul-abbas was with charlemagne when he died , some modern commentators venture that the beast had been brought to serve as a war elephant . ( cf . dembeck , mit tieren leben , 1961 ) , citing hodges , richard . ( cf . . place of death . the location of '' lippeham '' is a matter of conjecture , but has been placed at the '' mouth of the lippe river '' , quote : '' den rhein bei lippeham ( an der mundung der lippe ? ) '' ( its confluence with the rhine ) , in other words , somewhere near the city of wesel . the claim dates at least as far back as 1746 , after oettermann , die schaulust am elefanten ( 1982 ) p.98 , note 117 ( or even 1735 ) , when j . h . nünning ( nunningus ) and colleague published a notice that '' lippeham '' was to be identified with wesel ; , '' . & nbsp ; os elephantini femoris , ex inculto ad rheni ripam agro haud procul luppiae ostiis , olim luppemunda , luppeheim , lippeham , lippekant , & lippia dictis . ubi vetus celebrisque regum francorum carolingicae stirpis olim fuit curia , hodie vesalia dicta '' ( '' elephant femur bone unearthed from the field on the banks of the rhine , at a place not far from the mouth of the lippe river , aka luppemunda , luppeheim , lippeham , lippekant , & lippia , now called wesel , where the celebrated scions of the franks kings of the carolingian dynasty held court . '' ) and that a colossal bone unearthed from the area , in the possession of their affiliated museum , was plausibly a part of the remains of the elephant abul abbas . , itaque os musei nostri cum elephantis fit , . ad exuvias abulabazii carolo m . ab aarone persarum rege dono submissi '' another gigantic bone was found in the lippe river among a catch of fish in the herrschaft of in early 1750 , and it too was claimed to be a piece of abul abbas . , citing nünning et al . one detractor to the claim is richard hodges who places it in lüneburg heath , which is nowhere near the rhine . . modern embellished accounts . details of exhibition and death . the annales regni francorum contain only short reports about the transport of abul-abbas ( 801 ) , his delivery to the emperor ( 802 ) and his death ( 810 ) . but modern writers have given various embellished accounts . some indicate that when abul-abbas arrived , he was marched through various towns in germany to the astonishment of onlookers , that he was shown in '' speyer , strassburg , verdun , augsburg , and paderborn '' as ostentatious display of the emperor 's might , and was eventually housed in augsburg in what is now southern bavaria . some added details about the elephant 's death , stating he was in his forties and already suffering from rheumatism when it accompanied charlemagne in the campaign across the rhine heading to friesland . according to these sources , in a spell of '' cool rainy weather '' , abul-abbas developed a case of pneumonia . his keepers were able to transport the beast as far as münster , where he collapsed and died . . white elephant . some modern works indicate that abul-abbas was albino – literally a white elephant – but the basis for the claim is wanting . an early example claiming that abul-abbas was a '' white elephant '' occurs in a title authored by willis mason west ( 1902 ) , in 1971 , peter munz wrote a book intended for popular readership which repeated the same '' white elephant '' claim , but a reviewer flagged this as a '' slip '' given there was '' no evidence '' known to him to substantiate it . , quote : '' i know of no evidence that harun al-rashid 's present to charlemagne was literally a 'white ' elephant . '' mention of '' white elephant '' also misleadingly occurs in the title of the published catalog from the aachen exhibition of 2003 : ex oriente : isaak und der weisse elefant , however , in this publication is a contributing article by grewe and pohle that appends a question mark on it : '' among the famous gifts to charlemagne was a ( white ? ) elephant '' . : '' zu den für karl den großen bestimmten geschenken gehörte ein ( weißer ? ) elefant , '' . indian elephant . a number of authors have also asserted with seemingly unwavering certitude that abul-abbas was an indian elephant , though others cast this as an open question with the african elephant being a distinct possibility . see also . abbasid–carolingian alliance history of elephants in europe list of historical elephants war elephant . notes . citations . references . monumenta germaniae historica ( digital version .