Takeoff

horizontal takeoff . power settings . for light aircraft , usually full power is used during takeoff . large transport category ( airliner ) aircraft may use a flex temp for takeoff , where less than full power is applied in order to prolong engine life , reduce maintenance costs and reduce noise emissions . in some emergency cases , the power used can then be increased to increase the aircraft 's performance . before takeoff , the engines , particularly piston engines , are routinely run up at high power to check for engine-related problems . the aircraft is permitted to accelerate to rotation speed ( often referred to as v r ) . the term rotation is used because the aircraft pivots around the axis of its main landing gear while still on the ground , usually because of gentle manipulation of the flight controls to make or facilitate this change in aircraft attitude ( once proper air displacement occurs under / over the wings , an aircraft will lift off on its own ; controls are to ease that in ) . the nose is raised to a nominal 5° & ndash ; 15° nose up pitch attitude to increase lift from the wings and effect liftoff . for most aircraft , attempting a takeoff without a pitch-up would require cruise speeds while still on the runway . fixed-wing aircraft designed for high-speed operation ( such as commercial jet aircraft ) have difficulty generating enough lift at the low speeds encountered during takeoff . these are therefore fitted with high-lift devices , often including slats and usually flaps , which increase the camber and often area of the wing , making it more effective at low speed , thus creating more lift . these are deployed from the wing before takeoff , and retracted during the climb . they can also be deployed at other times , such as before landing . the speeds needed for takeoff are relative to the motion of the air ( indicated airspeed ) . a headwind will reduce the ground speed needed for takeoff , as there is a greater flow of air over the wings . typical takeoff air speeds for jetliners are in the range of . light aircraft , such as a cessna 150 , take off at around . ultralights have even lower takeoff speeds . for a given aircraft , the takeoff speed is usually dependent on the aircraft weight ; the heavier the weight , the greater the speed needed . scott , jeff ( 4 august 2002 ) '' airliner takeoff speeds '' . aerospace web . retrieved 12 august 2015 some aircraft are specifically designed for short takeoff and landing , which they achieve by becoming airborne at very low speeds . speed required . the takeoff speed required varies with aircraft weight and aircraft configuration ( flap or slat position , as applicable ) , and is provided to the flight crew as indicated airspeed . operations with transport category aircraft employ the concept of the takeoff v-speeds : v 1 , v r and v 2 . these speeds are determined not only by the above factors affecting takeoff performance , but also by the length and slope of the runway and any peculiar conditions , such as obstacles off the end of the runway . below v 1 , in case of critical failures , the takeoff should be aborted ; above v 1 the pilot continues the takeoff and returns for landing . after the co-pilot calls v 1 , they will call v r or '' rotate , '' marking speed at which to rotate the aircraft . the v r for transport category aircraft is calculated such as to allow the aircraft to reach the regulatory screen height at v 2 with one engine failed . then , v 2 ( the safe takeoff speed ) is called . this speed must be maintained after an engine failure to meet performance targets for rate of climb and angle of climb . in a single-engine or light twin-engine aircraft , the pilot calculates the length of runway required to take off and clear any obstacles , to ensure sufficient runway to use for takeoff . a safety margin can be added to provide the option to stop on the runway in case of a rejected takeoff . in most such aircraft , any engine failure results in a rejected takeoff as a matter of course , since even overrunning the end of the runway is preferable to lifting off with insufficient power to maintain flight . if an obstacle needs to be cleared , the pilot climbs at the speed for maximum climb angle ( v x ) , which results in the greatest altitude gain per unit of horizontal distance travelled . if no obstacle needs to be cleared , or after an obstacle is cleared , the pilot can accelerate to the best rate of climb speed ( v y ) , where the aircraft will gain the most altitude in the least amount of time . generally speaking , v x is a lower speed than v y , and requires a higher pitch attitude to achieve . assisted takeoff . assisted takeoff is any system for helping aircraft into the air ( as opposed to strictly under its own power ) . the reason it might be needed is due to the aircraft 's weight exceeding the normal maximum takeoff weight , insufficient power , or the available runway length may be insufficient , or a hot and high airfield , or a combination of all four factors . assisted takeoff is also required for gliders , which do not have an engine and so are unable to take off by themselves . vertical takeoff . vertical takeoff refers to aircraft or rockets that take off in a vertical trajectory . vertical takeoff eliminates the need for airfields . most vertical take off aircraft are also able to land horizontally , but there were certain rocket-powered aircraft of the luftwaffe that only took off vertically , landing in other ways . the bachem ba 349 natter landed under a parachute after having taken off vertically . other late third reich projects , such as the heinkel p.1077 julia or the focke-wulf volksjäger , climbed to their ceiling at a nearly vertical angle and landed later on a skid . ulrich albrecht : artefakte des fanatismus ; technik und nationalsozialistische ideologie in der endphase des dritten reiches ( in german ) . vtol . vertical take-off and landing ( vtol ) aircraft include fixed-wing aircraft that can hover , take off and land vertically as well as helicopters and other aircraft with powered rotors , such as tiltrotors . '' vertical takeoff & landing aircraft , '' john p . campbell , the macmillan company , new york , 1962 . rogers 1989 . laskowitz , i.b . '' vertical take-off and landing ( vtol ) aircraft . '' annals of the new york academy of sciences , vol . 107 , art.1 , 25 march 1963 . '' straight up - a history of vertical flight , '' steve markman and bill holder , schiffer publishing , 2000 . some vtol aircraft can operate in other modes as well , such as ctol ( conventional take-off and landing ) , stol ( short take-off and landing ) , and/or stovl ( short take-off and vertical landing ) . others , such as some helicopters , can only operate by vtol , due to the aircraft lacking landing gear that can handle horizontal motion . vtol is a subset of v/stol ( vertical and/or short take-off and landing ) . besides the helicopter , there are two types of vtol aircraft in military service : craft using a tiltrotor , such as the bell boeing v-22 osprey , and some aircraft using directed jet thrust such as the harrier family . rocket launch . the takeoff phase of the flight of a rocket is called '' rocket launch '' . launches for orbital spaceflights , or launches into interplanetary space , are usually from a fixed location on the ground , but may also be from a floating platform such as the san marco platform , or the sea launch launch vessel . see also . balanced field takeoff climb ( aeronautics ) cruise ( aeronautics ) descent ( aeronautics ) landing space launch v speeds . references .