Dead Prez

career . background ( 1990–2000 ) . in 1990 , m-1 headed to tallahassee , florida to attend famu ( florida agricultural and mechanical university ) where he and stic.man met and formed a relationship due to their mutual love of music and similar leftist political ideology . while there , their views solidified , m-1 becoming particularly interested in the black panther party . m-1 joined the uhuru movement in chicago for three years , while stic.man remained in florida . burned out by the arduous labor of uhuru , m-1 and stic.man chose to focus on music . brand nubian 's lord jamar discovered them in new york city and signed them a deal with loud records . although dead prez was not always loud 's top priority , they built a fan base due to their over-the-top performances ( they 've been known to ignite dollar bills and toss apples into the audiences , declaring that they must eat healthily ) . they had begun contributing songs to film soundtracks and made featurings on high-profile albums . their first recorded song , '' the game of life ( score ) '' appeared on the 1997 soundtrack to the film soul in the hole . in 1998 their song '' d.o.p.e . ( drugs oppress people everyday ) '' was featured in the movie slam . also in 1998 , they were featured on the skit '' the rain and the sun '' off big pun 's album capital punishment , and in 1999 were featured on the beatnuts ' song '' look around '' off their album musical massacre . releases ( 2000–present ) . image : iching-hexagram-07.svg right thumb 200px dead prez uses the shi hexagram , '' leading '' or '' the army '' , as part of their logo . the duo 's debut album was 2000 's let 's get free , with their most popular single to date '' hip hop '' . the album was well received by critics , and included intense political monologues featuring prominent black activist omali yeshitela , as well as '' animal in man '' - a retelling of george orwell 's animal farm . the instrumental version of their song '' hip hop '' was used as dave chappelle 's entrance music for his show on comedy central , and can be heard on every episode . '' hip hop '' has also been featured on the soundtrack of the popular video game skate as well as underground graffiti art documentaries of the era . the song is also used in the introduction of hip hop evolution , which is currently on netflix . in 2001 they collaborated with the coup , another politically active hip hop outfit , to release get up . in 2002 , dead prez contributed to red hot + riot , a compilation album created by the red hot organization in tribute to the music and work of nigerian musician fela kuti . the money raised by the cd was used for various charities devoted to raising aids awareness and fighting the disease . they collaborated with fellow hip-hop artists talib kweli and bilal and brazilian singer jorge ben to remake the famous fela kuti song '' shuffering and shmiling '' for the album . also in 2002 , dead prez released the independent mix tape turn off the radio : the mixtape vol . 1 , followed by the release of turn off the radio : the mixtape vol . 2 : get free or die tryin in 2003 . also in 2003 , their song '' hell yeah '' was featured in the 2 fast 2 furious soundtrack . in 2004 , columbia records finally released revolutionary but gangsta . they were featured in the film dave chappelle 's block party , in 2006 . in 2006 , they and former 2pac collaborators , the outlawz , jointly released two new albums : ca n't sell dope forever and soldier 2 soldier . in 2006 , m1 also recorded a solo album titled confidential . from the album , the song '' 'til we get there '' was on the ea sports video game nba live 07 . in 2007 , stic.man released his own solo record named manhood with boss up inc . / traffic records . m-1 further appeared with professord.us , of the politically charged hip hop group the dope poet society , on the track '' everything 's political '' off the 2008 album third world warriors vol . 1 . on the track , m-1 and professord.us trade verses in response to the question '' why is your music always so political ? '' . that same year , stic.man appeared on '' changing weather '' , the first single from marcel cartier 's album revolutionary minded 2 . dead prez released a mixtape entitled pulse of the people : turn off your radio vol . 3 on june 23 , 2009 . the mixtape is hosted by dj green lantern . on mother 's day 2010 , dead prez released '' the beauty within '' , a remix of b.o.b and bruno mars ' 1 single '' nothin ' on you . '' thatsthatish.com : dead prez - '' the beauty within '' additionally in 2010 , dead prez released a mixtape with dj drama entitled turn off the radio vol . 4 : revolutionary but gangsta grillz . the album is available for free download on their website , and they announced this release was their ten year commemoration of their most well known and commercially successful album let 's get free . the new album information age was released on october 16 , 2012 . documentary ( 2006 ) . in june 2006 , the cable movie network starz inblack began airing an original documentary called dead prez : it 's bigger than hip hop directed by john threat . the hour-long documentary featured live footage and interviews with dead prez , along with interviews from kamel bell , owner of ankh marketing and son of incarcerated black panther member herman bell ; fred hampton jr . , son of black panther deputy chairman of the illinois chapter fred hampton ; bay area rapper and poet ise lyfe , and hip hop activist and radio personality davey d . among the topics discussed in the documentary are the inadequacies of the public education system , people of color entrepreneurship and social revolution . m1 stated : we 've never had the opportunity to express ourselves on this level of magnitude . starz inblack taking a chance on us lets us know that the work we are doing is not in vain . that our message is penetrating , it 's getting through . the 'revolution will be televised ' as starz inblack presents 'dead prez : it 's bigger than hip-hop . frost illustrated . retrieved through web archive on december 6 , 2007 . . discography . studio albums 2000 : let 's get free 2004 : revolutionary but gangsta 2012 : information age live albums 2008 : live in san francisco collaboration albums 2006 : ca n't sell dope forever ( with outlawz ) 2013 : evolutionary minded ( furthering the legacy of gil scott-heron ) ( with kentyah , brian jackson & the new midnight band ) mixtapes 2002 : turn off the radio : the mixtape vol . 1 ( as dpz ) 2003 : turn off the radio : the mixtape vol . 2 : get free or die tryin 2009 : pulse of the people : turn off the radio vol . 3 ( hosted by dj green lantern ) 2010 : turn off the radio vol . 4 : revolutionary but gangsta grillz ( hosted by dj drama ) . references . external links .