Fredric Wertham

early life . wertham was born on march 20 , 1895 , in nuremberg birth certificate at the archive of the city of nuremberg , stadtarchiv nürnberg c 27/iv standesamt , geburtenregister nr . 521 , eintrag nr . 1302 as friedrich ignatz wertheimer . ella winter ( originally wertheimer ) was a relative . he did not change his name legally to fredric wertham until 1927 . he studied at king 's college london , at the universities of munich and erlangen , and graduated with an m.d . degree from the university of würzburg in 1921 . he was very much influenced by dr . emil kraepelin , a professor of clinical psychiatry at the university of munich , and worked briefly at the kraepelin clinic in munich in 1922 . kraepelin emphasized the effects of environment and social background on psychological development . around this time wertham corresponded and visited with sigmund freud , who influenced him in his choice of psychiatry as his specialty . career . in 1922 , he accepted an invitation to come to the united states and work under adolf meyer at the phipps psychiatric clinic at johns hopkins hospital in baltimore , maryland . he became a united states citizen and married the sculptress florence hesketh in 1927 . he moved to new york city in 1932 to accept a senior staff position at the bellevue mental hygiene clinic , the psychiatric clinic connected with the new york court of general sessions in which all convicted felons received a psychiatric examination that was used in court . in 1935 he testified for the defense in the trial of cannibalistic child rapist and serial killer albert fish , declaring him insane . in 1946 , wertham opened the lafargue clinic in the basement of st . philip 's church in harlem , a low-cost psychiatric clinic specializing in black teenagers . the clinic was financed by voluntary contributions . springhall , john . youth , popular culture and moral panics : penny gaffs to gangsta-rap , 1830–1996 . new york : st . martin 's press , 1998 . . seduction of the innocent and senate hearings . seduction of the innocent described overt or covert depictions of violence , sex , drug use , and other adult fare within '' crime comics '' —a term wertham used to describe not only the popular gangster/murder-oriented titles of the time but also superhero and horror comics as well—and asserted , based largely on undocumented anecdotes , that reading this material encouraged similar behavior in children . comics , especially the crime/horror titles pioneered by ec comics , were not lacking in gruesome images ; wertham reproduced these extensively , pointing out what he saw as recurring morbid themes such as '' injury to the eye '' ( as depicted in plastic man creator jack cole 's '' murder , morphine and me '' , which he illustrated and probably wrote for publisher magazine village 's true crime comics 2 ( may 1947 ) ; it involved dope-dealing protagonist mary kennedy nearly getting stabbed in the eye '' by a junkie with a hypodermic needle '' in her dream sequence spiegelman , art and kidd , chip ( 2001 ) . jack cole and plastic man : forms stretched to their limits , p.91 . retrieved on 2008-12-31 . ) . many of his other conjectures , particularly about hidden sexual themes ( e.g . images of female nudity concealed in drawings of muscles and tree bark , or batman and robin as gay partners ) , were met with derision within the comics industry . ( wertham 's claim that wonder woman had a bondage subtext was somewhat better documented , as her creator william moulton marston had admitted as much ; however , wertham also claimed that wonder woman 's strength and independence made her a lesbian . ) citing one of wertham 's arguments , that 95 % of children in reform school read comics proves that comics cause juvenile delinquency ( an example of the well-known logical fallacy correlation implies causation ) , stan lee recounted that wertham '' said things that impressed the public , and it was like shouting fire in a theater , but there was little scientific validity to it . and yet because he had the name doctor people took what he said seriously , and it started a whole crusade against comics . '' seduction of the innocent also analyzed the advertisements that appeared in 1950s comic books and the commercial context in which these publications existed . wertham objected to not only the violence in the stories but also the fact that air rifles and knives were advertised alongside them . wertham claimed that retailers who did not want to sell material with which they were uncomfortable , such as horror comics , were essentially held to ransom by the distributors . according to wertham , news vendors were told by the distributors that if they did not sell the objectionable comic books , they would not be allowed to sell any of the other publications being distributed . also in 1954 , wertham was the court 's appointed psychiatric expert in the trial of the brooklyn thrill killers . when the gang 's 18-year-old leader admitted that he had read pornography comic books , wertham concluded that the books were to blame for his crimes . the incredible true story of joe shuster ’ s nights of horror , comic book legal defense , october 3 , 2012 the splash made by this book and wertham 's previous credentials as an expert witness led to his appearing before the senate subcommittee on juvenile delinquency led by anti-crime crusader estes kefauver . in extensive testimony before the committee , wertham restated arguments from his book and pointed to comics as a major cause of juvenile crime . beaty notes '' wertham repeated his call . for national legislation based on the public health ideal that would prohibit the circulation and display of comic books to children under the age of fifteen . '' ( beatty , 157 ) the committee 's questioning of their next witness , ec publisher william gaines , focused on violent scenes of the type wertham had decried . though the committee 's final report did not blame comics for crime , it recommended that the comics industry tone down its content voluntarily ; possibly taking this as a veiled threat of potential censorship , publishers developed the comics code authority to censor their own content . the code banned not only violent images but also entire words and concepts ( e.g . '' terror '' and '' zombies '' ) and dictated that criminals must always be punished—thus destroying most ec-style titles , and leaving a sanitized subset of superhero comics as the chief remaining genre . later career . wertham 's views on mass media have largely overshadowed his broader concerns with violence and with overprotecting children from psychological harm . his writings about the effects of racial segregation were used as evidence in the landmark supreme court case brown v . board of education , and part of his 1966 book a sign for cain dealt with the involvement of medical professionals in the holocaust . to promote this book , wertham made two memorable appearances on the mike douglas show where he ended up debating his theories with the co-hosts , barbara feldon ( april 10 , 1967 ) and vincent price ( june 19 , 1967 ) . excerpts were shown at the 2003 comic con international . news from me university of calgary professor bart beaty , the only person allowed access to wertham 's personal papers before they were unsealed in 2010 , reveals that wertham tried in 1959 to sell a follow-up to seduction of the innocent concerning the effects of television on children , to be titled the war on children . much to wertham 's frustration , no publishers were interested in publishing it . wertham always denied that he favored censorship or had anything against comic books in principle , and in the 1970s he focused his interest on the benign aspects of the comic fandom subculture ; in his last book , the world of fanzines ( 1974 ) , he concluded that fanzines were '' a constructive and healthy exercise of creative drives '' . this led to an invitation for wertham to address the comic art convention . still infamous to most comics fans of the time , wertham encountered suspicion and heckling at the convention , and stopped writing about comics thereafter . before retirement he became a professor of psychiatry at new york university , a senior psychiatrist in the new york city department of hospitals , and a psychiatrist and the director of the mental hygiene clinic at the bellevue hospital center . . death . wertham died on november 18 , 1981 , at his retirement home in kempton , pennsylvania , at age 86 . . accusations of falsified data . after wertham 's manuscript collection at the library of congress was unsealed in 2010 , carol tilley , a university of illinois librarian and information science professor , investigated his research and found his conclusions to be largely baseless . in a 2012 study , tilley wrote '' wertham manipulated , overstated , compromised , and fabricated evidence—especially that evidence he attributed to personal clinical research with young people—for rhetorical gain . '' among the criticisms leveled at seduction of the innocent are that wertham used a non-representative sample of young people who were already mentally troubled , that he misrepresented stories from colleagues as being his own , and that wertham manipulated statements from adolescents by deliberately neglecting some passages while rephrasing others such that they better suited his thesis . legacy . wertham 's papers ( including the manuscript to the unpublished the war on children ) were donated to the library of congress and are held by the manuscript division . they were made available for use by scholars for research on may 20 , 2010 . a register of the papers has been prepared that displays the eclectic reach of wertham 's interests . fredric wertham : a register of his papers at the library of congress in 2014 , documentary filmmaker robert a . emmons jr . produced the documentary diagram for delinquents , which details the complicated and controversial history of fredric wertham and comic books in the 1940s and 1950s . diagram for delinquents the film 's goal is to create a more complex picture of wertham than has previously been depicted in comic book documentaries . his activism was cited in 2011 u . s . supreme court decision brown v . entertainment merchants association . wertham was satirized as a dr . bertham who was kidnapped and turned into a monster by a mad scientist in seaboard 's brute 2 ( april 1975 ) . issue 1 of bongo comics ' radioactive man shows comics from a young boy 's collection that satirize wertham 's negative view of comic books . these include crime does pay ( violence and gore ) ; headlights ( women with ludicrously pointed breasts ) ; stab ( pathological fixation on eye injuries ) ; and tales of revolting filth ( pretty much subsuming every other category ) . wertham himself is also parodied in the issue . according to the supplementary material of the hbo series watchmen , fredric wertham created a system for cataloging the mental states of costumed adventurers . the existence of the wertham spectrum in the watchmen universe implies that in a setting where comic book superheroes never caught on because there were real superheroes , wertham 's focus shifted from the psychology and effects of fictional superheroes to real ones . selected bibliography . 1948 : '' the comics , very funny '' , saturday review of literature , may 29 , 1948 , p . & nbsp ; 6 . ( condensed version in reader 's digest , august 1948 , p . & nbsp ; 15 ) 1953 : '' what parents do n't know about comic books '' . ladies ' home journal , nov . 1953 , p . & nbsp ; 50 . 1954 : '' blueprints to delinquency '' . reader 's digest , may 1954 , p . & nbsp ; 24 . 1954 : seduction of the innocent . amereon ltd . 1955 : '' it 's still murder '' . saturday review of literature , april 9 , 1955 , p . & nbsp ; 11 . 1956 : the circle of guilt . rinehart & company . 1968 : a sign for cain : an exploration of human violence . hale . 1973 : the world of fanzines : a special form of communication . southern illinois university press . 1973 : '' doctor wertham strikes back ! '' the monster times no . 22 , may 1973 , p . & nbsp ; 6 . see also . moral panic . references . further reading . ( 1954 ) . '' are comics horrible ? '' newsweek , may 3 , 1954 , p . & nbsp ; 60 . beaty , bart . fredric wertham and the critique of mass culture . university press of mississippi , 2005 . bowman , james . '' in defense of snobbery '' . august 26 , 2008 . decker , dwight . ( 1987 ) . '' the strange case of dr . wertham '' amazing heroes 123 ( august 15 , 1987 ) ; '' the return of dr . wertham '' amazing heroes 124 ( sept . 1 , 1987 ) ; '' from dr . wertham with love '' amazing heroes 125 ( sept . 15 , 1987 ) three part series , see below for link to condensed version posted online under title '' fredric wertham – anti-comics crusader who turned advocate '' . gibbs , wolcott . ( 1954 ) . '' keep those paws to yourself , space rat ! '' the new yorker , may 8 , 1954 . hajdu , david . the ten-cent plague : the great comic-book scare and how it changed america . farrar , straus and giroux , 2008 . larson , randall d . ( 1971 ) . '' an interview with fredric wertham , m.d . '' fandom unlimited 1 ( fanzine , 1971 ) . larson , randall d . ( 1977 ) . '' violence in cinema : an interview with fredric wertham , m.d . '' fandom unlimited 2 ( fanzine , 1977 ) amy kiste nyberg . '' seal of approval : the history of the comics code '' . university press of mississippi , 1998 . carol l . tilley . ( 2012 ) . seducing the innocent : fredric wertham and the falsifications that helped condemn comics . information & culture : a journal of history . 47 ( 4 ) , 383–413 . doi 10.1353/lac.2012.0024 . external links . fredric wertham – on lambiek comiclopedia fredric wertham – anti-comics crusader who turned advocate – condensed online version of dwight decker three part series listed above the end of seduction – lengthy history of wertham and censorship of comics comics reporter : '' let 's you and him fight '' part 1 , part 2 , part 3 , part 4 , part 5 – bart beaty and craig fischer discuss beaty 's '' fredric wertham and the critique of mass culture '' no evil shall escape my sight : frederic wertham and the anti-comics crusade – lecture by dr . chris bishop , australian national university , at the library of congress wertham collection : publications primarily related to psychology at the rare book and special collections division at the library of congress