Business cycle

history . theory . the first systematic exposition of economic crises , in opposition to the existing theory of economic equilibrium , was the 1819 nouveaux principes d'économie politique by jean charles léonard de sismondi . '' over production and under consumption '' , scarlett , history of economic theory and thought prior to that point classical economics had either denied the existence of business cycles , blamed them on external factors , notably war , or only studied the long term . sismondi found vindication in the panic of 1825 , which was the first unarguably international economic crisis , occurring in peacetime . sismondi and his contemporary robert owen , who expressed similar but less systematic thoughts in 1817 report to the committee of the association for the relief of the manufacturing poor , both identified the cause of economic cycles as overproduction and underconsumption , caused in particular by wealth inequality . they advocated government intervention and socialism , respectively , as the solution . this work did not generate interest among classical economists , though underconsumption theory developed as a heterodox branch in economics until being systematized in keynesian economics in the 1930s . sismondi 's theory of periodic crises was developed into a theory of alternating cycles by charles dunoyer , and similar theories , showing signs of influence by sismondi , were developed by johann karl rodbertus . periodic crises in capitalism formed the basis of the theory of karl marx , who further claimed that these crises were increasing in severity and , on the basis of which , he predicted a communist revolution . though only passing references in das kapital ( 1867 ) refer to crises , they were extensively discussed in marx 's posthumously published books , particularly in theories of surplus value . in progress and poverty ( 1879 ) , henry george focused on land 's role in crises – particularly land speculation – and proposed a land value tax as a solution . classification by periods . in 1860 french economist clément juglar first identified economic cycles 7 to 11 years long , although he cautiously did not claim any rigid regularity . m . w . lee , economic fluctuations . homewood , il , richard d . irwin , 1955 later , economist joseph schumpeter argued that a juglar cycle has four stages : expansion ( increase in production and prices , low interest rates ) crisis ( stock exchanges crash and multiple bankruptcies of firms occur ) recession ( drops in prices and in output , high interest-rates ) recovery ( stocks recover because of the fall in prices and incomes ) schumpeter 's juglar model associates recovery and prosperity with increases in productivity , consumer confidence , aggregate demand , and prices . in the 20th century , schumpeter and others proposed a typology of business cycles according to their periodicity , so that a number of particular cycles were named after their discoverers or proposers : the kitchin cycle of 3 to 5 years ( after joseph kitchin ) the juglar fixed investment cycle of 7 to 11 years ( often identified as '' the '' business cycle the kuznets swing of 15 to 25 years ( after simon kuznets – also called '' building cycle '' ) the kondratiev wave or long technological cycle of 45 to 60 years ( after the soviet economist nikolai kondratiev ) some say interest in the different typologies of cycles has waned since the development of modern macroeconomics , which gives little support to the idea of regular periodic cycles . others , such as dmitry orlov , argue that simple compound interest mandates the cycling of monetary systems . since 1960 , world gdp has increased by fifty-nine times , and these multiples have not even kept up with annual inflation over the same period . social contract ( freedoms and absence of social problems ) collapses may be observed in nations where incomes are not kept in balance with cost-of-living over the timeline of the monetary system cycle . the bible ( 760 bce ) and hammurabi 's code ( 1763 bce ) both explain economic remediations for cyclic sixty-year recurring great depressions , via fiftieth-year jubilee ( biblical ) debt and wealth resets . thirty major debt forgiveness events are recorded in history including the debt forgiveness given to most european nations in the 1930s to 1954 . . occurrence . there were great increases in productivity , industrial production and real per capita product throughout the period from 1870 to 1890 that included the long depression and two other recessions . there were also significant increases in productivity in the years leading up to the great depression . both the long and great depressions were characterized by overcapacity and market saturation . opening line of the preface . over the period since the industrial revolution , technological progress has had a much larger effect on the economy than any fluctuations in credit or debt , the primary exception being the great depression , which caused a multi-year steep economic decline . the effect of technological progress can be seen by the purchasing power of an average hour 's work , which has grown from 3 in 1900 to 22 in 1990 , measured in 2010 dollars . there were similar increases in real wages during the 19th century . ( see : productivity improving technologies ( historical ) . ) a table of innovations and long cycles can be seen at : . there were frequent crises in europe and america in the 19th and first half of the 20th century , specifically the period 1815–1939 . this period started from the end of the napoleonic wars in 1815 , which was immediately followed by the post-napoleonic depression in the united kingdom ( 1815–30 ) , and culminated in the great depression of 1929–39 , which led into world war ii . see financial crisis 19th century for listing and details . the first of these crises not associated with a war was the panic of 1825 . business cycles in oecd countries after world war ii were generally more restrained than the earlier business cycles . this was particularly true during the golden age of capitalism ( 1945/50–1970s ) , and the period 1945–2008 did not experience a global downturn until the late-2000s recession . stock market cycles 1942–1995 economic stabilization policy using fiscal policy and monetary policy appeared to have dampened the worst excesses of business cycles , and automatic stabilization due to the aspects of the government 's budget also helped mitigate the cycle even without conscious action by policy-makers . in this period , the economic cycle – at least the problem of depressions – was twice declared dead . the first declaration was in the late 1960s , when the phillips curve was seen as being able to steer the economy . however , this was followed by stagflation in the 1970s , which discredited the theory . the second declaration was in the early 2000s , following the stability and growth in the 1980s and 1990s in what came to be known as the great moderation . notably , in 2003 , robert lucas , in his presidential address to the american economic association , declared that the '' central problem of depression-prevention has been solved , for all practical purposes . '' fighting off depression , new york times , unfortunately , this was followed by the 2008–2012 global recession . various regions have experienced prolonged depressions , most dramatically the economic crisis in former eastern bloc countries following the end of the soviet union in 1991 . for several of these countries the period 1989–2010 has been an ongoing depression , with real income still lower than in 1989 . this has been attributed not to a cyclical pattern , but to a mismanaged transition from command economies to market economies . identifying . in 1946 , economists arthur f . burns and wesley c . mitchell provided the now standard definition of business cycles in their book measuring business cycles : a . f . burns and w . c . mitchell , measuring business cycles , new york , national bureau of economic research , 1946 . according to a . f . burns : a . f . burns , introduction . in : wesley c . mitchell , what happens during business cycles : a progress report . new york , national bureau of economic research , 1951 in the united states , it is generally accepted that the national bureau of economic research ( nber ) is the final arbiter of the dates of the peaks and troughs of the business cycle . an expansion is the period from a trough to a peak and a recession as the period from a peak to a trough . the nber identifies a recession as '' a significant decline in economic activity spread across the economy , lasting more than a few months , normally visible in real gdp , real income , employment , industrial production '' . . upper turning points of business cycle , commodity prices and freight rates . there is often a close timing relationship between the upper turning points of the business cycle , commodity prices , and freight rates , which is shown to be particularly tight in the grand peak years of 1873 , 1889 , 1900 and 1912 . jan tore klovland . indicators . numerous metrics are proposed to identify the business cycle , such as unemployment , stock market returns , and household spending rate . series used to infer the underlying business cycle fall into three categories : lagging , coincident , and leading . most are results of the cycle instead of the reason for the cycle , and thus lag . economists and investors alike speculate which series may lead the business cycle , providing advanced warning of changes and an advantage in information . a prominent coincident , or real-time , business cycle indicator is the aruoba-diebold-scotti index . spectral analysis of business cycles . recent research employing frequency domain has confirmed the presence of kondratiev waves in the world gdp dynamics at an acceptable level of statistical significance . see , e.g . andrey korotayev , & tsirel , sergey v . a spectral analysis of world gdp dynamics : kondratieff waves , kuznets swings , juglar and kitchin cycles in global economic development , and the 2008–2009 economic crisis . structure and dynamics . 2010 . vol . 4 . no . 1 . pp . 3–57 . korotayev & tsirel also detected shorter business cycles , dating the kuznets to about 17 years and calling it the third sub-harmonic of the kondratiev , meaning that there are three kuznets cycles per kondratiev . recurrence quantification analysis . recurrence quantification analysis has been employed to detect the characteristic of business cycles and economic development . to this end , orlando et al . developed the so-called recurrence quantification correlation index to test correlations of rqa on a sample signal and then investigated the application to business time series . the said index has been proven to detect hidden changes in time series . further , orlando et al . , over an extensive dataset , shown that recurrence quantification analysis may help in anticipating transitions from laminar ( i.e . regular ) to turbulent ( i.e . chaotic ) phases such as usa gdp in 1949 , 1953 , etc . last but not least , it has been demonstrated that recurrence quantification analysis can detect differences between macroeconomic variables and highlight hidden features of economic dynamics . . cycles or fluctuations ? . the business cycle follows changes in stock prices which are mostly caused by external factors such as socioeconomic conditions , inflation , exchange rates . intellectual capital does not affect a company stock 's current earnings . intellectual capital contributes to a stock 's return growth . copied from wikipedia article intellectual capital the impact of intellectual capital on a firm ’ s stock return evidence from indonesia ari barkah djamil , dominique razafindrambinina , caroline tandeans journal of business studies quarterly 2013 , volume 5 , number 2 in recent years economic theory has moved towards the study of economic fluctuation rather than a '' business cycle '' – though some economists use the phrase 'business cycle ' as a convenient shorthand . for example , milton friedman said that calling the business cycle a '' cycle '' is a misnomer , because of its non-cyclical nature . friedman believed that for the most part , excluding very large supply shocks , business declines are more of a monetary phenomenon . . proposed explanations . the explanation of fluctuations in aggregate economic activity is one of the primary concerns of macroeconomics and a variety of theories have been proposed to explain them . exogenous vs . endogenous . within economics , it has been debated as to whether or not the fluctuations of a business cycle are attributable to external ( exogenous ) versus internal ( endogenous ) causes . in the first case shocks are stochastic , in the second case shocks are deterministically chaotic and embedded in the economic system . the classical school ( now neo-classical ) argues for exogenous causes and the underconsumptionist ( now keynesian ) school argues for endogenous causes . these may also broadly be classed as '' supply-side '' and '' demand-side '' explanations : supply-side explanations may be styled , following say 's law , as arguing that '' supply creates its own demand '' , while demand-side explanations argue that effective demand may fall short of supply , yielding a recession or depression . this debate has important policy consequences : proponents of exogenous causes of crises such as neoclassicals largely argue for minimal government policy or regulation ( laissez faire ) , as absent these external shocks , the market functions , while proponents of endogenous causes of crises such as keynesians largely argue for larger government policy and regulation , as absent regulation , the market will move from crisis to crisis . this division is not absolute – some classicals ( including say ) argued for government policy to mitigate the damage of economic cycles , despite believing in external causes , while austrian school economists argue against government involvement as only worsening crises , despite believing in internal causes . the view of the economic cycle as caused exogenously dates to say 's law , and much debate on endogeneity or exogeneity of causes of the economic cycle is framed in terms of refuting or supporting say 's law ; this is also referred to as the '' general glut '' ( supply in relation to demand ) debate . until the keynesian revolution in mainstream economics in the wake of the great depression , classical and neoclassical explanations ( exogenous causes ) were the mainstream explanation of economic cycles ; following the keynesian revolution , neoclassical macroeconomics was largely rejected . there has been some resurgence of neoclassical approaches in the form of real business cycle ( rbc ) theory . the debate between keynesians and neo-classical advocates was reawakened following the recession of 2007 . mainstream economists working in the neoclassical tradition , as opposed to the keynesian tradition , have usually viewed the departures of the harmonic working of the market economy as due to exogenous influences , such as the state or its regulations , labor unions , business monopolies , or shocks due to technology or natural causes . contrarily , in the heterodox tradition of jean charles léonard de sismondi , clément juglar , and marx the recurrent upturns and downturns of the market system are an endogenous characteristic of it . the 19th-century school of underconsumptionism also posited endogenous causes for the business cycle , notably the paradox of thrift , and today this previously heterodox school has entered the mainstream in the form of keynesian economics via the keynesian revolution . mainstream economics . mainstream economics views business cycles as essentially '' the random summation of random causes '' . in 1927 , eugen slutzky observed that summing random numbers , such as the last digits of the russian state lottery , could generate patterns akin to that we see in business cycles , an observation that has since been repeated many times . this caused economists to move away from viewing business cycles as a cycle that needed to be explained and instead viewing their apparently cyclical nature as a methodological artefact . this means that what appear to be cyclical phenomena can actually be explained as just random events that are fed into a simple linear model . thus business cycles are essentially random shocks that average out over time . mainstream economists have built models of business cycles based the idea that they are caused by random shocks . drautzburg , thorsten . '' why are recessions so hard to predict ? random shocks and business cycles . '' economic insights 4 , no . 1 ( 2019 ) : 1-8 . slutzky , eugen . '' the summation of random causes as the source of cyclic processes . '' econometrica : journal of the econometric society ( 1937 ) : 105-146 . chatterjee , satyajit . '' from cycles to shocks : progress in business cycle theory . '' business review 3 ( 2000 ) : 27-37 . due to this inherent randomness , recessions can sometimes not occur for decades ; for example , australia did not experience any recession between 1991 and 2020 . isabella kwai . '' australia ’ s first recession in decades signals tougher times to come . '' new york times , 09.02.20 while economists have found it difficult to forecast recessions or determine their likely severity , research indicates that longer expansions do not cause following recessions to be more severe . tasci , murat , and nicholas zevanove . '' do longer expansions lead to more severe recessions ? . '' economic commentary 2019-02 ( 2019 ) . . keynesian . according to keynesian economics , fluctuations in aggregate demand cause the economy to come to short run equilibrium at levels that are different from the full employment rate of output . these fluctuations express themselves as the observed business cycles . keynesian models do not necessarily imply periodic business cycles . however , simple keynesian models involving the interaction of the keynesian multiplier and accelerator give rise to cyclical responses to initial shocks . paul samuelson 's '' oscillator model '' is supposed to account for business cycles thanks to the multiplier and the accelerator . the amplitude of the variations in economic output depends on the level of the investment , for investment determines the level of aggregate output ( multiplier ) , and is determined by aggregate demand ( accelerator ) . in the keynesian tradition , richard goodwin r . m . goodwin ( 1967 ) '' a growth cycle '' , in c.h . feinstein , editor , socialism , capitalism and economic growth . cambridge : cambridge university press accounts for cycles in output by the distribution of income between business profits and workers ' wages . the fluctuations in wages are almost the same as in the level of employment ( wage cycle lags one period behind the employment cycle ) , for when the economy is at high employment , workers are able to demand rises in wages , whereas in periods of high unemployment , wages tend to fall . according to goodwin , when unemployment and business profits rise , the output rises . credit/debt cycle . one alternative theory is that the primary cause of economic cycles is due to the credit cycle : the net expansion of credit ( increase in private credit , equivalently debt , as a percentage of gdp ) yields economic expansions , while the net contraction causes recessions , and if it persists , depressions . in particular , the bursting of speculative bubbles is seen as the proximate cause of depressions , and this theory places finance and banks at the center of the business cycle . a primary theory in this vein is the debt deflation theory of irving fisher , which he proposed to explain the great depression . a more recent complementary theory is the financial instability hypothesis of hyman minsky , and the credit theory of economic cycles is often associated with post-keynesian economics such as steve keen . post-keynesian economist hyman minsky has proposed an explanation of cycles founded on fluctuations in credit , interest rates and financial frailty , called the financial instability hypothesis . in an expansion period , interest rates are low and companies easily borrow money from banks to invest . banks are not reluctant to grant them loans , because expanding economic activity allows business increasing cash flows and therefore they will be able to easily pay back the loans . this process leads to firms becoming excessively indebted , so that they stop investing , and the economy goes into recession . while credit causes have not been a primary theory of the economic cycle within the mainstream , they have gained occasional mention , such as , cited approvingly by . real business-cycle theory . within mainstream economics , keynesian views have been challenged by real business cycle models in which fluctuations are due to random changes in the total productivity factor ( which are caused by changes in technology as well as the legal and regulatory environment ) . this theory is most associated with finn e . kydland and edward c . prescott , and more generally the chicago school of economics ( freshwater economics ) . they consider that economic crisis and fluctuations can not stem from a monetary shock , only from an external shock , such as an innovation . drautzburg , thorsten . '' why are recessions so hard to predict ? random shocks and business cycles . '' economic insights 4 , no . 1 ( 2019 ) : 1-8 . . product based theory of economic cycles . this theory explains the nature and causes of economic cycles from the viewpoint of life-cycle of marketable goods . the theory originates from the work of raymond vernon , who described the development of international trade in terms of product life-cycle – a period of time during which the product circulates in the market . vernon stated that some countries specialize in the production and export of technologically new products , while others specialize in the production of already known products . the most developed countries are able to invest large amounts of money in the technological innovations and produce new products , thus obtaining a dynamic comparative advantage over developing countries . recent research by georgiy revyakin proved initial vernon theory and showed economic cycles in developed countries overran economic cycles in developing countries . he also presumed economic cycles with different periodicity can be compared to the products with various life-cycles . in case of kondratiev waves such products correlate with fundamental discoveries implemented in production ( inventions which form the technological paradigm : richard arkwright 's machines , steam engines , industrial use of electricity , computer invention , etc . ) ; kuznets swing describe such products as infrastructural components ( roadways , transport , utilities , etc . ) ; juglar cycles may go in parallel with enterprise fixed capital ( equipment , machinery , etc . ) , and kitchin cycles are characterized by change in the society preferences ( tastes ) for consumer goods , and time , which is necessary to start the production . highly competitive market conditions would determine simultaneous technological updates of all economic agents ( as a result , cycle formation ) : in case if a manufacturing technology at an enterprise does not meet the current technological environment , – such company loses its competitiveness and eventually goes bankrupt . political business cycle . another set of models tries to derive the business cycle from political decisions . the political business cycle theory is strongly linked to the name of michał kalecki who discussed '' the reluctance of the 'captains of industry ' to accept government intervention in the matter of employment '' . persistent full employment would mean increasing workers ' bargaining power to raise wages and to avoid doing unpaid labor , potentially hurting profitability . however , he did not see this theory as applying under fascism , which would use direct force to destroy labor 's power . in recent years , proponents of the '' electoral business cycle '' theory have argued that incumbent politicians encourage prosperity before elections in order to ensure re-election – and make the citizens pay for it with recessions afterwards . the political business cycle is an alternative theory stating that when an administration of any hue is elected , it initially adopts a contractionary policy to reduce inflation and gain a reputation for economic competence . it then adopts an expansionary policy in the lead up to the next election , hoping to achieve simultaneously low inflation and unemployment on election day . • allan drazen , 2008 . '' political business cycles , '' the new palgrave dictionary of economics , 2nd edition . abstract . & nbsp ; & nbsp ; • william d . nordhaus , 1975 . '' the political business cycle , '' review of economic studies , 42 ( 2 ) , pp . 169–190 . & nbsp ; & nbsp ; • _____ , 1989:2 . '' alternative approaches to the political business cycle , '' brookings papers on economic activity , p pp . 1–68 . the partisan business cycle suggests that cycles result from the successive elections of administrations with different policy regimes . regime a adopts expansionary policies , resulting in growth and inflation , but is voted out of office when inflation becomes unacceptably high . the replacement , regime b , adopts contractionary policies reducing inflation and growth , and the downwards swing of the cycle . it is voted out of office when unemployment is too high , being replaced by party a . marxian economics . for marx , the economy based on production of commodities to be sold in the market is intrinsically prone to crisis . in the heterodox marxian view , profit is the major engine of the market economy , but business ( capital ) profitability has a tendency to fall that recurrently creates crises in which mass unemployment occurs , businesses fail , remaining capital is centralized and concentrated and profitability is recovered . in the long run , these crises tend to be more severe and the system will eventually fail . henryk grossmann das akkumulations – und zusammenbruchsgesetz des kapitalistischen systems ( zugleich eine krisentheorie ) , hirschfeld , leipzig , 1929 some marxist authors such as rosa luxemburg viewed the lack of purchasing power of workers as a cause of a tendency of supply to be larger than demand , creating crisis , in a model that has similarities with the keynesian one . indeed , a number of modern authors have tried to combine marx 's and keynes 's views . henryk grossman grossman , henryk the law of accumulation and breakdown of the capitalist system . pluto reviewed the debates and the counteracting tendencies and paul mattick subsequently emphasized the basic differences between the marxian and the keynesian perspective . while keynes saw capitalism as a system worth maintaining and susceptible to efficient regulation , marx viewed capitalism as a historically doomed system that can not be put under societal control . paul mattick , marx and keynes : the limits of mixed economy , boston , porter sargent , 1969 the american mathematician and economist richard m . goodwin formalised a marxist model of business cycles known as the goodwin model in which recession was caused by increased bargaining power of workers ( a result of high employment in boom periods ) pushing up the wage share of national income , suppressing profits and leading to a breakdown in capital accumulation . later theorists applying variants of the goodwin model have identified both short and long period profit-led growth and distribution cycles in the united states and elsewhere . peter flaschel , g . kauermann , and t . teuber , 'long cycles in employment , inflation and real wage costs ' , american journal of applied sciences special issue ( 2008 ) : 69–77 mamadou bobo diallo et al . , 'reconsidering the dynamic interaction between real wages and macroeconomic activity ' , research in world economy 2 , no . 1 ( april 2011 ) reiner franke , peter flaschel , and christian r . proaño , 'wage–price dynamics and income distribution in a semi-structural keynes–goodwin model ' , structural change and economic dynamics 17 , no . 4 ( december 2006 ) : 452–465 david gordon provided a marxist model of long period institutional growth cycles in an attempt to explain the kondratiev wave . this cycle is due to the periodic breakdown of the social structure of accumulation , a set of institutions which secure and stabilise capital accumulation . austrian school . economists of the heterodox austrian school argue that business cycles are caused by excessive issuance of credit by banks in fractional reserve banking systems . according to austrian economists , excessive issuance of bank credit may be exacerbated if central bank monetary policy sets interest rates too low , and the resulting expansion of the money supply causes a '' boom '' in which resources are misallocated or malinvestment because of artificially low interest rates . eventually , the boom can not be sustained and is followed by a '' bust '' in which the malinvestments are liquidated ( sold for less than their original cost ) and the money supply contracts . one of the criticisms of the austrian business cycle theory is based on the observation that the united states suffered recurrent economic crises in the 19th century , notably the panic of 1873 , which occurred prior to the establishment of a u.s . central bank in 1913 . adherents of the austrian school , such as the historian thomas woods , argue that these earlier financial crises were prompted by government and bankers ' efforts to expand credit despite restraints imposed by the prevailing gold standard , and are thus consistent with austrian business cycle theory . the austrian explanation of the business cycle differs significantly from the mainstream understanding of business cycles and is generally rejected by mainstream economists . mainstream economists generally do not support austrian school explanations for business cycles , on both theoretical as well as real-world empirical grounds . friedman , milton . '' the monetary studies of the national bureau , 44th annual report '' . the optimal quantity of money and other essays . chicago : aldine . pp . 261–284 . friedman , milton . '' the 'plucking model ' of business fluctuations revisited '' . economic inquiry : 171–177 . interview in barron 's magazine , aug . 24 , 1998 archived at hoover institution r . w . garrison , '' f . a . hayek as 'mr . fluctooations : ' in defense of hayek 's 'technical economics ' '' , hayek society journal ( lse ) , 5 ( 2 ) , 1 ( 2003 ) . austrians claim that the boom-and-bust business cycle is caused by government intervention into the economy , and that the cycle would be comparatively rare and mild without central government interference . yield curve . the slope of the yield curve is one of the most powerful predictors of future economic growth , inflation , and recessions . one measure of the yield curve slope ( i.e . the difference between 10-year treasury bond rate and the 3-month treasury bond rate ) is included in the financial stress index published by the st . louis fed . a different measure of the slope ( i.e . the difference between 10-year treasury bond rates and the federal funds rate ) is incorporated into the index of leading economic indicators published by the conference board . an inverted yield curve is often a harbinger of recession . a positively sloped yield curve is often a harbinger of inflationary growth . work by arturo estrella and tobias adrian has established the predictive power of an inverted yield curve to signal a recession . their models show that when the difference between short-term interest rates ( they use 3-month t-bills ) and long-term interest rates ( 10-year treasury bonds ) at the end of a federal reserve tightening cycle is negative or less than 93 basis points positive that a rise in unemployment usually occurs . arturo estrella and tobias adrian , frb of new york staff report no . 397 , 2009 the new york fed publishes a monthly recession probability prediction derived from the yield curve and based on estrella 's work . all the recessions in the united states since 1970 ( up through 2017 ) have been preceded by an inverted yield curve ( 10-year vs . 3-month ) . over the same time frame , every occurrence of an inverted yield curve has been followed by recession as declared by the nber business cycle dating committee . estrella and others have postulated that the yield curve affects the business cycle via the balance sheet of banks ( or shadow banking system ) . arturo estrella , frb of new york staff report no . 421 , 2010 when the yield curve is inverted banks are often caught paying more on short-term deposits ( or other forms of short-term wholesale funding ) than they are making on long-term loans leading to a loss of profitability and reluctance to lend resulting in a credit crunch . when the yield curve is upward sloping , banks can profitably take-in short term deposits and make long-term loans so they are eager to supply credit to borrowers . this eventually leads to a credit bubble . georgism . henry george claimed land price fluctuations were the primary cause of most business cycles . george , henry . ( 1881 ) . progress and poverty : an inquiry into the cause of industrial depressions and of increase of want with increase of wealth ; the remedy . kegan paul ( reissued by cambridge university press , 2009 ; the theory is generally discounted by modern mainstream economists . hansen , alvin h . business cycles and national income . new york : w . w . norton & company , 1964 , p . 39 . mitigating an economic downturn . many social indicators , such as mental health , crimes , and suicides , worsen during economic recessions ( though general mortality tends to fall , and it is in expansions when it tends to increase ) . as periods of economic stagnation are painful for the many who lose their jobs , there is often political pressure for governments to mitigate recessions . since the 1940s , following the keynesian revolution , most governments of developed nations have seen the mitigation of the business cycle as part of the responsibility of government , under the rubric of stabilization policy . since in the keynesian view , recessions are caused by inadequate aggregate demand , when a recession occurs the government should increase the amount of aggregate demand and bring the economy back into equilibrium . this the government can do in two ways , firstly by increasing the money supply ( expansionary monetary policy ) and secondly by increasing government spending or cutting taxes ( expansionary fiscal policy ) . by contrast , some economists , notably new classical economics robert lucas , argue that the welfare cost of business cycles are very small to negligible , and that governments should focus on long-term growth instead of stabilization . however , even according to keynesian theory , managing economic policy to smooth out the cycle is a difficult task in a society with a complex economy . some theorists , notably those who believe in marxian economics , believe that this difficulty is insurmountable . karl marx claimed that recurrent crises ( economic ) were an inevitable result of the operations of the capitalism . in this view , all that the government can do is to change the timing of economic crises . the crisis could also show up in a different form , for example as severe inflation or a steadily increasing deficit spending . worse , by delaying a crisis , government policy is seen as making it more dramatic and thus more painful . additionally , since the 1960s neoclassical economics have played down the ability of keynesian policies to manage an economy . since the 1960s , economists like nobel laureates milton friedman and edmund phelps have made ground in their arguments that inflationary expectations negate the phillips curve in the long run . the 1973–75 recession provided striking support for their theories while proving a dilemma for keynesian policies , which appeared to necessitate both expansionary policies to mitigate recession and contractionary policies to reduce inflation . friedman has gone so far as to argue that all the central bank of a country should do is to avoid making large mistakes , as he believes they did by contracting the money supply very rapidly in the face of the wall street crash of 1929 , in which they made what would have been a recession into the great depression .