The Tale of the Body Thief

plot summary . at the beginning of the story , lestat grows depressed and becomes remorseful because of his vampiric nature . although he tries to limit his victims to murderers , serial killers and other criminals , he nonetheless caves into temptation once in a while and kills an '' innocent '' , or someone who he feels does not necessarily deserve to die . lestat also suffers from constant nightmares concerning his late '' daughter '' , claudia , for whose death he blames himself . since defeating akasha , lestat has become extremely lonely . among his only remaining friends is david talbot , the elderly mortal head of the talamasca caste . although lestat has repeatedly offered to turn david , he has always refused to become a vampire and keep lestat company through eternity . lestat goes to the gobi desert at dawn in a half-hearted suicide attempt . when he does not die , he goes to david 's home in england to heal . a mysterious figure , raglan james , approaches lestat with what seems to be a cure for his ennui and depression . james sends lestat several messages hinting that he has the ability to body swap . eventually , he proposes to lestat that the two of them trade bodies for a day . against the advice of david and other vampires , lestat jumps at the opportunity . unfortunately , james has no intention of ever switching back , and lestat is forced to scheme to regain his body . lestat nearly dies after becoming human again—his new body is wracked by pneumonia , which he ignores during a tour of washington d.c . in the middle of winter . he is saved by the care of a nun named gretchen . he enjoys a short love affair with gretchen before she returns to south america , where she works in a convent , and lestat sets out in search of his body . lestat seeks help from other vampires but is completely ostracized . marius is extremely angry at him for leaving such a powerful body to a thief . likewise louis turns lestat away when he asks to turn his new body , arguing that lestat ought to be happy to be human again and also calling him out for slandering him in previous writings . lestat 's only ally is david . david reveals that james was a gifted psychic who once joined the talamasca , but was kicked out of the order for constant theft . james is a kleptomaniac who has stolen or schemed for literally everything he owns , from his house to his body . however , he also has major psychic problems , and his life is a series of cycles & mdash ; he gets rich by theft , then often ends up in prison . dying of cancer several years before , james tricked an inmate of a mental institution into switching bodies with him , allowing him a type of immortality . it is james 's lack of imagination and petty thievery that allow lestat and david to track him down . despite his newfound wealth and powerful new body , james continues to steal jewelry from people . he also makes a conspicuous show of his wealth , boarding the rms queen elizabeth 2 and draining victims of their blood along the ship 's path . the pattern allows his pursuers to easily find him aboard the ship . while lestat manages to regain his body with david 's help , he performs the switch during a sunrise and must immediately flee to a safe place during the day . when he awakes in the evening , he finds that both david and james have disappeared . lestat finds david in florida and is surprised to find that his friend , despite his earlier protestations , now wants to become a vampire . however , while taking his blood , lestat discovers a final trick & mdash ; when forced out of lestat 's body , james took over david 's body instead of returning to his own . lestat angrily attacks james , crushing his skull . the blow proves fatal & mdash ; the injury damages james 's brain and prevents him from either leaving the dying body or attempting another switch . david begins to enjoy life in the young body previously occupied by james . lestat returns to new orleans , reunites with louis , and begins to renovate his old house in the french quarter . however , lestat regains his '' evil '' nature upon finally accepting his vampirism and decides to turn david against his wishes . david initially resists lestat 's aggressive advances , but eventually succumbs . soon after david and lestat admit their love for each other . david disappears again , prompting lestat to fruitlessly search for him . lestat returns to new orleans and is surprised to find that david has already contacted louis . david explains to lestat that , in secret , this is what he always truly wanted . he tells lestat that he is no longer angry with him , although he does usurp lestat 's position of leadership , despite the latter 's protests . having gotten rid of his old age and mortality , david plans to visit rio de janeiro with louis , and asks lestat to join him . at the end , lestat realizes that , despite all that happened , he is still alone , has failed to regain his '' humanity '' , and has thrown away his only chance to make amends for his past misdeeds . motifs . in many ways , the tale of the body thief lays the groundwork for the following vampire chronicles novel , memnoch the devil . david talbot , in his occult fieldwork , has begun to understand the nature of the spirit world , and actually claims to have seen god and the devil sitting and talking in a cafe . in interviews after the book came out , rice claimed that her own father 's death helped to form the model for the relationship between lestat and talbot . rice had loved her father very much ( her mother died prematurely after succumbing to alcoholism ) , and when he was dying , she wished ( as lestat does with talbot ) that she could somehow make him young again so that she would n't lose him . this could make tale of the body thief the second of two vampire chronicle novels inspired by rice 's personal tragedies , the first being interview with the vampire ( which is denied by rice ) . lestat 's adjustment to his human body takes up a major portion of the book & mdash ; after almost two centuries of being a vampire , he finds he has trouble with the basic human nuances of eating , defecating , and taking care of his body . one of the realizations made by lestat is that he took his powers for granted for too long ; only after his adventure is he able to fully appreciate his vampiric abilities . likewise , lestat describes james as a devious and cunning opponent , a characterization he uses to justify how he was tricked . however , in reality , raglan james is an extremely petty and predictable criminal who is constantly dropping clues as to his next move & mdash ; at one point , talbot refers to james as '' a glorified purse snatcher '' . the novel is also ironic in the cues that it leaves behind . for example , one of the '' hints '' that raglan james leaves lestat is a copy of h . p . lovecraft 's short story , '' the thing on the doorstep '' . in the lovecraft story , body-switching also takes place , and has an added twist when a third party gets involved without the narrator 's knowledge . lestat does n't bother re-reading the short story ; if he had , he might have anticipated raglan james ' final trick . the darkest irony is lestat 's supposed concern for the elderly david talbot . one of his nightmares concerns a flashback to when the young talbot was a big-game hunter , and was nearly killed by a man-eating tiger . at the story 's beginning , lestat is constantly bothered by a foreboding that his friend is dying or in some mortal danger . he connects this feeling to william blake 's poem the tyger , which is quoted piecemeal throughout the entire novel : : :tyger ! tyger ! burning bright : :in the forests of the night , : :what immortal hand or eye : :could frame thy fearful symmetry ? at the end of the story , lestat realizes with horror that he must have been the '' tiger '' of his visions . film adaptation . in 2007 , the tale of the body thief was rumored to be adapted into film as united artists was interested in purchasing the film rights to the novel . rice announced via her facebook profile on february 7 , 2012 that brian grazer and ron howard 's film production company , imagine entertainment , had optioned the motion picture rights to the novel . lee patterson was to have written the screenplay . transformer 's alex kurtzman and roberto orci were also said to be on board as producers during the time of development . '' the plan is to treat the character ( lestat ) as if audiences have not met him before , '' said entertainment weekly with word from imagine . on april 7 , 2013 , during a live-internet radio chat with her son christopher and co-host eric shaw quinn , anne explained that a film adaptation is no longer in development and stated on her facebook profile : '' no lestat movie in the works & mdash ; after all these years , and the best efforts of all involved . we 've encountered difficulties we can not at this time overcome . '' rice 's son christopher apparently drafted and adapted a screenplay from the novel that was met with praise from those involved ; however , the project has been dismissed as the studio is n't '' willing to move forward with it '' due to differences that were beyond them . as of august 2014 , an entire reboot of the vampire chronicles was planned by producers alex kurtzman and roberto orci after the motion picture rights were optioned by universal pictures and imagine entertainment . christopher rice 's screenplay for the tale of the body thief was reportedly worked into the recent deal for a proposed film franchise and a reinterpretation of interview with the vampire was also hinted by rice herself via facebook . however , in november 2016 universal did not renew the contract , and the film and television rights reverted to rice , who began developing the vampire chronicles into a television series with christopher . . references .