Wikipedia:WikiProject Ecoregions

strategy and scope . an ecoregion , sometimes called a bioregion , is '' a relatively large area of land or water that contains a geographically distinct assemblage of natural communities . '' ecoregions are an obvious and objective way to understand physical geography . they also enable organization of ecology and climate data , including ranges of animals and plants . this wikiproject will create articles on all the terrestrial , marine , and freshwater ecoregions on earth using a consistent naming scheme . link to these ecoregion articles when you need to describe broad-scale ecology . this may be from articles on protected areas , mountains , rivers , lakes , and countries . the project will allow users to navigate logically from the entire planet earth down into the ecozones and ecoregions , and their bordering rivers , seas , and oceans . open tasks . we now have articles for all of the wwf terrestrial ecoregions – about 865 depending on definitions . a good base to work on ! here are some important next steps : . upgrade stubs . there are currently 71 stubs ( january 2021 ) . to see which ones they are , go to the project 's full checklist : a checklist of terrestrial ecoregions on en-wikipedia . click twice on the '' status '' column header to bring the stubs to the top . you can use the suggested references in the right hand column to get information for the articles . create ecoregion-specific subsections in '' redirect '' articles . about 90 of the ecoregions have boundaries similar to well-known geographic areas . for example , the 'aleutian islands tundra ' ecoregion covers the same islands as the aleutian islands article . so the ecoregion link is a redirect to the main article . two things need to be checked on these ecoregions : ( a ) do the ecoregion and main article subject really refer to the same area ? if not , a separate ecoregion article may be warranted . ( b ) is there an 'ecoregion ' subsection in the main article ? if not , one should be added , so that basic information about the ecoregion can be noted : realm , biome , wwf id , area in km2 , whether it is a global200 ecoregion , a couple of sentences describing how the flora/fauna differ from bordering ecoregions , a characterization of the conservation status , and of course the reference links . note : other checklists of ecoregions . list of ecoregions ( wwf ) : terrestrial , marine , and freshwater ecoregions for the entire world . these should be our top priority , since they are global in scope . lists of ecoregions by country . you can see which countries have missing or incomplete ecoregion articles and create or expand them , or create a missing country list . list of ecoregions in north america ( cec ) list of ecoregions in the united states ( epa ) . fill in basic data in wikidata items . for the wikidata page for each ecoregion , there should be complete coverage of some minimal data points : ecoregion name , realm , biome , countr ( ies ) , wwf id code , map , image , climate ( koppen ) , coordinates ( middle of the largest section ) . create high-quality example articles . currently there are no feature articles among the ecoregions . if anyone wishes to identify a candidate for upgrading to feature status , it would be a great help to the project . we can get a group of people helping . similarly , it would be good to upgrade each of the biome articles to '' b '' status , as they are the base for a lot of common information . upgrade the flora and fauna sections . there is no real standard , but readers probably want to know about : what species are characteristic of the area what species are notable for the area what species are of conservation interest ( threatened , endangered , vulnerable , endemic ) address plants , mammals , birds , reptiles , amphibians , fish describe the character of the habitats ( types of forest , desert , etc . ) . article cleanup . as always : copy edit clear any cleanup tags add '' main '' templates as appropriate write articles for important redlinks . add links to other articles that point to the ecoregion article . when an article for a country , protected area , mountain range , water body , etc . needs general information on its environment and ecology , link to the appropriate ecoregion ( s ) . similarly , articles for plants , animals , etc . should also refer to ecoregions when describing their range . create missing ecoregion maps . as of january 2021 , there are about 65 missing maps . one way to identify source data for maps is to look at the source information on the wikicommons page for a nearby ecoregion map . some other sources : an interactive map is at ' resolve' images can be found at nasa 's blue marble earth imagery databasin 's terrestrial ecoregions of the world has both the map and a dataset for terrestrial ecoregions . create missing articles for marine and freshwater ecoregions . we 'll set up a separate checklist for these . useful resources . text and content . the encyclopedia of earth contains articles for many ecoregions , the text of which is available under a creative commons attribution-sharealike 2.5 generic license . this license is compatible with wikipedia 's and the text can be re-used here . maps . the wikimedia commons maps of ecoregions category contains hundreds of ecoregion maps that can be used in ecoregion articles . google earth layers for the wwf ecoregions interactive wwf ecoregions map from the wwf interactive wwf ecoregions map from national geographic epa ecoregions . databases . wwf databases include terrestrial and marine ecoregions , as well as thousands of species distributions in terms of ecoregions . wikiproject watchlist - wikiproject ecoregions . soils . we should use the world reference base for soil resources ( wrb ) ( external link ) , as it is a worldwide soil classification system , widely accepted and translated in many languages . as of 2006 , it is the pre-eminent soil classification system , replacing the previous fao soil classification . issue 1 : the main map is '' fair use '' : could we ask for it , might we just put a link to it ? issue 2 : the main map is not precise enough to easily find references of soil types for each ecoregion . are there other , more precise maps ? see : ftp : //ftp.fao.org/agl/agll/wrb/wrbdom.gif the wrb borrows from modern soil classification concepts , including usda soil taxonomy . the classification is based mainly on soil morphology as an expression pedogenesis . a major difference with usda soil taxonomy is that soil-related climate regimes , such as xeric , ustic , and udic , are not part of the system , except insofar as climate influences soil profile characteristics ( see climate ) . useful citations . ecoregion ranges . when claiming that a country , state , landform , or protected area is in a wwf ecoregion , you can copy-paste the following citation to the original paper : it will appear as follows : ecoregion statistics . the atlas of global conservation from the nature conservancy has various statistics for all the wwf ecoregions , valid . these include numbers of bird , mammal , and threatened species , percent habitat loss , and percent area formally protected . just copy-paste the following if you use their stats : it will appear like this : . templates . add the template your user page . add the template to all ecoregion articles and fill out as many fields as possible . add the template to the top of the talk page of any article which is in the scope of this project . naming . ecoregion articles should use the names given them by their defining organizations ( wwf , epa , cec , etc ) . when there are differences with wikipedia conventions , default to wikipedia conventions regarding capitalization , and create redirects for all likely variations in naming and capitalization . formatting . an ecoregion article will typically contain the following sections : . infobox . the ecoregion infobox template contains various fields for describing an ecoregion . please fill out as many as possible . introduction . the name of the ecoregion . the biome in which it is contained . the countries it covers . setting . physical area of the ecoregion , in square kilometers and square miles . bordering ecoregions . the ecozone and bioregion in which it is contained . major geological/physiographic features of the ecoregion . soils . the rivers that flow through it , and the watersheds it lies within , including freshwater ecoregions that it overlaps . any oceans or seas that it borders . alternative names for the ecoregion , including names in local languages , other biogeographic naming schemes . climate . köppen climate classifications for parts of the ecoregion . statistics on rainfall and temperature throughout the year . important weather systems ( i.e . monsoons , el niño ) that influence the climate . flora . an account of major plant communities or habitat types , including their structure and predominant or characteristic species . the total number of plant species ( by phylum , if known ) , and the number and percentage of endemic plant species . the floristic region or regions it is a part of . the origins of the flora , and the floral affiliations with and distinctions from with neighboring ecoregions . fauna . an account of native animals organized from top predator down through lesser predators , then herbivore/prey animals and plants they feed on . the total number of animal species ( by phylum/class , if known ) , and the number and percentage of endemic animal species . the zoogeographic region or regions it is a part of . the origins of the fauna , and the faunal affiliations with and distinctions from with neighboring ecoregions . human use . an account of the history of human activity in the ecoregion . the resources of the ecoregion : agriculture , fishing , timber , mining , industry . major cities in the ecoregion . conservation and threats . local and global agents affecting the ecoregion 's ecology , including : protected and natural areas . resource extraction , including hunting , fishing , logging , gathering . deforestation , soil degradation , and desertification . invasive plants and animals , and a description of how they have impacted native ones . conservation status as defined by . ( need to establish whose conservation status to use ) . whether the region is part of the global 200 or a biodiversity hotspot . references . a list of article references . external links . link to the wwf scientific report , plus any other relevant links . article assessment . article assessments help project members prioritise improvements to articles related to ecoregions . project members should assess articles according to the importance and quality scales given at wikipedia : wikiproject ecoregions/assessment , and then record the results using the project template on the article talk page . e.g . : : : after assessing an article , you may want to place it on your watchlist for a while , and reassess the article if you see major improvements . new articles often take a few days or weeks before they stabilize , and may improve considerably during this period . participants . this wikiproject was proposed by earth , itself , fed up by itchy humans on its surface . right . earth ability is limited to do the job herself . and it fits very well in my biodiversity focus , so i 'll help a bit user : anthere curious about how earth proposed this . though i recognize that she is fed up , which i suppose is enough . i will help . sunray 17:26 , 2004 jan 15 ( utc ) tom radulovich ombudsman 22:19 , 28 april 2006 ( utc ) user : paleorthid - soil scientist , working on wp : soil . project tast 5 is to work in support of this project . user:1brettsnyder - i have created several ecoregion articles and will continue to do so , as well as improve any and all ecoregion articles i find lacking . user : every-leaf-that-trembles ( 2018 ) - writing wwf ecoregion articles , also filling out the wikidata items jarrahtree ( 2019 ) - adding for the processes interconnected with biota in oceania j-mo 19:49 , 13 september 2020 ( utc ) user : joe roe , interested in arid ecosystems in western asia . inactive . lots of work to do here , so i reckon i 'm in . oh btw , see m : ecoregion dtd on meta . quinobi 20:55 , 14 jun 2005 ( utc ) -- bcasterline • talk 04:37 , 1 june 2006 ( utc ) despite obvious inactivity . articles on biogeography ( still ) badly need some sort of standardization . miguel.v will work on ecoregion articles as i look them up and find them lacking . user : kaarel - i am a biologist interested ( among other things ) in biogeography and improving the wikipedia articles . user : bengrin85 i 'd be glad to help in any way i can , but i 'm no expert 02:00 , 25 july 2008 ( utc ) user : forstbirdo - forest engineer , translation of ecoregion articles into esperanto . user : farjad0322 ( talk & 124 ; contribs ) ( 31 august 2010 ) - i have joined this project so that i could learn more about deserts and xeric shrublands , woodlands , badlands , whatever . i am a coordinator of wp : desert . i also created ecoregions of pakistan . user : gulivar - interested in improving articles relating to ecoregions . user : cleveland13 - interested in improving ecoregion articles for a college project . related wikiprojects . wikiproject ecology wikiproject protected areas wikiproject geology wikiproject tree of life wikiproject oceans wikiproject rivers wikiproject lakes wikiproject deserts wikiproject botany wikiproject environment wikiproject forestry wikipedia : wikiproject lights camera wiki/parks wikipedia : wikiproject lights camera wiki/wildlife . see also . wikiproject ecoregions : another way to see the world . links to french-language wikipedia . région écologique écozone écodistrict classification écologique des terres . external watchlist . wikiproject watchlist - wikiproject ecoregions