United States presidential primary

background . there is no provision for the role of political parties in the united states constitution , since the founding fathers did not originally intend for american politics to be partisan . in federalist no . 9 and no . 10 , alexander hamilton and james madison , respectively , wrote specifically about the dangers of domestic political factions . thus in the first two presidential elections , the electoral college handled the nominations and elections in 1789 and 1792 that selected george washington . the beginnings of the american two-party system then emerged from washington 's immediate circle of advisors . hamilton and madison , who wrote the aforementioned federalist papers against political factions , ended up being the core leaders in this partisanship : hamilton became the leader of federalist party while madison co-helmed the democratic-republican party with thomas jefferson . richard hofstadter , the idea of a party system : the rise of legitimate opposition in the united states , 1780–1840 ( 1970 ) gordon s . wood , empire of liberty : a history of the early republic , 1789–1815 ( oxford history of the united states ) starting with the 1796 election , congressional party or a state legislature party caucus selected the party 's presidential candidates . before 1820 , democratic-republican members of congress would nominate a single candidate from their party . that system collapsed in 1824 , and since 1832 the preferred mechanism for nomination has been a national convention . james s . chase ; emergence of the presidential nominating convention , 1789–1832 ( 1973 ) . history . the first national convention was called by the anti-masonic party in 1831 , as they could not use the caucus system because they had no congressmen . the party leaders instead called for a national meeting of supporters to set the party 's candidate . this convention was held in baltimore on september 26 , 1831 which selected william wirt as their presidential candidate . delegates to the national convention were usually selected at state conventions whose own delegates were chosen by district conventions . sometimes they were dominated by intrigue between political bosses who controlled delegates ; the national convention was far from democratic or transparent . progressive era reformers looked to the primary election as a way to measure popular opinion of candidates , as opposed to the opinion of the bosses . florida enacted the first presidential primary in 1901 . the wisconsin direct open primary of 1905 was the first to eliminate the caucus and mandate direct selection of national convention delegates . in 1910 , oregon became the first state to establish a presidential preference primary , which requires delegates to the national convention to support the winner of the primary at the convention . by 1912 , twelve states either selected delegates in primaries , used a preferential primary , or both . by 1920 there were 20 states with primaries , but some went back , and from 1936 to 1968 , 12 states used them . the primary received its first major test in the 1912 election pitting incumbent president william howard taft against challengers theodore roosevelt and robert la follette . roosevelt proved the most popular candidate , but as most primaries were non-binding '' preference '' shows and held in only fourteen of the-then forty-eight states , the republican nomination went to taft , who controlled the convention . seeking to boost voter turnout , new hampshire simplified its ballot access laws in 1949 . in the ensuing non-binding '' beauty contest '' of 1952 , republican dwight eisenhower demonstrated his broad voter appeal by out-polling the favored robert a . taft , '' mr . republican . '' also , democrat estes kefauver defeated incumbent president harry s . truman , leading the latter to decide not to run for another term . paul t . david . presidential nominating politics in 1952 . ( 1954 ) volume : 1 : pp 37–40 . the first-in-the-nation new hampshire primary has since become a widely observed test of candidates ' viability . the impetus for national adoption of the binding primary election was the chaotic 1968 democratic national convention . vice president hubert humphrey secured the presidential nomination despite not winning a single primary under his own name . after this , a democratic national committee-commissioned panel led by senator george mcgovern – the mcgovern–fraser commission – recommended that states adopt new rules to assure wider participation . a large number of states , faced with the need to conform to more detailed rules for the selection of national delegates , chose a presidential primary as an easier way to come into compliance with the new national democratic party rules . the result was that many more future delegates would be selected by a state presidential primary . the republicans also adopted many more state presidential primaries . by 1992 , democrats had primaries in 40 states and republicans in 39 . with the broadened use of the primary system , states have tried to increase their influence in the nomination process . one tactic has been to create geographic blocs to encourage candidates to spend time in a region . vermont and massachusetts attempted to stage a joint new england primary on the first tuesday of march , but new hampshire refused to participate so it could retain its traditional place as the first primary . the first regional primary was the southern super tuesday of march 8 , 1988 , in which nine states united in the idea that a candidate would reflect regional interests . laurence w . moreland , et al . the 1988 presidential election in the south : continuity amidst change in southern party politics ( 1991 ) pp 3–20 it failed as all but two of the eight major candidates won at least one primary on that day . front-loading . another trend is to stage earlier and earlier primaries , given impetus by super tuesday and the mid-1990s move ( since repealed ) of the california primary and its bloc of votes—the largest in the nation—from june to march . to retain its tradition as the first primary in the country ( and adhere to a state law which requires it to be ) , new hampshire moved their primary forward , from early march to early january . a major reason states try to increase their influence , and vie for earlier primaries , is that in recent years the races have usually been decided before the primary season has ended in june . for example , john mccain officially clinched the 2008 republican presidential nomination in march , while during that same month barack obama held a substantial lead in pledged delegates in the democratic party primaries . in 2012 , obama faced no major challenger in the democratic party primaries since he had the advantage of incumbency ( see below ) , while mitt romney gained enough delegates to be declared the presumptive republican nominee by late april . in 2012 , both the republicans and the democrats moved their florida primary to january 31 , which was an earlier date than past election cycles . in response , other states also changed their primary election dates for 2012 , in order to claim a greater influence , creating a cascade of changes in other states . this followed what happened in 2008 when nevada moved its caucuses to january , causing other states to also move their primaries to earlier dates . senate majority leader and nevada senator harry reid was a major proponent of moving that state 's caucuses to january , arguing that nevada would be the perfect american microcosm : its western location , significant minority population , and strong labor population would be more representative of the country as a whole than iowa and new hampshire . both parties then enacted stricter timing rules for 2016 : primaries and caucuses can not start until february 1 ; and only iowa , new hampshire , south carolina and nevada are entitled to february contests . in u.s . territories . the primary and caucus system is the only method in which voters in puerto rico , guam , and other u.s . territories can have a say in the presidential race . under the u.s . constitution , u.s . territories are not represented in the electoral college , and thus voters residing in those areas are basically ineligible to vote in the general election . on the other hand , as stated above , the primaries and caucuses are non-governmental party affairs . both the democratic and republican parties , as well as other third parties , have agreed to let these territories participate in the presidential nomination process . in the two major party 's rules , '' territories '' are referred to as '' states '' , which can be carried over in discussion and media implying there are more than 50 states . advantage of incumbency . an incumbent president seeking re-election usually faces no opposition during their respective party 's primaries , especially if they are still popular . for presidents ronald reagan , bill clinton , george w . bush and barack obama , for example , their respective paths to nomination became uneventful and the races become merely pro forma ; all four then went on to win a second presidential term . with the lack of serious competition , the incumbent president 's party may also cancel several state primaries/caucuses to both save money and to show undivided support for the incumbent 's candidacy . serious challenges are rare , but then generally presage failure to win the general election in the fall . during the 1976 republican party primaries , then-former california governor reagan carried 23 states while running against incumbent president gerald ford ; ford then went on to lose the presidential election to jimmy carter . senator ted kennedy then carried 12 states while running against carter during the 1980 democratic party primaries ; reagan then defeated carter in the fall . pat buchanan captured a decent percentage of a protest vote against george h.w . bush during the 1992 republican primaries , but only received a handful of delegates ; bush too subsequently went on to lose in the general election to clinton . . process . both major political parties of the u.s.—the democratic party and the republican party—officially nominate their candidate for president at their respective national conventions . each of these conventions is attended by a number of delegates selected in accordance with the given party 's bylaws . the results of the presidential primaries and caucuses bind many of these delegates , known as pledged delegates , to vote for a particular candidate . both parties also have a group of unpledged delegates . republicans have three at-large delegates selected at the state convention from all the states and territories , 168 in number . these are each states ' two national committeepersons and the state chairperson . in democratic primaries through 2016 , about 85 % of delegates to the democratic national convention are '' pledged delegates '' who are apportioned to candidates according to the results of primaries and caucuses . the remaining 15 % are unpledged superdelegates ( consisting of sitting democratic governors , sitting democratic members of congress ( i.e . , senators and representatives ) , former and current democratic presidents and vice presidents , and a few leaders of democratic national committee-affiliated organizations , such as the young democrats of america ) who can vote for whomever they wish . jeff naft , the reason why dozens of lobbyists will be democratic presidential delegates , abc news ( february 29 , 2016 ) . becca stanek , superdelegates , explained , the week ( april 4 , 2016 ) . some superdelegates are former or current state or federal lobbyists . in 2016 , following a push by senator bernie sanders , burgess everett & seung min kim , sanders ' anti-superdelegate push gains steam in senate , politico ( june 21 , 2016 ) . the party voted in favor of superdelegate reform , such that in future presidential elections most superdelegates will be bound to their state primary results . david weigel , democrats vote to bind most superdelegates to state primary results , washington post ( july 23 , 2016 ) . . types of primaries and caucuses . franchise in a primary or caucus is governed by rules established by the state party , although the states may impose other regulations . while most states hold primary elections , a handful of states hold caucuses . instead of going to a polling place , voters attend local private events run by the political parties , and cast their selections there . one disadvantage of caucuses is that the state party runs the process directly instead of having the state and local governments run them . another is that most election laws do not normally apply to caucuses . nearly all states have a binding primary or caucus , in which the results of the election depending on state law or party rules legally bind some or all of the delegates to vote for a particular candidate at the national convention , for a certain number of ballots or until the candidate releases the delegates . some binding primaries are winner-take-all contests , in which all of a state 's delegates are required to vote for the same candidate . in a proportional vote , a state 's delegation is allocated in proportion to the candidates ' percent of the popular vote in a congressional district . in many of those states that have proportional vote primaries , a candidate must meet a certain threshold in the popular vote to be given delegates . some states may use a binding walking subcaucus system , where voters may instead be choosing pledged delegates to a local , county or state party convention , which then in turn selects pledged delegates to the national convention . a handful of states may also practice non-binding '' beauty contests '' , which are public opinion surveys for use by caucus delegates to select candidates to a state convention , which then in turn selects delegates to the national convention . in many states , only voters registered with a party may vote in that party 's primary , known as a closed primary . in some states , a semi-closed primary is practiced , in which voters unaffiliated with a party ( independents ) may choose a party primary in which to vote . in an open primary , any voter may vote in any party 's primary . a semi-open primary occurs when a voter must choose a party-specific ballot to cast , instead of being provided a single ballot where the voter must choose on the ballot itself which party 's primary to vote in . in all of these systems , a voter may participate in only one primary ; that is , a voter who casts a vote for a candidate standing for the republican nomination for president can not cast a vote for a candidate standing for the democratic nomination , or vice versa . a few states once staged a blanket primary , in which voters could vote for one candidate in multiple primaries , but the practice was struck down by the u.s . supreme court in the 2000 case of california democratic party v . jones as violating the freedom of assembly guaranteed by the first amendment . bruce e . cain and elisabeth r . gerber , voting at the political fault line : california 's experiment with the blanket primary ( 2002 ) . delegate selection rules . both the democratic party and the republican party usually modify their delegate selection rules between presidential elections , including how delegates are allocated to each state and territory . under the current democratic party selection rules , adopted in 2006 , pledged delegates are selected under proportional representation , which requires a candidate have a minimum of 15 % of a state 's popular vote to receive delegates . in addition , the democratic party may reject any candidate under their bylaws . each state publishes a delegate selection plan that notes the mechanics of calculating the number of delegates per congressional district , and how votes are transferred from local conventions to the state and national convention . since the 2012 democratic primaries , the number of pledged delegates allocated to each of the 50 u.s . states and washington , d.c . is based on two main factors : ( 1 ) the proportion of votes each state gave to the democratic candidate in the last three presidential elections , and ( 2 ) the number of electoral votes each state has in the united states electoral college . the u.s . territories of american samoa , guam , the northern mariana islands , puerto rico , and the us virgin islands are instead assigned a fixed number of pledged delegates . states and territories who schedule their primary or caucus later in the primary season may also get additional bonus delegates . the republican party 's rules since 2008 leave more discretion to the states in choosing a method of allocating pledged delegates . as a result , states variously applied the statewide winner-take-all method ( e.g . , new york ) , district- and state-level winner-take-all ( e.g . , california ) , or proportional allocation ( e.g . , massachusetts ) . changes in the rules before 2012 brought proportional representation to more states . the number of republican pledged delegates allocated to each of the 50 u.s . states is 10 at-large delegates , plus three district delegates for each congressional district . washington , d.c . and the five u.s . territories are instead assigned a fixed number of pledged delegates . states and territories get bonus delegates based on whether it ( if applicable ) has a republican governor , it has gop majorities in one or all chambers of its state legislature , whether one or both of its u.s . senators are republican , it has a gop majority in its delegation to the u.s . house of representatives , and whether its electoral college votes went to the republican candidate in the last presidential election . each party 's bylaws also specify which current and former elected officeholders and party leaders qualify as unpledged delegates . because of possible deaths , resignations , or the results of intervening or special elections , the final number of these superdelegates may not be known until the week of the convention . delegate voting at the convention . during the convention , there is generally a roll call of the votes . each delegation announces its vote tallies , usually accompanied with some boosterism of their state or territory . the delegation may pass , nominally to retally their delegates ' preferences , but often to allow a different delegation to give the leading candidate the honor of casting the majority-making vote . if no single candidate has secured a majority of delegates ( including both pledged and unpledged ) during the first vote , then a '' brokered convention '' results . all pledged delegates are then '' released '' and are able to switch their allegiance to a different candidate . thereafter , the nomination is decided through a process of alternating political horse trading , and additional rounds of re-votes . a customary ceremonial practice has been for the losing candidate ( s ) in the primary season to '' release '' their delegates at the convention and exhort them to vote for the winning nominee as a sign of party unity . thus , the vote tallied on the convention floor is unanimous or nearly so . for example , during the 2008 democratic national convention , hillary clinton ( who only captured about 22 % of delegates compared to barack obama 's approximate 72 % ) moved to nominate obama by acclamation , making it a unanimous vote . . calendar . campaigning for president often begins almost a year before the new hampshire primary , almost two years before the presidential election . this is largely because federal campaign finance laws including the federal election campaign act state that a candidate who intends to receive contributions aggregating in excess of 5,000 or make expenditures aggregating in excess of 5,000 , among others , must first file a statement of candidacy with the federal election commission . thus , presidential candidates officially announce their intentions to run that early so they can start raising or spending the money needed to mount their nationwide campaigns . during the first six months of the year , primaries and caucuses are separately held in each of the 50 states ; the washington , d.c . , and each of the five permanently inhabited us territories of american samoa , guam , the northern mariana islands , puerto rico , and the us virgin islands each party sets its own calendar and rules , and in some cases actually administers the election . however , to reduce expenses and encourage turnout , the major parties ' primaries are usually held the same day and may be consolidated with other state elections . the primary election itself is administered by local governments according to state law . in some cases , state law determines how delegates will be awarded and who may participate in the primary ; where it does not , party rules prevail . since the 1970s , states have held increasingly early primaries to maximize their leverage '' front-loading , caucuses and primaries '' . nominations & conventions : current practices . northeastern university . retrieved february 10 , 2016 . ( see front-loading and compression below ) . in reaction to these moves , both the democratic and republican national committees imposed a timing adjustment of scheduling rules , stripping states of delegates if they move their primaries early , such as the case in both the florida democratic primary and the florida republican primary in 2008 . iowa and new hampshire . the first binding event , in which a candidate can secure convention delegates , is traditionally the iowa caucus , usually held in late january or early february of the presidential election year . it is generally followed by the new hampshire primary , the first primary by tradition since 1920 and by new hampshire state law . new hampshire law states the primary shall be held '' on the tuesday at least seven days immediately preceding the date on which any other state shall hold a similar election . '' the iowa caucuses are not considered to be '' a similar election '' under new hampshire 's law because the former uses caucuses instead of primary elections . should any other state move its primary too close to new hampshire 's , or before , the new hampshire secretary of state is required to reschedule the primary accordingly . in recent elections , the iowa caucuses and new hampshire primary have garnered over half the media attention paid to the entire selection process . after iowa and new hampshire , the front runners then attempt to solidify their status , while the others fight to become 2 . scala ( 2003 ) because these states are small , campaigning takes place on a much more personal scale . as a result , even a little-known , underfunded candidate can use '' retail politics '' to meet intimately with interested voters and perform better than expected . the iowa caucuses and new hampshire primary have produced a number of headline-making upsets in history : sacala ( 2003 ) harry s . truman ended his presidential re-election bid in 1952 after losing the democratic party 's new hampshire primary . lyndon b . johnson dropped his 1968 presidential reelection bid after performing far below expectations in the democratic party 's new hampshire primary . in the 1972 democratic primaries , george mcgovern was initially considered a dark horse but he had better-than-expected second-place finishes in iowa and new hampshire and eventually won the nomination ; frontrunner edmund muskie who won both contests instead lost momentum . jimmy carter had entered the 1976 presidential race with extremely low name recognition and seemingly little chance against nationally better-known politicians but carter became the democratic party front-runner early on by winning the iowa caucuses and the new hampshire primary and he went on to win the nomination . george h . w . bush won the iowa caucus in 1980 , leading him to claim that he had '' big mo '' ( momentum ) over republican party presidential frontrunner ronald reagan . however , reagan won the new hampshire primary and several others to take the nomination . eight years later , in the 1988 republican presidential nomination battle , bush , serving as reagan 's vice president , unexpectedly finished third in iowa which bob dole won . dole was also leading in new hampshire polls but ended up losing that primary as he failed to counterattack ads from bush . bush had no serious trouble clinching the nomination afterward . gary hart was initially not considered a serious contender in 1984 , which featured former vice president walter mondale as the democratic party presidential frontrunner . however , hart had a respectable showing in iowa and then stunned mondale in new hampshire , the latter where hart had started campaigning months earlier . this resulted in a long primary battle , with mondale eventually emerging as the nominee after super tuesday iii . pat buchanan 's 2nd place showing in the 1992 and win in the 1996 new hampshire primaries coincided with the weakness of the future republican party presidential nominees , incumbent george h . w . bush , and senator bob dole respectively ; bush and dole subsequently lost the general election . in 1992 , then-governor bill clinton 's better-than-expected second-place finish in new hampshire salvaged his campaign and he went on to win the democratic party 's presidential nomination , following on to be elected president with a 43 % plurality . senator john mccain upset george w . bush in the republican party 's new hampshire primary in 2000 , bush 's frontrunner campaign had initially not expected serious opposition after other potential candidates like elizabeth dole and dan quayle decided not to run . mccain 's new-found momentum ended after his defeat in the south carolina primary ( see below ) , and though he pulled out wins in michigan and his home state of arizona , his campaign was ended by super tuesday . in the 2004 primaries , john kerry , whose campaign had been sagging in prior months , won the democratic party 's iowa caucus while john edwards unexpectedly finished second , over heavily favored howard dean and dick gephardt ( the latter two had been trading negative attacks in the weeks leading up to the vote ) . gephardt immediately ended his campaign , while dean 's post-concession speech drew negative attention . kerry went on to overcome dean 's initial lead in new hampshire to win that primary , and eventually the democratic presidential nomination . in 2008 , democratic party presidential frontrunner hillary clinton , whose campaign initially banked on a knockout victory in iowa , unexpectedly finished third in that caucus behind winner barack obama and john edwards . clinton then pulled off a comeback victory in new hampshire where obama had been leading the polls . although obama and clinton were largely well matched in most of the subsequent primaries , obama 's better organization and uncontested caucus victories were crucial to his winning the democratic nomination . in 2008 , john mccain , initially struggling among republican party contenders in 2007 , decided to skip iowa and concentrate on new hampshire ( the same primary where he had unexpectedly triumphed back in 2000 ) and mccain 's win rejuvenated his presidential campaign and he became the republican nominee . rudy giuliani and mitt romney , two candidates who had each led in the polls in 2007 , did not perform as expected in iowa and new hampshire . in 2012 , mitt romney was initially reported to be the first republican party non-incumbent presidential candidate , since the iowa caucus started in 1976 , to win both the iowa caucus ( albeit , by an 8-vote margin over rick santorum ) and new hampshire primary . however a final count released by the iowa state party sixteen days after the caucus contest reported santorum as the winner by 34 votes over romney , but by then romney had already won new hampshire by a comfortable margin . . nevada . in 2008 nevada was given the official '' first in the west '' status reflecting the growing importance of the west as well as nevada 's electoral bellwether status . america 's increasing ethnic diversity , urbanization , and geographic redistribution made influential political leaders come to the realization that iowa and new hampshire were not representative of the rest of the country . following the 2004 election , then-senate majority leader harry reid began making a case for nevada as the perfect american microcosm . since 2012 , the nevada caucuses have been the third race in the process after iowa and new hampshire . south carolina . south carolina is generally the '' first in the south '' primary . for the republicans , it is considered a '' firewall '' to protect establishment favorites and frontrunners in the presidential nomination race , being designed to stop the momentum of insurgent candidates who could have received a boost from strong showings in iowa and new hampshire . from its inception in 1980 through the election of 2008 , the winner of the south carolina republican presidential primary has gone on to win the nomination . in the 2012 republican primaries , newt gingrich initially finished poorly in the early states , but then scored an upset victory in south carolina over frontrunner mitt romney . however , after suffering a decisive defeat to romney in florida , gingrich 's campaign was relegated back to third place , leaving rick santorum as the main challenger to romney for the rest of the primaries . in 2020 , a decisive win in the south carolina primary helped former united states vice president joe biden win the democratic party u.s . presidential primary by eliminating several rivals and triggering strong wins across the country on super tuesday . biden had previously struggled in iowa and new hampshire . super tuesday . the tuesday in february or march when the greatest number of states hold primary elections and caucuses is known as '' super tuesday '' . because it is held in various states from geographically and socially diverse regions of the country , it typically represents a presidential candidate 's first test of national electability . more delegates can be won on super tuesday than on any other single day of the primary calendar , thus convincing wins during this day have usually propelled candidates to their party 's nomination . criticism . representativeness . because they are the states that traditionally hold their respective contests first , the iowa caucuses and the new hampshire primary usually attract the most media attention ; however , critics , such as mississippi secretary of state eric clark and tennessee senator william brock , point out that these states are not representative of the united states as a whole : they are overwhelmingly white , more rural , and wealthier than the national average , and neither is in the fast-growing west or south . conversely , states that traditionally hold their primaries in june , like california ( the most populous state overall ) and new jersey ( the most densely populated state ) , usually end up having no say in who the presidential candidate will be . as history , the races were usually over well before june . california and new jersey moved their primaries to february for the 2008 election , but in 2012 both states ended up moving them back to june . california lawmakers stated that consolidating their presidential and statewide primary election in june saves them about 100 million , and that it is not worth the cost when there is generally no competitive balance between the two political parties within california . in 2005 , the primary commission of the democratic national committee began considering removing iowa and new hampshire from the top of the calendar , but this proposal never gained approval , so those two states remain as the first two contests . new hampshire also fought back by obliging candidates who wanted to campaign in the state to pledge to uphold that primary as the first one . front-loading and compression . states vie for earlier primaries to claim greater influence in the nomination process , as the early primaries can act as a signal to the nation , showing which candidates are popular and giving those who perform well early on the advantage of the bandwagon effect . also , candidates can ignore primaries that fall after the nomination has already been secured , and would owe less to those states politically . as a result , rather than stretching from march to july , most primaries take place in a compressed time frame in february and march . national party leaders also have an interest in compressing the primary calendar , as it enables the party to reduce the chance of a bruising internecine battle and to preserve resources for the general campaign . in such a primary season , however , many primaries will fall on the same day , forcing candidates to choose where to spend their time and resources . indeed , super tuesday was created deliberately to increase the influence of the south . when states can not agree to coordinate primaries , however , attention flows to larger states with large numbers of delegates at the expense of smaller ones . because the candidate 's time is limited , paid advertising may play a greater role . moreover , a compressed calendar limits the ability of lesser-known candidates to corral resources and raise their visibility among voters , especially when a better-known candidate enjoys the financial and institutional backing of the party establishment . in an article from detroit news , tennessee senator bill brock said about front-loading , '' today , too many people in too many states have no voice in the election of our major party nominees . for them , the nominations are over before they have begun . '' . role of superdelegates . the term '' superdelegate '' itself was used originally as a criticism of unpledged delegates . superdelegates are only used by the democratic party . political commentator susan estrich argued in 1981 that these delegates , who at the time were predominantly white and male , had more power than other delegates because of their greater freedom to vote as they wish . the democratic party in particular has faced accusations that it conducts its nominating process in an undemocratic way , because superdelegates are generally chosen without regard to their preferences in the presidential race and are not obligated to support the candidate chosen by the voters . reform proposals . below are several proposals for reforming the primary system . california plan ( american plan ) . one reform concept is the graduated random presidential primary system , variations of which have been referred to as the american plan or the california plan . this plan starts with small primaries , and gradually moves up to larger ones , in 10 steps , with states chosen at random . the idea is that fewer initial primaries , typically in smaller states , would allow grassroots campaigns to score early successes and pick up steam . however , since states are chosen at random , travel costs may still be significant . delaware plan ( fourfold round plan ) . a commission empaneled by the republican national committee recommended the delaware plan in 2000 . this plan had states grouped by size into four groups , with the smallest primaries first , then the next-smallest , and so on . populous states objected to the plan , however , because it would have always scheduled their primaries at the end of the season . other criticisms included the wide geographic range of the states , necessitating high travel costs . the delaware plan was put to vote at republican national convention of 2000 and rejected . rotating regional primary system . the national association of secretaries of state has endorsed a rotating regional primary system , with the country split into four regions : the west , the midwest , the south , and the northeast . unlike the delaware plan and the american plan , the rotating regional primary system would lower campaigning costs by restricting groups of primaries to single , contiguous regions . author and political scientist larry sabato is also a proponent of this plan , but his proposal would have the order of regional primaries determined by lottery on january 1 of each presidential election year instead of on a rotating basis . in addition , his plan would allow for a few small population states , such as iowa and new hampshire , to hold their primaries in advance of the first region . criticisms of the regional plan include the higher entry costs than the other plans ( since 1/4 of the country would vote in the first regional ) , and the political bias of certain regions ( the south or the northeast ) unduly influencing the selection of a nominee . inter regional primary plan . in the interregional primary plan , the country is divided into geographical regions . on each primary date from march to june , one state from each of six regions votes . each election date would contain a wide variety of perspectives . the order of the states in each region is set by a lottery . in a 24-year cycle , every state would have a chance to be among the first primary states . the primary criticism of this plan is that travel costs would be quite high : in each round , candidates would essentially have to cover the entire country to campaign effectively . contrary to most reform plans , this would reduce the ability of lesser-funded candidates to build up from small contests to large ones . -- > . timing adjustment . in the 2008 republican primary , states that ran early primaries were punished by a reduction of 50 % in the number of delegates they could send to the national convention . extension of this idea would set timing tiers , under which states that ran earlier primaries would send proportionally fewer delegates to the national convention , and states that waited would get a higher proportional number of delegates to the convention . for example , the party allowed primaries before march 1 to send 40 % of delegates ; those during march could send 60 % ; those during april could send 80 % ; those during may could send 100 % ; and those during june could send 120 % . the effect of such a plan would be clumping of primaries at the beginning of each month . it would still allow states to determine the timing of their own primaries , while giving them some incentive to hold primaries later . the disadvantage of the timing adjustment method is that it does not reduce travel time as the regional plans do , although it does permit regional groups of states to voluntarily clump together in a single superprimary as they have done in the past . in practice , however , this timing tier system did not prevent states from moving their primaries in 2008 and 2012 . for example , during the 2012 republican primary , florida and several other states still moved their primaries to earlier dates despite being penalized delegates . both parties then enacted more severe penalties in 2016 for violating their timing rules . for republicans , states with more than 30 delegates that violate the timing rules will be deprived of all their delegates but nine ; states with less than 30 will be reduced to six . for democrats , states violating these rules will be penalized half of their pledged delegates and all of their unpledged delegates . . see also . ; lists of primaries by party democratic party presidential primaries republican party presidential primaries ; related topics ames ( iowa ) straw poll on a saturday in august prior to the election year , from 1979 to 2011 list of united states presidential candidates by number of primary votes . notes . references . brereton charles . first in the nation : new hampshire and the premier presidential primary . portsmouth , nh : peter e . randall publishers , 1987 . kendall , kathleen e . communication in the presidential primaries : candidates and the media , 1912–2000 ( 2000 ) hugh , gregg . '' first-in-the-nation presidential primary '' , state of new hampshire manual for the general court , ( department of state ) no.55 , 1997 . palmer , niall a . the new hampshire primary and the american electoral process ( 1997 ) '' reid , labor aided nevada with demos '' , arizona daily star , july 24 , 2006 . sabato , larry , politics : america 's missing constitutional link , virginia quarterly review , summer 2006 , 149–61 . scala , dante j . stormy weather : the new hampshire primary and presidential politics ( 2003 ) ware , alan . the american direct primary : party institutionalization and transformation in the north ( 2002 ) , a british perspective . external links . fairvote.org