A Canterbury Tale

plot . the story concerns three young people : british army sergeant peter gibbs ( dennis price ) , u.s . army sergeant bob johnson ( played by real-life sergeant john sweet ) , and a '' land girl '' , miss alison smith ( sheila sim ) . the group arrive at the railway station in the fictitious small kent town of chillingbourne ( filmed in chilham , fordwich , wickhambreaux and other villages in the area ) , near canterbury , late on friday night , 27 august 1943 . peter has been stationed at a nearby army camp , alison is due to start working on a farm in the area , and bob left the train by mistake , hearing the announcement '' next stop canterbury '' and thinking he was in canterbury . as they leave the station together alison is attacked by an assailant in uniform , who pours glue on her hair before escaping . it transpires that this has happened to other women , and the mystery attacker is known locally as '' the glue man '' . alison asks bob if he will spend the weekend in chillingbourne to help her solve the mystery . the next day , while riding a farm cart in the countryside , alison meets peter , who surrounds her cart with his platoon of three bren gun carriers . alison agrees to meet peter again . the three decide to investigate the attack , enlisting the help of the locals , including several small boys who play large-scale war games . the three use their detective skills to identify the culprit as a local magistrate , thomas colpeper ( eric portman ) , a gentleman farmer and pillar of the community , who also gives local history lectures to soldiers stationed in the district . alison interviews all the glue man 's victims to identify the dates and times of their attacks . gibbs visits colpeper at his home and steals the fire watch roster listing the nights colpeper was on duty in the town hall , whilst a paper drive for salvage by johnson 's boy commandos lets johnson discover receipts for gum used to make glue sold to colpeper . the dates of the attacks correspond with colpeper 's night watches , for which he wore a home guard uniform kept in the town hall . on their train journey to canterbury on the monday morning , colpeper joins the three in their compartment . they confront him with their suspicions , which he does not deny , and they discover that his motive is to prevent the soldiers from being distracted from his lectures by female company , as well as to help keep the local women faithful to their absent british boyfriends . in colpeper 's words , chaucer 's pilgrims travelled to canterbury to '' receive a blessing or to do penance '' . on arriving in the city of canterbury , devastated by wartime bombing , all three young people receive blessings of their own . alison discovers that her boyfriend , believed killed in the war , has survived after all ; his father , who had blocked their marriage because he thought his son could do better than a shopgirl , finally relents . bob receives long-delayed letters from his sweetheart , who is now a wac in australia . peter , a theatre organ before the war , gets to play the music of johann sebastian bach on the large organ at canterbury cathedral , before leaving with his unit . he decides not to report colpeper to the canterbury police , as he had planned to do . cast . eric portman as thomas colpeper , a gentleman farmer and magistrate in chillingbourne . he is a bachelor , living with his mother and , being very keen on the local history of the area , wants to share that knowledge with everyone around him , particularly with the soldiers from elsewhere in britain who have been billeted nearby . john sweet ( actor ) as acting sgt . bob johnson , asn 31036062 , hails from three sisters falls , oregon . on his way from salisbury to canterbury to meet his friend and fulfil a promise to his mother to see canterbury cathedral , he gets off the train at chillingbourne ( filmed at selling railway station between faversham and canterbury ) by mistake and almost immediately gets caught up in the mystery of the '' glue man '' . he has come to britain as a part of the american army preparing for the d-day . he becomes more and more willing to learn something about england during his visit . the original script mentioned that johnson was on his way to canterbury as his ancestors had come from there . the producers had originally planned to use burgess meredith in the role but changed their mind in favour of an unknown . meredith acted as a script editor for johnson 's character . dennis price as sgt peter gibbs , a theatre organ from london . he has been conscripted into the british army and has just been stationed at the military camp outside chillingbourne , where his unit is engaged in training manoeuvres . sheila sim as alison smith , a shop assistant in a department store in london . she has joined the women 's land army to '' do her bit '' to help in the defence of her country . she has been assigned to the farm of thomas colpeper , the local jp in chillingbourne . alison had previously spent a happy summer just outside chillingbourne , living in a caravan with her fiancé , an archaeologist who has since joined the raf and is missing in action at the outset of the film . ( he is reported at the end as alive and in gibraltar ) . alison is determined to solve the mystery of the '' glue man '' and seeks the help of bob johnson to do so . johnson replies '' you need about as much help as a flying fortress '' . charles hawtrey as thomas duckett , the town 's stationmaster . esmond knight as narrator/seven-sisters soldier/village idiot . the narrator reads the modernised extract from chaucer 's canterbury tales , followed by a piece in chaucerian style on the changes to kent since chaucer 's time ( both only in the original version ) . george merritt as ned horton and edward rigby as jim horton , play the blacksmith and the wheelwright . the real horton brothers , ben and neville , are seen acting as assistants to the actors . freda jackson as mrs honeywood , the farming woman who employs alison . eliot makeham as the church organist in canterbury . betty jardine as fee baker . harvey golden as sgt roczinsky , bob johnson 's friend in canterbury . leonard smith , james tamsitt and david todd , play among the group of boys enjoying an adventure and river battle in a bucolic setting . all of them were local to the canterbury area . smith , tamsitt and todd were selected for speaking roles . kim hunter as johnson 's girl ( american release ) . raymond massey as narrator ( american version ) ( voice ) . esma cannon as agnes the maid . production . writing . powell and pressburger , who were known collectivity as '' the archers '' , wrote the script together using the concept of light and time as a basis of identity . powell was said to have used the work of chaucer as inspiration to create a film that showed '' the love of his birthplace and all that he felt about england '' . . casting . all three leads were unknowns . many local people , including a lot of young boys , were recruited as extras for the extensive scenes of children 's outdoor activities such as river '' battles '' and dens . . filming . the film was shot throughout the county of kent not long after the baedeker raids of may–june 1942 which had destroyed large areas of the city centre of canterbury . much of the film is shot on location in and around canterbury cathedral and the city 's bomb sites , including the high street , rose lane and the buttermarket . the cathedral was not available for filming as the stained glass had been taken down , the windows boarded up and the organ , an important location for the story , removed to storage , all for protection against air raids . by the use of clever perspective , large portions of the cathedral were recreated within the studio by art director alfred junge . chilham mill features in the film in the scene where gi bob meets children playing in the river on a boat and later , with peter , when they get the proof about colpeper . the village was used for scenes showing chillingbourne village . in the scene where soldiers gather for a lecture at the colpepper institute they are actually in fordwich . selling , kent appears in the film as '' chillingbourne '' station at the beginning of the film . bob and alison ride on a cart through the village , the local wickhambreaux mill can be clearly seen . colpeper 's house was wickhambreaux court . a local wingham village pub '' the red lion '' was used for some exterior shots of '' the hand of glory '' inn where bob stays whilst in the village . other exterior shots of '' the hand of glory '' were filmed at '' the george & dragon '' , fordwich . before the credits , the following acknowledgement appears over an image of the cathedral viewed from the christ church gate , . soundtrack . besides that composed by allan gray for the film , musical works featured include : angelus ad virginem mid-15th century polyphony heard as a peal of bells in orchestral guise under the opening titles commando patrol by allan gray , stan bowsher , walter ridley – quickstep heard in the background during johnson and gibbs 's scene in the lobby of the hand of glory i see you everywhere by allan gray , stan bowsher , walter ridley – slow foxtrot heard in the background during johnson and gibbs 's scene in the lobby of the hand of glory turkey in the straw – folksong heard as agnes leaves bob 's bedroom come to the church in the wild wood – bob sings as he washes hear my prayer , o lord by henry purcell – the ethereal choral music heard as gibbs pauses on entering the cathedral bond of friendship – regimental march of the king 's division . played as the band nears the cathedral toccata and fugue in d minor , bwv 565 by j . s . bach ( the original while inside the cathedral and the orchestration by leopold stokowski outside the cathedral ) and the hymn onward christian soldiers – played on the organ by gibbs . reception . the world premiere was held on 11 may 1944 at the friars ' cinema ( later the second site of the marlowe theatre , now demolished ) , canterbury , england , an event commemorated there by a plaque unveiled by stars sheila sim and john sweet in october 2000 . a canterbury tale or two although the film initially had very poor reviews in the uk press , contemporary review and only small audiences , the film became a moderate success at the british box office in 1944 . murphy , robert ( 2003_ realism and tinsel : cinema and society in britain 1939-48 p.207 the film was the first production of powell and pressburger not to be a major box office draw . tritton , paul . a canterbury tale – memories of a classic wartime movie . canterbury : tritton publications , august 2000 . with the war over powell was forced by the studio to completely re-edit the film for the u.s . release , cutting over 20 minutes to make the film shorter and faster moving , adding narration by raymond massey , and filming '' bookends '' which introduced kim hunter as sergeant johnson 's girlfriend to make the film more contemporary . at the time of filming , hunter and massey were preparing to film a matter of life and death for powell . powell filmed hunter 's sequences with sweet on an english set simulating new york city where the couple , now married , presented the film as a flashback similar to the openings of the way to the stars and 12 o'clock high . sweet was actually filmed in new york with the sequences combined . the film was fully restored by the british film institute in the late 1970s and the new print was hailed as a masterwork of british cinema . it has since been reissued on dvd in both the uk and usa . legacy . there is now an annual festival based around the film in which film fans tour the film 's locations . location walks the theme of the film was used by spike milligan for the goon show the phantom head shaver of brighton in 1954 . the film was shown in the nave of canterbury cathedral on 19 september 2007 to help raise money for the cathedral restoration fund . bbc kent in may 2014 the film was shown in chilham village hall to help raise money for the restoration of its war memorial . the screening , which took place in village where the film was made , coincided with the 70th anniversary of the film 's première in canterbury . several video artists have recut the more visionary sections of the film as video art . dialogue from the film was sampled on the track '' introduction '' on the album merrie land and dreadzones second light . references . bibliography . . . . external links . reviews and articles at the powell & pressburger pages a tribute : a canterbury tale an essay by peter von bagh at the criterion collection scorsese and schoonmaker talk about a canterbury tale a screening of a canterbury tale in canterbury cathedral