L'Argent

plot summary . the novel takes place in 1864–1869 , beginning a few months after the death of saccard 's second wife renée ( see la curée ) . saccard is bankrupt and an outcast among the bourse financiers . searching for a way to reestablish himself , saccard is struck by plans developed by his upstairs neighbor , the engineer georges hamelin , who dreams of restoring christianity to the middle east through great public works : rail lines linking important cities , improved roads and transportation , renovated eastern mediterranean ports , and fleets of modern ships to move goods around the world . saccard decides to institute a financial establishment to fund these projects . he is motivated primarily by the potential to make incredible amounts of money and reestablish himself on the bourse . in addition , saccard has an intense rivalry with his brother eugène rougon , a powerful cabinet minister who refuses to help him after his bankruptcy and who is promoting a more liberal , less catholic agenda for the empire . furthermore , saccard , an intense anti-semite , sees the enterprise as a strike against the jewish bankers who dominate the bourse . from the beginning , saccard 's banque universelle ( universal bank ) stands on shaky ground . in order to manipulate the price of the stock , saccard and his confreres on the syndicate he has set up to jumpstart the enterprise buy their own stock and hide the proceeds of this illegal practice in a dummy account fronted by a straw man . while hamelin travels to istanbul to lay the groundwork for their enterprise , the banque universelle goes from strength to strength . stock prices soar , going from 500 francs a share to more than 3,000 francs in three years . furthermore , saccard buys several newspapers which serve to maintain the illusion of legitimacy , promote the banque , excite the public , and attack rougon . the novel follows the fortunes of about 20 characters , cutting across all social strata , showing the effects of stock market speculation on rich and poor . the financial events of the novel are played against saccard 's personal life . hamelin lives with his sister caroline , who , against her better judgment , invests in the banque universelle and later becomes saccard 's mistress . caroline learns that saccard fathered a son , victor , during his first days in paris . she rescues victor from his life of abject poverty , placing him in a charitable institution . but victor is completely unredeemable , given over to greed , laziness , and thievery . after he attacks one of the women at the institution , he disappears into the streets , never to be seen again . eventually , the banque universelle can not sustain itself . saccard 's principal rival on the bourse , the jewish financier gundermann , learns about saccard 's financial trickery and attacks , loosing stock upon the market , devaluing its price , and forcing saccard to buy millions of shares to keep the price up . at the final collapse , the banque holds one-fourth of its own shares worth 200 million francs . the fall of the banque is felt across the entire financial world . indeed , all of france feels the force of its collapse . the effects on the characters of l'argent are disastrous , including complete ruin , suicide , and exile , though some of saccard 's syndicate members escape and gundermann experiences a windfall . saccard and hamelin are sentenced to five years in prison . through the intervention of saccard 's brother eugène rougon , who does n't want a brother in jail , their sentences are commuted and they are forced to leave france . saccard goes to belgium , and the novel ends with caroline preparing to follow her brother to rome . historical background . because the financial world is closely linked with politics , l ’ argent encompasses many historical events , including : the 1860 druze massacre of maronite church in syria france 's invasion of mexico ( 1861–1867 ) the construction of the suez canal , opened in 1869 the austro-prussian war , including the battle of königgrätz at sadová in 1866 the third italian war of independence ( 1866 ) the universal exposition of 1867 the publication of das kapital in 1867 and the advent of marxism the 1882 collapse of the by the end of the novel , the stage is set for the franco-prussian war ( 1870–1871 ) and the fall of the second empire . relation to the other rougon-macquart novels . zola 's plan for the rougon-macquart novels was to show how heredity and environment worked on members of one family over the course of the second empire . all of the descendants of adelaïde fouque ( tante dide ) , saccard 's grandmother , demonstrate what today would be called obsessive-compulsive behaviors to varying degrees . saccard is obsessed with money and the building of wealth , to which everything in his life holds second place . in le docteur pascal , zola describes the influence of heredity on saccard as an '' adjection '' in which the natures of his avaricious parents are commingled . two other members of the rougon-macquart family also appear in l'argent : saccard 's sons maxime ( b . 1840 ) and victor ( b . 1853 ) . if his father 's obsession is with building wealth , maxime 's obsession is with keeping it . a widower , maxime ( who played a central role in la curée ) lives alone in opulence he does not share . in le docteur pascal , maxime is described as prematurely aged , afraid of pleasure and indeed of all life , devoid of emotion , and cold , characteristics introduced in l'argent . maxime is described as a '' dissemination '' of characteristics , having the moral prepotency of his father and the pampered egotism of his mother ( saccard 's first wife ) . victor , on the other hand , brought up in squalor , is the furthest extreme zola illustrates of the rougon family 's degeneracy . like his great-grandmother tante dide , victor suffers from neuralgia attacks . unlike jacques lantier ( his second cousin , see la bête humaine ) , he is unable to control his criminal impulses , and his disappearance into the streets of paris is no surprise . victor is described as a '' fusion '' of the lowest characteristics of his parents ( his mother was a prostitute ) . in le docteur pascal ( set in 1872 ) , zola tells us that saccard returns to paris , institutes a newspaper , and is again making piles of money . rougon is the protagonist of son excellence eugène rougon , the events of which predate l'argent . saccard 's daughter clotilde ( b . 1847 ) is the main female character in le docteur pascal . translations . l'argent has had the following translations into english : money , translated by benjamin tucker , 1891 money , translated by ernest a . vizetelly , 1894 ( new edition 1904 ; reprinted 1991 and 2007 ) money , translated by valerie minogue , 2014 , published by oxford university press in their oxford world 's classics series . adaptations . in 1928 , a silent film adaptation of l'argent was directed by marcel l'herbier . it used only the skeleton of the plot and it updated the setting to paris in the 1920s . the 1936 french film l'argent was directed by pierre billon . a three-part television adaptation of the book was directed by jacques rouffio for french tv in 1988 . shunt , a british theatre company , in 2009 created a piece of immersive theatre loosely based on the book , called 'money ' . references . brown , f . zola : a life ( new york : farrar , straus & giroux , 1995 ) zola , e . l'argent , translated as money by e . a . vizetelly ( 1894 ) zola , e . le doctor pascal , translated as doctor pascal by e . a . vizetelly ( 1893 ) . external links . ( french ) ( 1988 ) ( tv ) ( french ) featuring miou-miou preface to the original english translation ( 1928 ) by ernest a . vizetelly money at google books . full original english translation ( 1902 ) by ernest a . vizetelly l'argent map