Die for the Government

background . after forming in 1992 , the band spent the next few years recording demos and appearing on compilations and splits with other pittsburgh bands , as well as touring around the city . in 1995 , they recorded and released their first solo ep , kill kill kill . nicky garratt , at new red archives , heard the records and he contacted the band about releasing an album for the label . despite their distrust of record labels in general , they eventually signed so they could distribute their music further nationally . some members of the local community accused the band of selling out for signing with a national label . during their tour for the ep , andy and justin did not get along , leading to many fights . by the time the band had returned to pittsburgh , andy had started fighting with pat as well . although they were able to record the album together , andy left shortly after the record was finished . despite their problems , justin and pat wished andy well in the booklet , telling him to '' remember the good times , forget the rest '' . as a result , andy did n't play on the ensuing tour promoting the album before its release . the cd booklet also featured an article from a local fanzine titled '' it 's ok not to be a dick '' , describing a recent punk show that resulted in damage to the venue and attacking the '' jock punks '' that were responsible . song information . many of the songs on the record were written about the local punk scene , and included condemnation against the nazi punk that were infiltrating the music scene at the time , accusing them of ruining concerts and committing violent acts against other fans . the rest of the album features social-political songs heavily influenced by the gulf war back in 1991 . almost half the album was written back in 1992 and was featured on the band 's first demo tapes . you 'd do the same , kill the rich , and no more dead are all the same versions that were featured on the kill kill kill . davey destroyed the punk scene was also featured on the ep , although it was rerecorded for the album . you 'd do the same attacks the hypocritical attitudes of those who have criticized the band for their beliefs . the title track is the only anti-flag song to use a fade out ending . justin said that he was sitting in his room when he came up with the riff for the song , and started singing the words . he claimed that he knew in that moment that the song would capture the essence of what he wanted the band to be . the song references the gulf war and criticizes the us government for using military lives for their personal gain . it was also written as a response to the nationalism and jingoism that was spread throughout the country , and in the music scene in particular . drink drank punk is a fast-paced song that is from the point of view of a young punk fan who drinks heavily . rotten future was inspired by and a response to sex pistols front-man john lydon , and the nihilism that was prevalent in punk music as a result of the sex pistols . safe tonight was a more personal track , with justin singing about a kid in a violent home environment trying to run away . red , white , and brainwashed was written back in 1992 and was one of the first songs written by the band to be politically based . like the title track , the song criticized us military and government policy during the gulf war . despite claims on the internet , davey destroyed the punk scene was not written about davey havok of afi , as the band had written the track back in 1992 , years before they had met the band . they said that the name davey was from the claymation show davey and goliath . summer squatter is a more ska-influenced track than the rest of the album . the album 's liner notes described the song as being against punks who came into the scene , ruined it for other fans , then left , and not being against the practice of squatting . go-go dancer describes the protagonist falling in love with a girl who works at a punk show as a go-go dancer , and is unique among the anti-flag catalogue as being their only love song . police state in the usa references the waco siege and accuses the clinton administration of behaving like the eastern european communist countries . punk by the book is another track attacking '' stereotypical punks '' causing trouble for the scene . fuck police brutality is a hardcore style track , and talks about justin witnessing a police officer attack a kid for drinking outside a punk show , and getting a gun pulled on him when he tried to stop it ( pittsburgh at the time had one of the highest rates of police brutality in the us at the time ) . i 'm being watched by the cia features justin sarcastically singing the first verse of the star-spangled banner before launching into another hardcore style song . kill the rich and no more dead are attacks against the rich and upper class for their greed and destruction of the country 's national resources . confused youth is a song about parents forcing their kids to grow up and conform to society 's norms , and calls for solidarity among the youth . justin later said in 2016 that the last song , your daddy was a rich man , was written about a '' donald trump '' , and his father . recording . due to their lack of money , the band was unable to book a studio to record in . because of that , they rented equipment from their local music store and set up a makeshift studio in andy 's house . the drums were set up in the basement , with the rest of the equipment upstairs . according to justin , '' we ran a snake with all the cables through the laundry chute '' . the process lasted months , with the band eventually recording '' around 30-35 songs '' . some of the songs recorded during the sessions were later released on their split with dbs north america sucks ( which would later be re-released as their system does n't work for you ) . track listing . personnel . justin sane – guitar/vocals andy flag – bass/vocals , mixing on tracks 4,6,7,8,12,13,16 , and 17 pat thetic – drums andy '' reagan '' wheeler , ricky '' reagan '' wright , anne flag , mike poisel , mike armstrong , dan d . lion , jason decosta , and the band disco crisis all provided back up vocals . joe west and anti-flag - production . legacy . die for the government and fuck police brutality would later be released on the band 's compilation album '' a document of dissent '' on fat wreck chords in 2013 . kill the rich would be rerecorded for the band 's 20 years of hell in 2012 . in 2017 , the band launched the die for the government 20th anniversary tour to celebrate the album 's anniversary , where they played the album in its entirety for the first time ever along with the band 's hits . die for the government was later covered by german punk band zsk and russian punk band tarakany ! .