Rollie Fingers

early life and minor league career . fingers was born in steubenville , ohio , to george michael fingers and edna pearl ( née stafford ) fingers . his father ( who had played minor league baseball for the st . louis cardinals and roomed with stan musial ) , worked in a steubenville steel mill . one day , george fingers came home from work fed-up and said , '' that 's it , we 're moving to california . '' his father then sold the house for us 1,500 , bought a car , and took the family to rancho cucamonga . they could not afford hotels , so they slept in sleeping bags beside the highway . after getting to california , george fingers had to eventually go back to work in another steel mill . fingers attended upland high school in the southern california city of upland , and later , he attended one semester at chaffey college . the los angeles dodgers offered fingers a signing bonus of 20,000 , but fingers thought he had no chance to reach the major leagues for years because the dodgers had a solid pitching staff including sandy koufax and don drysdale , they were already winning pennants , and their farm system appeared to be full of talented players . he turned down the dodgers ' offer and signed with the kansas city athletics for less money ( a 13,000 signing bonus ) on christmas eve 1964 . at first , the athletics did not know whether to make him a pitcher or outfielder , but after deciding to play him as a pitcher , he was assigned to the leesburg a 's of the class a florida state league for the 1965 season . in 1966 , he played for the modesto reds of the class a california league , and he played for two seasons ( 1968 and 1969 ) for the birmingham a 's of the class aa southern league . on minor league opening day 1967 in birmingham—just nine days after he married his high school sweetheart and the upland high school team statistician ( jill ) —a hit baseball struck fingers in the face , breaking his cheekbone , jaw , and knocking out some teeth . his jaw was wired shut for five weeks , and when he returned to action , fingers jumped every time the ball was hit ; it took him about half the remaining season to get used to being on the mound again . . major league career . fingers was a starter throughout his minor league career . flaherty , tom ( december 20 , 1990 ) . – '' what a relief for fingers manager 's decision launched career that may land him in hall of fame '' . – the milwaukee journal . he had started 19 games in 1970 . rollie fingers . – baseball-reference.com . however , a may 15 , 1971 , start against the royals in kansas city was his last in regular rotation . during that game , he gave up one run on four hits in five full innings . athletics royals – saturday , may 15 , 1971 . – baseball-reference.com . fingers was called upon as a reliever in a game on may 21 , 1971 , entering in the first inning against the minnesota twins in oakland after starter blue moon odom gave up three runs and three walks in just eight batters . fingers pitched innings , allowing three hits and two runs . twins athletics – friday , may 21 , 1971 . – baseball-reference.com . by the end of may 1971 , athletics manager dick williams decided that fingers would be the late-inning closer . during the 1972 season , fingers entered games in the fifth inning on four occasions , but mostly entered in the sixth inning or later . rollie ringers 1972 pitching gamelog . – baseball-reference.com . he did start two games in 1973—april 21 versus the california angels at oakland and may 7 against the orioles at baltimore , the latter being the final start of his career . other than those two games , for the remainder of his career , his earliest entrance into a game was in the sixth inning , which happened on three more occasions . rollie ringers 1973 pitching gamelog . – baseball-reference.com . mainly he entered in the seventh , eighth , or ninth innings . rollie ringers 1971 pitching gamelog . – baseball-reference.com . fingers was part of the oakland athletics team that accomplished the first modern-day '' three-peat , '' winning the world series in 1972 , 1973 , and 1974 . for the third of those championships , he won the world series most valuable player award , earning two saves and one win during the series . just prior to the start of the 1974 world series against the los angeles dodgers , fingers and odom got into a fight in the a 's locker room after odom made a comment about fingers ' wife . though the incident lasted less than a minute , fingers required six stitches on his head , and odom sprained his ankle and had a noticeable limp . with the end of baseball 's reserve clause , all players not under a multiyear contract were set to become free agents after the 1976 season . believing he would not be able to afford to re-sign his key players , athletics ' owner charlie finley attempted to sell fingers and joe rudi to the boston red sox for 1 & nbsp ; million each and vida blue to the new york yankees for 1.5 & nbsp ; million in june . bowie kuhn , the commissioner of baseball , nullified the sale , saying that the transactions were '' not in the best interests of baseball '' . finley sued kuhn , and he benched fingers , rudi and blue , saying that they belonged to other teams . members of the athletics threatened to strike against finley if they did not play , and finley relented . after the season , fingers signed with the san diego padres as a free agent . fingers won the rolaids relief man award in 1977 , 1978 , and 1980 with the padres . after the 1980 season , on december 8 , the padres traded fingers , gene tenace , bob shirley , and a player to be named later ( later selected to be bob geren ) to the st . louis cardinals for terry kennedy , john littlefield , al olmsted , mike phillips , kim seaman , steve swisher , and john urrea . a few days later , the cardinals traded fingers , ted simmons , and pete vuckovich to the milwaukee brewers for sixto lezcano , lary sorensen , david green , and dave lapoint . in 1981 , fingers won the rolaids relief man of the year award , the american league ( al ) most valuable player award , and al cy young award . he saved 29 games for the 1982 brewers , but he pitched most of the season in pain and was forced to miss the brewers ' first ( and to date , only ) 1982 world series , where they were beaten in seven games by the cardinals . fingers missed the 1983 season with injury , and had a laminectomy to remove a herniated disk from his back in august 1984 . his last major league appearance was on september 17 , 1985 , against the baltimore orioles at memorial stadium . he pitched in relief of teddy higuera in the bottom of the eighth inning , facing two batters . he allowed a home run to gary roenicke , but he struck out rick dempsey to end the inning as the orioles won 6–0 . at the end of his career , after being released by the brewers the previous season , he was offered a contract by pete rose to play for the cincinnati reds for 1986 , but owner marge schott had a '' clean cut '' policy for her players , mandating that all players must be clean shaven . fingers 's reply to reds general manager bill bergesch was : '' well , you tell marge schott to shave her saint bernard , and i 'll shave my moustache '' . . fingers and modern relief pitching . when fingers reached the major leagues , the role of relief pitchers was limited , as starting pitchers rarely left games while holding a lead ; but as team offense increased following the 1968 season , and especially with the american league 's introduction of the designated hitter in 1973 , managers became more willing to replace starters in the late innings with a lead in order to forestall any late rallies by opponents . through the 1960s , both leagues ' annual saves leaders tended toward totals of 20–25 saves ; few pitchers remained in the role more than two or three years , with significant exceptions such as roy face and knuckleballer hoyt wilhelm . but in the 1970s—in an era allowing for greater opportunities for closers than had previously been available—fingers ' excellence in relief allowed him to gradually increase his annual saves totals past 30 . in 1980 , he broke wilhelm 's record of 227 saves and eventually finished with 341—a record that stood until jeff reardon passed it in 1992 . fingers is regarded as a pioneer of modern relief pitching , defining the role of the closer for years to come . as had generally been true in baseball through the 1960s , fingers was moved to the bullpen & mdash ; and eventually to his role as a closer & mdash ; because of struggles with starting . before fingers ' time , a former starter 's renewed success in the bullpen led back to a spot in the starting rotation . however , with the successes of fingers and contemporaries such as sparky lyle and goose gossage , it has been widely accepted that an excellent pitcher might actually provide a greater benefit to his team as a closer than as a third or fourth starter . ( gossage , for example , was moved to the starting rotation after first serving as a reliever for a few seasons . as a starter , he pitched 17 complete games , but was clobbered and eventually was moved back to the bullpen permanently . ) as a result , later teams have been more willing to move successful starters—notably dennis eckersley , dave righetti , and john smoltz & mdash ; to the permanent role of closer , with no plans to bring them back to the rotation . ( smoltz bucked that trend by successfully returning to the rotation in 2005 . ) in 2006 , bruce sutter became the first pitcher in baseball history elected to the hall of fame who never started a game in his major league career . moustache . baseball-reference.com ranks fingers 's moustache as the best in history . in addition to his pitching ability , fingers was noted for his waxed handlebar moustache , which he originally grew to get a 300 bonus from athletics owner charles o . finley . on the first day of spring training for the 1972 season , reggie jackson showed up with a beard . in protest—and believing the athletics ' management would want jackson to shave—fingers and a few other players started going without shaving to force jackson to shave off his beard . instead , finley , ever the showman who would do almost anything to sell tickets , then offered prize-money to the player who could best grow and maintain their facial hair until opening day—april 15 versus minnesota . fingers went all out for the monetary incentive offered by finley and patterned his moustache after the images of the players of the late 19th century . armold , elijah ( january 25 , 2007 ) . – '' a man and his famous moustache : hall of fame reliever rollie fingers and his facial hair visited york area sports night '' . – york daily record . taking it even further , finley came up with '' moustache day '' at the ballpark , where any fan with a moustache could get in free . conklin , mike ( august 22 , 2003 ) . – chin music – the art and science of pitchers ' facial hair . '' – chicago tribune . catfish hunter and ken holtzman also went for the bonus , but fingers with his snidely whiplash took the prize . p-i news services ( february 10 , 1986 ) . – '' horner gives bone marrow-to brother . '' – seattle post-intelligencer . slocum , bob ( february 10 , 1987 ) . – '' are these two veterans washed up ? fingers : ' i feel real healthy ' '' . – evening tribune . fingers later said , '' most of us would have grown one anywhere on our bodies for 300 . '' dickey , glenn ( september 16 , 1986 ) . – '' 49ers shopping for qb – how about young ? '' – san francisco chronicle . the players became known as the '' moustache gang . '' peters , nick ( october 14 , 1990 ) . – '' they 've met before – in 1971 , the a 's moustache gang met cincinnati 's big red machine '' . – the sacramento bee . prior to the disbandment of the original core , many hall of famers acknowledged the strength of not only their arms but also their mustaches . willie mays , prior to his retirement , acknowledged seeing fingers ' mustache as a proper send-off for his career . bill buckner said , '' the only thing stronger than my swing was the beauty of his mustache . '' lastly , johnny bench noted that as a catcher , seeing fingers ' mustache prepared him en route to winning two world series with the cincinnati reds . although most former athletics players shaved off their handlebar moustaches after the team traded most of their players in 1975–76 , fingers maintained his after signing with the san diego padres as a free agent in 1977 , and he still has the mustache today . honors . in 1992 he was inducted into the baseball hall of fame , joining wilhelm to become only the second reliever inducted ( bruce sutter and rich gossage have since followed , as has dennis eckersley , who was a starter for half of his career and a reliever for the other half ) . in 1999 , he ranked number 96 on the sporting news list of baseball 's greatest players , and was nominated as a finalist for the major league baseball all-century team . fingers later pitched a season in the short-lived senior professional baseball league . fingers is one of only ten players who have had their numbers retired from more than one team . in 2000 , fingers was also inducted by the san diego hall of champions into the honoring san diego 's finest athletes both on and off the playing surface . rollie fingers . – san diego hall of champions . . income tax controversy . sports illustrated reported on january 2 , 2007 , that fingers owed the state of wisconsin ( in 2007 ) more than 1.4 million in income taxes dating back to his time with the brewers ( including 1.1 million in interest ) and was at the time the seventh biggest tax delinquent in the state . fingers disputed the claim , saying he was shocked when he learned of it in 2005 and that taxes had been properly withheld from his brewers paychecks . on august 15 , 2007 , the associated press reported that fingers ' name had been removed from wisconsin 's delinquent tax list the previous month . '' that 's all been taken care of , '' he told the ap . '' i 've had more people try to tell me , 'you know , you owe 1.4 million . ' i said , 'no , i do n't . ' we got all that squared away . i had to go all the way back to 1981 on my income taxes . that 's all been taken care of , and i did pay my taxes back then , so there 's no problem . the revenue department 's happy with me right now , so it 's all been resolved . '' . in media . books . on april 1 , 2009 , rollie fingers and co-author christopher '' yellowstone '' ritter released : rollie 's follies , cincinnati , ohio : clerisy press . the work is a non-fiction baseball book that combines elements of humor , anecdotal storytelling , odd lists and historical trivia . fingers , rollie ; and christopher '' yellowstone '' ritter ( 2009 ) . rollie 's follies : a hall of fame revue of baseball lists and lore , stats and stories . cincinnati , ohio : clerisy press . the first book inspired a sequel , released march 16 , 2010 by fingers and ritter : fingers , rollie ; and christopher '' yellowstone '' ritter ( 2010 ) . the rollie fingers baseball bible : lists and lore , stories and stats . cincinnati , ohio : clerisy press . the rollie fingers baseball bible : lists and lore , stories and stats , cincinnati , ohio : clerisy press . television appearances . rollie fingers and four other members of his family appeared on a 1983 episode of the game show family feud . after the opening theme , to honor fingers , host richard dawson led the crowd in a chorus of '' take me out to the ball game '' . richmond , peter ( march 3 , 1983 ) . '' brewers crossing fingers '' . the miami herald . fingers also appeared in a pair of commercials for pepsi max , playing himself in a field of dreams setting along with other legendary players . in one commercial , when the pepsi max delivery man replenishes an empty vending machine , fingers appears to take his moustache off and give it to the delivery man , saying , '' great save , kid . you deserve this . '' . radio . in 1994/1995 a comedy segment entitled '' rollie tv '' , concerning a fictitious cable television channel devoted solely to the life of rollie fingers and helmed by a fingers-obsessed host named greg shuttlecock , aired once a week on the steve dahl radio show on wmvp 1000 am in chicago . the idea and segment were created and performed by jeffery c . johnson and jim toth . a '' rollie tv '' skit had originally aired in 1993 on toth and johnson 's chicago cable tv show color tv and was then adapted into segments for radio . auction on december 11 , 2020 , rollie fingers ' world series championship ring was sold at auction for 75,300 . . see also . bay area sports hall of fame list of major league baseball annual saves leaders games finished . references . external links . retrosheet sabr biography project rollie fingers official website rollie 's baseball follies :