Lyme Park

lyme caxton missal . this missal had been owned by the legh family since at least 1508 . it is the only known nearly complete copy of the earliest edition of a missal according to the sarum rite still in existence . when the family moved from the house in 1946 , the missal went with them , and was held for safe-keeping in the john rylands library in manchester . in the late 2000s the national trust acquired it , and it was decided to return it to lyme park . to celebrate this the décor of the library was restored to the way it had been during the 19th & nbsp ; century . this included re-graining of its ceiling , reproducing velvet for the upholstery and curtains , and re-papering the room with replica wallpaper , based on its original design . . grounds . the house is surrounded by formal gardens of in a deer park of about which are listed at grade & nbsp ; ii in the national register of historic parks and gardens . in the gardens and deer park are a number of structures . gardens . thumb to the west of the house is the former mill pond . from the south side a lawn slopes down to another pond beyond which is a small ravine with a stone bridge , this area being known as killtime . to the west of the lawn is the sunken dutch garden , which was created by william legh . it consists of formal flower beds with a central fountain . to the west , south and east of the orangery are further formal flower gardens , including rose gardens . deer park . the park was enclosed in the 14th & nbsp ; century by piers legh & nbsp ; i . in the 17th & nbsp ; century richard legh planted avenues of sycamore and lime trees . richard 's son , peter legh & nbsp ; xii carried out more extensive tree-planting in the park , giving it its current appearance . red deer descended from the original deer present when the park was enclosed graze in the grounds , as do highland cattle . formerly an unusual breed of wild white cattle with red ears grazed in the park but they became extinct in 1884 . sheep also graze in the park . the gritstone trail and the peak district boundary walk long-distance footpaths both cross the park . . structures . left the most obvious structure in the park , other than the house , is a tower called the cage which stands on a hill to the east of the approach road to the house . it was originally a hunting lodge and was later used as a park-keeper 's cottage and as a lock-up for prisoners . the first structure on the site was built about 1580 ; this was taken down and rebuilt in 1737 , possibly to a design by leoni for peter legh & nbsp ; x . the tower is built in buff sandstone rubble with ashlar sandstone dressings . it is square in plan , in three storeys , with attached small square towers surmounted by cupolas at the corners . the cage is a grade & nbsp ; ii listed building . also in the park is the paddock cottage which was erected by peter legh & nbsp ; ix and restored in the early 21st & nbsp ; century . to the east of this are the remains of the stag house . to the left of the house in lantern wood is a belvedere known as the lantern . it is built in sandstone and has three storeys and a spire ; the lowest storey is square in plan while the other storeys and the spire are octagonal . the top storey and spire date from about 1580 and originally formed a bellcote on the north gatehouse . this was removed during the restoration of the house by wyatt and rebuilt on the present site . it is a grade & nbsp ; ii listed building . immediately to the northeast of the house is the orangery which was designed in 1862 by alfred darbyshire . the orangery is joined to the house by a covered passage known as the dark passage . this was designed by wyatt for sir & nbsp ; thomas legh in 1815 and is a grade & nbsp ; ii listed building . further from the house , to the northeast of the orangery , are the stables . these are dated 1863 and were also designed by darbyshire . they are built in sandstone on a courtyard plan and are listed at grade & nbsp ; ii . other structures in the grounds listed at grade & nbsp ; ii are the pheasant house dating from about 1870 , an italian white marble puteal in the centre of the courtyard of the house dating from the 18th & nbsp ; century and probably brought to the house from venice in about 1900 , sandstone kennels in an h-plan dating from around 1870 , a pair of gardener 's cottages dated 1871 , terrace revetment walls to the west of the house containing some 17th-century masonry with later repairs , the lodge , gate piers and gates on lyme park drive , the forward gatepiers to lyme park drive , dating from the late 17th & nbsp ; century and moved to their present position about 1860 , the gate piers in red lane , and the gate piers , gates and railings to the north of the north front of the house . . preservation . lyme park is owned and administered by the national trust . the house , garden and park are open to the public at advertised hours . an entrance fee to the house and garden is payable by non-members of the national trust , and additional fee is charged for parking . in the grounds are shops , a refreshment kiosk , a coffee shop and a restaurant . the lyme caxton missal is on display in the library . associated with it is an interactive audio-visual display with a touch-screen facility to enable pages of the book to be '' turned '' , and chants from the missal to be sung as they would have been 500 & nbsp ; years ago . events are held in the park . the bowmen of lyme use the park for archery . lyme park and its hall have been used in several films and television programmes . the exterior of the hall was used as pemberley , the seat of mr darcy , in the 1995 bbc adaptation of jane austen 's novel pride and prejudice , and as a location for the red dwarf episode '' timeslides '' . it was also used as a location in the 2011 film the awakening and in the second series of the village in 2014 . in august 2019 , the park was hit by severe flooding and was evacuated . though staff attempted to rescue antiques and collectables , a large section of the garden was washed away . . see also . grade i listed buildings in cheshire listed buildings in lyme handley . notes .