HTMS Chakri Naruebet

design . the original plan was to acquire a 7,800 ton vessel from bremer vulcan , but the thai government cancelled this contract on 22 july 1991 . a new contract for a larger warship to be constructed at bazán 's shipyard in ferrol , spain was signed by the thai and spanish governments on 27 march 1992 . the proposed vessel was based on the design of the spanish navy aircraft carrier , which in turn was based on the united states navy 's sea control ship concept . the design is formally referred to by the rtn as an '' offshore patrol helicopter carrier '' . chakri naruebet while still operating with harriers was the smallest aircraft carrier with a fixed wing air group in operation in the world . she displaces 11,486 tons at full load . the carrier is long between perpendiculars , and overall . she is wide at the waterline , with a maximum beam of , and a draught of . the warship has a ship 's company of 62 officers , 393 sailors , and 146 aircrew . up to 675 additional personnel can be transported , usually from the royal thai marine corps . chakri naruebet is propelled by a combined diesel or gas ( codog ) system . each of the two , five-bladed propellers is connected to a bazán-mtu 16v1163 tb83 diesel engine ( providing , used for cruising speed ) , and a general electric lm2500 gas turbine ( providing , used to reach top speed for short periods ) . chakri naruebet has a maximum speed of , although she can only reach with the diesels alone . she has a maximum range of with a constant speed of , and at . werthem ( ed . ) , naval institute guide to combat fleets of the world , p . 772 . armament and aircraft . chakri naruebet is fitted with two 0.5-inch machine guns , and three matra sadral sextuple surface-to-air missile launchers firing mistral missiles . bishop & chant , aircraft carriers , p . 89 the missile launchers were installed in 2001 . the vessel is also fitted for but not with an 8-cell mark 41 vertical launch system for sea sparrow missiles , and four phalanx ciws . the carrier reportedly does n't have a functioning anti-aircraft defense system installed . the carrier was designed to operate an air group of up to six av-8s matador v/stol aircraft , plus four to six s-70b seahawk helicopters . chakri naruebet is also capable of carrying up to fourteen additional helicopters ; a mix of sikorsky sea king , sikorsky s-76 , and ch-47 chinook . there is only enough hangar space for ten aircraft . the matador was a first generation export version of the hawker siddeley harrier , acquired secondhand from the spanish navy in 1997 . ireland , the illustrated guide to aircraft carriers of the world , p . 249 goebel , harriers in service and the falklands war the nine spanish aircraft ( seven standard version plus two tav-8s trainer aircraft ) were refurbished by construcciones aeronáuticas sa firm before delivery . by 1999 , only one aircraft was operational , and the rtn was looking for other first-generation harriers to cannibalize for spares . in 2003 , the navy attempted to acquire several second-generation , ex-royal navy sea harrier fa2 aircraft from british aerospace , but the deal did not go ahead . dunn , the harrier : overseas service the inoperative matadors were finally eliminated from service lists in 2006 . cooper , end of a legend thailand was the last remaining government using first generation harrier airframes . the flight deck measures . a 12° ski-jump assists v/stol aircraft to take off . there are two aircraft lifts , each capable of lifting 20 tons . . sensors and countermeasures . the sensor suite of chakri naruebet consists of a hughes sps-52c air search radar operating on the e/f band , and two kelvin-hughes 1007 navigational radars . saunders ( ed . ) jane 's fighting ships 2008-2009 , p . 786 there are provisions to install an sps-64 surface search radar and a hull-mounted sonar , but neither has been fitted as of 2008 . fire control facilities are also yet to be fitted . the carrier is equipped with four mark 36 srboc , and an slq-25 towed decoy . in april 2012 saab won a contract to upgrade chakri naruebets command and control systems . this will include fitting a 9lv mk4 command and control system to the ship as well as a giraffe radar radar and improved datalinks . . construction . work on the thai carrier commenced in october 1993 , although it was not until 12 july 1994 that the hull was laid down . chakri naruebet was launched on 20 january 1996 by queen sirikit . sea trials were conducted from october 1996 to january 1997 , the latter part of which was in coordination with the spanish navy . this was followed by aviation trials at rota , spain . the carrier was handed over on 27 march 1997 , when she was commissioned into the rtn . she arrived in phuket on 4 august 1997 following a 42-day voyage from spain , and formally entered service on 10 august . chakri naruebet cost us 336 million to build . carpenter & wiencek , asian security handbook 2000 , p . 302 . role and operational history . chakri naruebet is the first aircraft carrier to be operated by a southeast asian nation . bishop & chant , aircraft carriers , p . 88 she is assigned to the third naval area command , and her intended duties include operational support of the rtn 's amphibious warfare forces , patrols and force projection around thailand 's coastline and economic exclusion zone , disaster relief and humanitarian missions , and search and rescue operations . however , at the time the carrier entered service , the 1997 asian financial crisis prevented the necessary funding to operate the ship from being available . consequently , chakri naruebet was usually only operational for a single day per month for training , with the rest of the time spent alongside as a '' part-time tourist attraction '' . the struggles continued for years , but today it is increasingly common to see her participate in maritime exercise or joint forces exercise – including passex , carat , guardian sea and cobra gold . she was also sent for a fleet review such as 2017 international maritime review in singapore . naval commentators usually consider chakri naruebet to be less an aircraft carrier and more the world 's largest and most expensive royal yacht , while the thai media have nicknamed the ship '' thai-tanic '' , and consider her to be a white elephant . between 4 and 7 november 1997 , chakri naruebet participated in disaster relief operations following the passage of tropical storm linda across the gulf of thailand and the kra isthmus . chakri nauebet disaster relief missions , royal thai navy the carrier 's main task was to search for and assist any fishing vessels affected by the storm . flooding in the songkhla province resulted in the carrier 's mobilisation in late november 2000 . chakri naruebet was anchored at an island marina off songkhla , and used as a base for helicopters and small boats transporting food , supplies , and wounded . in january 2003 after 2003 phnom penh riots , she was sent for her only '' show of force '' type mission to date—as an '' insurance '' policy for the pochentong-1 evacuation plan . following an 2004 indian ocean earthquake , tsunamis struck multiple regions around the indian ocean , including the andaman sea coast of thailand . the personnel of chakri naruebet were part of a 760-strong response by the thai military to the disaster . this task force was involved in search-and-rescue around phuket and the phi phi islands , treatment of wounded and handling of dead , and repair work to schools and government facilities . during the august 2005 filming of rescue dawn , a dramatized biographical film of us navy pilot dieter dengler and his capture during the vietnam war , the flight deck of chakri naruebet was used to represent the carrier . in november 2010 , the ship was involved in flood relief operations following the 2010 thai floods ; anchored off songkhla province , relief supplies and food were airlifted to people in the region , while hospital patients were evacuated by the ship 's helicopters . earth times , thai aircraft carrier used as floating kitchen chakri naruebet was sent to ko tao in late-march during the 2011 southern thailand floods , as the heavy storms causing the flooding had isolated the island , requiring the evacuation of tourists and local citizens . bangkok post , navy races south to aid victims on january 11 , 2021 , the rtn reported two sailors from the chakri naruebet were confirmed positive with covid-19 after visiting pah daeng beer house in sattahip district . . see also . list of naval ship classes in service . references . references . ; books ; journal and news articles ; websites . external links .