1922 in literature

events . this is a significant year for high modernism in english literature . january – ryūnosuke akutagawa 's modernist short story '' in a grove '' ( 藪の中 , yabu no naka ) is published in the japanese magazine shinchō . january 24 – façade ( entertainment ) , poems by edith sitwell recited over an instrumental accompaniment by william walton , are first performed , privately in london . january 27 – franz kafka begins intensive work on his novel the castle ( novel ) at the mountain resort of spindlermühle , ceasing around early september in mid-sentence . february 2 in a '' savage creative storm '' of less than three weeks beginning today at château de muzot in switzerland , rainer maria rilke writes his sonnets to orpheus ( die sonette an orpheus ) and completes his duino elegies ( duineser elegien ) . the modernist novel ulysses by james joyce is published complete in book form by sylvia beach 's shakespeare and company in paris ( on 2/2/22 , joyce 's 40th birthday ) , with a further edition in paris for the egoist press , london , on october 12 , much of it seized by the united states customs service ) . the u.k . customs will also seize copies entering the country . february–september – d . h . and frieda lawrence migrate from europe to the united states , visiting australia on the way , where he completes writing his novel kangaroo . march – f . scott fitzgerald 's novel the beautiful and damned is published in book form by charles scribner 's sons in new york ; on december 10 a silent film version is released . c . march 8 – the czech playwrights karel and josef čapek 's play pictures from the insects ' life ( ze života hmyzu , also known as the insect play , published 1921 ) is first performed at the national theatre brno . it is also first performed this year in english translation , in the united states . april – marcel proust 's sodome et gomorrhe ii ( part of the novel sequence in search of lost time ) is published in paris . may 18 – marcel proust , james joyce , sergei diaghilev , igor stravinsky , pablo picasso , erik satie and clive bell , hosted by english art patron and novelist sydney schiff , dine in paris at the hotel majestic : their one joint meeting . may 27 – f . scott fitzgerald 's short story '' the curious case of benjamin button '' is published in the smart set magazine . june f . scott fitzgerald 's short story '' the diamond as big as the ritz '' appears in collier 's magazine . over one night at his home in shaftsbury , vermont , robert frost completes the poem '' new hampshire '' and at sunrise writes '' stopping by woods on a snowy evening '' . both first appear in the new hampshire ( collection ) ( 1923 ) . july – having issued a 2nd edition of antónio botto 's poetry collection canções through his lisbon publishing house olisipo , fernando pessoa publishes a magazine article praising botto 's courage and sincerity in shamelessly singing homosexual love as a true aesthete , sparking controversy over literatura de sodoma . august – t . e . lawrence is recruited into the british royal air force as ordinary aircraftman 352087 john hume ross by flying officer w . e . johns in london . lawrence later writes the mint about his experiences . summer – f . scott fitzgerald 's novel the great gatsby ( 1925 ) is set on long island at this time , partly inspired by scott and zelda fitzgerald 's life from october 9 at great neck , new york , with the novelist ring lardner and the newspaper editor herbert bayard swope as friends and neighbors . september marcel proust 's sequence in search of lost time begins to appear in english in a translation by c . k . scott moncrieff of swann 's way , as the first volume of remembrance of things past . this occurs two months before the author 's death . t . s . eliot and e . m . forster stay in the country with virginia woolf and discuss joyce 's ulysses . september 14 – sinclair lewis 's satirical novel babbitt is published by harcourt ( publisher ) . september 22 bengali writer kazi nazrul islam publishes the poem '' anandamoyeer agamane '' ( the advent of the delightful mother ) in support of the indian independence movement , in the puja issue of his new biweekly dhumketu . for this he is arrested in the bengal presidency and imprisoned on a charge of sedition for much of the following year . he goes on a hunger strike and composes many poems while in prison . his poem '' bidrohi '' ( বিদ্রোহী , the rebel , december 1921 ) appears in his first anthology , agnibeena . f . scott fitzgerald 's short story collection tales of the jazz age is published by charles scribner 's sons in new york . september 29 – drums in the night ( trommeln in der nacht ) , at the munich kammerspiele , becomes the first play by bertolt brecht to be staged . october 15 – t . s . eliot founds the criterion magazine ( october 15 ) , with the first appearance of his poem the waste land . this will be first fully published in book form by boni & liveright in new york in december . october 26 – jacob 's room by virginia woolf is published by the hogarth press of richmond upon thames with a jacket design by the author 's sister vanessa bell . also this summer , woolf writes the short story '' mrs dalloway in bond street '' ( published july 1923 ) , the groundwork of the novel mrs dalloway ( 1925 ) . november – uri zvi greenberg flees to berlin after the second issue of the yiddish literary journal albatros , which he edits , is seized . the warsaw authorities accuse him of blasphemy for iconoclastic depictions of jesus , notably his prose poem '' royte epl fun veybeymer '' ( red apples from the trees of pain ) . december – a valise containing all ernest hemingway 's manuscripts of the past year 's writing is stolen at paris-gare de lyon . december 6 – w . b . yeats becomes a nominated members of the 1922 seanad in the irish free state . december 10 – the national library of albania is inaugurated in tirana . december 20 – jean cocteau 's antigone appears at the reopened théâtre de l'atelier in the montmartre district of paris , with sets by pablo picasso , music by arthur honegger and costumes by gabrielle chanel . génica athanasiou plays the title rôle , with charles dullin as creon and antonin artaud as tiresias . there are dadaist protests . unknown date – the first newbery medal for authors of distinguished children 's books is awarded by the american library association to hendrik willem van loon for the story of mankind ( 1921 ) . . new books . fiction . e . f . benson – miss mapp pío baroja – la lucha por la vida ( the struggle for life , trilogy , 1922–1924 ) ernest bramah – kai lung 's golden hours edgar rice burroughs – at the earth 's core karel čapek the absolute at large ( továrna na absolutno ) krakatit willa cather – one of ours agatha christie – the secret adversary colette – la maison de claudine aleister crowley – diary of a drug fiend grazia deledda – il dio dei venti ( the god of the winds ) e . r . eddison – the worm ouroboros f . scott fitzgerald the beautiful and damned tales of the jazz age gilbert frankau – the love story of aliette brunton david garnett – lady into fox william gerhardie – futility hermann hesse – siddhartha robert hichens – december love vsevolod ivanov '' armoured train 14–69 '' ( short story ) colored winds james joyce – ulysses franz xaver kappus – the red rider faik konica – një ambasadë e zulluve në paris d . h . lawrence aaron 's rod england , my england and other stories sinclair lewis – babbitt lu xun – the true story of ah q katherine mansfield – the garden party ( novel ) victor margueritte – la garçonne ( english translation the bachelor girl , 1923 ) a . a . milne – the red house mystery paul morand – open all night e . phillips oppenheim – the great prince shan baroness orczy the triumph of the scarlet pimpernel nicolette : a tale of old provence boris pilnyak – the naked year marcel proust – sodome et gomorrhe ii ( volume 4 part 2 of in search of lost time ) ernest raymond – tell england liviu rebreanu – forest of the hanged ( pădurea spânzuraților ) marah roesli – sitti nurbaya rafael sabatini – captain blood may sinclair – life and death of harriett frean booth tarkington – gentle julia sigrid undset – korset ( '' the cross '' , third and final part of kristin lavransdatter ) urmuz – bizarre pages ( first samples ; written c . 1908 ) carl van vechten – peter whiffle elizabeth von arnim – the enchanted april edgar wallace the angel of terror the crimson circle the flying fifty-five mr . justice maxell the valley of ghosts stanley j . weyman – ovington 's bank virginia woolf – jacob 's room image : carl sandburg 's rootabaga stories ( 1922 ) , frontispiece.jpg thumb rootabaga stories 1st ed . frontispiece by maud and miska petersham francis brett young – pilgrim 's rest stefan zweig amok the eyes of my brother , forever ( die augen des ewigen bruders ) fantastic night ( phantastische nacht ) letter from an unknown woman ( brief einer unbekannten ) moonbeam alley ( die mondscheingasse ) . children and young people . richmal crompton just william ( first in the just william series of 39 books ) more william hugh lofting – the voyages of doctor dolittle hendrik willem van loon – the story of mankind ( non-fiction ) beatrix potter – cecily parsley 's nursery rhymes carl sandburg – rootabaga stories walter scott story – skinny harrison adventure margery williams – the velveteen rabbit . drama . imtiaz ali taj – anarkali arnolt bronnen – parricide ( vatermord ) karel čapek – the makropulos affair ( věc makropulos ) jean cocteau – antigone j . b . fagan ( adaptation ) – treasure island arthur goodrich – so this is london ian hay – the happy ending hugo von hofmannsthal – the great world theatre ( das salzburger große welttheater ) lauw giok lan – pendidikan jang kliroe eugene o'neill – the hairy ape ouyang yuqian ( 欧阳予倩 ) – after returning home ( 回家以后 ) luigi pirandello henry iv ( enrico iv ) clothing the naked ( vestire gli ignudi ) the imbecile ( l'imbecille ) percy bysshe shelley – the cenci ( first public performance in england ) carl sternheim – the fossil ( das fossil ) tian han ( 田漢 ) a night in the coffee shop ( kafeidian yi ye ) before lunch ( wufan zhiqian ) ) ernst toller – the machine-wreckers ( die maschinenstürmer ) ben travers – the dippers arthur valentine – tons of money john willard – the cat and the canary . poetry . mário de andrade – paulicéia desvairada ( hallucinated city ) manuel maples arce – andamios interiores ( poemas radiograficos ) edmund blunden – the shepherd , and other poems of peace and war a . e . coppard – hips and haws t . s . eliot – the waste land thomas hardy – late lyrics and earlier , with many other verses a . e . housman – last poems isaac rosenberg ( killed 1918 ) – poems sacheverell sitwell – the hundred and one harlequins , and other poems birger sjöberg – fridas bok césar vallejo – trilce mohammad yamin – tanah air . non-fiction . e . e . cummings – the enormous room albert einstein – the meaning of relativity leonora eyles – the woman in the little house benjamin fondane – imagini și cărți din franța james george frazer – the golden bough magema magwaza fuze ( died 1922 ) – abantu abamnyama lapa bavela ngakona ( the black people and whence they came ) frank harris – my life and loves ( publication begins ) agnes jekyll – kitchen essays t . e . lawrence – seven pillars of wisdom ( private edition ) walter lippmann – public opinion james o . mckinsey – budgetary control bronisław malinowski – argonauts of the western pacific w . somerset maugham – on a chinese screen hans prinzhorn – artistry of the mentally ill radu rosetti – amintiri g . m . trevelyan – british history in the nineteenth century , 1782–1901 hendrik willem van loon – the story of mankind ludwig wittgenstein – tractatus logico-philosophicus . births . january 10 – terence kilmartin , irish journalist and translator ( died 1991 ) january 22 – howard moss , american poet , playwright , and critic ( died 1987 ) january 23 – vernon scannell , british poet ( died 2007 ) february 6 – denis norden , english comedy writer february 18 – helen gurley brown , american editor and publisher ( died 2012 ) march 12 – jack kerouac , american author of on the road ( died 1969 ) march 27 – dick king-smith , english children 's author ( died 2011 ) april 13 – john braine , english novelist ( died 1986 ) april 16 kingsley amis , english novelist ( died 1995 ) samuel youd ( john christopher ) , english science fiction novelist ( died 2012 ) april 22 – guillermo cabrera infante , cuban novelist ( died 2005 ) april 28 – alistair maclean , scottish novelist ( died 1987 ) may 6 – alan ross , indian-born english poet and editor ( died 2001 ) may 8 – mary q . steele , american naturalist and author ( died 1992 ) may 27 – sidney keyes , english poet ( died 1943 ) may 30 – hal clement , american science fiction writer ( died 2003 ) june 11 – erving goffman , canadian sociologist ( died 1982 ) june 29 – vasko popa , yugoslav poet ( died 1991 ) june 30 – mollie hunter , scottish novelist and children 's writer ( died 2012 ) july 12 – michael ventris , english translator ( died 1956 ) july 15 – cathal ó sándair , irish language novelist ( died 1996 ) july 17 – donald davie , english poet ( died 1995 ) july 19 – george mcgovern , american author and politician ( died 2012 ) august 9 – philip larkin , english poet ( died 1985 ) august 18 – alain robbe-grillet , french novelist ( died 2008 ) september 12 – jackson mac low , american poet ( died 2004 ) november 11 – kurt vonnegut , american novelist ( died 2007 ) november 16 – josé saramago , portuguese writer ( died 2010 ) november 26 – charles m . schulz , american cartoonist ( died 2000 ) december 11 – grace paley , american writer ( died 2007 ) december 28 – stan lee , american comic-book writer and editor ( died 2018 ) december 29 – william gaddis , american novelist ( died 1998 ) . deaths . january 3 – berthold delbrück , german linguist ( born 1842 ) january 12 – thomas gibson bowles , english founder of the lady and vanity fair ( born 1881 ) january 27 nellie bly , american journalist ( born 1864 ) giovanni verga , italian author ( born 1840 ) february 3 – john butler yeats , irish artist and poet ( born 1839 ) june 12 – wolfgang kapp , prussian journalist ( born 1858 ) june 28 – velimir khlebnikov , russian writer ( born 1885 ) july 8 – mori ōgai ( 森鷗外 ) , japanese novelist and poet ( born 1862 ) july 26 – ehrman syme nadal , american author ( born 1843 ) august 14 – alfred harmsworth , 1st viscount northcliffe , british newspaper proprietor ( born 1865 ) august 25 – edward george honey , australian journalist ( born 1885 ) august 29 – georges sorel , french philosopher ( born 1847 ) september 2 – henry lawson , australian poet ( born 1867 ) september 4 – george r . sims , english writer ( born 1847 ) september 10 – wilfrid scawen blunt , english poet and radical ( born 1840 ) october 30 – géza gárdonyi , hungarian historical novelist ( born 1863 ) november 1 – lima barreto , brazilian novelist and journalist ( born 1881 ) november 18 – marcel proust , french author ( born 1871 ) november 24 – erskine childers , irish historian and novelist ( born 1870 ) november 27 – alice meynell , english poet ( born 1847 ) december 13 – hannes hafstein , icelandic poet and prime minister ( born 1861 ) december 19 – clementina black , english novelist and political writer ( born 1853 ) unknown date – mary anna needell ( mrs . j . h . needell ) , english novelist ( born 1830 ) . awards . hawthornden prize for poetry : edmund blunden james tait black memorial prize for fiction : david garnett , lady into fox james tait black memorial prize for biography : percy lubbock , earlham newbery medal for children 's literature : hendrik willem van loon , the story of mankind nobel prize in literature : jacinto benavente prix goncourt : henri béraud , le martyre de l'obèse pulitzer prize for drama : eugene o'neill , anna christie pulitzer prize for poetry : edwin arlington robinson , collected poems pulitzer prize for the novel : booth tarkington , alice adams . references .