West Lothian question

background . the equivalent question was raised by the opponents of irish home rule in defeating william gladstone 's first ( 1886 ) and second ( 1893 ) home rule bills . basil williams enumerated four schemes which gladstone proposed at various stages : total exclusion of irish members . inclusion of irish members , in reduced numbers , for all purposes . inclusion of irish members , in their full numbers , for certain specified purposes — the '' in and out '' clause . inclusion of irish members , in their full numbers , for all purposes — the omnes omnia ( all people ) clause . the '' west lothian question '' itself was first posed in 1977 during a british house of commons debate about scottish and welsh devolution proposals . in the 14 november sitting , tam dalyell , the labour mp for the scottish constituency of west lothian , asked , for how long will english constituencies and english honourable members tolerate & nbsp ; . at least 119 honourable members from scotland , wales and northern ireland exercising an important , and probably often decisive , effect on english politics while they themselves have no say in the same matters in scotland , wales and northern ireland ? to illustrate his point , dalyell chose the example of a member of parliament for west lothian who could vote on matters affecting the english town of blackburn ( in lancashire ) , but not on matters concerning the blackburn in his own constituency . the name '' west lothian question '' was later coined by the ulster unionist mp enoch powell in a response to dalyell 's speech , when he said '' we have finally grasped what the honourable member for west lothian is getting at . let us call it the west lothian question . '' the question is more commonly assumed to refer to the anomaly that came into being in 1999 , with scottish , welsh and northern ireland members at westminster allowed to vote upon english matters , but mps for english constituencies having no influence on affairs which were devolved to scotland , wales or northern ireland . dalyell was a vocal opponent of scottish devolution in the 1979 and 1997 plebiscites . a devolved scottish parliament was created in 1999 after a clear majority voted in favour of devolution in the second referendum . legal status . the scottish parliament was formed by statute , the scotland act 1998 , and is thus a creation of westminster . no sovereign status on the scottish parliament is conferred , and the act has not changed the status of the westminster parliament as the supreme legislature of scotland , with westminster retaining the ability to override , or veto , any decisions taken by the scottish parliament . the westminster parliament remains the sovereign body ; powers are devolved rather than transferred to the scottish parliament . the ability of all westminster mps to vote on scottish legislation has not been legally diminished by devolution , as made clear by section 28 ( 7 ) of the scotland act 1998 , which states that the legislative powers of the scottish parliament do '' not affect the power of the parliament of the united kingdom to make laws for scotland '' . legislation relating to reserved issues such as defence , national security , foreign policy and monetary and economic issues are voted on by all the mps at westminster to ensure consistency across the whole of the united kingdom . the scottish parliament is not able to pass laws on these issues itself , as they were not devolved . the west lothian question is not involved in this situation , as all parts of the union have a say roughly proportional to their population and all are equally affected . during devolution , a convention was created to manage the power of westminster to legislate on matters within the legislative competence of the scottish parliament . this is known as the sewel convention , and the related scottish parliamentary motions are now known as legislative consent motions ( previously sewel motions ) . these motions ( of which there are around a dozen per year ) allow mps to vote on issues which , among other things , are within the scottish parliament 's legislative competence . the sewel convention states that the westminster parliament will not normally legislate on devolved matters in scotland without first obtaining the consent of the scottish parliament . english votes for english laws ( evel ) . during the 2000s a number of pieces of legislation which affected only or mainly england were passed by the uk parliament , although the votes cast by mps were such that the legislation would not have been passed if only the votes cast by mps representing english constituencies had been counted . the opposition conservative party commissioned a report , '' devolution , the west lothian question and the future of the union '' , which proposed some procedural changes restricting the participation of mps representing non-english constituencies during the passage of bills relating only to england . while the conservatives were in government from 2010 to 2015 in coalition with the liberal democrats , they set up the mckay commission to look into the question . the commission proposed that bills in the house of commons which affected england solely or differently should require a majority vote of mps representing english constituencies . the conservative manifesto for the 2015 general election included a proposal that england-only legislation should require approval from a legislative grand committee prior to its third reading in the house of commons . having won a majority in that election , the conservative government used a change in standing orders in october 2015 to give mps representing english ( or english and welsh ) constituencies a '' veto '' over laws affecting only england ( or only england and wales ) . thus , a new law can not be imposed only on england by a majority of all mps if a majority of english mps are opposed . however , a proposed new law can still be vetoed by a majority of all mps even if a majority of english mps are in favour . so evel only answers the west lothian question in a one-sided sense . other possible answers to the question . english devolution . . english parliament or assembly . the creation of a devolved english parliament , with full legislative powers , akin to the scottish parliament is seen by some as a solution to this problem , campaign for an english parliament , with full legislative powers also being conferred on the existing welsh parliament . the westminster ( united kingdom ) parliament would continue to meet and legislate on matters of uk-wide competence such as defence , foreign affairs and economic matters with the parliaments of england , wales , scotland and northern ireland legislating locally . in the early-20th-century context of irish home rule , the equivalent option was dubbed home rule all round . lord falconer , the former secretary of state for constitutional affairs , has stated that he believes that an english parliament would '' dwarf all other institutions . '' peter hain , who campaigned for a welsh assembly , warned creating an english parliament or trying to stop scottish and welsh mps from voting on england-only matters would break up the union . chuka umunna suggested in july 2015 that the labour party should support the creation of a separate english parliament , as part of a federal united kingdom . . regional assemblies . the labour government of tony blair attempted to address part of the west lothian question by introducing english regional assemblies with no legislative powers . originally , it was planned that these would be directly elected . the london assembly was the first of these , established following a referendum in 1998 , in which public and media attention was focused principally on the post of mayor of london . 'overwhelming vote for mayor ' , bbc news online , 8 may 1998 ken livingstone was the first directly elected mayor of london . he started his victory speech with '' as i was saying before i was so rudely interrupted 14 years ago '' , making it clear he saw the london assembly as a recreation of a similar london wide authority to that of the greater london council , which he had led before it was abolished in the 1980s . paul waugh and andrew grice . ken reclaims the capital , the independent 6 may 2000 further progress was thwarted when a referendum in the north east rejected the proposal for an elected assembly in november 2004 north east votes 'no ' to assembly , bbc news online , 5 november 2004 leading to the shelving of similar proposals for other english regions . the regional development agencies were all scrapped by march 2012 with their powers and functions being transferred either to local government or in the case of london , the greater london authority . increased powers to english counties and cities . douglas carswell and daniel hannan have proposed that all the powers currently devolved to the scottish parliament should also be devolved to the english counties and cities . this would mean that the situation of scottish mps voting on policy which only affected england would no longer arise , because parliament would no longer be responsible for areas of policy which affected only england . therefore , parliament would have to choose to make policy either for the united kingdom as a whole , or not at all . carswell and hannan write : '' all the fields of policy currently within the purview of the holyrood parliament should be transferred to english counties and cities ( thereby , incidentally , answering the west lothian question ) . '' . dissolution of the union . another solution might be the dissolution of the united kingdom leading to some or all of the countries of the united kingdom ( england , northern ireland , scotland , and wales ) becoming independent sovereign states . the scottish national party ( snp ) , which campaigns for scottish independence , won an outright majority in the scottish parliament in the 2011 scottish election . a referendum was held on 18 september 2014 , with voters rejecting independence by 55 % to 45 % . in wales , welsh nationalist party plaid cymru holds welsh independence as a long-term aim , while the welsh national party more aggressively campaigns for independence . in northern ireland there are no mainstream political parties calling for an ulster nationalism , but parties calling for a united ireland include sinn féin and the social democratic and labour party ( sdlp ) . reducing the number of scottish mps . during the existence of the parliament of northern ireland ( 1922–1972 ) , the number of mps elected from northern ireland to westminster was below the standard ratio of mps compared with the rest of the uk . during periods when the predominantly unionist mps from northern ireland deprived labour of working majorities , conservatives supported the principle that '' every member of the house of commons is equal to every other member of the house of commons '' . scotland traditionally enjoyed a greater number of mps per head of population than the rest of the uk , but this advantage was reduced significantly at the 2005 uk general election . under boundary reforms proposed by the conservatives , there would be 50 scottish seats out of a uk total of 600 . an argument against the idea of having a lower number of mps , in return for more devolved powers , is that if the national parliament takes important decisions ( such as waging war ) then people should be fully represented . . see also . barnett formula britishness campaign for an english parliament cornish self-government movement democratic deficit english nationalism federalism in the united kingdom asymmetric federalism proportional representation scottish independence sewel convention scottish mafia welsh nationalism . references . further reading . devolution : the end of britain ? , tam dalyell , jonathan cape , london , 1977 devolution in britain today , russell deacon , manchester university press , 2006 report on devolution and the governance of england , house of commons justice committee , 24 may 2009 a stronger or weaker union ? public reactions to asymmetric devolution in the united kingdom , professor john curtice , university of strathclyde , publius & nbsp ; – the journal of federalism , volume 36 , number 1 , winter 2006 , oxford university press ( pdf file ) the west lothian question , oonagh gay , house of commons library sn/pc/2586 , 26 june 2006 ( pdf file ) n . lloyd-jones , '' united kingdom : four nations or one ? '' , '' history today '' ( february 2015 ) . external links . commission on the consequences of devolution for the house of commons house of commons scotland bill debate , 14 november 1977 talking politics : the west lothian question , bbc news online , 1 june 1998 hansard text of a debate on the subject in 1998 ( scroll down for the start , and continue on to subsequent pages ) mckay commission report : report of the commission on the consequences of devolution for the house of commons statement by the prime minister on the scottish independence referendum uk parliament : english votes for english laws : house of commons bill procedure