Ossuary

persian ossuaries . in persia , the zoroastrians used a deep well for this function from the earliest times ( c . 3,000 years ago ) and called it astudan ( literally , '' the place for the bones '' ) . there are many rituals and regulations in the zoroastrian faith concerning the astudans . roman catholic ossuaries . image : san bernardino ossuary 2.jpg thumb left the ossuary of san bernardino alle ossa in milan . many examples of ossuaries are found within europe , including the santa maria della concezione dei cappuccini in rome , italy ; the martyrs of otranto in south italy ; the fontanelle cemetery and purgatorio ad arco in naples , italy ; the san bernardino alle ossa in milan , italy ; the brno ossuary and the sedlec ossuary in the czech republic ; the czermna skull chapel in poland ; and the capela dos ossos ( '' chapel of bones '' ) in évora , portugal . the village of wamba in the province of valladolid , spain , has an impressive ossuary of over a thousand skulls inside the local church , dating from between the 12th and 18th centuries . a more recent example is the douaumont ossuary in france , which contains the remains of more than 130,000 french and german soldiers that fell at the battle of verdun during world war i . the catacombs of paris represents another famous ossuary . the catacombs beneath the monastery of san francisco in lima , peru , also contains an ossuary . . eastern orthodox ossuaries . image : greekossuaries.jpg thumb right 190px contemporary greek ossuaries made of wood and metal . the use of ossuaries is a longstanding tradition in the orthodox church . the remains of an orthodox christian are treated with special reverence , in conformity with the biblical teaching that the body of a believer is a '' temple of the holy spirit '' , having been sanctified and transfigured by baptism , holy communion and the participation in the mystical life of the church . in orthodox monastery , when one of the brethren dies , his remains are buried ( for details , see christian burial ) for one to three years , and then disinterred , cleaned and gathered into the monastery 's charnel house . if there is reason to believe that the departed is a saint , the remains may be placed in a reliquary ; otherwise the bones are usually mingled together ( skulls together in one place , long bones in another , etc . ) . the remains of an abbot may be placed in a separate ossuary made out of wood or metal . the use of ossuaries is also found among the laity in the greek orthodox church . the departed will be buried for one to three years and then , often on the anniversary of death , the family will gather with the parish priest and celebrate a parastas ( memorial service ) , after which the remains are disinterred , washed with wine , perfumed , and placed in a small ossuary of wood or metal , inscribed with the name of the departed , and placed in a room , often in or near the church , which is dedicated to this purpose . jewish ossuaries . image : ossuary inscription shalam zion.gif thumb left jewish ossuary inscription from second temple period during the second temple period , jews burial customs were varied , differing based on class and belief . for the wealthy , one option available included primary burials in burial caves , followed by secondary burials in ossuaries . these bone boxes were placed in smaller niches of the burial caves , on the benches used for the desiccation of the corpse , or even on the floor . these ossuaries are almost exclusively made of limestone , roughly 40 % of which are decorated with intricate geometrical patterns . many ossuaries , plain or decorated , feature inscriptions identifying the deceased . these inscriptions are the chief scholarly source for identifying naming conventions in this region during this period . among the best-known jewish ossuaries of this period are : an ossuary inscribed 'simon the temple builder ' in the collection of the israel museum ; one inscribed 'yehohanan ben hagkol ' that contained an iron nail in a heel bone suggesting crucifixion ; another inscribed 'james son of joseph , brother of jesus ' , the authenticity of which is not supported by most scholars ; and ten ossuaries recovered from the talpiot tomb in 1980 , several of which are reported to have names recorded in the new testament . geographically , ossuaries are almost exclusively associated with tombs in and around jerusalem ; however , caches of contemporaneous ossuaries have been discovered in jericho . there is ongoing scholarly disagreement as to the function and origin of ossuary burial . some argue that this form of burial was born out of a theological shift in ideas about purity . specifically , in the mishnah and talmud , jewish sages from the period are depicted debating the methods and beliefs around ossuary burial . the perspectives they espouse are connected to the pharisaic tradition ; as such , it is speculated that ossuaries were developed by elite members of the pharisaic religious school before spreading to other sects . others argue that material conditions of the elite have more influence on ossuaries use and form during this period . an increase in wealth among the urban elite in jerusalem and jericho , coupled with a building boom that created a surplus of stone masons , allowed for new kinds of burial to evolve . it has been observed that ossuaries follow philosophically with greco-roman ideas of individuality in death and physically with hellenistic forms of chest burial ; as such , ossuaries may be an elite imitation of imperial burial modes that did not violate jewish cultural norms . the custom of secondary burial in ossuaries , on a whole , did not persist among jews past the second temple period nor appear to exist widely among jews outside the land of israel . there are , of course , exceptions to every trend : after the destruction of the second temple , poor imitations of ossuaries made of clay were created in galilee ; the last stone ossuaries are found in beth shearim and date from the late third century ce ; and at least one ossuary dating from the second temple period has been discovered in alexandria . largest ossuary . the skeletal remains of six million people lie , neatly arranged , in catacombs ( also known as ossuaries or charnel houses ) beneath the streets of paris , france . the city is riddled with an estimated 300 & nbsp ; km ( 186 miles ) of tunnels and pathways , of which 11,000 square meters ( nearly three acres ) are packed tightly with the bones of those re-interred from the city 's overflowing cemeteries in the late 1700s . . see also . image : köln st ursula goldene kammer02.jpg thumb the ursulakammer in the basilica of st . ursula in cologne , where in the 17th century the largest mosaic in human bones ever was created , that covers the four walls of the room . aircraft boneyard boneyard , arizona columbarium crypt mausoleum sarcophagus tzompantli . references .