Gros Morne National Park

geology . the park 's rock formations , made famous by robert stevens and harold williams , include oceanic crust and mantle rock exposed by the obduction process of plate tectonics , as well as sedimentary rock formed during the ordovician , precambrian granite and palaeozoic igneous rocks . a guide to the geology of the park and adjacent areas the park is located in the great northern peninsula of western newfoundland . this peninsula is referred to as the humber zone , a miogeocline , the highlands of which contain the largest external basement massif of the grenville orogeny in the appalachian orogen . this precambrian basement is known as the long range inlier , long range complex or basement gneiss complex , consisting of quartz-feldspar gneisses and granites that are up to 1550 ma in age . mt . gros morne and mt . big level lie within this inlier . the western boundary of this inlier ( along western brook pond , st . pauls inlet , and south of portl creek pond ) consists of devonian and ordovician thrust faults , where crystalline rocks thrust over cambrian-ordovician carbonate rocks and the lower paleozoic humber arm allochthon . the rocky harbour mélange is a lower-middle ordovician collection of greywacke , quartzite , dolomite shale , chert , limestone blocks within a black , green , and red scaly shale matrix , which occurs along the shore from west brook pond to humber arm ( bay of islands ) . the south portion of the park , table mtn . ( tablelands ) and north arm mtn . , consists of upper cambrian and lower ordovician ophiolites known as the bay of islands complex , little post complex , and old man cove formation . finally , a pleistocene ice cap flowed radially across the island , developing fjords such as bonne bay . . tablelands . the tablelands , found between the towns of trout river and woody point in south west of gros morne national park , look more like a barren desert than traditional newfoundland . this is due to the ultramafic rock – peridotite – which makes up the tablelands . it is thought to originate in the earth 's mantle and was forced up from the depths during a plate collision several hundred million years ago . peridotite lacks some of the usual nutrients required to sustain most plant life and has a toxic quality , hence its barren appearance . from the intertidal zone to the upper mantle -- the amazing geology of gros morne national park , page 9 peridotite is also high in iron , which accounts for its brownish colour ( rusted colour ) . underneath this weathered zone , the rock is really a dark green colour . soils . the many soil associations mapped in the park reflect the wide variety of bedrock . the silver mountain soil association , dominant in the northeastern area , is a very stony sandy loam developed on glacial till overlying granite , granitic gneiss and schist . similar rocks underlie the st . paul 's inlet association farther west . sedimentary rocks ( including some dolomitic limestone ) in the southeastern sector support the north lake association of stony sandy loam . an association of mostly-shallow loam , the cox 's cove , occupies a discontinuous band over shale , slate , limestone and sandstone near the coast . the coastal strip north of bonne bay is mostly underlain by the peaty gull 's marsh association and the coarse sally 's cove association except for an area of clay ( wood 's island association ) around rocky harbour . the stony infertile soils of the ultramafic tablelands south of bonne bay belong to the serpentine range association . soils of the sandy lake – bay of islands area , western newfoundland . western brook pond - fjord . western brook pond is a fresh water fjord which was carved out by glaciers during the most recent ice age from 25,000 to about 10,000 years ago . once the glaciers melted , the land , which had been pushed down by the weight of the ice sheet , rebounded and the outlet to the sea was cut off . the long narrow '' pond '' then filled in with fresh water . the water in the fjord is extremely pure and is assigned the highest purity rating available for natural bodies of water . pissing mare falls , the highest waterfall in eastern north america and 199th highest in the world , flows into western brook pond . sedimentary rocks , some of them calcareous , underlie the westernmost shores . elsewhere , granitic gneiss is dominant . map 1551a . nature and wildlife . the most notable animal in the park is the moose , part of a booming population that was introduced to newfoundland around 1900 . other common wildlife in the park include red foxes and arctic foxes , an ecotype of caribou ( r.t caribou ) , black bears , snowshoe hares , red squirrels , lynxes , river otters and beavers . harbour seals are common in st . pauls inlet , and cetaceans ( minkes , humpbacks , fins , pilots , orcas , atlantic white-sided dolphins , harbour porpoises ) may be in the area especially during the capelin season in early summer . many bird species can be found in the park , from shorebirds along the ocean to birds of the bogs and interior forests . . world heritage site . in 1987 , the park was designated a unesco world heritage site for both its geological history and its exceptional scenery . the geology of the park in particular illustrates the concept of plate tectonics , and has shed important light on geological evolution and its processes . trails . hiking the trails is a popular activity at gros morne . there are about 20 marked day trip trails , exploring coastal and interior areas of the park . one of the more strenuous dayhikes is the 16 & nbsp ; km hike over gros morne mountain . this trail is also called the james callaghan trail after the former british prime minister , who visited in 1976 , in recognition of his conservation efforts . a small controversy arose after the prime minister did not visit the trail that had been named in his honour . the interior of the park can also be accessed , notably through the multi-day long range traverse between western brook pond and gros morne mountain . arts and culture . the park is home to many arts festivals , including : gros morne theatre festival , writers at woody point , gros morne summer music , and trails , tales and tunes . . in popular culture . gros morne appears as a playable area in the 2014 videogame assassin 's creed rogue . see also . national parks of canada list of national parks of canada bonne bay marine station green point . references . external links . gros morne : a cultural history park web site park webpage at worldheritagesite.org unesco whs gros morne national park town of woody point