Hohenems

geography . the town is located at above sea level , about south of lake constance . hohenems extends for from north to south and from west to east . its total area is , of which 42 % is covered with forest . the oxbow lake of the river rhine in the west , forming the border of austria as well as eu to switzerland , and the mountainside in the east is at the narrowest point of the austrian rhine valley . the schlossberg ( '' castle mountain '' ) , elevation , offers a distinctive backdrop to the town center . hohenems is divided into the neighborhoods of markt ( centre ) , oberklien and unterklien ( north ) , hohenems-reute ( east ) , schwefel ( south ) and herrenried ( west ) . it is surrounded by six other communities , lustenau and dornbirn in the dornbirn district ( north and east ) , fraxern , götzis and altach in the feldkirch district ( south ) and diepoldsau in the swiss canton st . gallen ( west ) . history . the summit of the schlossberg rock , within 45 minutes walk from the town center , is crowned by the ruins of alt-ems , a castle dating back to the 9th century ce . from the 12th century it was among the largest fortifications in the south of the german kingdom . tiscover : ruin alt-ems the stronghold was very extensive , with a length of up to 800 m ( 2,625 & nbsp ; ft ) and a width of 85 & nbsp ; m ( 280 & nbsp ; ft ) . it reached its peak of fame from the 13th to 16th centuries , as a residence of many lords and knights of hohenems . as they were loyal ministerialis of the hohenstaufen dynasty , the castle served as a prison for notable prisoners like the norman king william iii of sicily , who probably died there in 1198 . hohenems was granted municipal rights and liberties ( german stadtrecht ) in 1333 , but the town did not make use of these rights for 650 years until , in 1983 , the government of vorarlberg granted hohenems full status as a '' municipality '' . the burg neu-ems ( also called '' schloss glopper '' ) , built in 1343 , is located on a mountain promontory near alt-ems . in 1407 both castles were destroyed during the appenzell wars , but rebuilt shortly afterwards . burg neu-ems is still intact today and is the private property of the waldburg-zeil family . the renaissance palace stands at the foot of the schlossberg and dominates the main square of town , the schlossplatz . it was built from 1562 to 1567 , according to plans by architect martino longhi the elder . religious wars and a plague decimated the population and devastated the area over the next century , ironically the time of the greatest power of the ( protestant ) counts of hohenems , when they acquired vaduz castle from what was later to become liechtenstein . two manuscripts of the nibelungenlied were found in hohenems , in 1755 and 1779 , in the palace 's library . . jewish heritage . the jewish community in hohenems had its beginnings with a charter in 1617 . soon thereafter a synagogue , a ritual bath ( mikvah ) , a school and a poorhouse were built . a cemetery was established on the southern outskirts of town . jewish economic activity in the town resulted in the first coffee house in 1797 , and in 1841 , the first bank and insurance company in vorarlberg . the hohenems jewish community celebrated its golden era around 1862 , with nearly 600 jewish citizens , 12 % of the population . the jewish presence in town was terminated in 1942 with the deportation of the last remaining jew , frieda nagelberg , to vienna and eventually to izbica . recently three jewish people have moved into hohenems . the synagogue survived the kristallnacht without damage . it was acquired by the municipality after the war and converted into a fire station . all objects pertaining to its use as a synagogue were removed or destroyed . in 2001 the synagogue was renovated and it now used as a cultural centre . synagogue the jewish museum hohenems , official website . the jewish quarter , which has had historical preservation status since 1996 , includes numerous townhouses and mansions surrounding the synagogue . along with the former christengasse ( '' christian lane '' ) , renamed marktstrasse ( market street ) , it forms the urban core of hohenems . in 1991 , the jewish museum hohenems was opened in a mansion in the center of the jewish quarter . the museum commemorates the history of the jewish community in hohenems . the many remaining objects it exhibits bear witness to the former flourishing jewish community in hohenems . as part of its remembrance culture , a section of the museum is dedicated to the memory of the darkest chapter in vorarlberg history - the national socialist period , and its attempts to eliminate all traces of jewish culture in vorarlberg and beyond . the jewish cemetery south of the town dates to the first jewish settlement in 1617 and is still in use today . it contains more than 500 graves , with 370 surviving gravestones . jewish cemetery jewish museum hohenems , official website . retrieved july 8 , 2010 . mayors . 2004-2015 : richard amann since december 2015 : dieter egger ( born 1969 ) . population . infrastructure . apart from the historical sites , the town center is rapidly developing a modest urban ambience , with hotels , shops , and restaurants . on the outskirts of town there are large businesses , with branches of multinational retail chains and a ten-screen multiplex . on the way to the mountain village reute , high above hohenems , there is a unique museum - stoffels säge-mühle ( '' stoffel 's sawmill '' ) - which presents the history of saw milling and mill grinding technologies . hohenems has several leisure amenities . in the mountain area there is a small ski resort ( schuttannen ) and a rock-climbing area called löwenzähne ( '' lion 's teeth '' ) with walls up to 150 & nbsp ; m ( 500 & nbsp ; ft ) and level 10 . there also is a wide range of hiking trails and mountain biking routes nearby . the town boasts of the largest recreational centers ( 13 hectares ) in vorarlberg , tiscover : rheinauen situated on the banks of the river rhine 's oxbow lake . one section of the hospital in hohenems was originally built in 1908 , and has now been totally renovated . called the kaiserin-elisabeth-krankenhaus ( '' empress elisabeth hospital '' ) , it is a magnificent example of art nouveau architecture . it hosts the palliative care unit . the modern general hospital was built in 1972 . transport . two state roads , the vorarlberger strasse l190 and the rheinstrasse l203 cross the municipality from north to south . the l46 leads from the town center to the customs buildings at the border to switzerland . hohenems has motorway access to the rheintal/walgau-autobahn ( austrian a14/european route e60 ) and is on the main west-east route connecting the vorarlbergbahn railway line in the directions bregenz and innsbruck . the train system is operated by the austrian federal railways ( öbb ) . the sole airfield in vorarlberg , with a 630 m ( 2,066 & nbsp ; ft ) runway , is located within the municipal borders www.loih.at : flugplatz hohenems-dornbirn . trivia . hohenems was one of the locations in the swiss-austrian film akte grüninger . the town is the site of the climax of dennis wheatley 's novel about the 1914 outbreak of the first world war , the second seal ( 1950 ) . twin towns . hohenems has twinned with bystré and polička in the czech republic ( since 1997 ) website of hohenems - sistercities : bystre and policka . notable persons . jean améry , ( 1912-1978 ) , resistance fighter against nazism , essayist matthias brandle ( born 1989 ) , professional cyclist august brentano ( 1829-1886 ) , newspaper dealer rudolf von ems ( 1200-1254 ) , medieval poet and minstrel adi hütter ( born 1970 ) , football player and coach christian klien ( born 1983 ) , formula one racing driver michael köhlmeier ( born 1949 ) , austrian writer and musician marcel mathis ( born 1993 ) , alpine skier harald morscher ( born 1972 ) , cyclist ramazan özcan ( born 1984 ) , football goalkeeper hans jörg schelling ( born 1953 ) , entrepreneur , politician ( övp ) and former federal minister of finance mark sittich von hohenems ( prince-archbishop of salzburg ) ( 1574-1619 ) , archbishop of salzburg salomon sulzer ( 1804-1890 ) , reform cantor and composer bernhard vogel ( 1913-2000 ) , politician , member of parliament and the federal council ( spö ) wolfram waibel jr . ( born 1970 ) , austrian sports marksman eckart witzigmann ( born 1941 ) , cook , awarded three stars in michelin fatima spar ( born 1977 ) , jazz singer and composer . notes . external links . town of hohenems jewish museum of hohenems stoffel 's saw mill