The Lavender Hill Mob

plot . henry holland ( alec guinness ) is dining with a fellow briton in a posh restaurant in rio de janeiro where he is well known . he relates a story explaining his presence in rio . it seems he was an apparently unambitious london bank clerk in charge of gold bullion deliveries for over 20 years . he had a reputation for fussing over details and suspecting all cars he observed following the bullion van , but all in all appeared to be a man dedicated to his job and the gold 's security . in fact , he had hatched the '' perfect '' plot to steal a load of bullion and retire . the one thing stopping him had been that selling the gold on the black market in britain was too risky , and he was at a loss as to how to smuggle it abroad . one evening a new lodger & nbsp ; – artist alfred pendlebury ( stanley holloway ) & nbsp ; – arrives at holland 's boarding house in lavender hill . pendlebury owns a foundry that makes presents and souvenirs that are sold in many resorts , including foreign ones . noticing how similar the foundry is to the place where the gold is made into ingots , holland decides that the ideal way of smuggling the gold out of the country would be as eiffel tower paperweights sold in paris , and puts this hypothetically to his new friend : '' by jove , holland , it 's a good job we 're both honest men . '' '' it is indeed , pendlebury . '' when holland suddenly finds that he is about to be transferred to another department at the bank , he and pendlebury quickly move into action . they recruit two petty crooks , lackery wood ( sid james ) and shorty fisher ( alfie bass ) , to help them carry out the robbery . the plan is simple but clever , and it succeeds : wood and fisher carry out the hijack of the bullion van and switch the gold to pendlebury 's works van . holland , who is supposedly assaulted and almost drowned in the robbery , becomes the hero of the hour . the police find themselves running around in circles , unable to track down the '' master criminal '' who is in fact right under their noses giving them false statements and misleading clues . meanwhile , holland and his associates melt the gold in pendlebury 's foundry and export it to france disguised as miniature eiffel towers . the plan goes wrong when the woman running the souvenir kiosk in paris misunderstands her instructions due to a language mixup - the box of gold towers is marked with an ' r ' ( for 'reserve ' ) but she assumes she has to keep back any boxes marked ' a ' , which in french sounds like the english pronunciation of ' r ' . instead of holding back the specially-marked box of eiffel towers , she opens it and puts them out for sale . pendlebury and holland , who have adopted the names of '' al '' and '' dutch '' , arrive to retrieve their disguised bullion only to find that six of the towers have been sold to a party of british schoolgirls . a wild chase back to calais and the channel ferry canterbury follows but hold-ups to buy tickets and negotiate passport , customs and currency controls prevent them from boarding the ship carrying the girls in time . if just one of those towers is found to be gold then the game is up . pendlebury and holland therefore track down the schoolgirls and , in exchange for a similar tower and ten shillings apiece , recover most of the loot . one girl however refuses to return hers since she intends to give it to a friend who is a policeman . the girl delivers the souvenir to the officer , who is at an exhibition of police history and methods at hendon police college . also attending is a police inspector who is investigating the robbery . as part of the case he checked up on pendlebury 's foundry and was told that many souvenirs bought in foreign places are actually made in britain . a sudden thought occurs to him and he orders the souvenir to be tested . at that moment pendlebury snatches it and he and holland make their escape in a police car . a confused pursuit then takes place through london , with holland using the radio in the police car they have stolen to divert the pursuers to a different car . eventually , though , an officer succeeds in stopping their car and arresting pendlebury . holland escapes to rio de janeiro with the six gold towers , worth '' £25,000 , enough to keep me for one year in the style to which i was , ah , unaccustomed . '' but now , he finishes telling his visitor , the money is mostly gone . as they leave the restaurant , holland is seen to be handcuffed to his countryman . cast . ; cast notes audrey hepburn makes an early film appearance in a small role as chiquita near the start of the film . robert shaw also made his first film appearance , playing a police laboratory technician towards the end of the film . english actress patricia garwood made her first film appearance in this movie at the age of nine . production . screenwriter clarke is said to have come up with the idea of a clerk robbing his own bank while doing research for the film pool of london ( 1951 ) , a crime thriller surrounding a jewel theft . he consulted the bank of england on the project and it set up a special committee to advise on how best the robbery could take place . the aurum film encyclopedia & nbsp ; – the gangster film , edited by phil hardy , aurum press , 1998 empire & nbsp ; – special collectors ' edition & nbsp ; – the greatest crime movies ever , published in 2001 extensive location filming was made in both london and paris . '' filming locations '' on imdb . retrieved december 2011 the scenes show a london still marked by bomb sites from the second world war . ; london , england , uk bank–monument station bank of england , threadneedle street bramley arms pub , bramley road , notting hill ( finale : end of the chase ) cheapside carlton road , ealing ( zebra crossing on way to police exhibition ) gunnersbury park ( police exhibition ) queen victoria street , blackfriars ( scene of bullion robbery ) raf northolt , ruislip ( airport ) ; paris , france river seine eiffel tower in the car chase scene at the end of the film , an officer uses a police box to report seeing a police car being driven by a man in a top hat . in fact , the driver is wearing the uniform of the police as originally set up in 1829 by sir robert peel , known as '' bobbies '' or '' peelers . '' the scene where holland and pendlebury run down the eiffel tower 's spiral staircase and become increasingly dizzy and erratic , as does the camera work , presages james stewart 's condition in alfred hitchcock 's vertigo , made seven years later . a film montage of sensational newspaper headlines marks the crime as taking place in august 1950 . reception . the lavender hill mob had its charity world premiere at the marble arch odeon cinema in london on the 28th of june 1951 . the film was popular at the british box office . until star wars ( film ) , it was guinness 's highest-grossing film at the u.s . box office with rentals of 580,000 . . awards and honours . the film won the academy award for best writing , story and screenplay . guinness was nominated for the award of academy award for best actor . the film also won the bafta award for best british film . see also . 1951 in film bfi top 100 british films british films of 1951 heist film . references . ; notes ; bibliography vermilye , jerry . the great british films . citadel press , 1978 . pp . & nbsp ; 147–149 . external links . the lavender hill mob review at old movies