Man of La Mancha

history . man of la mancha started as a non-musical teleplay written by dale wasserman for cbs 's dupont show of the month program . this original telecast starred lee j . cobb , colleen dewhurst ( who replaced viveca lindfors ) , and eli wallach and was performed on a television sound stage . the dupont disliked the title man of la mancha , thinking that its viewing audience would not know what la mancha actually meant , so a new title , i , don quixote , was chosen . the play was broadcast live on november 9 , 1959 , with an estimated audience of 20 million . wasserman , dale . the impossible musical ( 2003 ) . hal leonard corporation . , pp . 48–53 the new york public library at lincoln center , billy rose collection , has a rare tape of this broadcast . years after this television broadcast and after the original teleplay had been unsuccessfully optioned as a non-musical broadway play , director albert marre called wasserman and suggested that he turn his play into a musical . mitch leigh was selected as composer , with orchestrations by carlyle w . hall . unusually for the time , this show was scored for an orchestra with no violins or other traditional orchestral stringed instruments apart from a double bass , instead making heavier use of brass , woodwinds , percussion and utilizing flamenco guitars as the only stringed instruments of any sort . synopsis and song lyrics allmusicals.com . retrieved january 27 , 2010 the original lyricist of the musical was poet w . h . auden , but his lyrics were discarded , some of them considered too overtly satiric and biting , attacking the bourgeois audience at times . auden 's lyrics were replaced by those of joe darion . www.broadway.tv article '' broadway hidden treasures revealed '' . productions . the musical first played at the goodspeed opera house in connecticut in 1965 . rex harrison was to be the original star of this production , but although harrison had starred in a musical role in the stage and film versions of my fair lady , the musical demands of the role of don quixote were too heavy for him . after 22 previews , the musical opened off-broadway at the experimental thrust stage anta washington square theatre in greenwich village on november 22 , 1965 . the show moved to broadway to the martin beck theatre on march 20 , 1968 , then to the eden theatre on march 3 , 1971 , and finally to the mark hellinger theatre on may 26 , 1971 for its last month , a total original broadway run of 2,328 performances . musical staging and direction were by albert marre , choreography was by jack cole , and howard bay was the scenic and lighting designer , with costumes by bay and patton campbell . richard kiley won a tony award for his performance as cervantes/quixote in the original production , and it made kiley a bona fide broadway star . gussow , mel . '' richard kiley , the man of la mancha , is dead at 76 '' , the new york times , march 6 , 1999 kiley was replaced in the original broadway run by first jose ferrer on broadway and in the 1966 national tour , and then by operatic baritone david atkinson . atkinson also performed cervantes/quixote in the 1968 national tour and for all of the matinee performances in the 1972 broadway revival , which also starred kiley . the original cast also included irving jacobson ( sancho ) , ray middleton ( innkeeper ) , robert rounseville ( the padre ) , and joan diener ( aldonza ) . john cullum , hal holbrook , and lloyd bridges also played cervantes and don quixote during the run of the production . keith andes also played the role . the musical was performed on a single set that suggested a dungeon . all changes in location were created by alterations in the lighting , by the use of props supposedly lying around the floor of the dungeon , and by reliance on the audience 's imagination . more recent productions , however , have added more scenery . guernsey , otis l . curtain times : the new york theatre , 1965–1987 ( 1987 ) . hal leonard corporation , , p . 36 prideaux , tom . 'man of la mancha'life magazine , april 8 , 1966 the original west end london production was at the piccadilly theatre , opening on april 24 , 1968 and running for 253 performances . keith michell starred , with joan diener reprising her original role and bernard spear as sancho . 1968 listing guidetomusicaltheatre.com . retrieved january 26 , 2010 the play has been revived on broadway four times : 1972 – with richard kiley as cervantes/quixote , running for 140 performances 1977 – with richard kiley as cervantes/quixote , tony martinez as sancho panza and emily yancy as aldonza/dulcinea , running for 124 performances 1992 – with raul julia as cervantes/quixote and sheena easton as aldonza/dulcinea , running for 108 performances . easton was replaced late in the run by joan diener . 2002 – with brian stokes mitchell as cervantes/quixote , mary elizabeth mastrantonio as aldonza/dulcinea , and ernie sabella as sancho panza , running for 304 performances ; marin mazzie took over as aldonza ( dulcinea ) on july 1 , 2003 . this production featured scenic and costume design by paul brown , lighting design by paul gallo , sound design by tony meola and projection design by elaine j . mccarthy . in the film man of la mancha ( 1972 ) , the title role went to peter o'toole ( singing voice dubbed by simon gilbert ) , james coco was sancho , and sophia loren was aldonza . 'man of la mancha ' movie listing internet movie database . retrieved january 26 , 2010 hal linden played quixote in the show 's 1988 u.s . national tour , '' listing : 'man of la mancha ' – stars hal linden , july 19–31 '' , texas monthly , july 1988 and robert goulet played quixote in the 1997–98 u.s . national tour . theater , orange coast performing arts center , through january 5 , 'man of la mancha ' , starring robert goulet '' orange coast magazine , january 1997 a studio-made recording of the score was released in 1996 , conducted by paul gemignani and starring plácido domingo as quixote , mandy patinkin as sancho , julia migenes as aldonza , jerry hadley as the priest and samuel ramey as the innkeeper . in 2014 , man of la mancha featured as part of the stratford festival in stratford , ontario , canada . the shakespeare theatre company produced man of la mancha as part of their 2014–2015 season . the production starred anthony warlow as quixote and amber iman as aldonza/dulcinea . in 2019 , the play received a west end revival with a production at the london coliseum . kelsey grammer starred as cervantes/quixote , danielle de niese as aldonza/dulcinea , peter polycarpou as sancho , and nicholas lyndhurst as the governor/innkeeper . man of la mancha - english national opera website ( 2019 ) . synopsis . in the late sixteenth century , failed author-soldier-actor and tax collector miguel de cervantes has been thrown into a dungeon by the spanish inquisition , along with his manservant . they have been charged with foreclosing on a monastery . their fellow prisoners attack them , eager to steal the contents of the large trunk cervantes has brought with him . however , a sympathetic criminal known as '' the governor '' suggests setting up a mock trial instead . only if cervantes is found guilty will he have to hand over his possessions . a cynical prisoner , known as '' the duke , '' charges cervantes with being an idealist and a bad poet . cervantes pleads guilty , but then asks if he may offer a defense , in the form of a play , acted out by him and all the prisoners . the '' governor '' agrees . cervantes takes out a makeup kit and costume from his trunk , and transforms himself into alonso quijano , an old gentleman who has read so many books of chivalry and thought so much about injustice that he has lost his mind and set out as a knight-errant . quijano renames himself don quixote de la mancha , and goes off to find adventures with his '' squire '' , sancho panza . ( '' man of la mancha ( i , don quixote ) '' ) don quixote warns sancho that they are always in danger of being attacked by quixote 's mortal enemy , an evil magician known as the enchanter . suddenly he spots a windmill , mistakes it for a four-armed giant , attacks it , and receives a beating from the encounter . quixote decides that he lost the battle because he was never properly knighted . he then mistakes a rundown inn for a castle and orders sancho to announce their arrival by blowing his bugle . cervantes talks some prisoners into assuming the roles of the inn 's serving wench and part-time prostitute aldonza , and a group of muleteers who are propositioning her . aldonza fends them off sarcastically ( '' it 's all the same '' ) , but eventually deigns to accept their leader , pedro , who pays in advance . don quixote enters with sancho , asking for the lord of the castle . the innkeeper ( played by the governor ) humors don quixote as best he can . quixote sees aldonza and declares that she is his lady , dulcinea , to whom he has sworn eternal loyalty ( '' dulcinea '' ) . aldonza , used to rough treatment , is first flabbergasted and then annoyed at quixote 's kindness , and is further aggravated when the muleteers turn quixote 's tender ballad into a mocking serenade . meanwhile , antonia , don quixote 's niece , has gone with quixote 's housekeeper to seek advice from the local priest , who realizes that the two women are more concerned with the embarrassment quixote 's madness may bring them than with his actual welfare ( '' i 'm only thinking of him '' ) . cervantes chooses '' the duke '' to play dr . sanson carrasco , antonia 's fiancé , a man just as cynical and self-centered as the prisoner who is playing him . carrasco is upset at the idea of marrying into the family of a madman , but the priest convinces carrasco that it would be a worthy challenge to use his abilities to cure his prospective uncle-in-law . carrasco and the priest set out to bring don quixote back home ( '' i 'm only thinking of him reprise '' ) . back at the inn , sancho delivers a missive from don quixote to aldonza courting her favor and asking for a token of her esteem . aldonza provides the requested token : an old dishrag . she asks sancho why he follows quixote , but he can come up with no explanation other than '' i really like him '' . alone , aldonza ponders quixote 's behavior and her inability to laugh at him ( '' what do you want of me ? '' ) . in the courtyard , the muleteers once again taunt aldonza with a suggestive song ( '' little bird , little bird '' ) . pedro makes arrangements with her for an assignation later . the priest and dr . carrasco arrive , but can not reason with don quixote . quixote becomes distracted by a barber who passes by the inn , wearing his shaving basin on his head to ward off the sun 's heat ( '' the barber 's song '' ) . quixote threatens the barber with a sword and snatches the basin , declaring it is the '' golden helmet of mambrino '' , which makes its wearer invulnerable . dr . carrasco and the priest leave , with the priest impressed by don quixote 's view of life and wondering if curing him is really worthwhile ( '' to each his dulcinea '' ) . quixote still wishes to be officially dubbed a knight : he plans to stand vigil all night over his armor in the inn 's courtyard , and then have the innkeeper ( whom he mistakes for a nobleman ) grant him knighthood the following morning . aldonza encounters quixote in the courtyard and confronts him ; quixote does his best to explain the ideals he follows and the quest he is on ( '' the impossible dream '' ) . pedro enters , furious at being kept waiting , and slaps aldonza . enraged , don quixote takes him and all the other muleteers on in a fight ( '' the combat '' ) . don quixote has no martial skill , but by luck and determination – and with the help of aldonza and sancho – he prevails , and the muleteers are all knocked unconscious . but the noise attracts the attention of the innkeeper , who tells quixote that he must leave . quixote apologizes for the trouble but reminds the innkeeper of his promise to dub him knight . the innkeeper does so ( '' knight of the woeful countenance '' ) . quixote then declares that he must comfort the wounded muleteers , because chivalry requires kindness to one 's enemies . aldonza , impressed , says that she will help the muleteers instead . but when she comes to them with bandages , they beat her , rape her , and carry her off ( '' the abduction '' ) . quixote , unaware of this , contemplates his recent victory and new knighthood ( '' the impossible dream '' – first reprise ) . at this point , the don quixote play is brutally interrupted when the inquisition enters the dungeon and drags off an unwilling prisoner to be tried . the duke taunts cervantes for his look of fear , and accuses him of not facing reality . this prompts cervantes to passionately defend his idealism . the don quixote play resumes ( '' man of la mancha '' – first reprise ) . quixote and sancho have left the inn and encounter a band of gypsies ( '' moorish dance '' ) who take advantage of quixote 's naiveté and steal everything they own , including quixote 's horse rocinante and sancho 's donkey dapple . the gypsy scene is omitted in some productions . quixote and sancho are forced to return to the inn . aldonza also shows up at the inn , bruised and ashamed . quixote swears to avenge her , but she tells him off , flinging her real , pitiful history in his face and blaming him for allowing her a glimpse of a life she can never have . she begs him to see her as she really is but quixote can only see her as his dulcinea ( '' aldonza '' ) . suddenly , another knight enters . he announces himself as don quixote 's mortal enemy , the enchanter , in the form of the '' knight of the mirrors '' . he insults aldonza , so quixote challenges him to combat . the knight of the mirrors and his attendants bear huge mirrored shields , and as they swing them at quixote ( '' knight of the mirrors '' ) , the glare blinds him . the knight taunts quixote , forcing him to see himself as the world sees him : a fool and a madman . don quixote collapses , weeping . the knight of the mirrors removes his helmet – he is really dr . carrasco , returned with his latest plan to cure quixote . cervantes announces that the story is finished , but the prisoners are dissatisfied with the ending . they prepare to burn his manuscript when he asks for the chance to present one last scene . the governor agrees . quixote is back at home , and has fallen into a coma . sancho tries to cheer him up ( '' a little gossip '' ) , and alonso opens his eyes . he is now sane : he gives his name as alonso quijano and thinks his knightly career was just a dream . however , he feels close to death , and asks the priest to help him make out his will . aldonza suddenly forces her way into the room . she has come to visit quixote because she can no longer bear to be anyone but dulcinea . when he does not recognize her , she sings a reprise of '' dulcinea '' and tries to help him remember the words of '' the impossible dream . '' suddenly , he remembers everything and rises from his bed , calling for his armor and sword so that he may set out again ( '' man of la mancha '' – second reprise ) . but it is too late – in mid-song , he cries out and falls dead . the priest sings '' the psalm '' ( psalm 130 in latin ) for the dead . sancho is distraught at his friend 's death . aldonza tries to comfort him , saying that alonso quijano may be dead but don quixote lives on . when sancho addresses her as aldonza , she replies , '' my name is dulcinea . '' the inquisition enters to take cervantes to his trial , and the prisoners , finding him not guilty , return his manuscript . it is his ( as yet ) unfinished novel , don quixote . as cervantes and his servant mount the staircase to go to their impending trial , the prisoners , led by the girl who played dulcinea , sing '' the impossible dream '' in chorus . musical numbers . '' overture '' '' man of la mancha ( i , don quixote ) '' – don quixote , sancho '' food , wine , aldonza ! '' – muleteers '' it 's all the same '' – aldonza '' dulcinea '' – don quixote '' i 'm only thinking of him '' – antonia , padre , housekeeper '' we 're only thinking of him '' – antonia , carasco , padre , housekeeper '' the missive '' – sancho '' i really like him '' – sancho '' what does he want of me ? '' – aldonza '' little bird , little bird '' – muleteers '' barber 's song '' – barber '' golden helmet of mambrino '' – don quixote , sancho & barber '' to each his dulcinea '' – padre '' the impossible dream '' – don quixote '' the combat ( instrumental ) '' – orchestra '' the dubbing '' – innkeeper , aldonza & sancho '' knight of the woeful countenance '' - innkeeper '' little bird , little bird ( reprise ) '' leading into an instrumental entitled . '' the abduction '' – muleteers '' the impossible dream ( reprise ) '' – don quixote '' man of la mancha ( reprise ) '' – don quixote '' moorish dance ( instrumental ) '' – moors '' aldonza '' – aldonza '' knight of the mirrors ( choreographed instrumental sequence ) '' – orchestra '' a little gossip '' – sancho '' dulcinea ( reprise ) '' – aldonza '' the impossible dream ( reprise ) '' – aldonza & don quixote '' man of la mancha ( reprise ) '' – don quixote , aldonza & sancho '' the psalm '' – padre '' finale ultimo : the impossible dream ( reprise ) '' – company . translated stage adaptations . spanish . the first spanish production opened in 1966 in madrid , spain , starring nati mistral as aldonza and the great spanish baritone luis sagi-vela as quixote/cervantes . a cast album was released by columbia records featuring four songs , all except the last sung by sagi-vela : '' the impossible dream '' , '' dulcinea '' , '' little bird '' , and '' what do you want from me '' . the first mexican production premiered on february 19 , 1969 at the teatro manolo fábregas in mexico city , with mistral reprising her acclaimed aldonza , claudio brook as quixote/cervantes , and oscar pulido as sancho panza . the best-selling cast recording was issued by mca/decca on lp , and was later re-issued on cd by honda music international . a peruvian cast album was released in 1969 as well . josé sacristán and paloma san basilio starred in an acclaimed madrid revival in 1998 . a 2-disc cast album was issued by emi-odeón , recorded live at teatro lope de vega . a 2004 revival opened at the teatro calderón in madrid and also toured throughout spain , finishing in barcelona . on september 28 , 2016 , a new production opened at the teatro de los insurgentes in mexico city , with benny ibarra as quixote/cervantes , ana brenda contreras as aldonza and carlos corona as sancho panza . swedish . the first swedish production opened september 1 , 1967 at malmö stadsteater ( now malmö opera ) . starring in the three lead roles were lars ekman , maj lindström and k g lindström . hebrew . a hebrew-language production was produced by giora godik in tel aviv , israel , in 1967 . . german . the first german language version was written by robert gilbert and started on 4 january 1968 in vienna with dietrich haugk as director . don quixote/cervantes was played by josef meinrad , aldonza by blanche aubry and sancho panza by fritz muliar . the production was quite successful and subsequentially shown in other german speaking theaters . a recording with the german cast was published by polydor within the same year . musical / cervantes - testament des sklaven . der spiegel , 1968-01-29 ( german ) michael holzinger : der mann von la mancha ( 1968 ) . sempre audio , 2009-10-17 ( german ) an austrian version of the musical , in german , was presented on austrian television in 1994 , with karl merkatz ( playing cervantes and quixote at the age of sixty-four ) and dagmar hellberg in the leading roles . . french . a french adaptation premiered at the théâtre des champs-élysées on december 11 , 1968 . belgian singer-songwriter jacques brel translated the songs and played the lead ( the only time he ever adapted songs written by other writers or appeared in a stage musical ) . joan diener reprised her role as aldonza ( this time singing in french ) . wasserman , dale . the impossible musical ( 2003 ) . hal leonard corporation . , pp . 163-164 it was recorded and issued in 1968 as the album l'homme de la mancha . 'man of la mancha ' recording , 1968 french cast amazon.com . retrieved january 26 , 2010 another french version based on brel 's translation was produced in liège in 1998 and 1999 with josé van dam in the lead role . van dam biography laphil.com , october 1999 . retrieved january 26 , 2010 in march 2012 , french baritone david serero performed the lead of role of don quixote in a new production , produced by himself , in paris and deauville with an international cast including jeane manson , charlie glad , lionel losada , gilles san juan and directed by james marvel . bulgarian . a bulgarian adaptation for television was released in 1968 directed by asen trayanov and grisha ostrovski , starring kosta tsonev , nikola anastasov , grigor vachkov , konstantin kotsev , vasil mihaylov and tatyana lolova . a bulgarian stage adaptation was realized directed by grisha ostrovski . cantonese . a cantonese production entitled '' the heroic spirit of a warrior '' opened in 1982 in hong kong , starred yiu tsang-pak as the leading role . another cantonese production with a new title '' sleepwalking knight of la mancha '' opened in hong kong in 2004 , with yiu tsang-pak returning as the leading role . the book was re-translated by rupert chan . chinese . the first mandarin chinese production of the musical opened dec . 2015 in shanghai , china , starring kain liu as don quixote/cervantes . this production used '' i , don quixote '' as title , and was directed by american director joseph graves . in may 2016 , the show premiered in beijing with kain liu repeating the title role . bengali . a bengali adaptation by arun mukherjee entitled dukhi mukhi joddha was staged in calcutta in 1994 by the theater group chetana , under his direction . in april 2018 chetana once again staged a much elaborate adaptation of the musical under the direction of sujan ( neel ) mukhopadhyay , entitled don.takye bhalo lagye and starring suman mukhopadhyay in the title role . korean . a korean production first opened at the haeorum theater of the national theater of korea in 2005 under the name don quixote . ryu jung-han and kim seong-ki starred as the main characters . in a 2007 production , this time staged under its original name , cho seung-woo and jung sung-hwa starred as quixote/cervantes . they reprised their roles a year later and in 2010 . multiple stars played the titular role in the 2012 production , including hwang jung-min ( who had to step down due to him directing and starring in a production of sondheim 's assassins and was replaced by ryu jung-han ) , seo bum-suk , and hong kwang-ho . jung sung-hwa and cho seung-woo played the main character in a 2013 production . in a 2015 production marking the tenth anniversary of the musical 's first performance in korea , jo and ryu returned in the lead role . japanese . a japanese-language production entitled the impossible dream was produced in tokyo , japan , where matsumoto kōshirō ix ( as ichikawa somegorō vi ) took the lead role . . others . the musical has been and continues to be produced in many other languages around the world , and in 2012 and 2013 played in germany , hungary , czech republic , romania , china , poland , dominican republic , chile , russia , and in rio de janeiro , brazil . cast albums are available in many languages including german from the 1968 vienna performance ( der mann von la mancha ) and the 1969 hamburg cast ( der mann von la mancha ) , the 1969 dutch cast ( de man van la mancha ) , the 1970 norwegian cast ( mannen frå la mancha ) , the 1997 polish cast ( człowiek z la manchy ) , the 1997 czech cast ( muž z la manchy ) , the 2001 hungarian cast ( la mancha lovagja ) , and many others . . awards and nominations . original broadway production .