Pyrrole

properties . pyrrole is a colorless volatile liquid that darkens readily upon exposure to air , and is usually purified by distillation immediately before use . pyrrole has a nutty odor . pyrrole is a 5-membered aromatic heterocycle , like furan and thiophene . unlike furan and thiophene , it has a dipole in which the positive end lies on the side of the heteroatom , with a dipole moment of 1.58 & nbsp ; d . in cdcl 3 , it has chemical shifts at 6.68 ( h2 , h5 ) and 6.22 ( h3 , h4 ) . pyrrole is weakly basic , with a conjugate acid pk a of −3.8 . the most thermodynamically stable pyrrolium cation ( c 4 h 6 n + ) is formed by protonation at the 2 position . substitution of pyrrole with alkyl substituents provides a more basic molecule—for example , tetramethylpyrrole has a conjugate acid pk a of +3.7 . pyrrole is also weakly acidic at the n–h position , with a pk a of 16.5 . as a hydrogen bonding lewis acid it is classified as a hsab and the ecw model lists its acid parameters as e a 1.38 and c a 0.68 . history . pyrrole was first detected by f . & nbsp ; f . runge in 1834 , as a constituent of coal tar . see especially pages 67–68 , where runge names the compound pyrrol ( fire oil ) or rothöl ( red oil ) . in 1857 , it was isolated from the pyrolysate of bone . its name comes from the greek pyrrhos , “ reddish , fiery ” ) , from the reaction used to detect it—the red color that it imparts to wood when moistened with hydrochloric acid . . occurrence in nature . pyrrole itself is not naturally occurring , but many of its derivatives are found in a variety of cofactors and natural products . common naturally produced molecules containing pyrroles include vitamin b12 , bile pigments like bilirubin and biliverdin , and the porphyrins of heme , chlorophyll , chlorins , bacteriochlorins , and porphyrinogens . other pyrrole-containing secondary metabolites include pqq , makaluvamine m , ryanodine , rhazinilam , lamellarin , prodigiosin , myrmicarin , and sceptrin . the syntheses of pyrrole-containing haemin , synthesized by hans fischer was recognized by the nobel prize . pyrrole is a constituent of tobacco smoke and may contribute to its toxic effects . . synthesis . pyrrole is prepared industrially by treatment of furan with ammonia in the presence of solid acid catalysts , like silica and alumina . 200px pyrrole can also be formed by catalytic dehydrogenation of pyrrolidine . laboratory routes . several syntheses of the pyrrole ring have been described . . hantzsch pyrrole synthesis . the hantzsch pyrrole synthesis is the reaction of β-ketoesters ( 1 ) with ammonia ( or primary amines ) and α-haloketones ( 2 ) to give substituted pyrroles ( 3 ) . 300px . knorr pyrrole synthesis . the knorr pyrrole synthesis involves the reaction of an α-amino ketone or an α-amino-β-ketoester with an activated methylene compound . the method involves the reaction of an α-aminoketone ( 1 ) and a compound containing a methylene group α to ( bonded to the next carbon to ) a carbonyl group ( 2 ) . 350px . paal–knorr pyrrole synthesis . in the paal–knorr pyrrole synthesis , a 1,4-dicarbonyl compound reacts with ammonia or a primary amine to form a substituted pyrrole . . van leusen reaction . the van leusen reaction can be used to form pyrroles , by reaction of tosylmethyl isocyanide ( tosmic ) with an enone in the presence of base , in a michael addition . a 5-endo cyclization then forms the 5-membered ring , which reacts to eliminate the tosyl group . the last step is tautomerization to the pyrrole . barton–zard synthesis . the barton–zard synthesis proceeds in a manner similar to the van leusen synthesis . an isocyanoacetate reacts with a nitroalkene in a 1,4-addition , followed by 5-endo-dig cyclization , elimination of the nitro group , and tautomerization . 400px . piloty–robinson pyrrole synthesis . the starting materials in the piloty–robinson pyrrole synthesis , named for gertrude and robert robinson and oskar piloty , are two equivalents of an aldehyde and hydrazine . the product is a pyrrole with substituents at the 3 and 4 positions . the aldehyde reacts with the diamine to an intermediate di-imine ( r–c n−n c–r ) . in the second step , a 3,3-sigmatropic rearrangement takes place between . addition of hydrochloric acid leads to ring closure and loss of ammonia to form the pyrrole . the mechanism was developed by the robinsons . in one modification , propionaldehyde is treated first with hydrazine and then with benzoyl chloride at high temperatures and assisted by microwave chemistry : 400px . cycloaddition-based routes . pyrroles bearing multiple substituents are obtained from the reaction of münchnones and alkynes . the reaction mechanism involves 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition followed by loss of carbon dioxide by a retro-diels–alder process . similar reactions can be performed using azalactones . pyrroles can be prepared by silver-catalyzed cyclization of alkynes with isonitriles , where r 2 is an electron-withdrawing group , and r 1 is an alkane , aryl group , or ester . examples of disubstituted alkynes have also been seen to form the desired pyrrole in considerable yield . the reaction is proposed to proceed via a silver acetylide intermediate . this method is analogous to the azide–alkyne click chemistry used to form azoles . other methods . one synthetic route to pyrrole involves the decarboxylation of ammonium mucate , the ammonium salt of mucic acid . the salt is typically heated in a distillation setup with glycerol as a solvent . . biosynthesis of pyrroles . the de novo biosynthesis of pyrrole rings begins with aminolevulinic acid ( ala ) , which is synthesized from glycine and succinyl-coa . ala dehydratase catalyzes the condensation of two ala molecules via a knorr-type ring synthesis to form porphobilinogen ( pbg ) . this later reacts to form , for example , the macrocycles heme and chlorophyll . . proline is biosynthesis derived from the amino acid l -glutamate . glutamate-5-semialdehyde is first formed by glutamate 5-kinase ( atp-dependent ) and glutamate-5-semialdehyde dehydrogenase ( which requires nadh or nadph ) . this can then either spontaneously cyclize to form 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylic acid , which is reduced to proline by pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase ( using nadh or nadph ) , or turned into ornithine by ornithine aminotransferase , followed by cyclisation by ornithine cyclodeaminase to form proline . . proline can be used as precursor of aromatic pyrroles in secondary natural products , as in prodigiosins . the biosynthesis of prodigiosin involves the convergent coupling of three pyrrole type rings ( labeled a , b , and c in figure 1 ) from l-proline , l-serine , l-methionine , pyruvate , and 2-octenal . ring a is synthesized from l-proline through the nonribosomal peptide synthase ( nrps ) pathway ( figure 2 ) , wherein the pyrrolidine ring of proline is oxidized twice through fad+ to yield pyrrole ring a . ring a is then expanded via the polyketide synthase pathway to incorporate l-serine into ring b ( figure 3 ) . ring a fragment is transferred from the peptidyl carrier protein ( pcp ) to the acyl carrier protein ( acp ) by a ks domain , followed by transfer to malonyl-acp via decarboxylative claisen condensation . this fragment is then able to react with the masked carbanion formed from the plp mediated decarboxylation of l-serine , which cyclizes in a dehydration reaction to yield the second pyrrole ring . this intermediate is then modified by methylation ( which incorporates a methyl group from l-methionine onto the alcohol at the 6 position ) and oxidation of the primary alcohol to the aldehyde to yield the core a-b ring structures . reactions and reactivity . due to its aromaticity , pyrrole is difficult to hydrogenate , does not easily react as a diene in diels–alder reactions , and does not undergo usual olefin reactions . its reactivity is similar to that of benzene and aniline , in that it is easy to alkylate and acylate . under acidic conditions , pyrroles polymerize easily , and thus many electrophile reagents that are used in benzene chemistry are not applicable to pyrroles . in contrast , substituted pyrroles ( including protected pyrroles ) have been used in a broad range of transformations . . reaction of pyrrole with electrophiles . pyrroles generally react with electrophiles at the α position ( c2 or c5 ) , due to the highest degree of stability of the protonated intermediate . pyrroles react easily with nitrate ( e.g . nitric acid/ac 2 o ) , sulfonate ( py·so 3 ) , and halogenating ( e.g . ncs , nbs , bromine , sulfonyl chloride , and ki/hydrogen peroxide ) agents . halogenation generally provides polyhalogenated pyrroles , but monohalogenation can be performed . as is typical for electrophilic additions to pyrroles , halogenation generally occurs at the 2-position , but can also occur at the 3-position by silation of the nitrogen . this is a useful method for further functionalization of the generally less reactive 3-position . acylation . acylation generally occurs at the 2-position , through the use of various methods . acylation with acid anhydrides and acid chlorides can occur without a catalyst ; alternatively , a lewis acid may be used . 2-acylpyrroles are also obtained from reaction with nitriles , by the houben–hoesch reaction . pyrrole aldehydes can be formed by a vilsmeier–haack reaction . n-acylation of simple pyrrole does not occur . alkylation . electrophilic alkylation of simple pyrrole is uncommon . alkylation to form enones at c2 has been seen . reaction of deprotonated pyrrole . the nh proton in pyrroles is moderately acidic with a pk a of 16.5 . pyrrole can be deprotonated with strong bases such as butyllithium and sodium hydride . the resulting alkali pyrrolide is nucleophilic . treating this conjugate base with an electrophile such as iodomethane gives n-methylpyrrole . n-metalated pyrrole can react with electrophiles at the n or c positions , depending on the coordinating metal . more ionic nitrogen–metal bonds ( such as with li , na , and k ) and more solvating solvents lead to n-alkylation . nitrophilic metals , such as mgx , lead to alkylation at c ( mainly c2 ) , due to a higher degree of coordination to the nitrogen atom . in the cases of n-substituted pyrroles , metalation of the carbons is more facile . alkyl groups can be introduced as electrophiles , or by cross-coupling reactions . substitution at c3 can be achieved through the use of n-substituted 3-bromopyrrole , which can be synthesized by bromination of n-silylpyrrole with nbs . reductions . pyrroles can undergo reductions to pyrrolidines and to pyrrolines . for example , birch reduction of pyrrole esters and amides produced pyrrolines , with the regioselectivity depending on the position of the electron-withdrawing group . cyclization reactions . pyrroles with n-substitution can undergo cycloaddition reactions such as 4+2- , 2+2- , and 2+1-cyclizations . diels-alder cyclizations can occur with the pyrrole acting as a diene , especially in the presence of an electron-withdrawing group on the nitrogen . vinylpyrroles can also act as dienes . pyrroles can react with carbenes , such as dichlorocarbene , in a 2+1-cycloaddition . with dichlorocarbene , a dichlorocyclopropane intermediate is formed , which breaks down to form 3-chloropyridine ( the ciamician–dennstedt rearrangement ) . . commercial uses . polypyrrole is of some commercial value . n-methylpyrrole is a precursor to n-methylpyrrolecarboxylic acid , a building-block in pharmaceutical chemistry . pyrroles are also found in several drugs , including atorvastatin , ketorolac , and sunitinib . pyrroles are used as lightfast red , scarlet , and carmine pigments . . analogs and derivatives . structural analogs of pyrrole include : pyrroline , a partially saturated analog with one double bond pyrrolidine , the saturated hydrogenated analog derivatives of pyrrole include indole , a derivative with a fused benzene ring . see also . simple aromatic rings tetrapyrrole polypyrrole azonine . references . further reading . . external links . synthesis of pyrroles ( overview of recent methods ) substitution reaction mechanisms of nitrogen-containing heteroaromatics