USS Massachusetts (BB-2)

design and construction . massachusetts was constructed from a modified version of a design drawn up by a policy board in 1889 for a short-range battleship . the original design was part of an ambitious naval construction plan to build 33 battleships and 167 smaller ships . the united states congress saw the plan as an attempt to end the us policy of isolationism and did not approve it , but a year later approved funding for three coast defense battleships , which would become massachusetts and her sister ships and . the ships were limited to coastal defense due to their moderate endurance , relatively small displacement and low freeboard which limited seagoing capability . they were however heavily armed and armored ; conway 's all the world 's fighting ships describes their design as '' attempting too much on a very limited displacement . '' construction of the ships was authorized on 30 june 1890 , and the contract for massachusetts—not including guns and armor—was awarded to william cramp & sons of philadelphia , who offered to build it for 3,020,000 . the total cost of the ship was almost twice as high , approximately 6,000,000 . the contract specified the ship had to be built in three years , but slow delivery of armor plates and guns caused a delay . her keel was laid down on 25 june 1891 , and she was launched two years later on 10 june 1893 . the launching ceremony was attended by thousands of people , including secretary of the navy hilary a . herbert , and commander george dewey . her preliminary sea trial did not take place until march 1896 , because of the delays in armor and gun deliveries . at this point massachusetts was almost complete , and her official trial was held a month later . service history . early career . massachusetts was commissioned on 10 june 1896 , with captain frederick rodgers in command . she had her shakedown cruise between august and november 1896 , followed by an overhaul at the new york navy yard . in february 1897 , she made a short voyage to charleston , south carolina . the battleship departed new york , again in may , for boston , where a celebration in her honor was held . for the next ten months the warship participated in training maneuvers with the north atlantic squadron , off the coast of florida , and visited several major ports on the american east coast . on 27 march 1898 , she was ordered to hampton roads , virginia , to join the flying squadron , under commodore winfield scott schley , for the blockade of cuba . spanish–american war . after the outbreak of the spanish–american war , the flying squadron steamed to key west . there , schley met with rear admiral sampson , who had just returned from the bombardment of san juan , puerto rico . they discussed the possible locations of the spanish squadron , under admiral cervera , and schley was sent to the harbor of cienfuegos , cuba , to look for cervera . schley arrived off cienfuegos , on 22 may , and took several days to establish that cervera 's ships were not in the harbor . the squadron then proceeded to santiago de cuba , the only other port on the southern coast of cuba , large enough for the spanish ships , arriving after several delays on 29 may . on arrival , the , was visible from outside the harbor entrance , confirming that the spanish fleet was in the harbor . schley blockaded the harbor and informed sampson , who arrived with his own squadron on 1 june , and assumed overall command . during the next month massachusetts took part in the blockade of santiago de cuba , occasionally bombarding the harbor forts . on the night of 2–3 july , she and the two cruisers and , left the blockade to load coal in guantanamo bay , cuba . this caused her to miss the battle of santiago de cuba , on 3 july , in which the spanish fleet attempted to break through the blockade and was completely destroyed . the next day the battleship came back to santiago de cuba , where she and fired at the disarmed , which was being scuttled by the spanish , in an attempt to block the harbor entrance channel . massachusetts was then sent to puerto rico , to support the american occupation until she steamed home to new york , on 1 august , arriving on 20 august . post spanish–american war . after a quick overhaul in drydock , massachusetts was attempting to leave new york harbor , on 10 december 1898 , when she struck diamond reef , flooding five of her forward compartments . she was forced to return to the navy yard , where she was placed in drydock again for repairs which took around three months . for a year massachusetts served with the north atlantic squadron , visiting various cities on the atlantic coast . in may 1900 , she and indiana were placed in reserve as the navy had an acute officer shortage and needed to put the new and s into commission . the battleships were reactivated the following month as an experiment in how quickly this could be achieved , and massachusetts returned to service with the north atlantic squadron . in march 1901 , the battleship grounded again , this time in the harbor of pensacola , florida , but the ship was able to continue her trip . a more serious accident occurred during target practice in january 1903 , when an explosion in an turret killed nine crew members . they were the first fatalities aboard a united states battleship since the sinking of , in 1898 . another accident happened in august of that year , when massachusetts grounded on a rock in frenchman bay , maine . the ship was seriously damaged and had to be repaired in drydock . in december 1904 , yet another lethal accident took place aboard massachusetts : three men were killed and several others badly burned when a broken gasket caused steam to fill the boiler room . on 8 january 1906 , the battleship was decommissioned and her crew was transferred to her sister ship indiana , which had completed a three-year modernization . massachusetts now received the same upgrades , including twelve /50 caliber single-purpose guns to replace the and most of the lighter guns , new babcock & wilcox boilers , counterweights to balance her main turrets , a lattice mast and electric traversing mechanisms for her turrets . on 2 may 1910 , massachusetts was placed in reduced commission so she could be used for the annual naval academy midshipmen summer cruise . despite her modernizations the battleship was now regarded as '' obsolete and worthless , even for the second line of defense '' by secretary of the navy george von lengerke meyer . she saw little use , other than summer cruises , and was transferred to the atlantic reserve fleet when it was formed in 1912 . after a quick trip to new york , for a presidential fleet review , in october 1912 , the warship returned to philadelphia , and stayed there until she was decommissioned on 23 may 1914 . world war i . after the united states entered world war i , massachusetts was recommissioned for the final time , on 9 june 1917 . she was used by naval reserve gun crews for gunnery training in block island sound , until 27 may 1918 . the battleship was then redeployed to serve as a heavy gun target practice ship near chesapeake bay , until the end of world war i . massachusetts returned to philadelphia , on 16 february 1919 . she was decommissioned for the final time on 31 march 1919 , after being re-designated '' coast battleship number 2 '' two days earlier so her name could be reused for the first south dakota-class dreadnought battleship . like the rest of its class , bb-54 was scrapped before completion as part of the us ' compliance with the washington naval treaty of 1922 . the name was again used for , which was laid down in 1939 , served in world war ii and is now a museum ship . scuttling . massachusetts was struck from the naval vessel register on 22 november 1920 , and loaned to the united states department of war , then used as a target ship for experimental artillery . she was scuttled in shallow water in the gulf of mexico , off pensacola , on 6 january 1921 , and bombarded by the coastal batteries of fort pickens and by railway artillery . on 20 february 1925 , the department of war returned her wreck to the us navy , which offered her for scrap , but no acceptable bids were received . another attempt to sell her for scrap was made in 1956 , but the state of florida prevented this . eventually massachusetts was declared the property of the state of florida , by the supreme court of florida . on 10 june 1993—the centennial anniversary of her launching—the site became the fourth florida underwater archaeological preserve . in 2001 , the wreck also was added to the national register of historic places , and it still serves as an artificial reef and diving spot . massachusetts figurehead is on display in dahlgren hall , at the united states naval academy , in annapolis , maryland .