1984 in literature

events . april 4 – the narrative of george orwell 's dystopian novel nineteen eighty-four ( 1949 ) begins and causes widespread discussion . g . k . chesterton 's the napoleon of notting hill ( 1904 ) is also set in this year ; and haruki murakami 's 1q84 ( いちきゅうはちよん , ichi-kyū-hachi-yon , 2009–2010 ) is set in a parallel version of it . june 16 – cirque du soleil is founded in baie-saint-paul , quebec , by two former street performers , guy laliberté and gilles ste-croix . july – tom wolfe 's novel the bonfire of the vanities begins serialization in rolling stone . december 19 – ted hughes ' appointment as poet laureate of the united kingdom is announced in succession to sir john betjeman , philip larkin having turned down the post . unknown dates prvoslav vujčić 's second poetry collection , kastriranje vetra ( castration of the wind ) , written during a week 's imprisonment in tuzla for criticising the state , is banned in yugoslavia . of mice and men , the 1937 novel by john steinbeck , is removed from tennessee public schools , when the school board chair promises to oust all '' ostensibly filthy '' books from public school curricula and libraries . redu in belgium becomes a book town . saqi books , an independent u.k . publisher , is founded by mai ghoussoub . new books . fiction . warren adler – random hearts kingsley amis – stanley and the women martin amis – money v . c . andrews – seeds of yesterday jeffrey archer – first among equals richard bachman ( stephen king ) – thinner j . g . ballard – empire of the sun iain banks – the wasp factory rené barjavel – l'enchanteur julian barnes – flaubert 's parrot j . j . benítez – caballo de troya thomas bernhard – woodcutters ( holzfällen ) j . bernlef – hersenschimmen ( out of mind ) michael bishop one winter in eden who made stevie crye ? simon brett – a shock to the system david brin – the practice effect anita brookner – hotel du lac tom clancy – the hunt for red october maryse condé – segou : les murailles de terre bernard cornwell ( as susannah kells ) – fallen angels michel déon – je vous écris d'italie marguerite duras – l'amant louise erdrich – love medicine howard fast – the outsider leon forrest – two wings to veil my face frederick forsyth – the fourth protocol john gardner – role of honour william gibson – neuromancer william golding – '' the paper men '' alasdair gray – 1982 , janine kent haruf – the tie that binds frank herbert – heretics of dune david hughes – the pork butcher john jakes – love and war stephen king , peter straub – the talisman russell kirk – watchers at the strait gate jaan kross – professor martens ' departure ( professor martensi ärasõit ) milan kundera – the unbearable lightness of being ( first published in french as l'insoutenable légèreté de l'être ) sue limb – up the garden path robert ludlum – the aquitaine progression norman mailer – tough guys do n't dance ruth manning-sanders – a book of magic horses m . t . vasudevan nair – randamoozham ( രണ്ടാമൂഴം , second turn ) mitiarjuk nappaaluk – sanaaq robert b . parker – valediction milorad pavić – dictionary of the khazars ellis peters dead man 's ransom the pilgrim of hate mario puzo – the sicilian thomas pynchon – slow learner christoph ransmayr – the terrors of ice and darkness pratibha ray – yajnaseni bob shea and robert anton wilson – the illuminatus ! trilogy ( collected edition ) michael slade – headhunter danielle steel – full circle neal stephenson – the big u ( debut novel ) botho strauß – the young man robert swindells – brother in the land antonio tabucchi – indian nocturne ( notturno indiano , novella ) john updike – the witches of eastwick gore vidal – lincoln tim winton – shallows janusz zajdel – paradyzja . children and young people . chris van allsburg – the mysteries of harris burdick sandra cisneros - the house on mango street helen cresswell – the secret world of polly flint kevin eastman and peter laird – teenage mutant ninja turtles ( comic book ) mem fox – wilfrid gordon mcdonald partridge patricia reilly giff – the beast in ms . rooney 's room ( first in polk street school series ) michelle magorian – back home bill peet – pamela camel dr . seuss – the butter battle book j . r . r . tolkien ( with michael hague ) – the hobbit . drama . howard barker – scenes from an execution howard brenton – bloody poetry dario fo – elizabeth : almost by chance a woman ( quasi per caso una donna : elisabetta ) michael frayn – benefactors beth henley – the miss firecracker contest elfriede jelinek – illness or modern women ( krankheit oder moderne frauen , published ) joshua sobol – ghetto tom stoppard – rough crossing . poetry . john ashbery – a wave louise erdrich – jacklight christopher gilbert – across the mutual landscape paulette jiles – celestial navigation sharon olds – the dead and the living . non-fiction . morrill cody and hugh ford – the women of montparnasse , the americans in paris roald dahl – boy an autobiography louise hay – you can heal your life lee iacocca – iacocca : an autobiography steven levy – hackers : heroes of the computer revolution audre lorde – sister outsider : essays and speeches robin morgan ( ed . ) – sisterhood is global m . alice ottoboni – the dose makes the poison : a plain-language guide to toxicology derek parfit – reasons and persons joan peters – from time immemorial : the origins of the arab-jewish conflict over palestine herbert jay stern – judgment in berlin e . o . wilson – biophilia : the human bond with other species . births . april 16 – amelia atwater-rhodes , american novelist may 9 – ezra klein , american journalist and columnist may 21 – jackson pearce , american young-adult novelist june 5 – simon rich , american humorist , novelist and screenwriter july 12 – amanda hocking , american fantasy novelist august 8 – owen jones , english columnist and author and commentator november 20 – halley feiffer , american playwright and actress december 10 – helen oyeyemi , english novelist and playwright . deaths . february 12 – julio cortázar , argentine novelist , short story writer and essayist ( born 1914 ) february 21 – michail aleksandrovich sholokhov , russian writer , nobel prize laureate ( born 1905 ) february 22 uwe johnson , german writer in england ( born 1934 ) jessamyn west , american novelist ( born 1902 ) march 4 – odd bang-hansen , norwegian novelist and children 's writer ( born 1908 ) march 8 – eleanor graham , english children 's writer and editor ( born 1896 ) march 12 – arnold ridley , english playwright and actor ( born 1896 ) march 26 – branko ćopić , bosnian serb writer ( suicide , born 1915 ) april 1 – elizabeth goudge , english writer ( born 1900 ) april 15 – alexander trocchi , scottish writer ( born 1925 ) april 21 marcel janco , romanian–israeli artist , art theorist , essayist and poet ( born 1895 ) manuel mujica láinez , argentine novelist ( born 1910 ) may 16 – irwin shaw , american playwright , screenwriter and novelist ( born 1913 ) may 19 – john betjeman , english poet laureate ( born 1906 ) june 6 – a . bertram chandler , english-australian soldier and author ( born 1912 ) ) june 10 – halide nusret zorlutuna , turkish poet and novelist ( born 1901 ) june 30 – lillian hellman , american playwright ( born 1905 ) july 6 – denys val baker , welsh novelist and short story writer ( born 1917 ) august 14 – j . b . priestley , english novelist and playwright ( born 1894 ) august 25 – truman capote ( truman streckfus persons ) , american fiction writer ( born 1924 ) september 7 – liam o'flaherty , irish novelist and short story writer ( born 1896 ) october 31 – eduardo de filippo , italian playwright ( born 1900 ) november 6 – gastón suárez , bolivian novelist and dramatist ( born 1929 ) november 10 – xavier herbert , australian novelist ( born 1901 ) november 12 – chester himes , american writer ( born 1909 ) december 4 – ștefan voitec , romanian politician and journalist ( born 1900 ) december 6 – gray barker , american writer on paranormal ( born 1925 ) december 14 – vicente aleixandre , spanish writer , nobel prize laureate ( born 1898 ) . awards . nobel prize in literature : jaroslav seifert . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : kate grenville , lilian 's story kenneth slessor prize for poetry : les murray , the people 's other world miles franklin award : tim winton , shallows . canada . see 1984 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : marguerite duras , l'amant prix médicis french : bernard-henri lévy , le diable en tête prix médicis international : elsa morante , aracoeli . spain . miguel de cervantes prize : ernesto sabato . united kingdom . betty trask award , established by society of authors , prize : ronald frame , winter journey , clare nonhebel , cold showers booker prize : anita brookner , hotel du lac carnegie medal for children 's literature : margaret mahy , the changeover cholmondeley award : michael baldwin , michael hofmann , carol rumens eric gregory award : martyn crucefix , mick imlah , jamie mckendrick , bill smith , carol ann duffy , christopher meredith , peter armstrong , iain bamforth james tait black memorial prize for fiction : j . g . ballard , empire of the sun , and angela carter , nights at the circus james tait black memorial prize for biography : lyndall gordon , virginia woolf : a writer 's life 1984 whitbread awards : james buchan , a parish of rich women . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : arthur smith , elegy on independence day frost medal : jack stadler nebula award : william gibson , neuromancer newbery medal for children 's literature : beverly cleary , dear mr . henshaw pulitzer prize for drama : david mamet , glengarry glen ross pulitzer prize for fiction : william j . kennedy – ironweed pulitzer prize for poetry : mary oliver : american primitive . elsewhere . premio nadal : josé de tomás garcía – la otra orilla de la droga . references .