Pudendal nerve

structure . the pudendal nerve is paired , meaning there are two nerves , one on the left and one on the right side of the body . each is formed as three roots immediately converge above the upper border of the sacrotuberous ligament and the coccygeus muscle . the three roots become two cords when the middle and lower root join to form the lower cord , and these in turn unite to form the pudendal nerve proper just proximal to the sacrospinous ligament . the three roots are derived from the ventral rami of the second , third , and fourth sacral spinal nerves , with the primary contribution coming from the fourth . the pudendal nerve passes between the piriformis muscle and coccygeus ( ischiococcygeus ) muscles and leaves the pelvis through the lower part of the greater sciatic foramen . it crosses over the lateral part of the sacrospinous ligament and reenters the pelvis through the lesser sciatic foramen . after reentering the pelvis , it accompanies the internal pudendal artery and internal pudendal vein upwards and forwards along the lateral wall of the ischiorectal fossa , being contained in a sheath of the obturator fascia termed the pudendal canal , along with the internal pudendal blood vessels . inside the pudendal canal , the nerve divides into branches , first giving off the inferior rectal nerve , then the perineal nerve , before continuing as the dorsal nerve of the penis ( in males ) or the dorsal nerve of the clitoris ( in females ) . . nucleus . the nerve is a major branch of the sacral plexus , with fibers originating in onuf 's nucleus in the sacrum region of the spinal cord . . variation . the pudendal nerve may vary in its origins . for example , the pudendal nerve may actually originate in the sciatic nerve . consequently , damage to the sciatic nerve can affect the pudendal nerve as well . sometimes dorsal rami of the first sacral nerve contribute fibers to the pudendal nerve , and even more rarely . . function . the pudendal nerve has both motor and sensory functions . it does not carry parasympathetic fibers but does carry sympathetic fibers . the pudendal nerve supplies sensation to the penis in males , and to the clitoris in females , which travels through the branches of both the dorsal nerve of the penis and the dorsal nerve of the clitoris . the posterior scrotum in males and the labia in females are also supplied , via the posterior scrotal nerves ( males ) or posterior labial nerves ( females ) . the pudendal nerve is one of several nerves supplying sensation to these areas . page neurovascular bundles of the perineum branches also supply sensation to the anal canal . by providing sensation to the penis and the clitoris , the pudendal nerve is responsible for the afferent component of penile erection and clitoral erection . it is also responsible for ejaculation . branches also innervate muscles of the perineum and the pelvic floor ; namely , the bulbospongiosus and the ischiocavernosus muscles respectively , the levator ani muscle ( including the iliococcygeus , pubococcygeus , puborectalis and either pubovaginalis in females or puboprostaticus in males ) the external anal sphincter ( via the inferior anal branch ) , and male or female external urethral sphincter . as it functions to innervate the external urethral sphincter it is responsible for the tone of the sphincter mediated via acetylcholine release . this means that during periods of increased acetylcholine release the skeletal muscle in the external urethral sphincter contracts , causing urinary retention . whereas in periods of decreased acetylcholine release the skeletal muscle in the external urethral sphincter relaxes , allowing voiding of the bladder to occur . ( clarification : unlike the internal sphincter muscle , the external sphincter is made of skeletal muscle , therefore it is under voluntary control of the somatic nervous system . ) . clinical significance . anesthesia . a pudendal anesthesia , also known as a saddle nerve block , is a local anesthesia technique used in an obstetric procedure to anesthetize the perineum during labor . in this procedure , an anesthetic agent such as lidocaine is injected through the inner wall of the vagina about the pudendal nerve . . damage . the pudendal nerve can be compressed or stretched , resulting in temporary or permanent neuropathy . irreversible nerve injury may occur when nerves are stretched by 12 % or more of their normal length . if the pelvic floor is over-stretched , acutely ( e.g . prolonged or difficult childbirth ) or chronically ( e.g . chronic straining during defecation caused by constipation ) , the pudendal nerve is vulnerable to stretch-induced neuropathy . pudendal nerve entrapment , also known as alcock canal syndrome , is very rare and is associated with professional cycling . systemic diseases such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis can damage the pudendal nerve via demyelination or other mechanisms . a pelvic tumor ( most notably a large sacrococcygeal teratoma ) , or surgery to remove the tumor , can also cause permanent damage . unilateral pudendal nerve neuropathy inconsistently causes fecal incontinence in some , but not others . this is because crossover innervation of the external anal sphincter occurs in some individuals . . imaging . the pudendal nerve is difficult to visualize on routine ct or mri , however under ct guidance , a needle may be placed adjacent to the pudendal neurovascular bundle . the ischial spine , an easily identifiable structure on ct , is used as the level of injection . a spinal needle is advanced via the gluteal muscles and advanced within several millimeters of the ischial spine . contrast ( x-ray dye ) is then injected , highlighting the nerve in the canal and allowing for confirmation of correct needle placement . the nerve may then be injected with cortisone and local anesthetic to confirm and also treat chronic pain of the external genitalia ( known as vulvodynia in females ) , pelvic and anorectal pain . . nerve latency testing . the time taken for a muscle supplied by the pudendal nerve to contract in response to an electrical stimulus applied to the sensory and motor fibers can be quantified . increased conduction time ( terminal motor latency ) signifies damage to the nerve . 2 stimulating electrodes and 2 measuring electrodes are mounted on the examiner 's gloved finger ( '' st mark 's electrode '' ) . . history . the term pudendal comes from latin , meaning external genitals , derived from , meaning '' parts to be ashamed of '' . the pudendal canal is also known by the eponymous term '' alcock 's canal '' , after benjamin alcock , an irish anatomist who documented the canal in 1836 . alcock documented the existence of the canal and pudendal nerve in a contribution about iliac arteries in robert bentley todd 's '' the cyclopaedia of anatomy and physiology '' . . additional images . file : gray829.png the male pelvis , showing the pudendal nerve ( centre right ) file : grant 1962 214.png schematic showing the structures innervated by the pudendal nerve file : grant 1962 215.png diagram of the course of the pudendal nerve in the male pelvis . see also . neurogenic bladder . references . external links . - '' inferior view of female perineum , branches of the internal pudendal artery . '' diagnosis and treatment at www.nervemed.com www.pudendal.com pudendal nerve entrapment at chronicprostatitis.com ct sequence showing a pudendal nerve block .