Real McCoy (band)

history . 1989–1990 : early success in germany . the real mccoy project ( originally known in europe as m.c . sar & the real mccoy ) was the result of the successful collaboration between music producer juergen wind ( j . wind ) , music producer frank hassas ( quickmix ) , and rapper olaf jeglitza ( o-jay ) under their music production company freshline records . wind and hassas wrote and produced the project 's main hits between 1990 and 1994 at wind studios b.c . in spandau , germany . traditionally , jeglitza was given additional producer credits alongside wind and hassas as j . wind , quickmix & o . jeglitza for freshline . in reality , jeglitza only had a minor songwriting role on the team and strictly provided rap vocals for the song productions . in 1993 , he became the front man of the project . the first single from the project was a cover version of the hit '' pump up the jam '' by technotronic featuring new rap verses from jeglitza . the single was released in 1989 and distributed by zyx records in germany where it reached no . 16 on the singles charts . chart progression of the single '' pump up the jam - rap '' : in germany provided by musicline.de following the unexpected success of the single , wind took over the management of freshline records and became the leading producer and composer behind the project . the follow-up releases were hip house style records . '' it 's on you '' debuted in 1990 and became a top hit in germany and a success in other european territories . the single was particularly successful in france where it had earned silver status for selling 200,000 units . the growing success of the two singles motivated zyx records to request a live act and a music video for '' it 's on you '' . a frenchman of african descent named george shampro mario was hired to be m.c . sar and to act as the front man and rapper for the project . unbeknownst to the public , he was really a lip-sync artist who was miming the rap vocals of jeglitza for the live performances and the music video . during this early stage of the project , jeglitza remained completely anonymous . singer patricia petersen ( patsy ) sang the choruses on the single and fronted the project with mario . four more singles ( '' do n't stop '' , '' make a move '' , '' let 's talk about love '' , and '' no showbo '' ) and an album ( on the move ! ) were later released . each of these follow-up releases failed commercially . in 1992 , freshline ended their relationship with zyx records . 1993–1995 : mainstream success with '' another night '' . in late 1992 , freshline had formed a new partnership deal with hansa records ( bmg berlin ) to release new music for the project . after a deal was finalized , wind immediately began planning out a success strategy for the project with hansa 's a & r executive david brunner and bmg president andy selleneit . the three then made a creative decision to change the musical style of the project from hip house to eurodance and pop . wind and hassas wrote and produced the new single '' another night '' while jeglitza wrote his rap verses . a producer duo known as the berman brothers ( siblings frank and christian berman ) recommended to wind their session singer karin kasar for the singing choruses . after hearing a demo of her voice , wind selected her for the role . in exchange for her participation in the project , the brothers made a deal with wind to be listed as producers with freshline as freshline & the berman brothers . they also made a deal with wind to make the remixes for the single . a mix created by the brothers was selected to be the official single version of the song . petersen remained the front woman and mimed kasar 's vocals for live performances and the music video for the new single . wind and brunner then decided to remove mario from the project . jeglitza was then promoted into a front man role alongside petersen thus making the project a duo act . brunner organized the marketing , promotion , distribution , sales strategies for the single and was credited as executive producer under the alias '' d.n.b . '' when released in the summer of 1993 , '' another night '' was only a minor hit in europe reaching no.18 in germany and barely making the top 100 in several other countries . shortly after the release of the single , wind and hassas produced the maxx hit '' get-a-way '' under the alias '' the movement '' . brunner distributed the single through intercord . when released in october 1993 , the single became a major commercial success in europe alongside the growing success of '' another night '' . by mid-1994 , m.c . sar & the real mccoy had begun to achieve notable success on the charts alongside the massive success of the maxx hits : '' get-a-way '' and no more ( i ca n't stand it ) '' . thanks to the promotional efforts of bmg canada , '' another night '' had suddenly hit no.1 on the canadian dance/urban chart in march 1994 and had remained on the chart for several weeks . the follow-up singles '' automatic lover ( call for love ) '' and '' run away '' and the album space invaders were then released in europe . after noticing how quickly '' another night '' had reached no . 1 on the canadian dance/urban chart , arista records ceo clive davis became interested in bringing m.c . sar & the real mccoy to the u.s . market . davis had previously had success making the swedish pop group ace of base a hit the u.s . and sought to do the same with m.c . sar & the real mccoy . after deal was finalized between arista and bmg , the project name was shortened to real mccoy and '' another night '' was released in the u.s . in the summer of 1994 . the single had peaked at no.3 in the u.s . by november 1994 and had quickly reached platinum status . the follow-up single release of '' run away '' was also a successful hit in the u.s . reaching gold status . thanks to the success of the two hits , an all new u.s . release of the space invaders album was quickly planned for 1995 . the project was officially re-branded as a trio act featuring jeglitza , petersen and newcomer vanessa mason . the space invaders album was re-titled another night . the cover art , imagery and marketing for the album was completely changed to present a lighter romantic tone . several tracks from the album were removed for the new release . davis commissioned a new team of producers to write and produce three new covers songs ( '' come and get your love '' , '' ooh boy '' , '' if you should ever be lonely ( deep in the night ) '' ) and an original track ( sleeping with an angel ) for the album . the new production team included : songwriters billy steinberg & rick noweles , producer shep pettibone and the lemon productions team ( per adebratt , douglas carr & tony ekman ) . thanks to the promotional efforts of arista along with the popularity of '' another night '' and '' run away '' , the album reached double platinum status and became a mainstream commercial success in 1995 . '' come and get your love '' was released as the third real mccoy single and reached no.1 on the hot dance/club play chart . '' automatic lover ( call for love ) '' was also released late in 1995 as a fourth single but saw lesser success peaking at no.52 on the charts . the space invaders track '' love & devotion '' was released in europe and australia as a real mccoy single . it earned gold status in australia and peaked at no.11 in the united kingdom . while real mccoy 's success was at its peak in 1995 , the maxx project had quickly begun to decline in europe due to the lack of new hits on the european charts . by the end of 1995 , the project had permanently disbanded . 1997–1998 : group decline after one more time album . in 1997 the follow-up album one more time was released . singer lisa cork was recruited as a replacement for petersen and kasar . wind produced the album without hassas or brunner 's involvement and instead worked with the lemon productions team ( adebratt , carr & ekman ) and songwriter/producer brent argovitz . the berman brothers produced a shania twain cover for the album while also making new remixes for the singles . for promotional reasons , jeglitza was credited as an executive producer alongside davis . the lead single from the album , ( also called '' one more time '' ) , reached no.3 in australia and achieved platinum status but saw lesser success in the u.s . peaking at no . 27 chart listing of the single '' one more time '' for the week of jul 19 , 1997 on the charts . the follow-up singles '' i wan na come ( with you ) '' and the shania twain cover '' ( if you 're not in it for love ) i 'm outta here ! '' failed to chart and were also commercial failures . the disappointing commercial sales of the album and the final singles lead to the quick demise of the lineup in 1997 . in 1998 , bmg re-released the original space invaders album , under the title real mccoy – love & devotion in germany . 1999–2015 : real mccoy continuation and hiatus . in 1999 and 2000 , two new real mccoy singles were released with an all new lineup . rapper jason ammon and singers gabriele koopmans and ginger maria kamphuis were marketed as the 'new ' real mccoy . the first single released with the new lineup was a re-recorded version of '' it 's on you '' . koopmans and kamphuis recorded new vocals for the song while jeglitza re-recorded his original rap verses . a music video was filmed for the single in miami , florida , starring ammon , koopmans and kamphuis with a cameo from jeglitza . ammon mimed jeglitza 's rap vocals in the music video . a second single titled '' hey now '' was released in 2000 featuring rap from ammon and singing from koopmans and kamphuis . both singles became commercial failures resulting in the demise of the new lineup . after a long hiatus , jeglitza ( under the name real mccoy ) collaborated with the polish band ich troje in 2006 to create the song '' follow my heart '' . jeglitza and the band represented poland at the eurovision song contest 2006 . billboard article may 18 , 2006 the song , however , failed to qualify for the grand final . in early 2007 , a new real mccoy song titled '' people are still having sex '' was released in germany . the single was a cover of the famous la tour single of the same name . in august 2009 , jeglitza performed as real mccoy with singers debbie butts and gemma louise sampson for dj bobo 's '' dj bobo and friends '' concert in engelberg , switzerland . facebook event invite by dj bobo pictures of real mccoy at dj bobo and friends concert - august 1 , 2009 jeglitza also recorded the track '' two hearts '' with butts and sampson , but the track was never released officially . 2016–present : return of karin kasar and real mccoy revival . in 2016 , jeglitza returned again as real mccoy with the original studio singer karin kasar . as a live duo act , jeglitza and kasar perform as real mccoy at '90s festivals worldwide . members . olaf jeglitza ( o-jay ) – rapper ( 1989–present ) george shampro mario ( m.c . sar ) – frontman only , lip-sync ( 1990–1992 ) patricia petersen ( patsy ) – singer , lip-sync ( 1990–1995 ) yvonne parker ( sunday ) – session singer ( 1990 ) karin kasar – session singer , live performer ( 1993–1995 , 2016–present ) vanessa mason – singer , lip-sync ( 1994–1997 ) lisa cork – singer ( 1996–1997 ) jason ammon – rapper ( 1999 ) gabriele koopmans – singer ( 1999 ) ginger maria kamphuis – singer ( 1999 ) debbie butts – singer ( 2009 ) gemma louise sampson – singer ( 2009 ) . discography . albums . . references . external links . real mccoy official facebook page list of releases from the online music database discogs