Étienne Bonnot de Condillac

biography . he was born at grenoble into a legal family , the youngest of three brothers . his two older brothers jean and gabriel took names associated with one of the family 's properties at mably , loire , and were each known as '' bonnot de mably '' . étienne identified with another property at condillac , drôme , was known as '' bonnot de condillac '' . like his brother gabriel , condillac took holy orders ( 1733–1740 ) at saint-sulpice church in paris . he was appointed as abbot of mureau . condillac devoted his whole life , with the exception of an interval as a court-appointed tutor to the duchy of parma , to speculative thought . his works are : ( 1746 ) ; ( 1749 ) ; ( 1754 ) ; ( 1755 ) ; a comprehensive cours d'études ( 1767–1773 ) in 13 vols . , written for the young duke ferdinand of parma , a grandson of louis xv ; ( 1776 ) ; and two posthumous works , ( 1781 ) and the unfinished ( 1798 ) . in paris , condillac was involved with the circle of denis diderot , the philosopher who was co-contributor to the encyclopédie . he developed a friendship with jean-jacques rousseau , which lasted in some measure to the end of his life . it likely started when rousseau was a tutor to two of his brother jean 's sons in lyon—jean bonnot de mably was then provost of the police and known as monsieur de mably . together with his brother gabriel , who became the well-known political writer known as abbé de mably , condillac introduced rousseau to an intellectual circle . condillac 's relations with unorthodox philosophers did not injure his career . he had already published several works when the french court sent him to parma to educate the orphan duke , then a child of seven years . on his return from italy , condillac was elected to the académie française in 1768 . contrary to the popular idea that he attended only one meeting , he was a frequent attendee until two years before his death . he spent his later years in retirement at flux , a small property which he had purchased near beaugency on the loire river . he died there on 2 or 3 august 1780 . work . condillac is important both as a psychologist and as having established systematically in france the principles of john locke . voltaire had made the english philosopher fashionable . condillac developed his concept of empirical sensationism , and demonstrated '' lucidity , brevity , moderation , and an earnest striving after logical method . '' his first book , the essai sur l'origine des connaissances humaines , keeps close to his english master . he accepts with some reluctance locke 's deduction of our knowledge from two sources , sensation and reflection . he uses as his main principle of explanation the association of ideas . his next book , the traité des systèmes , is a vigorous criticism of those modern systems which are based upon abstract principles or upon unsound hypotheses . his polemic , which is inspired throughout by locke , is directed against the innate ideas of the cartesians , malebranche 's faculty-psychology , leibniz 's monadism and pre-established harmony , and , above all , against the conception of substance set forth in the first part of the ethics of baruch spinoza . by far the most important of his works is the traité des sensations , in which condillac treats psychology in his own characteristic way . he questioned locke 's doctrine that the senses give us intuitive knowledge of objects , that the eye , for example , naturally judges shapes , sizes , positions , and distances . he believed it was necessary to study the senses separately , to distinguish precisely what ideas are owed to each sense , to observe how the senses are trained , and how one sense aids another . he believed that the conclusion has to be that all human faculty and knowledge are transformed sensation only , to the exclusion of any other principle , such as reflection . the author imagines a statue organized inwardly like a man , animated by a soul which has never received an idea , into which no sense-impression has ever penetrated . he unlocks its senses one by one , beginning with smell , as the sense that contributes least to human knowledge . at its first experience of smell , the consciousness of the statue is entirely occupied by it ; and this occupancy of consciousness is attention . the statue 's smell-experience will produce pleasure or pain ; and pleasure and pain will thenceforward be the master-principle which , determining all the operations of its mind , will raise it by degrees to all the knowledge of which it is capable . the next stage is memory , which is the lingering impression of the smell experience upon the attention : '' memory is nothing more than a mode of feeling . '' from memory springs comparison : the statue experiences the smell , say , of a rose , while remembering that of a carnation ; and '' comparison is nothing more than giving one 's attention to two things simultaneously . '' and '' as soon as the statue has comparison it has judgment . '' comparisons and judgments become habitual , are stored in the mind and formed into series , and thus arises the powerful principle of the association of ideas . from comparison of past and present experiences in respect of their pleasure-giving quality arises desire ; it is desire that determines the operation of our faculties , stimulates the memory and imagination , and gives rise to the passions . the passions , also , are nothing but sensation transformed . these indications will suffice to show the general course of the argument in the first section of the traité des sensations . he thoroughly developed this idea through the subsequent chapters : '' of the ideas of a man limited to the sense of smell , '' '' of a man limited to the sense of hearing , '' '' of smell and hearing combined , '' '' of taste by itself , and of taste combined with smell and hearing , '' '' of a man limited to the sense of sight . '' in the second section of the treatise , condillac invests his statue with the sense of touch , which first informs it of the existence of external objects . in a very careful and elaborate analysis , he distinguishes the various elements in our tactile experiences-the touching of one 's own body , the touching of objects other than one 's own body , the experience of movement , the exploration of surfaces by the hands : he traces the growth of the statue 's perceptions of extension , distance and shape . the third section deals with the combination of touch with the other senses . the fourth section deals with the desires , activities and ideas of an isolated man who enjoys possession of all the senses ; and ends with observations on a '' wild boy '' who was found living among bears in the forests of lithuania . the conclusion of the whole work is that in the natural order of things , everything has its source in sensation , and yet that this source is not equally abundant in all men ; men differ greatly in the degree of vividness with which they feel . finally , he says that man is nothing but what he has acquired ; all innate faculties and ideas are to be swept away . modern theories of evolution and heredity have differed from this . condillac 's work on politics and history , in his cours d'études , is considered of less interest . in logic , on which he wrote extensively , he is far less successful than in psychology . he enlarges with much iteration on the supremacy of the analytic method ; argues that reasoning consists in the substitution of one proposition for another which is identical with it ; and lays it down that science is the same thing as a well-constructed language , a proposition which in his , he tries to prove by the example of arithmetic . his logic is limited by his study of sensations and lack of knowledge of science other than mathematics . he rejects the medieval apparatus of the syllogism ; but is precluded by his standpoint from understanding the active , spiritual character of thought ; nor had he that interest in natural science and appreciation of inductive reasoning which form the chief merit of js mill . some might claim that condillac 's anti-spiritual psychology , with its explanation of personality as an aggregate of sensations , leads straight to atheism and determinism . however , he denies both these consequences . what he says upon religion is always in harmony with his profession ; and he vindicated the freedom of the will in a dissertation that has very little in common with the to which it is appended . the common reproach of materialism should certainly not be made against him . he always asserts the substantive reality of the soul ; and in the opening words of his , '' whether we rise to heaven , or descend to the abyss , we never get outside ourselves—it is always our own thoughts that we perceive , '' we have the subjectivist principle that forms the starting-point of berkeley . language . condillac considered language as the vehicle by which senses and emotions were transformed into higher mental faculties . he believed that the structure of language reflects the structure of thought , and compared ideas to the sounds of a harpsichord . his theories had a major effect on the development of linguistics . condillac promoted '' sensualism , '' a theory that says all knowledge comes from the senses and there are no innate ideas . condillac promoted an expressionist theory of linguistic creation that anticipates the prime features of later thoughts about language by german theorist johann gottfried herder ( 1744–1803 ) . george albert wells , the origin of language : aspects of the discussion from condillac to wundt ( 1987 ) . economics . condillac 's 'le commerce et le gouvernement ' ( published in 1776 , the same year as adam smith 's wealth of nations ) attempted to place economics in a coherent logical framework . he was a friend of françois quesnay – leader of the physiocrats . much of condillac 's work reflected mainstream physiocrats , particularly his analysis of the structure of taxation and proposals for the revival of the economy , but he also proposed another line of argument , claiming that producers work to obtain utility . most physiocrats rejected utility and the idea was ignored until his 'rediscovery ' by stanley jevons and carl menger in 1871 . in his theory of '' vrai prix '' true price , condillac proposed a theory of human history divided into two phases : progress and decline . progress is marked by a rational development and use of resources ; decline is precipitated by bad behavior from the upper classes that then trickles down to the workers , encouraging excess , luxury , and false prices that harm the masses . condillac saw the remedy to this as '' vrai prix , '' a true price created by the unimpeded interaction of supply and demand , to be achieved by complete deregulation . people would be taught to work toward their best interest in an open market through a reshaping of their perceptions . by advocating of a free market economy in contrast to the prevailing contemporary policy of state control in france , condillac influenced classical liberal economics orain ( 2006 ) . history . condillac 's histoire ancienne and histoire moderne ( 1758–1767 ) demonstrated how the experience and observation of the past aided man . history was not a mere retelling of the past , but a source of information and inspiration as well . reason and critical thinking can improve man 's lot and destroy superstition and fanaticism . history thus served as a moral , political , and philosophical textbook which taught man to live better . thus the two histories present the basic program of the enlightenment in crystallized form . legacy . as was fitting to a disciple of locke , condillac 's ideas have had most importance in their effect upon english thought . in matters connected with the association of ideas , the supremacy of pleasure and pain , and the general explanation of all mental contents as sensations or transformed sensations , his influence can be traced upon the mills and upon bain and herbert spencer . and , apart from any definite propositions , condillac did a notable work in the direction of making psychology a science ; it is a great step from the desultory , genial observation of locke to the rigorous analysis of condillac , short-sighted and defective as that analysis may seem to us in the light of fuller knowledge . his method , however , of imaginative reconstruction was by no means suited to english ways of thinking . in spite of his protests against abstraction , hypothesis and synthesis , his allegory of the statue is in the highest degree abstract , hypothetical and synthetic . james mill , who stood more by the study of concrete realities , put condillac into the hands of his youthful son with the warning that here was an example of what to avoid in the method of psychology . a modern historian has compared hobbs , catherine , rhetoric on the margin of modernity , vico , condillac , monboddo , southern illinois university press , carbondale , illinois ( 2002 ) condillac with scottish enlightenment philosopher and history of evolution lord monboddo , who had a similar fascination with abstraction and ideas . in france condillac 's doctrine , so congenial to the tone of 18th century philosophism , reigned in the schools for over fifty years , challenged only by a few who , like maine de biran , saw that it gave no sufficient account of volitional experience . early in the 19th century , the romantic awakening of germany had spread to france , and sensationism was displaced by the eclectic spiritualism of victor cousin . condillac 's collected works were published in 1798 ( 23 vols . ) and two or three times subsequently ; the last edition ( 1822 ) has an introductory dissertation by a . f . théry . the has a very long article on condillac by naigeon . biographical details and criticism of the in j . p . damiron 's , tome iii . ; a full criticism in v cousin 's , ser . i . tome iii . consult also f rethoré , ( 1864 ) ; l dewaule , ( 1891 ) ; histories of philosophy . in condillac 's statue , a chapter in a mind so rare : the evolution of human consciousness , psychologist and cognitive neuroscientist merlin donald argues that condillac was the first constructivist . . works . . notes . references . . further reading . orain , arnaud . '' directing or reforming behaviors ? a discussion of condillac 's theory of 'vrai prix ' . '' history of political economy 2006 38 ( 3 ) : 497–530 . external links . étienne bonnot de condillac , an essay on the origin of human knowledge , being a supplement to mr . locke 's essay on the human understanding , translated by thomas nugent ( london : j . nourse , 1756 ) . facsimile ed . , introd . robert g . weyant , 1971 , scholars ' facsimiles & reprints , . traité de l'art d'écrire correctement la langue française ( paris : dufart , 1812 )