Tariqa

orders of sufism . the most popular tariqa in the west is the mevlevi order , named after rumi . cf . ordens sufis no islã , p . 37 . mateus soares de azevedo ( s . paulo , polar , 2020 ) . in the same time the bektashi order was also founded , named after the alevi muslim saint haji bektash veli . four large tariqas in south asia are : the naqshbandi order , named after baha-ud-din naqshband bukhari ; the qadiri order , named after abdul qadir jilani ; the chishti order , named after khawaja mawdood chisti while khawaja moinuddin chishti is the most famous sheikh ; the suhrawardi order , named after shahab al-din suhrawardi . large tariqats in africa include muridiyya and tijaniyya . others can be offshoots of a tariqa . for example , the qalandariyya has roots in malamatiyya ( with buddhism and hinduism influence ) and wafa ' i ( a combination of yasawiyya-sunni and batiniyya-shia ) of orders are offshoots of the suhrawardi order . the ashrafia after the 13 the century illustrious sufi saint ashraf jahangir semnani 'hayate makhdoom syed ashraf jahangir semnani ( 1975 ) , second edition ( 2017 ) , maktaba jamia ltd , shamshad market , aligarh 202002 , india . is the sub branch of chishti spiritual lineage . the maizbhandari tariqa or maizbhandari sufi order is a liberated sufism order established in the bangladesh in the 19th century by the gausul azam shah sufi syed ahmadullah maizbhandari ( 1826 ad − 1906 ad ) , 27th descendant of the islamic prophet , muhammad . membership of a particular sufi order is not exclusive and can not be likened to the ideological commitment to a political party . unlike the christian monastic orders which are demarcated by firm lines of authority and sacrament , sufis often are members of various sufi orders . the non-exclusiveness of sufi orders has consequences for the social extension of sufism . they can not be regarded as indulging in a zero sum competition which a purely political analysis might have suggested . rather their joint effect is to impart to sufism a cumulant body of tradition , rather than individual and isolated experiences . sufi martyrs of love by carl w . ernst , bruce b . lawrence . pg 28 in most cases the sheikh nominates his khalifa or '' successor '' during his lifetime , who will take over the order . in rare cases , if the sheikh dies without naming a khalifa , the students of the tariqa elect another spiritual leader by vote . in some orders it is recommended to take a khalif from the same order as the murshid . in some groups it is customary for the khalifa to be the son of the sheikh , although in other groups the khalīfa and the sheikh are not normally relatives . in yet other orders a successor may be identified through the spiritual dreams of its members . tariqas have silsilas '' chain , lineage of sheikhs '' . almost all orders except the naqshbandi order claim a silsila that leads back to muhammad through ali . ( the naqshbandi silsila goes back to abu bakr , the first caliph of sunni islam , and then muhammad ibn abi bakr . historians however have traced this chain back to ali as muhammad ibn abi bakr was brought up by ali from the age of three ) . note : there are other sufi orders that have other sahabis r.a . in their chain of transmission of bayt , i.e . owaisayah order traces its chain through caliph umar farooq , uthmaniyah haqqaniyah traces its chain through caliph uthman bin affan , seeriniyah traces its chain of bayt through mohammed bin sirin through anas bin malik to the prophet . every murid , on entering the tariqa , gets his awrad , or daily recitations , authorized by his murshid ( usually to be recited before or after the pre-dawn prayer , after the afternoon prayer and after the evening prayer ) . usually these recitations are extensive and time-consuming ( for example the awrad may consist of reciting a certain formula 99 , 500 or even 1000 times ) . one must also be in a state of ritual purity ( as one is for the obligatory prayers to perform them while facing mecca ) . the recitations change as a student ( murid ) moves from a mere initiate to other sufi degrees ( usually requiring additional initiations ) . the initiation ceremony is routine and consists of reading chapter 1 of the quran followed by a single phrase prayer . criteria have to be met to be promoted in rank : the common way is to repeat a single phrase prayer 82,000 times or more as in the case of burhaniyya , a number that grows with each achieved rank . murids who experience unusual interaction during meditation : hear voices like '' would you like to see a prophet ? '' or see visions who might even communicate with the murid are held dear in the '' haḍra '' , the weekly group-chanting of prayers in attempt of reaching spirits as they are likely to experience something unusual and pass it on . this murid is promoted faster than others . the least common way is to cause a miracle to happen with criteria similar to that of catholic sainthood . being mostly followers of the spiritual traditions of islam loosely referred to as sufism , these groups were sometimes distinct from the ulma or officially mandated scholars , and often acted as informal missionaries of islam . they provided accepted avenues for emotional expressions of faith , and the tariqas spread to all corners of the muslim world , and often exercised a degree of political influence inordinate to their size ( take for example the influence that the sheikhs of the safavid had over the armies of tamerlane , or the missionary work of ali-shir nava ' i in turkestan among the mongol and tatar people ) . history . the tariqas were particularly influential in the islamization of sudan during the 9th to 14th centuries , where they spread south along trade routes between north africa and the sub-saharan kingdoms of ghana and mali . on the west african coast they set up zawiyas on the shores of the river niger and even established independent kingdoms such as al-murabitun or almoravids . the al hakika mizaan mizaani sufi order deals with heavy internalization and meditations , their spiritual practice is called al qudra mizaan ( united states ) . the sanusi order were also highly involved in missionary work in africa during the 19th century , spreading both islam and a high level of literacy into africa as far south as lake chad and beyond by setting up a network of zawiyas where islam was taught . much of central asia and southern russia was won over to islam through the missionary work of the tarīqahs , and the majority of indonesia 's population , where a muslim army never set foot , was converted to islam by the perseverance of both muslim traders and sufi missionaries . sufism in india played a similarly crucial role in the diffusion of islam at the élite and popular levels ; its music , art , and poetry flourished in a highly sophisticated persianate society . tariqas were brought to china in the 17th century by ma laichi and other chinese sufis who had studied in mecca and yemen , and had also been influenced by spiritual descendants of the kashgarian sufi master afaq khoja . on the chinese soil the institutions became known as menhuan , and are typically headquartered near the tombs ( gongbei ) of their founders . one of dillon 's main sources is : certain scholars , e.g . , g . h . jansen , credit the original tariqas with several specific accomplishments : preventing islam from becoming a cold and formal doctrine by constantly infusing it with local and emotionally popular input , including stories and plays and rituals not part of islam proper . ( a parallel would be the role of aesop relative to the greek mythos . ) leading muslim conquests against the christian west , as far back as the qadiri order of the 12th century . see also . dargah dervish khanqah salik zawiya ( institution ) ahl al-bayt . notes . references . j . m . abun-nasr , '' the tijaniyya '' , london 1965 m . berger , '' islam in egypt today - social and political aspects of popular religion '' , london , 1970 j . k . birge , '' the bektashi order of dervishes '' , london and hartford , 1937 clayer , nathalie , muslim brotherhood networks , ego - european history online , mainz : institute of european history , 2011 , retrieved : may 23 , 2011 . o . depont and x . coppolani , '' les confreries religieuses musulmans '' ( the muslim brotherhoods as they existed then ) , algiers , 1897 e . e . evans-pritchard , '' the sanusi of cyrenaica '' , oxford , 1949 m . d . gilsenen , '' saint and sufi in modern egypt '' , oxford , 1978 g . h . jansen , '' militant islam '' , pan , london 1979 f . de jong , '' turuq and turuq-linked institutions in nineteenth-century egypt '' , brill , leiden,1978 j . w . mcpherson , '' the moulids of egypt '' , cairo , 1941 mateus soares de azevedo , '' ordens sufis no islã : iniciação às confrarias esotéricas muçulmanas no irã xiita e no mundo sunita '' , são paulo , polar editora , 2020 . external links . philtar ( philosophy of theology and religion at the division of religion and philosophy of st martin 's college ) has a very useful graphical illustration of the sufi schools .