Fylfot

etymology . the most commonly cited etymology for this is that it comes from the notion common among nineteenth-century antiquarians , but based on only a single 1500 manuscript , that it was used to fill empty space at the foot of stained glass windows in medieval churches . this etymology is often cited in modern dictionaries ( such as the collins english dictionary and merriam-webster online ) . thomas wilson ( 1896 ) , suggested other etymologies , now considered untenable : '' in great britain the common name given to the swastika from anglo-saxon times . was fylfot , said to have been derived from the anglo-saxon fower fot , meaning four-footed , or many-footed . '' quoting from and '' the word fylfot is scandinavian and is compounded of old norse fiǫl- , equivalent to the anglo-saxon fela , german viel , '' many '' , and fótr , '' foot '' , the many-footed figure . '' quoting from the germanic root fele is cognate with english full , which has the sense of '' many '' . both fele and full are in turn related to the greek poly- , all of which stem from the proto-indo-european root ple- . a fylfot is thus a '' poly-foot '' , to wit , a '' many-footed '' sigil . history . the fylfot , together with its sister figure the gammadion , has been found in a great variety of contexts over the centuries . it has occurred in both secular and sacred contexts in the british isles , elsewhere in europe , in asia minor and in africa . while these two terms might be broadly interchangeable in some places , we can detect a certain degree of affinity between term and terrain . thus we might usefully associate the gammadion more with byzantium , rome and graeco-roman culture on the one hand , and the fylfot more with celtic and anglo-saxon culture on the other . although the gammadion is very similar to the fylfot in appearance , it is thought to have originated from the conjunction of four capital 'gammas ' , gamma being the third letter of the greek alphabet . both of these swastika-like crosses may have been indigenous to the british isles before the roman invasion . certainly they were in evidence a thousand years earlier but these may have been largely imports . they were certainly substantially in evidence during the romano-british period with widespread examples of the duplicated greek fret motif appearing on mosaics . after the withdrawal of the romans in the early 5th century there followed the anglo-saxon and jutish migrations . we know that the fylfot was very popular amongst these incoming tribes from northern europe as we find it on artefacts such as brooches , sword hilts and funerary urns . although the findings at sutton hoo are most instructive about the style of lordly anglo-saxon burials , the fylfot or gammadion on the silver dish unearthed there clearly had an eastern provenance . the fylfot was widely adopted in the early christian centuries . it is found extensively in the roman catacombs . a most unusual example of its usage is to be found in the porch of the parish church of great canfield , essex , england . as the parish guide rightly states , the fylfot or gammadion can be traced back to the roman catacombs where it appears in both christian and pagan contexts . more recently it has been found on grave-slabs in scotland and ireland . a particularly interesting example was found in elrig , wigtownshire in scotland . ( passim ) gospel books also contain examples of this form of the christian cross . the most notable examples are probably the book of kells and the lindisfarne gospels . mention must also be made of an intriguing example of this decoration that occurs on the ardagh chalice . from the early 14th century on , the fylfot was often used to adorn eucharistic robes . during that period it appeared on the monumental brasses that preserved the memory of those priests thus attired . they are mostly to be found in east anglia and the home counties . probably its most conspicuous usage has been its incorporation in stained glass windows notably in cambridge and edinburgh . in cambridge it is found in the baptismal window of the holy sepulchre , cambridge , together with other allied christian symbols , originating in the 19th century . in scotland , it is found in a window in the scottish national war memorial in edinburgh . the work was undertaken by douglas strachan and installed during the 1920s . he was also responsible for a window in the chapel of westminster college , cambridge . a similar usage is to be found in the central congregational church in providence , rhode island , usa . it was not a little surprising to find the fylfot on church bells in england . they were adopted by the heathcote family in derbyshire as part of their iconographic tradition in the 16th and 17th centuries . this is probably an example where pagan and christian influence both have a part to play as the fylfot was amongst other things the symbol of thor , the norse god of thunder and its use on bells suggests it was linked to the dispelling of thunder in popular mythology . . in heraldry . thumb in modern heraldry texts the fylfot is typically shown with truncated limbs , rather like a cross potent that 's had one arm of each t cut off . it 's also known as a cross cramponned , ~nnée , or ~nny , as each arm resembles a crampon or angle-iron ( compare winkelmaßkreuz in german ) . examples of fylfots in heraldry are extremely rare , and the charge is not mentioned in oswald barron 's article on '' heraldry '' in most 20th-century editions of encyclopædia britannica . a twentieth-century example ( with four heraldic roses ) can be seen in the lotta svärd emblem . parker 's glossary of heraldry ( see below ) gives the following example : : argent , a chevron between three fylfots gules -- leonard chamberlayne , yorkshire so drawn in ms . harleian , 1394 , pt . 129 , fol . 9 fol . 349 of ms . ( in lieu of an image from this ms . , a modern rendering of this blazon is shown on the right . ) . modern use of the term . from its use in heraldry—or from its use by antiquaries—fylfot has become an established word for this symbol , in at least british english . however , it was only rarely used . wilson , writing in 1896 , says , '' the use of fylfot is confined to comparatively few persons in great britain and , possibly , scandinavia . outside of these countries it is scarcely known , used , or understood . '' in more recent times , fylfot has gained greater currency within the areas of design history and collecting , where it is used to distinguish the swastika motif as used in designs and jewellery from that used in nazi paraphernalia . even though the swastika does not derive from nazism , it has become associated with it , and fylfot functions as a more acceptable term for a '' good '' swastika . hansard for 12 june 1996 reports a house of commons discussion about the badge of no . 273 squadron raf , royal air force . in this , fylfot is used to describe the ancient symbol , and swastika used as if it refers only to the symbol used by the nazis . odinic rite ( or ) , a germanic pagan organization , use both '' swastika '' and '' fylfot '' for what they claim as a '' holy symbol of odinism '' . the or fylfot is depicted with curved outer limbs , more like a '' sunwheel swastika '' than a traditional ( square ) swastika or heraldic fylfot . . see also . buddhism hinduism jainism boreyko coat of arms swastika triskelion brigid 's cross western use of the swastika in the early 20th century . references . notes bibliography stephen friar ( ed . ) , a new dictionary of heraldry ( alpha books 1987 ; figure , p . & nbsp ; 121 james parker , a glossary of terms used in heraldry ( 1894 ) : online heraldsnet.org thomas wilson , the swastika : the earliest known symbol , and its migrations ; with observations on the migration of certain industries in prehistoric times . smithsonian institution . ( 1896 ) thomas woodcock and john martin robinson , the oxford guide to heraldry ( oxford 1990 ; figure , p . & nbsp ; 200 . external links . online versions of wilson 's book , the swastika : the swastika swaztika ( sic ) ( a scan of the original publication ) symbol 15:1— symbols.com