Mindset

history of research . it would appear that some of the earliest empirical explorations of mindset originated in the early 1900s ( gollwitzer 1990 , 2012 ) . these studies are identified as foundational and precursory for the study of cognition ( gollwitzer 1990 , 2012 ) . the attention to mindset within the study of cognitive psychology has continued relatively unabated . in addition to the field of cognitive psychology , the use of mindset is evident within the social sciences and several other fields ( e.g . , positive psychology ) . a characteristic of this area of study , in all its various manifestations , is the fragment use of mindset throughout the academy ( e.g . french , 2016 ) . in politics . a well-known example is the '' cold war mindset '' prevalent in both the u.s . and ussr , which included absolute trust in two-player game theory , in the integrity of command chain , in control of nuclear materials , and in the mutual assured destruction of both in the case of war . although most consider that this mindset usefully served to prevent an attack by either country , the assumptions underlying deterrence theory have made assessments of the efficacy of the cold war mindset a matter of some controversy . most theorists consider that the key responsibility of an embedded power group is to challenge the assumptions that comprise the group 's own mindset . according to these commentators , power groups that fail to review or revise their mindsets with sufficient regularity can not hold power indefinitely , as a single mindset is unlikely to possess the flexibility and adaptability needed to address all future events . for example , the variations in mindset between democratic party and republican party presidents in the u.s . may have made that country more able to challenge assumptions than the kremlin with its more static bureaucracy . modern military theory attempts to challenge entrenched mindsets in dealing with asymmetric warfare , terrorism , and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction . in combination , these threats represent '' a revolution in military affairs '' and require very rapid adaptation to new threats and circumstances . in this context , the cost of not implementing adaptive mindsets can not be afforded . in system thinking . building on magoroh maruyama 's concept of mindscape , maruyama , m . ( 1980 ) . mindscapes and science theories , current anthropology , vol . 21 , no . 5 . ( oct . , 1980 ) , pp . 589-608 maruyama , m . ( 1988 ) . dynamics among business practice , aesthetics , science , politics and religion . cultural dynamics 1988 ; 1 ; 309-335 mindset theory includes cultural and social orientation type values : hierarchical individualism ( hi ) , egalitarian individualism ( ei ) , hierarchical collectivism ( hc ) , egalitarian collectivism ( ec ) , hierarchic synergism ( hs ) , egalitarian synergism ( es ) , hierarchical populism ( hp ) , and egalitarian populism ( ep ) . yolles , m.i , fink , g . , 2014 , personality , pathology and mindsets : part 1-3 . vol . 43 n . ( 1 ) . collective . naturally , the question regarding the embodiment of a collective mindset comes to mind . erikson 's ( 1974 ) analysis of group-identities and what he calls a life-plan seems relevant here . he recounts the example of american indians , who were meant to undergo a reeducation process meant to imbue a modern '' life-plan '' that aimed for a house and a richness expressed by a filled bank account . erikson writes that the indians ' collective historic identity as buffalo hunters was oriented around such fundamentally different reasons/goals that even communication about the divergent '' life plans '' was itself difficult . there is a double relation between the institution embodying for example an entrepreneurial mindset and its entrepreneurial performance . firstly , an institution with an entrepreneurial philosophy will set entrepreneurial goals and strategies as a whole , but maybe even more importantly , it will foster an entrepreneurial milieu , allowing each entity to pursue emergent opportunities . in short , philosophical stance codified in the mind , hence as mindset , lead to a climate that in turn causes values that lead to practice . collective mindsets in this sense are described in such works as hutchin 's '' cognition in the wild '' ( 1995 ) , who analyzes a whole team of naval navigators as the cognitive unit or as computational system , or senges ' knowledge entrepreneurship in universities ( 2007 ) . there are also parallels to the emerging field of '' collective intelligence '' ( e.g . ( zara , 2004 ) ) and exploiting the '' wisdom of the crowds '' ( surowiecki , 2005 ) of stakeholders . zara notes that since collective reflection is more explicit , discursive , and conversational , it therefore needs a good ¿gestell ? —especially when it comes to information and communication technology . most historians use the concept of mentality or mindset to denote very slowly changing mental dispositions active over longer periods of time , but occasionally there have been efforts to also apply it to much more rapidly changing historical situations such as the french revolution ( michel vovelle ) or the short period of allied occupation of germany after world war ii ( hentschel 2007 ) . specific theories . types and theories . as previously alluded to , there is a great deal of variation within the study of mindsets . this variation includes how to define , measure , and conceptualize a mindset as well as the types of mindset identified . even amongst scholars within the same disciple studying the same mindset , substantial variations exist ( french , 2016 ) . nevertheless , any discussion of mindset should include recognition concerning the numerous , varied , and growing number of mindsets and mindset theories that receive attention in multiple disciplines throughout the academy . mindset agency theory . mindset theory , as based on the cultural values defined by sagiv and schwarts , explains the nature , functions , and variables that make up the characteristics of personality . the mindscape theory and cultural values outlined by sagive and schwarts combine to make a more comprehensive whole of mindset agency theory . . mindscape theory . similar to the mbti , the mindscapes of maruyama seek to measure individuals on a scale of characteristics and placed into four categories of personalities that make up the population of the world . each contain differing views toward information , perception , logic , and ethics . hierarchical bureaucrats generally view the world as having natural order with competition and consequences much like natural selection . independent princes view the world as random , individualistic , and chaotic with a natural decay that is inevitable . social reformers view the world as a balance that can be maintained by symbiosis between everything . generative revolutionaries view the world as potential for growth through interaction and symbiosis ; change is encouraged . sagiv-schwarts cultural values . sagiv and schwarts posited three bi-polar dimensions to culture based on values . these dimensions contain opposites in the realms of cognitive , figurative , and operative values : cognitive : embeddedness or autonomy figurative : mastery or harmony operative : hierarchy or egalitarian . fixed and growth mindset . according to carol dweck , individuals can be placed on a continuum according to their implicit views of '' where ability comes from '' . dweck states that there are two categories ( growth mindset versus fixed mindset ) that can group individuals based on their behaviour , specifically their reaction to failure . people with a '' fixed mindset '' believe that abilities are mostly innate and interpret failure as the lack of necessary basic abilities , while those with a '' growth mindset '' believe that they can acquire any given ability provided they invest effort or study . in particular , an individual 's mindset impacts how they face and cope with challenges , such as the transition into junior high school from elementary school or losing your job . according to dweck , individuals with a '' growth '' mindset are more likely to continue working hard despite setbacks . dweck argues that the growth mindset '' will allow a person to live a less stressful and more successful life '' . in a 2012 interview , dweck defined both fixed and growth mindsets : an example of a person with a growth mindset is an employee who , when posed with an extraordinarily challenging assignment , takes the project as a growing opportunity instead of one that will defeat them . despite whatever lack of success they may have , this individual would appreciate the opportunity to learn from such difficulty and gain knowledge , instead of feeling defeated about any incompleteness or lack of success . classroom implications . a large part of dweck 's research on mindsets has been done in the field of education , and how these mindsets affect a student 's performance in the classroom . in order for students to effectively adopt a growth mindset , a classroom culture needs to be established that nurtures this type of thinking . one of the ways educators can do this is by creating a growth-mindset culture in their classroom that provides the right kind of praise and encouragement . according to dweck ( 2010 ) , '' praising students for the process they have engaged in—the effort they applied , the strategies they used , the choices they made , the persistence they displayed , and so on—yields more long-term benefits than telling them they are 'smart ' when they succeed '' . as such , it is important for educators to carefully craft and design meaningful learning activities for their students to engage in the classroom . according to dweck 2010 , '' the teacher should portray challenges as fun and exciting , while portraying easy tasks as boring and less useful for the brain '' . students who are engaged in more challenging learning activities , have more opportunities to make mistakes and struggle , allowing the teacher to interject with some new strategies to try while praising students for the work they have done so far . a second strategy to promote a growth-mindset culture in the classroom is to explicitly teach lessons related to what it means to adopt a growth mindset . possible activities include establishing personal goals , writing letters , or having students share with one another something they used to be poor at and now are very good at . in a recent study by hussein ( 2018 ) , the effects of reflective journal writing on students ' growth mindset was examined . it was found that the use of journaling could positively affect a student 's learning process by improving their conceptual knowledge , promoting growth mindset , and enhancing understanding of their thoughts through writing . the way educators evaluate their students ' work and communicate their progress can also contribute to the establishment of a growth mindset culture in the classroom . more specifically , dweck ( 2010 ) identifies the word '' yet '' as a valuable tool to assess students learning . if an educator hears students saying they are not good at something or ca n't do something , it is important for the teacher to interject with the words '' not yet '' to reinforce the idea that ability and motivation are fluid . overall , it is clear to see that a classroom that includes challenging learning tasks , praising of the process , and explicit growth mindset teaching and assessment , is a classroom where students will have the tools needed to become lifelong learners . reshaping mindsets in students and educators . while elements of our personality – such as sensitivity to mistakes and setbacks – can make us predisposed towards holding a certain mindset , we are able to develop and reshape our mindset through our interactions . aldhous , p . ( 2008 ) . free your mind and watch it grow . new scientist , 199 ( 2670 ) , 44-45 . in multiple studies , dweck and her colleagues noted that alterations in mindset could be achieved through '' praising the process through which success was achieved '' , cimpian , a . , aree , h.c . , markman , e.m . , dweck , c.s . ( 2007 ) . subtle linguistic cues affect children 's motivation . association for psychological science , 18 ( 4 ) , 314-316 . '' having college aged students read compelling scientific articles that support one view or the other '' , or teaching junior high school students '' that every time they try hard and learn something new , their brain forms new connections that , over time , make them smarter '' . dweck , c.s . ( 2007 ) . the perils and promises of praise . early intervention at every age , 65 ( 2 ) , 34-39 . these studies all demonstrate how framing and discussing students ' work and effort play a considerable role in the type of mindset students develop and students ' conceptions of their own ability . while a great deal of research in the education field has focused on a students ability to adopt a growth mindset , less attention and focus has been given to teacher mindsets and the role they play in influencing their students . hattie ( 2012 ) states , '' differing mindsets , or assumptions , that teachers possess about themselves and their students play a significant role in determining their expectations , teaching practices , and how students perceive their own mindset . '' in a recent study by patrick & joshi ( 2019 ) , the way teachers explain growth and fixed mindsets was explored . using 150 semi-structured interviews , two major findings were revealed . the first finding was that teachers ' prior beliefs about learning and learners influenced how they engaged with these mindsets . secondly , it was found that many teachers tended to oversimplify the concepts of a growth and fixed mindset into positive and negative traits . this suggests the need for more teacher training and support in order for teachers to be able to successfully implement growth mindset initiatives in their classrooms . a study conducted by seaton ( 2018 ) , looked specifically at the impact of teacher training aimed at influencing their mindsets and the effect on their resulting practice . the teachers in this study underwent six different training sessions . it was found that the training sessions had an impact on teachers ' mindsets & this change was sustained three months after the training as well . the results of this study suggest that adults ' mindsets are malleable and can shift if the right supports are in place . this study reinforces the bond between a teacher 's own beliefs and how they can strongly influence the mindset of his/her students ; therefore , further highlighting the need for proper teacher training in order for mindset initiatives within schools to be fully successful . fixed and growth mindsets in males vs . females . carol dweck and jo boaler have done extensive research on the topics of fixed and growth mindset . however , studies on this topic show that there is a disparity in the fixed and growth mindsets of females and males . in boaler 's ability and mathematics : the mindset revolution that is reshaping education , the author argues that fixed mindset beliefs lead to inequalities in education ; these findings partially explain low achievement and participation amongst minorities and female students . boaler 's research shows that many women feel as though they are not smart enough nor capable enough to continue in certain subjects , such as stem areas of academia . boaler uses carol dweck 's research showing that '' gender differences in mathematics performance only existed among fixed mindset students '' ( boaler , 2013 ) . in addition , l.s . blackwell delivered research exploring if growth mindsets can be promoted within minority groups ( boaler , 2013 ) . this is the mindset in which boaler and dweck believe people can gain knowledge . boaler said , '' the key growth mindset message was that effort changes the brain by forming new connections , and that students control this process . the growth mindset intervention halted the students ' decline in grades and started the students on a new pathway of improvement and high achievement '' ( boaler , 2013 ) . educational systems focusing on creating a growth mindset environment allow girls to feel like their intelligence is malleable rather than constant . implications for at risk students . dweck 's research and theory of growth and fixed mindsets has been useful in intervention strategies with at risk students , dispelling negative stereotypes in education held by teachers and students , understanding the impacts of self-theories on resilience , and understanding how process praise can foster a growth mindset and positively impact students ' motivation levels . veronikas , s . , shaughnessy , m.f . ( 2004 ) . a reflective conversation with carol dweck . gifted education international , 19 ( 1 ) , 27-33 . in particular , a study by rhew , piro , goolkasian & cosentino ( 2018 ) , suggested that a growth mindset intervention can increase the motivation levels of adolescent special education participants . in another study , it was suggested that substance use has adverse effects on adolescent reasoning . developing a growth mindset in these adolescents was shown to reduce this adverse effect . these studies further illustrate how educators can use intervention strategies , targeting a growth mindset , by allowing students to see that their behaviour can be changed with effort . . criticism . in recent years , there has been criticism leveraged at '' growth mindset '' as a concept , and the related research that has been carried out . . benefit mindset . in 2015 , ashley buchanan proposed a complementary evolution to the fixed and growth mindset called the benefit mindset . the benefit mindset describes society 's everyday leaders who promote well-being on both an individual and a collective level . that is , people who discover their strengths to make valuable contributions to causes that are greater than the self . they question why they do what they do , positioning their actions within a purposeful context . buchanan argues '' creating cultures of contribution and everyday leadership could be one of the best points of leverage we have for simultaneously bringing out the best in people , organisations and the planet . '' . wellbeing mindset . in 2020 , jürgen nagler defined a wellbeing mindset as '' the whole of attitudes , beliefs , and values of a person or group of people that foster wellbeing . wellbeing relate to a person , group of people , the whole of humanity , other sentient beings such as animals , and/or planet earth . '' building on several years of primary research and the work of carol dweck , ash buchanan , otto scharmer , donna meadows and amartya sen , nagler connects mindset theory with human development . he argues that mindsets guide people 's thinking and behavior and play a key role in people 's life experiences , development journey , and wellbeing . . global mindset . originating from the study of organizational leadership and coinciding with the growth of multinational corporations in the 1980s , organizations observed that the effectiveness of their executives did not necessarily translate cross-culturally . global mindset emerged as an explanation ( javidan & walker , 2013 ) . essentially , leaders in cross-cultural contexts were hypothesized to need an additional skill , ability , or proficiency ( i.e . a global mindset ) that enabled effectiveness regardless of the culture or context ( perlmutter , 1969 ; rhinesmith , 1992 ) . one of the defining characteristics of the study of global mindset is the variety in which scholars conceptualize and operationalize the construct ; and yet ; scholars typically agree that global mindset and its development increases global effectiveness for both individuals and organizations ( french & chang , 2016 ) . abundance and scarcity . those with abundance mindset believe that there are enough resources for everyone , while those with the scarcity mindset believe that there is a limited number of resources and that zero-sum game , leading to competition for resources . productive and defensive . according to chris argyris ( 2004 ) , there are two dominant mindsets in organizations : the productive mindset and the defensive mindset . the productive mindset seeks out valid knowledge that is testable . the productive reasoning mindset creates informed choices and makes reasoning transparent . the defensive mindset , on the other hand , is self-protective and self-deceptive . when this mindset is active , people or organizations only seek out information that will protect them . truth can be shut out when it is seen as threatening . the defensive mindset may lead to learning based on false assumptions or prevent learning altogether ( argyris , 2004 ) . see also . dual mentality . bounded rationality elitism ethical egoism and good and evil game theory property dualism rational irrationality . notes . references . argyris , c . ( 2004 ) . reasons and rationalizations : the limits to organizational knowledge . oxford : oxford univ . press . erikson , e.h . ( 1974 ) . identitaet und lebenszyklus : surkamp french , r . p . , ii . ( 2016 ) . the fuzziness of mindsets : divergent conceptualizations and characterizations of mindset theory and praxis . international journal of organizational analysis , 24 ( 4 ) , 673–691 . doi : french , r . p . , ii , & chang , h . ( 2016 ) . conceptual re-imagining of global '' mindset '' : knowledge as prime in the development of global leaders . journal of international organizations studies , 7 ( 1 ) , 49–62 . gollwitzer , p . m . ( 1990 ) . action phases and mind-sets . in e . t . higgins & r . m . sorrentino ( eds . ) , the handbook of motivation and cognition : foundations of social behavior ( vol . 2 , pp . & nbsp ; 52–92 ) . new york , ny : guilford press . gollwitzer , p . m . ( 2012 ) . mindset theory of action phases . in p . a . m . van lange , a . w . kruglanski & e . t . higgins ( eds . ) , handbook of theories of social psychology ( vol . 1 , pp . & nbsp ; 526–545 ) . thousand oaks , ca : sage . hentschel , k . ( 2007 ) . the mental aftermath . the mentality of german physicists 1945–1949 . oxford : oxford univ . press . hutchins , e . ( 1995 ) . cognition in the wild . cambridge , mass . ; london : mit press . javidan , m . , & walker , j . l . ( 2013 ) . developing your global mindset : the handbook for successful global leaders . edina , mn : beaver 's pond press . perlmutter , h . v . ( 1969 ) . the tortuous evolution of the multinational corporation . columbia journal of world business , 4 ( 1 ) , 9-18 . rhinesmith , s . h . ( 1992 ) . global mindsets for global managers . training & development , 46 ( 10 ) , 63–68 . senges , m . ( 2007 ) knowledge entrepreneurship in universities : practice and strategy in the case of internet based innovation appropriation surowiecki , j . ( 2005 ) . the wisdom of crowds : why the many are smarter than the few . london : abacus . vovelle , m . ( 1990 ) . ideologies and mentalities . chicago : univ . of chicago press ( transl . by eamon o'flaherty ) . zara , o . ( 2004 ) . managing collective intelligence : towards a new corporate governance maj . sonise lumbaca ( 2012 ) . awg program reinforces adaptive mindsets , builds adaptive army leaders .