Gentleman

gentleman by conduct . in the tale of melibee ( ca . 1386 ) , geoffrey chaucer says : '' certes he sholde not be called a gentil man , that . ne dooth his diligence and bisynesse , to kepen his good name '' ; and in the wife of bath 's tale ( 0000 ) : loke who that is most vertuous alway prive and apert , and most entendeth ay to do the gentil dedes that he can and take him for the gretest gentilman in the french allegorical poem the romance of the rose ( ca . 1400 ) , guillaume de lorris and jean de meun described the innate character of a gentleman : '' he is gentil bycause he doth as longeth to a gentilman . '' that definition develops until the 18th century , when in 1710 , in the tatler no . 207 , richard steele said that '' the appellation of gentleman is never to be affixed to a man 's circumstances , but to his behaviour in them . '' hence , the apocryphal reply of king james ii of england to a lady 's petition to elevate her son to the rank of gentleman : '' i could make him a nobleman , but god almighty could not make him a gentleman . '' selden said '' that no charter can make a gentleman , which is cited as out of the mouth of some great princes who have said it , '' because '' they , without question , understood gentleman for generosus in the antient sense , or as if it came from genii/geni in that sense . '' the word gentilis identifies a man of noble family , a gentleman by birth , for '' no creation could make a man of another blood than he is . '' in contemporary usage , the word gentleman is ambiguously defined , because '' to behave like a gentleman '' communicates as little praise or as much criticism as the speaker means to imply ; thus , '' to spend money like a gentleman '' is criticism , but '' to conduct a business like a gentleman '' is praise . william harrison . in the 16th century , the clergyman william harrison said that '' gentlemen be those whom their race and blood , or at the least their virtues , do make noble and known . '' in that time , a gentleman usually was expected to have a coat of arms , it being accepted that only a gentleman could have a coat of arms , as indicated in an account of how gentlemen were made in the day of william shakespeare : gentlemen whose ancestors are not known to come in with william i of england ( for of the saxon races yet remaining we now make none accompt , much less of the british issue ) do take their beginning in england after this manner in our times . who soever studieth the laws of the realm , who so abideth in the university , giving his mind to his book , or professeth physic and the liberal arts , or beside his service in the room of a captain in the wars , or good counsel given at home , whereby his commonwealth is benefited , can live without manual labour , and thereto is able and will bear the port , charge and countenance of a gentleman , he shall for money have a coat and arms bestowed upon him by heralds ( who in the charter of the same do of custom pretend antiquity and service ) and thereunto being made so good cheap be called master , which is the title that men give to esquires and gentlemen , and reputed for a gentleman ever after . which is so much the less to be disallowed of , for that the prince doth lose nothing by it , the gentleman being so much subject to taxes and public payments as is the yeoman or husbandman , which he likewise doth bear the gladlier for the saving of his reputation . being called also to the wars ( for with the government of the commonwealth he medleth little ) what soever it cost him , he will both array and arm himself accordingly , and show the more manly courage , and all the tokens of the person which he representeth . no man hath hurt by it but himself , who peradventure will go in wider buskins than his legs will bear , or as our proverb saith , now and then bear a bigger sail than his boat is able to sustain . . shakespeare . in this way , shakespeare himself was demonstrated , by the grant of his coat of arms , to be no '' vagabond '' , but a gentleman . the inseparability of arms and gentility is shown by two of his characters : petruchio : i swear i 'll cuff you if you strike again . katharine : so may you lose your arms : if you strike me , you are no gentleman ; and if no gentleman , why then no arms . : —the taming of the shrew , act ii , scene i however , although only a gentleman could have a coat of arms ( so that possession of a coat of arms was proof of gentility ) , the coat of arms recognised rather than created the status ( see g . d . squibb , the high court of chivalry , pp . & nbsp ; 170–177 ) . thus , all armigers were gentlemen , but not all gentlemen were armigers . hence , henry v , act iv , scene iii : for he today that sheds his blood with me shall be my brother : be he ne'er so vile , this day shall gentle his condition . and gentlemen in england now abed shall think themselves accurs 'd they were not here and hold their manhoods cheap whilst any speaks that fought with us upon st . crispin 's day . . superiority of the fighting man . the fundamental idea of '' gentry '' , symbolised in this grant of coat-armour , had come to be that of the essential superiority of the fighting man , and , as selden points out ( page 707 ) , the fiction was usually maintained in the granting of arms '' to an ennobled person though of the long robe wherein he hath little use of them as they mean a shield . '' at the last , the wearing of a sword on all occasions was the outward and visible sign of a gentleman ; the custom survives in the sword worn with court dress . a suggestion that a gentleman must have a coat of arms was vigorously advanced by certain 19th- and 20th-century heraldists , notably arthur charles fox-davies in england and thomas innes of learney in scotland . the suggestion is discredited by an examination , in england , of the records of the high court of chivalry and , in scotland , by a judgment of the court of session ( per lord mackay in maclean of ardgour v . maclean 1941 sc 613 at 650 ) . the significance of a right to a coat of arms was that it was definitive proof of the status of gentleman , but it recognised rather than conferred such a status , and the status could be and frequently was accepted without a right to a coat of arms . confucianism . in east asia , the characteristics of a gentleman are based upon the principles of confucianism , wherein the term jūnzǐ ( 君子 ) denotes and identifies the '' son of a ruler '' , a '' prince '' , a '' noble man '' ; and the ideals that conceptually define '' gentleman '' , '' proper man '' , and a '' perfect man '' . conceptually , jūnzǐ included an hereditary elitism , which obliged the gentleman to act ethically , to : morally cultivate himself ; participate in the correct performance of ritual ; show filial piety and loyalty to whom due ; and cultivate humanity . the opposite of the jūnzǐ is the xiǎorén ( 小人 ) , '' petty person '' and '' small person '' . as in english , in the chinese usage the word small , can denote and connote a person who is '' mean '' , '' petty in mind and heart '' , and '' narrowly self-interested '' , greedy , materialistic , and personally superficial . robert e . lee . lee 's definition speaks only to conduct . the forbearing use of power does not only form a touchstone , but the manner in which an individual enjoys certain advantages over others is a test of a true gentleman . the power which the strong have over the weak , the employer over the employed , the educated over the unlettered , the experienced over the confiding , even the clever over the silly—the forbearing or inoffensive use of all this power or authority , or a total abstinence from it when the case admits it , will show the gentleman in a plain light . the gentleman does not needlessly and unnecessarily remind an offender of a wrong he may have committed against him . he can not only forgive , he can forget ; and he strives for that nobleness of self and mildness of character which impart sufficient strength to let the past be but the past . a true man of honor feels humbled himself when he can not help humbling others . as quoted by lee 's conception is one of the better known expositions in favor of the southern culture of honor . landed gentry . that a distinct order of landed gentry existed in england very early has , indeed , been often assumed and is supported by weighty authorities . thus , the late professor freeman ( in encyclopædia britannica xvii . page 540 b , 9th edition ) said : '' early in the 11th century the order of 'gentlemen ' as a separate class seems to be forming as something new . by the time of the conquest of england the distinction seems to have been fully established . '' stubbs ( const . hist . , ed . 1878 , iii . 544 , 548 ) takes the same view . sir george sitwell , however , has suggested that this opinion is based on a wrong conception of the conditions of medieval society and that it is wholly opposed to the documentary evidence . the most basic class distinctions in the middle ages were between the nobiles , i.e . , the tenants in chivalry , such as earls , barons , knights , esquires , the free ignobiles such as the citizens and burgesses , and franklins , and the unfree peasantry including villeins and serfs . even as late as 1400 , the word gentleman still only had the descriptive sense of generosus and could not be used as denoting the title of a class . yet after 1413 , we find it increasingly so used , and the list of landowners in 1431 , printed in feudal aids , contains , besides knights , esquires , yeomen and husbandmen ( i.e . householders ) , a fair number who are classed as '' gentilman '' . sir george sitwell . sir george sitwell gave a lucid , instructive and occasionally amusing explanation of this development . the immediate cause was the statute i henry v . cap . v . of 1413 , which laid down that in all original writs of action , personal appeals and indictments , in which process of outlawry lies , the '' estate degree or mystery '' of the defendant must be stated , as well as his present or former domicile . at this time , the black death ( 1349 ) had put the traditional social organization out of gear . before that , the younger sons of the nobles had received their share of the farm stock , bought or hired land , and settled down as agriculturists in their native villages . under the new conditions , this became increasingly impossible , and they were forced to seek their fortunes abroad in the french wars , or at home as hangers-on of the great nobles . these men , under the old system , had no definite status ; but they were generosi , men of birth , and , being now forced to describe themselves , they disdained to be classed with franklins ( now sinking in the social scale ) , still more with yeomen or husbandmen ; they chose , therefore , to be described as '' gentlemen '' . on the character of these earliest gentlemen the records throw a lurid light . sir george sitwell ( p . & nbsp ; 76 ) , describes a man typical of his class , one who had served among the men-at-arms of lord talbot at the battle of agincourt : the premier gentleman of england , as the matter now stands , is '' robert ercleswyke of stafford , gentilman '' . fortunately & mdash ; for the gentle reader will no doubt be anxious to follow in his footsteps & mdash ; some particulars of his life may be gleaned from the public records . he was charged at the staffordshire assizes with housebreaking , wounding with intent to kill , and procuring the murder of one thomas page , who was cut to pieces while on his knees begging for his life . if any earlier claimant to the title of gentleman be discovered , sir george sitwell predicted that it will be within the same year ( 1414 ) and in connection with some similar disreputable proceedings . from these unpromising beginnings , the separate order of gentlemen evolved very slowly . the first gentleman commemorated on an existing monument was john daundelyon of margate ( died circa 1445 ) ; the first gentleman to enter the house of commons , hitherto composed mainly of '' valets '' , was william weston , '' gentylman '' ; but even in the latter half of the 15th century , the order was not clearly established . as to the connection of gentilesse with the official grant or recognition of coat-armour , that is a profitable fiction invented and upheld by the heralds ; for coat-armour was the badge assumed by gentlemen to distinguish them in battle , and many gentlemen of long descent never had occasion to assume it and never did . further decline of standards . this fiction , however , had its effect , and by the 16th century , as has been already pointed out , the official view had become clearly established that gentlemen constituted a distinct social order and that the badge of this distinction was the heralds ' recognition of the right to bear arms . however , some undoubtedly '' gentle '' families of long descent never obtained official rights to bear a coat of arms , the family of strickland being an example , which caused some consternation when lord strickland applied to join the order of malta in 1926 and could prove no right to a coat of arms , although his direct male ancestor had carried the english royal banner of st . george at the battle of agincourt . the younger sons of noble families became apprentices in the cities , and there grew up a new aristocracy of trade . merchants are still '' citizens '' to william harrison ; but he adds '' they often change estate with gentlemen , as gentlemen do with them , by a mutual conversion of the one into the other . '' . a line between classes . a frontier line between classes so indefinite could not be maintained in some societies such as england , where there was never a '' nobiliary prefix '' to stamp a person as a gentleman , as opposed to france or germany . the process was hastened , moreover , by the corruption of the heralds ' college and by the ease with which coats of arms could be assumed without a shadow of claim , which tended to bring the science of heraldry into contempt . the prefix '' de '' attached to some english names is in no sense '' nobiliary '' . in latin documents de was the equivalent of the english '' of '' , as de la for '' at '' ( so de la pole for '' atte poole '' ; compare such names as '' attwood '' or '' attwater '' ) . in english this '' of '' disappeared during the 15th century : for example the grandson of johannes de stoke ( john of stoke ) in a 14th-century document becomes '' john stoke '' . in modern times , under the influence of romanticism , the prefix '' de '' has been in some cases '' revived '' under a misconception , e.g . '' de trafford '' , '' de hoghton '' . very rarely it is correctly retained as derived from a foreign place-name , e.g . '' de grey '' . the situation varies somewhat in scotland , where the territorial designation still exists and its use is regulated by law . with the growth of trade and the industrial revolution from 1700 to 1900 , the term widened to include men of the urban professional classes : lawyers , doctors and even merchants . by 1841 the rules of the new gentlemen 's club at ootacamund was to include : '' . gentlemen of the mercantile or other professions , moving in the ordinary circle of indian society '' . ootacamund club history notes , 2011 . formal court titles . at several monarchs ' courts , various functions bear titles containing such rank designations as gentleman ( suggesting it is to be filled by a member of the lower nobility , or a commoner who will be ennobled , while the highest posts are often reserved for the higher nobility ) . in english , the terms for the english/scottish/british court ( equivalents may include lady for women , page for young men ) include : gentleman at arms gentleman-in-waiting gentleman of the bedchamber gentleman of the chapel royal gentleman-usher in france , gentilhomme . rendered as '' gentleman-in-ordinary '' . as gentleman of the bed-chamber in spain , e.g . , gentilhombre de la casa del príncipe , '' gentleman of the household of the prince '' such positions can occur in the household of a non-member of a ruling family , such as a prince of the church : gentiluomo of the archbishop of westminster . modern usage . the word gentleman as an index of rank had already become of doubtful value before the great political and social changes of the 19th century gave to it a wider and essentially higher significance . the change is well illustrated in the definitions given in the successive editions of the encyclopædia britannica . in the 5th edition ( 1815 ) , '' a gentleman is one , who without any title , bears a coat of arms , or whose ancestors have been freemen . '' in the 7th edition ( 1845 ) it still implies a definite social status : '' all above the rank of yeomen . '' in the 8th edition ( 1856 ) , this is still its '' most extended sense '' ; '' in a more limited sense '' it is defined in the same words as those quoted above from the 5th edition ; but the writer adds , '' by courtesy this title is generally accorded to all persons above the rank of common tradesmen when their manners are indicative of a certain amount of refinement and intelligence . '' the reform act 1832 did its work ; the middle classes came into their own , and the word gentleman came in common use to signify not a distinction of blood , but a distinction of position , education and manners . by this usage , the test is no longer good birth or the right to bear arms , but the capacity to mingle on equal terms in good society . in its best use , moreover , gentleman involves a certain superior standard of conduct , due , to quote the 8th edition once more , to '' that self-respect and intellectual refinement which manifest themselves in unrestrained yet delicate manners . '' the word gentle , originally implying a certain social status , had very early come to be associated with the standard of manners expected from that status . thus , by a sort of punning process , the '' gentleman '' becomes a '' gentle-man '' . in another sense , being a gentleman means treating others , especially women , in a respectful manner and not taking advantage or pushing others into doing things they do n't wish to do . the exception , of course , is to push someone into something they need to do for their own good , such as a visit to the hospital , or pursuing a dream they have suppressed . in some cases , its meaning becomes twisted through misguided efforts to avoid offending anyone ; a news report of a riot may refer to a '' gentleman '' trying to smash a window with a dustbin in order to loot a store . similar use ( notably between quotation marks or in an appropriate tone ) may also be deliberate irony . another relatively recent usage of gentleman is as a prefix to another term to imply that a man has sufficient wealth and free time to pursue an area of interest without depending on it for his livelihood . examples include gentleman scientist , gentleman farmer , gentleman architect , and stede bonnet . a very specific incarnation and possible origin of this practise existed until 1962 in cricket , where a man playing the game was a '' gentleman cricketer '' if he did not get a salary for taking part in the game . by tradition , such gentlemen were from the british gentry or aristocracy - as opposed to players , who were not . in the same way in horse racing a gentleman rider is an amateur jockey , racing horses in specific flat and hurdle races . the term gentleman is used in the united states ' uniform code of military justice in a provision referring to '' conduct befitting an officer and a gentleman . '' the use of the term '' gentleman '' is a central concept in many books of american literature : adrift in new york , by horatio alger ; '' fraternity : a romance of inspiration , by anonymous , with a tipped in letter from j.p . morgan , ( 1836 ) ; gone with the wind , by margaret mitchell ( 1936 ) . it relates to education and manners , a certain code of conduct regarding women that has been incorporated in the u.s . into various civil rights laws and anti-sexual-harassment laws that define a code of conduct to be followed by law in the workplace . scarlett o'hara in gone with the wind , states '' you 're no gentleman '' on occasions when a lack of manners and respect toward her causes her to feel insulted . sources and references . . further reading . . external links .