Milton Bradley Company

history . foundation . milton bradley found success making board games . in 1860 , milton bradley moved to springfield , massachusetts , and set up the state 's first color lithography shop . its graphic design of abraham lincoln sold very well , until lincoln grew his beard and rendered the likeness out-of-date . struggling to find a new way to use his lithography machine , bradley visited his friend george tapley . tapley challenged him to a game , most likely an old english game . bradley conceived the idea of making a purely american game . he created the checkered game of life , which had players move along a track from infancy to happy old age , in which the point was to avoid ruin and reach happy old age . squares were labeled with moral positions from honor and bravery to disgrace and ruin . players used a spinner instead of dice because of the negative association with gambling . by spring of 1861 , over 45,000 copies of the checkered game of life had been sold . bradley became convinced board games were his company 's future . when the american civil war broke out in early 1861 , milton bradley temporarily gave up making board games and tried to make new weaponry . however , upon seeing bored soldiers stationed in springfield , bradley began producing small games which the soldiers could play during their down time . these are regarded as the first travel games in the country . these games included chess , checkers , backgammon , dominoes , and '' the checkered game of life . '' they were sold for one dollar a piece to soldiers and charitable organizations , which bought them in bulk to distribute . kindergarten movement . the milton bradley company took a new direction in 1869 after milton bradley went to hear a lecture about the kindergarten movement by early education pioneer , elizabeth peabody . peabody promoted the philosophy of the german scholar friedrich fröbel . froebel stated that through education children learn and develop through creative activities . bradley would spend much of the rest of his life promoting the kindergarten movement both personally and through the milton bradley company . in the late 1860s , bradley became involved in the kindergarten movement . deeply invested in the cause , his company began manufacturing educational items such as colored papers and paints . the company was hurt by bradley 's generosity . he gave these materials away free of charge , which cost them . due to the long depression of the late 1870s , his investors told him either his kindergarten work must go or they would go . bradley chose to keep his kindergarten work . his friend george tapley bought the interest of the lost investors and took over as president of the milton bradley company . milton bradley was an early advocate of friedrich froebel 's idea of kindergarten . springfield 's first kindergarten students were milton bradley 's two daughters , and the first teachers in springfield were milton , his wife and his father . milton bradley 's company 's involvement with kindergartens began with the production of '' gifts , '' the term used by froebel for the geometric wooden play things that he felt were necessary to properly structure children 's creative development . bradley spent months devising the exact shades in which to produce these materials ; his final choice of six pigments of red , orange , yellow , green , blue , and violet would remain the standard colors for children 's art supplies through the 20th century . by the 1870s , the company was producing dozens of games and capitalizing on fads . milton bradley became the first manufacturer in america to make croquet sets . the sets included wickets , mallets , balls , stakes , and an authoritative set of rules to play by that bradley himself had created from oral tradition and his own sense of fair play . in 1880 , the company began making jigsaw puzzles . the company 's educational supplies turned out to be a large portion of their income at the turn of the century . they produced supplies any grade school teacher could use , such as toy money , multiplication sticks , and movable clock dials . milton bradley continued producing games , particularly parlor games played by adults . they produced '' visit to the gypsies , '' '' word gardening , '' '' happy days in old new england , '' and '' fortune telling . '' they also created jigsaw puzzles of wrecked vehicles , which were popular among young boys . . 20th century . when milton bradley died in 1911 , the company was passed to robert ellis , who passed it to bradley 's son-in-law robert ingersoll , who eventually passed it to george tapley 's son , william . in 1920 , bradley bought out mcloughlin brothers , which went out of business after john mcloughlin 's death . milton bradley began to decline in the 1920s and fell dramatically in the 1930s during the great depression . fewer people were spending money on board games . the company kept losing money until 1940 , when they sank too low and banks demanded payment on loans . desperate to avoid bankruptcy , the board of directors persuaded james j . shea , a springfield businessman , to take over presidency of the company . shea immediately moved to decrease the company 's debt . he began a major renovation of the milton bradley plant by burning old inventory that had been accumulating since the turn of the century . with the outbreak of world war ii , milton bradley started producing a universal joint created by shea used on the landing gear of fighter planes . they also reproduced a revised version of their game kits for soldiers , which earned the company 2 & nbsp ; million . milton bradley did not stop creating board games , although they did cut their line from 410 titles to 150 . new games were introduced during this time , such as the patriotic game of the states , snakes & ladders and candyland . the advent of the television could have threatened the industry , but shea used it to his advantage . various companies acquired licenses to television shows for the purpose of producing all manner of promotional items including games . in 1959 , milton bradley released concentration , a memory game based on an nbc concentration ( game show ) ; the game was such a success that editions were issued annually into 1982 , long after the show was cancelled in 1973 ( similar practices were used for box game adaptations of the game shows password and jeopardy ! ) . milton bradley celebrated their centennial in 1960 with the re-release of the checkered game of life , which was modernized . it was now simply called the game of life and the goal was no longer to reach happy old age , but to become a millionaire . twister made its debut in the 1960s as well . thanks to johnny carson 's suggestive comments as eva gabor played the game on his show , twister became a phenomenon . in the 1960s , milton bradley games were licensed in australia by john sands pty ltd . in 1967 , james shea jr . took over as president of milton bradley ( becoming ceo in 1968 ) succeeding his father . during his presidency , milton bradley bought playskool mfg . co . the e.s . lowe company , makers of yahtzee , and body language . during the 1970s and 1980s , electronic games became popular . milton bradley released simon in 1978 , which was fairly late in the movement . by 1980 , it was their best-selling item . in 1979 , milton bradley also developed the first hand-held cartridge-based console , the microvision . in 1983 , seeing the potential in the new vectrex vector-based video game console , the company purchased general consumer electronics ( gce ) . both the vectrex and the microvision were designed by jay smith . during the late 1980s and early 1990s , milton bradley marketed a series of games ( such as heroquest and battle masters ) in north america that were developed in the united kingdom by games workshop ( gw ) that drew heavily from gw 's warhammer fantasy universe , albeit without explicit reference to the warhammer product line . hasbro ownership . in 1984 , hasbro bought out milton bradley ending 124 years of family ownership . the 1990s saw the release of gator golf , crack the case , mall madness , and 1313 dead end drive . in 1991 , hasbro acquired milton bradley 's former arch-rival parker brothers . in 1998 , milton bradley merged with parker brothers to form hasbro games . after the consolidation , milton bradley and parker brothers turned into brands of hasbro before being both dropped in 2009 in favor of the parent company 's name , since adjusted to hasbro gaming .