Barque

etymology . the word '' barque '' entered english via the french term , which in turn came from the latin barca by way of occitan , catalan , spanish , or italian . the latin barca may stem from celtic barc ( per thurneysen ) or greek baris ( per diez ) , a term for an egyptian boat . the oxford english dictionary , however , considers the latter improbable . the word barc appears to have come from celtic languages . the form adopted by english , perhaps from irish , was '' bark '' , while that adopted by latin as barca very early , which gave rise to the french barge and barque . in latin , spanish , and italian , the term barca refers to a small boat , not a full-sized ship . french influence in england led to the use in english of both words , although their meanings now are not the same . well before the 19th century , a barge had become interpreted as a small vessel of coastal or inland waters , or a fast rowing boat carried by warships and normally reserved for the commanding officer . somewhat later , a bark became a sailing vessel of a distinctive rig as detailed below . in britain , by the mid-19th century , the spelling had taken on the french form of barque . although francis bacon used this form of the word as early as 1592 , the works of francis bacon , volume 8 , cambridge university press , 2011 shakespeare still used the spelling '' barke '' in sonnet 116 in 1609 . throughout the period of sail , the word was used also as a shortening of the barca-longa of the mediterranean sea . the usual spelling convention is that , to distinguish between homophones , when spelled as barque it refers to a ship , and when spelled as bark it refers to either a sound or to a tree hide . '' barcarole '' in music shares the same etymology , being originally a folk song sung by venice gondolier and derived from barca & mdash ; '' boat '' in italian , or in late latin . . bark . in the 18th century , the british royal navy used the term bark for a nondescript vessel that did not fit any of its usual categories . thus , when the british admiralty purchased a collier for use by james cook in his journey of exploration , she was registered as hm bark endeavour to distinguish her from another endeavour , a sloop already in service at the time . she happened to be a ship-rigged sailing vessel with a plain bluff bow and a full stern with windows . william falconer 's dictionary of the marine defined '' bark '' , as '' a general name given to small ships : it is however peculiarly appropriated by seamen to those which carry three masts without a mizzen topsail . our northern mariners , who are trained in the coal-trade , apply this distinction to a broad-sterned ship , which carries no ornamental figure on the stem or prow . '' the uk 's national archives state that a paper document surviving from the 16th century in the cheshire and chester archives and local studies service , notes the names of robert ratclyfe , owner of the bark '' sunday '' and 10 mariners appointed to serve under rt . hon . the earl of sussex , lord deputy of ireland . barque rig . by the end of the 18th century , the term barque ( sometimes , particularly in the us , spelled bark ) came to refer to any vessel with a particular type of sail-plan . this comprises three ( or more ) masts , fore-and-aft sails on the aftermost mast and square rig on all other masts . barques were the workhorse of the golden age of sail in the mid-19th century as they attained passages that nearly matched full-rigged ships , but could operate with smaller crews . the advantage of these rigs was that they needed smaller ( therefore cheaper ) crews than a comparable full-rigged ship or brig-rigged vessel , as fewer of the labour-intensive square sails were used , and the rig itself is cheaper . conversely , the ship rig tended to be retained for training vessels where the larger the crew , the more seamen were trained . another advantage is that a barque can outperform a schooner or barkentine , and is both easier to handle and better at going to windward than a full-rigged ship . while a full-rigged ship is the best runner available , and while fore-and-aft rigged vessels are the best at going to windward , the barque is often the best compromise , and combines the best elements of these two . most ocean-going windjammers were four-masted barques , since the four-masted barque is considered the most efficient rig available because of its ease of handling , small need of manpower , good running capabilities , and good capabilities of rising toward wind . usually , the main mast was the tallest ; that of moshulu extends to 58 & nbsp ; m off the deck . the four-masted barque can be handled with a surprisingly small crew—at minimum , 10—and while the usual crew was around 30 , almost half of them could be apprentices . today many sailing-school ships are barques . a well-preserved example of a commercial barque is the pommern , the only windjammer in original condition . its home is in mariehamn outside the åland maritime museum . the wooden barque sigyn , built in gothenburg 1887 , is now a museum ship in turku . the wooden whaling barque charles w . morgan , launched 1841 , taken out of service 1921 , is now a museum ship at mystic seaport in connecticut . the charles w . morgan has recently been refit and is ( as of summer , 2014 ) sailing the new england coast . the united states coast guard still has an operational barque , built in germany in 1936 and captured as a war prize , the uscgc eagle , which the united states coast guard academy in new london uses as a training vessel . the sydney heritage fleet restored an iron-hulled three-masted barque , the james craig , originally constructed as clan macleod in 1874 and sailing at sea fortnightly . the oldest active sailing vessel in the world , the star of india , was built in 1863 as a full-rigged ship , then converted into a barque in 1901 . this type of ship inspired the french composer maurice ravel to write his famous piece , une barque sur l'ocean , originally composed for piano , in 1905 , then orchestrated in 1906 . barques and barque shrines in ancient egypt . in ancient egypt , barques , referred to using the french word as egyptian hieroglyphs were first translated by the frenchman jean-françois champollion , were a type of boat used from egypt 's earliest recorded times and are depicted in many drawings , paintings , and reliefs that document the culture . transportation to the afterlife was believed to be accomplished by way of barques , as well , and the image is used in many of the religious murals and carvings in temples and tombs . the most important egyptian barque carried the dead pharaoh to become a deity . great care was taken to provide a beautiful barque to the pharaoh for this journey , and models of the boats were placed in their tombs . many models of these boats , that range from tiny to huge in size , have been found . wealthy and royal members of the culture also provided barques for their final journey . the type of vessel depicted in egyptian images remains quite similar throughout the thousands of years the culture persisted . barques were important religious artifacts , and since the deities were thought to travel in this fashion in the sky , the milky way was seen as a great waterway that was as important as the nile on earth ; cult image of the deities traveled by boats on water and ritual boats were carried about by the priests during festival ceremonies . temples included barque shrines , sometimes more than one in a temple , in which the sacred barques rested when a procession was not in progress . in these stations , the boats would be watched over and cared for by the priests . barque of st . peter . the barque of st . peter , or the barque of peter , is a reference to the roman catholic church . the term refers to peter , the first pope , who was a fisherman before becoming an apostle of jesus . the pope is often said to be steering the barque of st . peter .