Deception Island

geography . located within the bransfield strait , the island is roughly circular and horseshoe-shaped , with a maximum diameter around . the highest peak , mont pond on the east side of the island , has an elevation of , while mount kirkwood on the west has an elevation of . over half ( 57 % ) of the island is covered by glaciers up to 100 m thick , ice-cored moraines , or ice covered pyroclasts . the centre of the island has been flooded by the sea to form a large bay , now called port foster , about long and wide . the bay has a narrow entrance , just wide , called neptune 's bellows . the port is a basin with a flat floor up to deep with several small submarine cones and domes . the port is rimmed by a shallow coastal shelf with sandy-gravelly beaches . the outer coast of the island is characterized by cliffs of rock or ice . raven 's rock , a navigation hazard , lies below the water in the middle of the channel . just inside neptune 's bellows lies the cove whalers bay , which is bordered by a large black sand beach . several maars line the inside rim of the caldera , with some containing crater lakes ( including one named crater lake ) . others form bays within the harbour , such as the wide whalers bay . other features of the island include mount kirkwood , fumarole bay , sewing-machine needles , telefon bay , and telefon ridge . a 2016 study on ardley island , to the northeast , examined lake guano sediments and studied penguin population dynamics over 7,000 years . three of five population growth phases were terminated by a sudden crash , due to volcanic eruptions from the active volcano of deception island . the history of volcanic eruptions is still under investigation , but several larger eruptions happened in the last 10,000 years . . geology . deception island is the exposed portion of an active shield volcano 30 & nbsp ; km in diameter . the island is associated with bransfield basin seafloor spreading that includes a volcanic ridge and seamounts dating back to the pleistocene . deception island volcanic ash layers have been found on other south shetland islands , the bransfield strait , the scotia sea and in south pole ice cores . volcanic tremors are common , originating from depths less than 10 & nbsp ; km . historical eruptions occurred in 1839–42 , 1967 , 1969 , and 1970 . stratigraphy of the island is characterized by the pre-caldera port foster group and the post-caldera mount pond group , both within the deception island volcanic complex . the port foster group 's principal outcrops are located at south point , cathedral crags near entrance point and north of punta de la descubierta forming spectacular coastal cliffs along the western portion of the island . the group is composed of the fumarole bay formation consisting of hydrovolcanic tephra , the basaltic shield formation consisting of lavas and strombolian scoria , and the outer coast tuff formation consisting of lapilli-tuffs . the mount pond group dominates the surface geology and consists of the pyroclastic baily head and pendulum cove formations , both formed during hydrovolcanic eruptions , and the stonethrow ridge formation consisting of tuff cone and maar deposits . the caldera collapsed as either a hydrovolcanic eruption of the outer coast tuff formation , releasing about 30 cubic kilometers of magma , or passively due to regional tectonics , since the island is at the intersection of the bransfield strait rift and the orthogonal hero fracture zone . . history . the first authenticated sighting of deception island was by the british sealers william smith and edward bransfield from the brig williams in january 1820 . it was first visited and explored by the american sealer nathaniel palmer on the sloop hero the following summer , on 15 november 1820 . he remained for two days , exploring the central bay . palmer named it '' deception island '' on account of its outward deceptive appearance as a normal island , when the narrow entrance of neptune 's bellows revealed it rather to be a ring around a flooded caldera . palmer was part of an american sealing fleet from stonington , connecticut , under the command of benjamin pendleton , consisting of 6 ships . port fisher was used as their operational base from 1820–21 . palmer met bellingshausen close to the island in jan . 1821 , during the first russian antarctic expedition . . whaling and sealing . over the next few years , deception became a focal point of the short-lived fur-sealing industry in the south shetlands . the industry began with a handful of ships in the 1819–20 summer season , rising to nearly a hundred in 1821–22 . while the island did not have a large seal population , it was a perfect natural harbour , mostly free from ice and winds , and a convenient rendezvous point . some men likely lived ashore in tents or shacks for short periods during the summer , though no archaeological or documentary evidence survives to confirm this . massive overhunting meant that the fur seals neared extinction in the south shetlands within a few years , and the sealing industry collapsed as quickly as it had begun . deception was abandoned again in approximately 1825 . sealing captain robert fildes charted port foster in 1820–21 , which in 1829 became the first published antarctica nautical chart . in 1829 , the british naval expedition to the south atlantic under the command of captain henry foster in stopped at deception . the expedition conducted a topographic survey and scientific experiments , particularly pendulum and magnetic observations . gordon elliott fogg , a history of antarctic science , cambridge , cambridge university press , 1992 , pp . 72–74 a watercolour made by lieutenant kendall of the chanticleer during the visit may be the first image made of the island . a subsequent visit by the american elephant-sealer ohio in 1842 reported the first recorded volcanic activity , with the southern shore '' in flames '' . the second phase of human activity at deception began in the early 20th century . in 1904 , an active whaling industry was established at south georgia , taking advantage of new technology and an almost untouched population of whales to make rapid profits . it spread south into the south shetland islands , where the lack of shore-based infrastructure meant that the whales had to be towed to moored factory ships for processing ; these needed a sheltered anchorage and a plentiful supply of fresh water , both of which could be found at deception . in 1906 , the norway-chilean whaling company sociedad ballenera de magallanes started using whalers bay as a base for a single ship , the gobernador bories . other whalers followed , with several hundred men resident at deception during the antarctic summers and as many as 13 ships operating in peak years . in 1908 , the british government formally declared the island to be part of the falkland islands dependencies , thus under british control , establishing postal services and appointing a magistrate and customs officer for the island . the magistrate was to ensure that whaling companies were paying appropriate licence fees to the falklands government and ensuring adherence to catch quotas . a cemetery was built in 1908 , a radio station in 1912 , a hand-operated railway also in 1912 , and a small permanent magistrate 's house in 1914 . the cemetery , by far the largest in antarctica , held graves for 35 men along with a memorial to 10 more presumed drowned . these were not the only constructions ; as the factory ships of the period were only able to strip the blubber from whales and could not use the carcasses , a permanent on-shore station was established by the norwegian company hvalfangerselskabet hektor a/s in 1912 – up to an estimated 40 % of the available oil was being wasted by the ship-based system . this was the only successful shore-based industry ever to operate in antarctica , reaping high profits in its first years . a number of exploring expeditions visited deception during these years , including the hubert wilkins of 1928 , when a lockheed vega was flown from a beach airstrip on the first successful flights in antarctica . the development of pelagic whaling in the 1920s , where factory ships fitted with a slipway could tow aboard entire whales for processing , meant that whaling companies were no longer tied to sheltered anchorages . a boom in pelagic antarctic whaling followed , with companies now free to ignore quotas and escape the costs of licences . this rapidly led to overproduction of oil and a collapse in the market , and the less profitable and more heavily regulated shore-based companies had trouble competing . in early 1931 , the hektor factory finally ceased operation , ending commercial whaling at the island entirely . . scientific research . on 16 nov . 1928 , hubert wilkins made the first antarctic flight from a whalers bay ash runway . deception remained uninhabited for a decade , but was revisited in 1941 by the british auxiliary warship ss queen of bermuda , which destroyed the oil tanks and some remaining supplies to ensure it could not be used as a german supply base . in 1942 , an argentinean party aboard the primero de mayo visited and left signs and painted flags declaring the site argentinean territory ; the following year , a british party with returned to remove the signs . hms carnarvon castle 1943 in 1961 , argentina 's president arturo frondizi visited the island to show his country 's interest . regular visits were made by other countries operating in the antarctic , including the 1964 visit of the us coast guard icebreaker , which ran aground inside the harbour . from the log book of christopher malinger , seaman on the uscgc eastwind however , the volcano returned to activity in 1967 and 1969 , destroying the existing scientific stations . both british and chilean stations were demolished , and the island was again abandoned for several years . the final major volcanic eruption was reported by the russian bellingshausen station on king george island and the chilean station arturo prat on greenwich island ; both stations experienced major falls of ash on 13 august 1970 . in 2000 , there were two summer-only scientific stations , the spanish gabriel de castilla base and the argentinian decepción station . remains of previous structures at whalers bay include rusting boilers and tanks , an hangar , and the british scientific station house ( biscoe house ) , with the middle torn out by the 1969 mudflows . a bright orange derelict airplane fuselage , which is that of a de havilland canada dhc-3 otter that belonged to the royal air force , was recovered in 2004 . plans to restore the airplane and return it to the island have been made . the russian cruise ship ran aground at deception island on 27 november 2006 . she was towed off by the spanish navy icebreaker las palmas and later became a ghost ship in the north atlantic . tourism . the first cruise ship arrived in january 1966 . by 1999 , over 10,000 tourists had visited the island . . research stations . aguirre cerda . aguirre cerda research station was a chilean antarctic base , located at pendulum cove on deception island in the south shetland islands , inaugurated in 1955 . it was evacuated in december 1967 when volcanic eruptions forced the evacuation of the base . deception . deception station is an argentine base located at deception island . the station was founded on january 25 , 1948 , and was a year-round station until december 1967 , when volcanic eruptions forced the evacuation of the base . since then , it has been inhabited only during the summer . gabriel de castilla . gabriel de castilla base is a spain research station located on deception island . the station was constructed in 1990 . . gutiérrez vargas refuge . the gutiérrez vargas refuge , named after an aviation captain who died on december 30 , 1955 , was located at from aguirre cerda station and was inaugurated on february 12 , 1956 . its purpose was to serve as a refuge for the members of the station in case of fire . on december 4 , 1967 , the refuge was definitively abandoned , as was the aguirre cerda station , due to a violent volcanic eruption . the remains of the refuge structure can still be seen on the beach where it was located . station b . the island was finally reoccupied in early 1944 by a party of men from operation tabarin , a british expedition , who established a permanent scientific base named station b . station b british antarctic survey this was occupied until 5 december 1967 , when an eruption forced a temporary withdrawal . it was used again between 4 december 1968 and 23 february 1969 , when further volcanic activity caused it to be abandoned . . environment . deception island has become a popular tourist stop in antarctica because of its several colonies of chinstrap penguins , as well as the possibility of making a warm bath by digging into the sands of the beach . mount flora is the first site in antarctica where fossilized plants were discovered . jurassic liverworts from mount flora , hope bay , antarctica after the norwegian coastal cruise liner ran aground off the coast of deception island on 30 january 2007 , fuel from the ship washed into a bay . ecological damage has not yet been determined . on 4 february 2007 , the spanish gabriel de castilla research station on deception island reported that water and sand tests were clean , and that they had not found signs of the oil , estimated as . deception island exhibits some wildly varying microclimates . near volcanic areas , the air can be as hot as , and water temperature can reach . antarctic specially protected areas . eleven terrestrial sites have been collectively designated as an antarctic specially protected area ( aspa 140 ) , primarily for their botanic and ecological values , because the island has the greatest number of rare plant species of any place in the antarctic . this is largely due to frequent volcanic activity creating new substrates for plant colonisation : collins point ( site a ) contains good examples of long-established vegetation , with high species diversity and several rarities . crater lake ( site b ) has a scoria-covered lava with a diverse cryptogamic flora , and exceptional development of sod-forming mosses . an unnamed hill at the southern end of fumarole bay ( site c ) has several rare species of mosses that have colonised the heated soil crust close to a line of volcanic vents . fumarole bay ( site d ) is geology complex with the most diverse flora on the island . west stonethrow ridge ( site e ) supports several rare mosses , liverworts , and lichens . telefon bay ( site f ) has all its surfaces dating from 1967 , thus allowing accurate monitoring of colonisation by plants and animals . pendulum cove ( site g ) is another known-age site being colonised by mosses and lichens . mount pond ( site h ) contains exceptional moss , liverwort , and lichen communities . perchue cone ( site j ) is an cinder cone with rare mosses . ronald hill to kroner lake ( site k ) is another known-age site being colonised by numerous cryptogam species , and with a unique algae community on the lake shore . south east point ( site l ) supports the most extensive population of antarctic pearlwort known in the antarctic region . in addition , two marine sites in port foster have collectively been designated aspa 145 , to protect their benthos communities . . important bird area . baily head , a prominent headland forming the easternmost extremity of the island , has been identified as an important bird area ( iba ) by birdlife international because it supports a very large bird colony of chinstrap penguins ( 100,000 pairs ) . the iba comprises the ice-free headland and about of beach on either side of it . other birds known to nest at the site include brown skuas , cape petrels , and snowy sheathbills .