Acer rubrum

description . though a . rubrum is usually easy to identify , it is highly changeable in morphological characteristics . it is a medium to large sized tree , reaching heights of and exceptionally over in the southern appalachians where conditions favor its growth . the leaves are usually long on a full-grown tree . the trunk diameter often ranges from ; depending on the growing conditions , however , open grown trees can attain diameters of up to . the trunk will remain free of branches until some distance up the tree on forest grown trees , while individuals grown in the open are shorter and thicker with a more rounded crown . trees on poorer sites often become malformed and scraggly . generally the crown is irregularly ovoid with ascending whip-like curved shoots . the bark is a pale grey and smooth when the individual is young . as the tree grows the bark becomes darker and cracks into slightly raised long plates . the largest known living red maple is located near armada , michigan , at a height of and a bole circumference , at breast height , of . the leaf of the red maple offer the easiest way to distinguish it from its relatives . as with all north american maple trees , they are deciduous and arranged oppositely on the twig . they are typically long and wide with 3-5 palmate lobes with a serrated margin . the sinuses are typically narrow , but the leaves can exhibit considerable variation . when five lobes are present , the three at the terminal end are larger than the other two near the base . in contrast , the leaves of the related silver maple , a . saccharinum , are much more deeply lobed , more sharply toothed and characteristically have 5 lobes . the upper side of a . rubrums leaf is light green and the underside is whitish and can be either glaucous or hairy . the leaf stalks are usually red and are up to long . the leaves can turn a characteristic brilliant red in autumn , but can also become yellow or orange on some individuals . soil acidity can influence the color of the foliage and trees with female flowers are more likely to produce orange coloration while male trees produce red . the fall colors of red maple are most spectacular in the northern part of its range where climates are cooler . the twigs of the red maple are reddish in color and somewhat shiny with small lenticels . dwarf shoots are present on many branches . the buds are usually blunt and greenish to reddish in color , generally with several loose scales . the lateral buds are slightly stalked , and in addition there may be collateral buds present as well . the buds form in fall and winter and are often visible from a distance due to their large size and reddish tint . the leaf scars on the twig are v-shaped and contain 3 bundle scars . the flowers are generally unisexual , with male and female flowers appearing in separate sessile clusters , though they are sometimes also bisexual . they appear in late winter to early spring , from december to may depending on elevation and latitude , usually before the leaves . the tree itself is considered polygamodioecious , meaning some individuals are male , some female , and some monoecious . under the proper conditions , the tree can sometimes switch from male to female , male to hermaphroditic , and hermaphroditic to female . the red maple will begin blooming when it is about 8 years old , but it significantly varies between tree to tree : some trees may begin flowering when they are 4 years old . the flowers are red with 5 small petals and a 5-lobed calyx , usually at the twig tips . the staminate flowers are sessile . the pistillate flowers are borne on pedicels that grow out while the flowers are blooming , so that eventually the flowers are in a hanging cluster with stems long . the petals are lineal to oblong in shape and are pubescent . the pistillate flowers have one pistil formed from two fused carpels with a glabrous superior ovary and two long styles that protrude beyond the perianth . the staminate flowers contain between 4 and 12 stamens , often with 8 . the fruit is a samara long that grows in pairs with somewhat divergent wings at an angle of 50 to 60 degrees . they are borne on long slender stems and are variable in color from light brown to reddish . they ripen from april through early june , before even the leaf development is altogether complete . after they reach maturity , the seeds are dispersed for a 1 to 2 week period from april through july . . distribution and habitat . acer rubrum is one of the most abundant and widespread trees in eastern north america . it can be found from the south of newfoundland , through nova scotia , new brunswick and southern quebec to the southwest west of ontario , extreme southeastern manitoba and northern minnesota ; southward through wisconsin , illinois , missouri , eastern oklahoma , and eastern texas in its western range ; and east to florida . it has the largest continuous range along the north american atlantic coast of any tree that occurs in florida . in total it ranges from north to south . the species is native to all regions of the united states east of the 95th meridian . the tree 's range ends where the mean minimum isotherm begins , namely in southeastern canada . a . rubrum is not present in most of the prairie peninsula of the northern midwest ( although it is found in ohio ) , the coastal prairie in southern louisiana and southeastern texas and the swamp prairie of the florida everglades . red maple 's western range stops with the great plains where conditions become too dry for it . the absence of red maple from the prairie peninsula is most likely due to the tree 's poor tolerance of wildfires . red maple is most abundant in the northeastern us , the upper peninsula of michigan , and northeastern wisconsin and is rare in the extreme west of its range and in the southeastern us . in several other locations , the tree is absent from large areas but still present in a few specific habitats . an example is the bluegrass region of kentucky , where red maple is not found in the dominant open plains , but is present along streams . here the red maple is not present in the bottom land forests of the grain belt , despite the fact it is common in similar habitats and species associations both to the north and south of this area . in the northeastern us , red maple can be a climax forest species in certain locations , but will eventually give way to sugar maple . acer rubrum does very well in a wide range of soil types , with varying textures , moisture , ph , and elevation , probably more so than any other forest tree in north america . a . rubrum 's high ph tolerance means that it can grow in a variety of places , and it is widespread along the eastern united states . it grows on glaciated as well as unglaciated soils derived from the following rocks : granite , gneiss , schist , sandstone , shale , slate , conglomerate , quartzite , and limestone . chlorosis can occur on very alkaline soils , though otherwise its ph tolerance is quite high . moist mineral soil is best for germination of seeds . red maple can grow in a variety of moist and dry biomes , from dry ridges and sunny , southwest-facing slopes to peat bogs and swamps . while many types of tree prefer a south- or north-facing aspect , the red maple does not appear to have a preference . its ideal conditions are in moderately well-drained , moist sites at low or intermediate elevations . however , it is nonetheless common in mountainous areas on relatively dry ridges , as well as on both the south and west sides of upper slopes . furthermore , it is common in swampy areas , along the banks of slow moving streams , as well as on poorly drained flats and depressions . in northern michigan and new england , the tree is found on the tops of ridges , sandy or rocky upland and otherwise dry soils , as well as in nearly pure stands on moist soils and the edges of swamps . in the far south of its range , it is almost exclusively associated with swamps . additionally , red maple is one of the most drought-tolerant species of maple in the carolinas . miller , j.h . , & miller , k.v . ( 1999 ) . forest plants of the southeast and their wildlife uses . champaign , il : kings time printing . red maple is far more abundant today than when europeans first arrived in north america . it only contributed minimally to old growth upland forests , and would only form same-species stands in riparian zones . the density of the tree in many of these areas has increased 6- to 7-fold , and this trend seems to be continuing , all of which is due to human factors , mainly continued heavy logging and a recent trend of young , shrubby forests recovering from past human disturbances . also , the decline of american elm and american chestnut due to introduced diseases has contributed to its spread . red maple dominates such sites , but largely disappears until it only has a sparse presence by the time a forest is mature . this species is in fact a vital part of forest regeneration in the same way that paper birch is . because it can grow on a variety of substrates , has a high ph tolerance , and grows in both shade and sun , a . rubrum is a prolific seed producer and highly adaptable , often dominating disturbed sites . while many believe that it is replacing historically dominant tree species in the eastern united states such as sugar maples , beeches , oaks , tsuga and pines , red maple will only dominate young forests prone to natural or human disturbance . in areas disturbed by humans where the species thrives , it can reduce diversity , but in a mature forest it is not a dominant species ; it only has a sparse presence and adds to the diversity and ecological structure of a forest . extensive use of red maple in landscaping has also contributed to the surge in the species ' numbers as volunteer seedlings proliferate . finally , disease epidemics have greatly reduced the population of elms and chestnuts in the forests of the us . while mainline forest trees continue to dominate mesic sites with rich soil , more marginal areas are increasingly being dominated by red maple . . ecology . red maple 's maximum lifespan is 150 years , but most live less than 100 years . the tree 's thin bark is easily damaged from ice and storms , animals , and when used in landscaping , being struck by flying debris from lawn mowers , allowing fungi to penetrate and cause heart rot . its ability to thrive in a large number of habitats is largely due to its ability to produce roots to suit its site from a young age . in wet locations , red maple seedlings produce short taproots with long , well-developed lateral roots ; while on dry sites , they develop long taproots with significantly shorter laterals . the roots are primarily horizontal , however , forming in the upper of the ground . mature trees have woody roots up to long . they are very tolerant of flooding , with one study showing that 60 days of flooding caused no leaf damage . at the same time , they are tolerant of drought due to their ability to stop growing under dry conditions by then producing a second growth flush when conditions later improve , even if growth has stopped for 2 weeks . acer rubrum is one of the first plants to flower in spring . a crop of seeds is generally produced every year with a bumper crop often occurring every second year . a single tree between in diameter can produce between 12,000 and 91,000 seeds in a season . a tree in diameter was shown to produce nearly a million seeds . red maple produces one of the smallest seeds of any of the maples . fertilization has also been shown to significantly increase the seed yield for up to two years after application . the seeds are epigeal and tend to germinate in early summer soon after they are released , assuming a small amount of light , moisture , and sufficient temperatures are present . if the seeds are densely shaded , then germination commonly does not occur until the next spring . most seedlings do not survive in closed forest canopy situations . however , one- to four-year-old seedlings are common under dense canopy . though they eventually die if no light reaches them , they serve as a reservoir , waiting to fill any open area of the canopy above . trees growing in a zone 9 or 10 area such as florida will usually die from cold damage if transferred up north , for instance to canada , maine , vermont , new hampshire and new york , even if the southern trees were planted with northern red maples . due to their wide range , genetically the trees have adapted to the climatic differences . red maple is able to increase its numbers significantly when associate trees are damaged by disease , cutting , or fire . one study found that 6 years after clearcutting a oak-hickory forest containing no red maples , the plot contained more than 2,200 red maple seedlings per hectare ( 900 per acre ) taller than . one of its associates , the black cherry ( prunus serotina ) , contains benzoic acid , which has been shown to be a potential allelopathic inhibitor of red maple growth . red maple is one of the first species to start stem elongation . in one study , stem elongation was one-half completed in 1 week , after which growth slowed and was 90 % completed within only 54 days . in good light and moisture conditions , the seedlings can grow in their first year and up to each year for the next few years , making it a fast grower . the red maple is used as a food source by several forms of wildlife . elk and white-tailed deer in particular use the current season 's growth of red maple as an important source of winter food . several lepidoptera ( butterflies and moths ) utilize the leaves as food , including larvae of the rosy maple moth ( dryocampa rubicunda ) ; see list of lepidoptera that feed on maples . due to a . rubrums very wide range , there is significant variation in hardiness , size , form , time of flushing , onset of dormancy , and other traits . generally speaking , individuals from the north flush the earliest , have the most reddish fall color , set their buds the earliest and take the least winter injury . seedlings are tallest in the north-central and east-central part of the range . in florida , at the extreme south of the red maple 's range , it is limited exclusively to swamplands . the fruits also vary geographically with northern individuals in areas with brief , frost-free periods producing fruits that are shorter and heavier than their southern counterparts . as a result of such variation , there is much genetic potential for breeding programs with a goal of producing red maples for cultivation . this is especially useful for making urban cultivars that require resistance from verticillium wilt , air pollution , and drought . red maple frequently hybridizes with silver maple ; the hybrid , known as freeman 's maple , acer × freemanii , is intermediate between the parents . allergenic potential . the allergenic potential of red maples varies widely based on the cultivar . the following cultivars are completely male and are highly allergenic , with an opals allergy scale rating of 8 or higher : 'autumn flame ' ( 'flame ' ) 'autumn spire' 'columnare ' ( 'pyramidale ' ) 'firedance ' ( 'landsburg ' ) 'karpick' 'northwood' 'october brilliance' 'sun valley' 'tiliford' the following cultivars have an opals allergy scale rating of 3 or lower ; they are completely female trees , and have low potential for causing allergies : 'autumn glory' 'bowhall' 'davey red' 'doric' 'embers' 'festival' 'october glory' 'red skin' 'red sunset ' ( 'franksred ' ) . toxicity . the leaves of red maple , especially when dead or wilted , are extremely toxic to horses . the toxin is unknown , but believed to be an oxidant because it damages red blood cells , causing acute hemolysis that inhibits the transport of oxygen . this not only decreases oxygen delivery to all tissues , but also leads to the production of methemoglobin , which can further damage the kidneys . the ingestion of 700 & nbsp ; grams ( 1.5 pounds ) of leaves is considered toxic and 1.4 kilograms ( 3 pounds ) is lethal . symptoms occur within one or two days after ingestion and can include depression , lethargy , increased rate and depth of breathing , increased heart rate , jaundice , dark brown urine , colic , laminitis , coma , and death . treatment is limited and can include the use of methylene blue or mineral oil and activated carbon in order to stop further absorption of the toxin into the stomach , as well as blood transfusions , fluid support , diuretics , and anti-oxidants such as vitamin c . about 50 % to 75 % of affected horses die or are euthanized as a result . . cultivation . red maple 's rapid growth , ease of transplanting , attractive form , and value for wildlife ( in the eastern us ) has made it one of the most extensively planted trees . in parts of the pacific northwest , it is one of the most common introduced trees . its popularity in cultivation stems from its vigorous habit , its attractive and early red flowers , and most importantly , its flaming red fall foliage . the tree was introduced into the united kingdom in 1656 and shortly thereafter entered cultivation . there it is frequently found in many parks and yards . red maple is a good choice of a tree for urban areas when there is ample room for its root system . forming an association with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi can help a . rubrum grow along city streets . it is more tolerant of pollution and road salt than sugar maples , although the tree 's fall foliage is not as vibrant in this environment . like several other maples , its low root system can be invasive and it makes a poor choice for plantings near paving . it attracts squirrels , who eat its buds in the early spring , although squirrels prefer the larger buds of the silver maple . red maples make vibrant and colorful bonsai , and have year around attractive features for display . . cultivars . numerous cultivars have been selected , often for intensity of fall color , with 'october glory ' and 'red sunset ' among the most popular . toward its southern limit , 'fireburst ' , 'florida flame ' , and 'gulf ember ' are preferred . many cultivars of the freeman maple are also grown widely . below is a partial list of cultivars : 'armstrong ' – columnar to fastigate in shape with silvery bark and modest orange to red fall foliage . 'autumn blaze ' – rounded oval form with leaves that resemble the silver maple . the fall color is orange red and persists longer than usual . 'autumn flame ' – a fast grower with exceptional bright red fall color developing early . the leaves are also smaller than the species . 'autumn radiance ' – dense oval crown with an orange-red fall color . 'autumn spire ' – broad columnar crown ; red fall color ; very hardy . 'bowhall ' – conical to upright in form with a yellow-red fall color . 'burgundy bell ' – compact rounded uniform shape with long lasting , burgundy fall leaves . 'columnare ' – an old cultivar growing to with a narrow columnar to pyramidal form with dark green leaves turning orange and deep red in fall . 'gerling ' – a compact , slow growing selection , this individual only reaches and has orange-red fall foliage . 'northwood ' – branches are at a 45 degree angle to the trunk , forming a rounded oval crown . though the foliage is deep green in summer , its orange-red fall color is not as impressive as other cultivars . 'october brilliance ' – this selection is slow to leaf in spring , but has a tight crown and deep red fall color . 'october glory ' – has a rounded oval crown with late developing intense red fall foliage . along with 'red sunset ' , it is the most popular selection due to the dependable fall color and vigorous growth . this cultivar has gained the royal horticultural society 's award of garden merit . 'redpointe ' – superior in alkaline soil , strong central leader , red fall color . 'franksred ' – is also a recipient of the award of garden merit . the other very popular choice , this selection does well in heat due to its drought tolerance and has an upright habit . it has very attractive orange-red fall color and is also a rapid and vigorous grower . 'scarlet sentinel ' – a columnar to oval selection with 5-lobed leaves resembling the silver maple . the fall color is yellow-orange to orange-red and the tree is a fast grower . 'schlesingeri ' – a tree with a broad crown and early , long lasting fall color that is a deep red to reddish purple . growth is also quite rapid . the original tree grew at the home of barthold schlesinger in brookline , massachusetts . 'shade king ' – this fast growing cultivar has an upright-oval form with deep green summer leaves that turn red to orange in fall . ' v.j . drake ' – this selection is notable because the edges of the leaves first turn a deep red before the color progresses into the center . other uses . in the lumber industry acer rubrum is considered a '' soft maple '' , a designation it shares , commercially , with silver maple ( a . saccharinum ) . in this context , the term '' soft '' is more comparative , than descriptive ; i.e . , '' soft maple '' , while softer than its harder cousin , sugar maple ( a . saccharum ) , is still a fairly hard wood , being comparable to black cherry ( prunus serotina ) in this regard . like a . saccharum , the wood of red maple is close-grained , but its texture is softer , less dense , and has not as desirable an appearance , particularly under a clear finish . however , the wood from acer rubrum while being typically less expensive than hard maple , also has greater dimensional stability than that of a . saccharum , and also machines and stains easier . thus , high grades of wood from the red maple can be substituted for hard maple , particularly when it comes to making stain/paint-grade furniture . red maple lumber also contains a greater percentage of '' curly '' ( aka '' flame '' / '' fiddleback '' ) figure , which is prized by musical instrument/custom furniture makers , as well as the veneer industry . as a soft maple , the wood tends to shrink more during the drying process than with the hard maples . red maple is also used for the production of maple syrup , though the hard maples acer saccharum ( sugar maple ) and acer nigrum ( black maple ) are more commonly utilized . one study compared the sap and syrup from the sugar maple with those of the red maple , as well as those of the acer saccharinum ( silver maple ) , acer negundo ( boxelder ) , and acer platanoides ( norway maple ) , and all were found to be equal in sweetness , flavor , and quality . however , the buds of red maple and other soft maples emerge much earlier in the spring than the sugar maple , and after sprouting chemical makeup of the sap changes , imparting an undesirable flavor to the syrup . this being the case , red maple can only be tapped for syrup before the buds emerge , making the season very short . native americans used red maple bark as a wash for inflamed eyes and cataracts , and as a remedy for hives and muscular aches . they also would brew tea from the inner bark to treat coughs and diarrhea . pioneers made cinnamon-brown and black dyes from a bark extract , and iron sulphate could be added to the tannin from red maple bark in order to make ink . red maple is a medium quality firewood , possessing less heat energy , nominally , than other hardwoods such as ash : , oak : , or birch : .