1995 in literature

events . january 12 – the première of sarah kane 's complete blasted at the royal court theatre upstairs in london provokes outrage . february 28 – the diary of bridget jones column first appears in the independent newspaper ( london ) . march 1 – the dylan thomas centre in swansea is opened by jimmy carter . april 23 – world book day is first celebrated . july 16 – amazon.com , incorporated a year earlier by jeff bezos in washington ( state ) as an online bookstore , sells its first book : douglas hofstadter 's fluid concepts and creative analogies . august – blackwell uk becomes the first british bookseller to offer online purchasing . december 13 – the released film of jane austen 's sense and sensibility has an academy award-winning screenplay by emma thompson . uncertain dates simon & schuster pays us 4.2 million for hardcover publishing rights to the christmas box , self-published by richard paul evans , which has appeared on the new york times best seller list . fjærland in norway becomes a book town . . new books . fiction . ben aaronovitch – the also people louisa may alcott ( posthumous ) – a long fatal love chase roger macbride allen ambush at corellia assault at selonia showdown at centerpoint julia alvarez – in the time of the butterflies martin amis – the information kevin j . anderson – darksaber iain banks – whit pat barker – the ghost road daniel blythe – infinite requiem thomas brussig – helden wie wir ( heroes like us ) christopher bulis – the sorcerer 's apprentice edgar rice burroughs and joe r . lansdale – tarzan : the lost adventure t . c . boyle – the tortilla curtain albert camus ( posthumous ) – the first man ( le premier homme , unfinished ) andrew cartmel – warlock mary higgins clark – silent night michael connelly – the last coyote paul cornell – human nature bernard cornwell sharpe 's battle battle flag the winter king douglas coupland – microserfs robert crais – voodoo river michael crichton – the lost world maurice g . dantec – les racines du mal martin day – the menagerie l . sprague de camp and christopher stasheff – the exotic enchanter samuel delany – hogg terrance dicks – shakedown : return of the sontarans umberto eco – the island of the day before stanley elkin – mrs . ted bliss kirill eskov – the gospel of afranius ( « евангелие от афрания » ) nicholas evans – the horse whisperer timothy findley – the piano man 's daughter richard ford – independence day jon fosse – melancholy ( melancholia i ) carlos fuentes – the crystal frontier ( la frontera de cristal ) john gardner – goldeneye john grisham – the rainmaker barbara hambly – children of the jedi craig hinton – millennial rites nick hornby – high fidelity kazuo ishiguro – the unconsoled elfriede jelinek – the children of the dead jo jung-rae – arirang welwyn wilton katz – out of the dark stephen king – rose madder joe r . lansdale – the two-bear mambo john le carré – our game andy lane the empire of glass original sin paul leonard dancing the code toy soldiers jonathan lethem – amnesia moon barry letts – the ghosts of n-space robert ludlum – the apocalypse watch steve lyons head games time of your life frank mccourt – angela 's ashes ( semi-autobiographical ) val mcdermid – the mermaids singing david a . mcintee lords of the storm sanctuary andreï makine – dreams of my russian summers ( le testament français ) henning mankell – chronicler of the winds ( comédia infantil ) stephen marley – managra zakes mda – ways of dying james a . michener – miracle in seville rohinton mistry – a fine balance mary mcgarry morris – songs in ordinary time kate orman – set piece terry pratchett – maskerade douglas preston and lincoln child relic mount dragon christoph ransmayr – the dog king ( morbus kitahara ) jean raspail – l'anneau du pêcheur justin richards – system shock andrew roberts – the aachen memorandum gareth roberts the romance of crime zamper j . jill robinson – eggplant wife philip roth – sabbath 's theater salman rushdie – the moor 's last sigh gary russell – invasion of the cat-people josè saramago – blindness ( ensaio sobre a cegueira ) w . g . sebald – the rings of saturn ( the rings of saturn : an english pilgrimage ) sidney sheldon – morning , noon and night jane smiley - moo danielle steel – five days in paris neal stephenson – the diamond age james b . stewart – blood sport dave stone – sky pirates ! jim turner , editor – cthulhu mythos anthology cthulhu 2000 andrew vachss – footsteps of the hawk robert james waller – puerto vallarta squeeze dave wolverton – the courtship of princess leia . children and young people . chris van allsburg – bad day at riverbend elizabeth arnold – the parsley parcel marion zimmer bradley ( with rosemary edghill ) – ghostlight jimmy carter ( illustrated by amy carter ) – the little baby snoogle-fleejer donald hall ( with barry moser ) – the pageant virginia hamilton ( with leo and diane dillon ) – her stories : african american folktales , fairy tales , and true tales joe r . lansdale – tarzan : the lost adventure jim murphy – the great fire alison prince – the sherwood hero philip pullman – northern lights ( in us as the golden compass ) diana pullein-thompson – i wanted a pony josephine pullein-thompson – six ponies mario vargas llosa ( with willi glasauer ) – hitos y mitos literarios ( the milestones and the stories of greatest literary works ) jacqueline wilson – double act . drama . parv bancil – papa was a bus conductor jez butterworth – mojo margaret edson – wit horton foote – the young man from atlanta jon fosse – the name sarah kane – blasted terrence mcnally – master class yasmina reza – the unexpected man ( l'homme du hasard ) tom stoppard – indian ink . poetry . mark doty – atlantis : poems . non-fiction . andré aciman – out of egypt jean baudrillard – the gulf war did not take place john g . bennett ( posthumously ) – the masters of wisdom george g . blackburn – the guns of normandy wayne c . booth , gregory g . colomb , and joseph m . williams – the craft of research pascal bruckner – the temptation of innocence l . sprague de camp – the ape-man within tim cornell – the beginnings of rome : italy and rome from the bronze age to the punic wars paul davies – about time robin dunbar – the trouble with science mark epstein – thoughts without a thinker : psychotherapy from a buddhist perspective bill gates – the road ahead doris kearns goodwin – no ordinary time : franklin and eleanor roosevelt : the home front in world war ii nelson mandela – long walk to freedom leonard nimoy – i am spock leslie and les parrott – saving your marriage before it starts man ray and andré breton – man ray , 1890–1976 condoleezza rice and philip zelikow – germany unified and europe transformed : a study in statecraft oliver sacks – an anthropologist on mars simon schama – landscape and memory sterling seagrave – lords of the rim miranda seymour – robert graves : life on the edge howard stern – miss america binod bihari verma – tapasa vai ganga maithili , biography ibn warraq – why i am not a muslim jane wilson-howarth – bugs , bites & bowels ( later editions as the essential guide to travel health ) . deaths . january 9 – peter cook , english writer , comedian and satirist ( born 1937 ) january 30 – gerald durrell , english nature writer and naturalist ( born 1925 ) january 31 – george abbott , american writer , director and producer ( born 1887 ) february 4 – patricia highsmith , american crime novelist ( born 1921 ) february 6 – xia yan ( 夏衍 ) , chinese playwright and screenwriter , ( born 1900 ) february 21 robert bolt , english dramatist ( born 1924 ) calder willingham , american writer ( born 1922 ) february 23 – james herriot , english veterinary novelist ( born 1916 ) march 9 – ian ballantine , american publisher ( born 1916 ) april 14 – brian coffey , irish poet ( born 1905 ) may 30 or may 31 – ștefana velisar teodoreanu , romanian novelist , memoirist and poet ( born 1897 ) june 14 – roger zelazny , american fantasy and science fiction writer ( born 1937 ) june 25 – qiu miaojin ( 邱妙津 ) , taiwanese chinese novelist ( suicide , born 1969 ) july 16 may sarton , belgian-born american poet , novelist and memoirist ( born 1912 ) stephen spender , english poet ( born 1909 ) july 25 – janice elliott , english novelist and children 's writer ( born 1931 ) august 3 – edward whittemore , american novelist , ( born 1933 ) august 19 – pierre schaeffer , french composer and writer ( born 1910 ) august 29 – michael ende , german fantasy novelist ( born 1929 ) october 13 – henry roth , austrian-born american novelist and short story writer ( born 1906 ) october 22 – kingsley amis , english novelist ( born 1922 ) november 10 – ken saro-wiwa , nigerian writer ( executed , born 1941 ) november 13 – mary elizabeth counselman , american author and poet ( born 1911 ) november 16 – robert h . adleman , american novelist and historian ( born 1919 ) november 17 – marguerite young , american novelist , poet and biographer ( born 1908 ) november 22 – margaret st . clair , american science fiction writer ( born 1911 ) december 2 – robertson davies , canadian novelist ( born 1913 ) december 9 – toni cade bambara , american writer ( born 1939 ) december 30 – heiner müller , german dramatist ( born 1929 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : seamus heaney camões prize : josé saramago . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : richard king , kindling does for firewood c . j . dennis prize for poetry : bruce beaver , anima and other poems kenneth slessor prize for poetry : peter boyle , coming home from the world mary gilmore prize : aileen kelly , coming up for light miles franklin award : helen darville , the hand that signed the paper . canada . bronwen wallace memorial award giller prize : rohinton mistry , a fine balance see 1995 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : denise chong , the concubine 's children faculty of arts , 1995 , edna staebler award , wilfrid laurier university , previous winners , denise chong , retrieved 11/27/2012 . france . prix goncourt : andreï makine , le testament français prix décembre : jean échenoz , les grandes blondes prix médicis french : vassilis alexakis , la langue maternelle and andreï makine , le testament français prix médicis international : alessandro baricco , châteaux de la colère . united kingdom . booker prize : pat barker , the ghost road carnegie medal for children 's literature : philip pullman , northern lights james tait black memorial prize for fiction : christopher priest , the prestige james tait black memorial prize for biography : gitta sereny , albert speer : his battle with the truth cholmondeley award : u . a . fanthorpe , christopher reid , c . h . sisson , kit wright eric gregory award : colette bryce , sophie hannah , tobias hill , mark wormald newdigate prize : antony dunn 1995 whitbread awards : kate atkinson , behind the scenes at the museum . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : sandy solomon , pears , lake , sun aiken taylor award for modern american poetry : maxine kumin american academy of arts and letters gold medal for fiction , william maxwell carnegie medal : philip pullman , northern lights compton crook award : doranna durgin , dun lady 's jess hugo award : lois mcmaster bujold , mirror dance nebula award : robert sawyer , the terminal experiment newbery medal for children 's literature : sharon creech , walk two moons pulitzer prize for drama : horton foote , the young man from atlanta pulitzer prize for fiction : carol shields , the stone diaries pulitzer prize for poetry : philip levine , the simple truth pulitzer prize for biography or autobiography : joan d . hedrick , harriet beecher stowe : a life pulitzer prize for general non-fiction : jonathan weiner , the beak of the finch : a story of evolution in our time pulitzer prize for history : doris goodwin , no ordinary time : franklin and eleanor roosevelt : the home front in world war ii wallace stevens award : james tate whiting awards : : fiction : michael cunningham , reginald mcknight , matthew stadler , melanie sumner : nonfiction : andré aciman , lucy grealy ( nonfiction/poetry ) , suzannah lessard , russ rymer : poetry : james l . mcmichael , mary ruefle . elsewhere . new zealand book award for poetry : michele leggott , dia montana book award for poetry : michael jackson , pieces of music premio nadal : ignacio carrión hernández , cruzar el danubio . references .