Veneration

buddhism . both main branches of buddhism , theravada and mahayana , recognize those who have achieved a high degree of enlightenment as an arhat . mahayana buddhism particularly gives emphasis to the power of saints to aid ordinary people on the path to enlightenment . those who have reached enlightenment , and have delayed their own complete enlightenment in order to help others , are called bodhisattvas . mahayana buddhism has formal liturgical practices for venerating saints , along with very specific levels of sainthood . tibetan buddhism venerate especially holy lamas , such as the dalai lama , as saints . . christianity . veneration towards those who were considered holy began in early christianity , with the martyrs first being given special honor . official church commemoration of saints in rome beginning as early as the third century . over time , the honor also began to be given to those christians who lived lives of holiness and sanctity . various denominations venerate and determine saints in different ways , with some having a formal canonization or glorification process . it is also the first step to becoming a saint . . catholicism and orthodoxy . in catholic and orthodox theology , veneration is a type of honor distinct from the latria , which is due to god alone . according to mark miravelle , of the franciscan university of steubenville , the english word '' worship '' has been associated with both veneration and adoration : as st . thomas aquinas once explained , adoration , which is known as latria in classical theology , is the worship and homage that is rightly offered to god alone . it is the manifestation of submission , and acknowledgement of dependence , appropriately shown towards the excellence of an uncreated divine person and to his absolute lordship . it is the worship of the creator that god alone deserves . although we see in english a broader usage of the word “ adoration ” which may not refer to a form of worship exclusive to god—for example , when a husband says that he “ adores his wife ” —in general it can be maintained that adoration is the best english denotation for the worship of latria . veneration , known as dulia in classical theology , is the honor and reverence appropriately due to the excellence of a created person . excellence exhibited by created beings likewise deserves recognition and honor . we see a general example of veneration in events like the awarding of academic awards for excellence in school , or the awarding of olympic medals for excellence in sports . there is nothing contrary to the proper adoration of god when we offer the appropriate honor and recognition that created persons deserve based on achievement in excellence . we must make a further clarification regarding the use of the term “ worship ” in relation to the categories of adoration and veneration . historically , schools of theology have used the term “ worship ” as a general term which included both adoration and veneration . they would distinguish between “ worship of adoration ” and “ worship of veneration . ” the word “ worship ” ( in a similar way to how the liturgical term “ cult ” is traditionally used ) was not synonymous with adoration , but could be used to introduce either adoration or veneration . hence catholic sources will sometimes use the term “ worship ” not to indicate adoration , but only the worship of veneration given to mary and the saints . in the syriac orthodox church liturgical service , the hail mary is pronounced as a prefatory prayer after the our father , and before the priest 's entrance to the chancel . the name of the blessed virgin mary has also been probably used for the sanctification of altars , above the name of all other saints . church theologians have long adopted the terms latria for the type of worship due to god alone , and dulia and proskynesis for the veneration given to angels , saints , relics and icons . s.v . dulia , s.v . proskynesis , s.v . communion of saints , s.v . images , veneration of , catholic and orthodox theologies also include the term hyperdulia for the type of veneration specifically paid to mary , mother of jesus , in catholic and orthodox traditions . this distinction is spelled out in the dogmatic conclusions of the seventh ecumenical council ( 787 ) , which also decreed that iconoclasm , i.e . forbidding icons and their veneration , a dogma central to the iconoclastic controversy , is a heresy that amounts to a denial of the incarnation of jesus . now , the roman catholic tradition has a well established philosophy for the veneration of the virgin mary via the field of mariology with pontifical schools such as the marianum specifically devoted to this task . publisher ’ s notice in the second italian edition ( 1986 ) , reprinted in english edition , gabriel roschini , o.s.m . ( 1989 ) . the virgin mary in the writings of maria valtorta ( english edition ) . kolbe 's publication inc . for the doctrine of the roman catholic church , the mother of god was the subject of three other different dogmas : immaculate conception ( absence of the original sin , by grace of god ) perpetual virginity ( before , during , and after the birth of jesus , till her assumption ) assumption ( in body and soul to heaven ) . the special graces accorded by god to mary motivated her title of mediatrix of all graces to the humanity , her intercessory ability to jesus christ god about the believers ' intentions of prayer , and lastly the special veneration that the catholic , eastern orthodox and oriental orthodox churches - sharing the same dogmas - attribute to her , in comparison with all other saints . protestant . in protestant churches , veneration is sometimes considered to amount to the heresy of idolatry , and the related practice of canonization amounts to the heresy of apotheosis . protestant theology usually denies that any real distinction between veneration and worship can be made , and claims that the practice of veneration distracts the christian soul from its true object , the worship of god . in his institutes of the christian religion , john calvin writes that '' ( t ) he distinction of what is called dulia and latria was invented for the very purpose of permitting divine honours to be paid to angels and dead men with apparent impunity '' . veneration is , therefore , considered a type of blasphemy by luther and some protestants . however , some protestant streams , particularly anglicanism , allow the veneration of saints in the a manner similar to catholicism . hinduism . hinduism has a longstanding and living tradition of reverence toward sants ( saints ) and mahatma , with the line often blurring between humanity and divinity in the cases of godman ( india ) . the bhakti movements popularised devotion to saintly figures such as , , and gurus as models showing the way to liberation . cybelle shattuck , hinduism ( london : routledge , 1999 ) , page 61 , . islam . islam has had a rich history of veneration of saints ( often called wali , which literally means '' friend of god '' ) , see john renard , friends of god : islamic images of piety , commitment , and servanthood ( berkeley : university of california press , 2008 ) ; idem . , tales of god friends : islamic hagiography in translation ( berkeley : university of california press , 2009 ) which has declined in some parts of the islamic world in the twentieth century due to the influence of the various streams of salafism . in sunni islam , the veneration of saints became a very common form of religious celebration early on , and saints came to be defined in the eighth-century as a group of '' special people chosen by god and endowed with exceptional gifts , such as the ability to work miracles . '' radtke , b . , “ saint ” , in : encyclopaedia of the qurʾān , general editor : jane dammen mcauliffe , georgetown university , washington dc . the classical sunni scholars came to recognize and honor these individuals as venerable people who were both '' loved by god and developed a close relationship of love to him . '' '' belief in the miracles of saints ( karāmāt al-awliyāʾ ) . became a requirement in sunni islam during the classical period , '' jonathan a.c . brown , '' faithful dissenters : sunni skepticism about the miracles of saints , '' journal of sufi studies 1 ( 2012 ) , p . 123 with even medieval critics of the ubiquitous practice of ziyara like ibn taymiyyah emphatically declaring : '' the miracles of saints are absolutely true and correct , and acknowledged by all muslim scholars . the quran has pointed to it in different places , and the hadith have mentioned it , and whoever denies the miraculous power of saints are innovators or following innovators . '' ibn taymiyyah , mukhtasar al-fatawa al-masriyya ( al-madani publishing house , 1980 ) , p . 603 the vast majority of saints venerated in the classical sunni world were the sufis , who were all sunni mystics who belonged to maddhab . john renard , friends of god : islamic images of piety , commitment , and servanthood ( berkeley : university of california press , 2008 ) veneration of saints eventually became one of the most widespread sunni practices for more than a millennium , before it was opposed in the twentieth century by the salafi movement , whose various streams regard it as '' being both un-islamic and backwards . rather than the integral part of islam which they were for over a millennium . '' juan eduardo campo , encyclopedia of islam ( new york : infobase publishing , 2009 ) , p . 600 in a manner similar to the protestant reformation , see jonathan a.c . brown , misquoting muhammad ( london : oneworld publications , 2015 ) , p . 254 the specific traditional practices which salafism has tried to curtail in both sunni and shia contexts include those of wali , ziyara , tawassul , and relics . as christopher taylor has remarked : '' throughout islamic history a vital dimension of islamic piety was the veneration of muslim saints… . due , however to certain strains of thought within the islamic tradition itself , particularly pronounced in the nineteenth and the twentieth centuries . some modern day muslims have either resisted acknowledging the existence of muslim saints altogether or have viewed their presence and veneration as unacceptable deviations . '' christopher taylor , in the vicinity of the righteous ( leiden : brill , 1999 ) , pp . 5-6 . judaism . while orthodox and organized judaism do not countenance the veneration of saints per se , veneration and pilgrimage to burial sites of holy jewish leaders is an ancient part of the tradition . '' . the veneration of , and pilgrimages to , saints were part of an ancient jewish tradition . '' today it is common for some jews to visit the graves of many righteous jewish leaders . '' the life of these , mainly sephardi and oriental ( mizrahi ) communities , is marked by an unself-conscious and unquestioning commitment to deeply rooted values , where legalism often yields to common sense , and mystical piety plays an integral part , visible in such practices as veneration of tombs of patriarchs and saints , often associated with pilgrimage . '' the tradition is particularly strong among moroccan jews , and jews of sephardi descent , although also by some ashkenazi jews as well . this is particularly true in israel , where many holy jewish leaders are buried . the cave of the patriarchs in hebron , rachel 's tomb in bethlehem and that of maimonides in tiberius are examples of burial sites that attract large pilgrimages in israel . in america , the only such example is the grave site of rabbi menachem mendel schneerson , at the ohel , in the cemetery in queens where he is buried alongside his father-in-law . during his lifetime , schneerson himself would frequently visit the gravesite ( ohel ) of his father-in-law , where he would read letters and written prayers , and then place them on the grave . today visitors to the grave of schneerson include jews of orthodox , reform and conservative background , as well as non-jews . the new york observer , editorial , 07/08/14 . '' rebbe to the city and rebbe to the world '' . shmuley boteach , '' cory booker the spiritual senator '' , 10/18/13 visitors typically recite prayers of psalms and bring with them petitions of prayers written on pieces of paper which are then torn and left on the grave . . see also . genuflection hagiography iconography intercession of saints mary , mother of jesus muhammad in islam patron saint relic shrine tzadik veneration of the dead . references . external links . on the invocation , veneration , and relics , of salnts , and on sacred images . roman catholic teaching from the council of trent ( 1545–63 ) '' dulia '' from the catholic encyclopedia ( 1911 )