Théophile Delcassé

biography . delcassé was born at pamiers , in the ariège département . he wrote articles on foreign affairs for the république française and paris , and in 1888 was elected conseiller général of his native département , standing as '' un disciple fidèle de léon gambetta . '' in the following year he entered the chamber as deputy for foix . colonial affairs . delcassé was appointed under-secretary for the colonies in the second ribot cabinet ( january to april 1893 ) , and retained his post in the dupuy cabinet till its fall in december 1893 . it was largely owing to his efforts that the french colonial office was made a separate department with a minister at its head , and to this office he was appointed in the second dupuy cabinet ( may 1894 to january 1895 ) . he gave a great impetus to french colonial enterprise , especially in west africa , where he organized the newly acquired colony of dahomey , and despatched the liotard mission to the upper ubangi . while in opposition , delcassé devoted special attention to naval affairs , and in noted speeches he declared that the function of the french navy was to secure and develop colonial enterprise , deprecated all attempts to rival the british fleet , and advocated the construction of commerce destroyers as france 's best reply to england . foreign minister . on the formation of the second brisson cabinet in june 1898 he succeeded gabriel hanotaux as foreign minister , and retained that post under the subsequent premierships of dupuy , waldeck-rousseau , combes and rouvier . in 1898 delcassé had to deal with the delicate situation caused by captain marchand 's occupation of the town of fashoda in the sudan ( the fashoda incident ) for which , as he admitted in a speech in the chamber on 23 january 1899 , he accepted full responsibility , since it arose directly out of the liotard expedition ; and in march 1899 he concluded an agreement with britain by which the difficulty was finally adjusted , and france consolidated her vast colonial empire in north-west africa . in the same year he acted as mediator ( the main mediator being jules cambon , french ambassador in washington ) between the united states of america and spain , and brought the peace negotiations to a successful conclusion . delcassé was originally a moderate willing to find a compromise with germany , but berlin ignored his overtures , he then became very anti-german . kaiser wilhelm called him '' the most dangerous man for germany in france '' . delcassé improved relations between france and italy : at the same time , he adhered firmly to the alliance with russia , and in august 1899 made a visit to saint petersburg , which he repeated in april 1901 . in june 1900 he made an arrangement with spain , fixing the long-disputed boundaries of the french and spanish possessions in west africa . finally , in his greatest achievement , he concluded the entente cordiale with great britain , covering colonial and other questions which had long been a matter of dispute , especially concerning egypt , newfoundland and morocco . suspicion of the growing entente between france and england soon arose in germany , and in 1905 german assertiveness was shown in a crisis which was forced on in the matter of french policy by delcassé personally , a sore point with germany . the situation became acute , and germany forced delcassé 's resignation in early 1906 . he retired into private life , but in 1908 was warmly welcomed on a visit to england . naval affairs . in 1909 delcassé was appointed chairman of a commission appointed to investigate the french navy . the report was drawn up on 24 may 1909 and concluded that the french navy was unprepared and the naval administration and organization were in disarray . delcassé was appointed minister of marine on 2 march 1911 in the cabinet of ernest monis . delcassé promulgated closer cooperation between the british and french fleets . this arrangement was an important factor in leading britain to side with france against germany when world war i started . on 25 september 1911 , as the battleship liberté was moored in toulon harbor , an accidental explosion in one of her forward ammunition magazines for the secondary guns destroyed the ship . 210 men died and 136 were seriously injured . the captain , louis jaurès , was on leave at the time . after the explosion there was a debate in the chamber of deputies in which the honour of jaurès and the responsibility for the use of unstable powder by the navy was questioned . jaurès had to face a court martial , but was acquitted unanimously on 21 december 1911 . paul painlevé , president of the navy committee , appointed a commission of inquiry after the explosion , which followed that of the battleship iéna . captain antoine schwerer was a member of the commission of inquiry and wrote a scathing '' report on naval powders '' ( 1912 ) . delcassé ordered that all ammunition made before 1907 be replaced . the older ammunition was removed from the ships , and the remainder was steadily replaced with a new explosive containing the diphenylamine as a stabilizer . continued efforts were made to improve the powders , and there were no more major disasters . it was not until 1914 that the '' powder crisis '' was fully resolved . delcassé retained his position in the cabinet of joseph caillaux . when that fell on 14 january 1912 raymond poincaré urged delcassé to become prime minister and minister of foreign affairs . delcassé declined , but agree to remain minister of the navy in poincaré 's cabinet . later career . president armand fallières ' term in office expired in january 1913 , and delcassé decided to leave the ministry of marine and run for the presidency . he did not succeed . after the election , which was won by poincaré , a new cabinet was formed by aristide briand . briand offered delcassé the post of minister of marine or minister of war in the new cabinet , but delcassé declined . he would soon be appointed ambassador to russia , and then minister of war . on 26 august 1914 after the germans announced successes in the north and east , rené viviani announced the resignation of the cabinet . in the new cabinet , announced within an hour , viviani retained his post . delcassé was minister of foreign affairs , aristide briand was minister of justice and alexandre millerand was minister of war . delcassé resigned from the cabinet on 14 october 1915 , partly on the grounds of differing opinions and partly because of ill health . . honours . : grand cordon of the royal order of leopold , 1900 handelsblad ( het ) 03-11-1900 . : grand cross of the order of st . alexander , 1902 : grand cross of the order of charles iii , with collar , 9 july 1900 : honorary grand cross of the royal victorian order , 4 may 1903 the london gazette , issue 27560 , p . 3526 . portrayal in media . portrayed by harald paulsen ( delcassé is credited as the '' french foreign minister '' ) in the 1941 german film ohm krüger . portrayed by oliver borlen in the 2012 filipino film , el presidente . references . sources . . further reading . andrew , christopher m . théophile delcassé and the making of the entente cordiale : a reappraisal of french foreign policy 1898-1905 ( macmillan , 1968 ) brown , roger glenn . fashoda reconsidered : the impact of domestic politics on french policy in africa , 1893-1898 ( johns hopkins university press , 1970 ) gooch , g.p . before the war : studies in diplomacy ( vol 1 1936 ) online long chapter on delcassé , pp & nbsp ; 87–186 . external links .