Urination

anatomy and physiology . anatomy of the bladder and outlet . the main organs involved in urination are the urinary bladder and the urethra . the smooth muscle of the bladder , known as the detrusor , is innervated by sympathetic nervous system fibers from the lumbar spinal cord and parasympathetic fibers from the sacrum spinal cord . fibers in the pelvic nerves constitute the main afferent limb of the voiding reflex ; the parasympathetic fibers to the bladder that constitute the excitatory efferent limb also travel in these nerves . part of the urethra is surrounded by the male or female external urethral sphincter , which is innervated by the somatic pudendal nerve originating in the cord , in an area termed onuf 's nucleus . smooth muscle bundles pass on either side of the urethra , and these fibers are sometimes called the internal urethral sphincter , although they do not encircle the urethra . further along the urethra is a sphincter of skeletal muscle , the sphincter of the membranous urethra ( external urethral sphincter ) . the bladder 's epithelium is termed transitional epithelium which contains a superficial layer of dome-like cells and multiple layers of stratified cuboidal cells underneath when evacuated . when the bladder is fully distended the superficial cells become squamous ( flat ) and the stratification of the cuboidal cells is reduced in order to provide lateral stretching . physiology . the physiology of micturition and the physiologic basis of its disorders are subjects about which there is much confusion , especially at the supraspinal level . micturition is fundamentally a spinobulbospinal reflex facilitated and inhibited by higher brain centers such as the pontine micturition center and , like defecation , subject to voluntary facilitation and inhibition . in healthy individuals , the lower urinary tract has two discrete phases of activity : the storage ( or guarding ) phase , when urine is stored in the bladder ; and the voiding phase , when urine is released through the urethra . the state of the reflex system is dependent on both a conscious signal from the brain and the firing rate of sensory fibers from the bladder and urethra . at low bladder volumes , afferent firing is low , resulting in excitation of the outlet ( the sphincter and urethra ) , and relaxation of the bladder . at high bladder volumes , afferent firing increases , causing a conscious sensation of urinary urge . when the individual is ready to urinate , he or she consciously initiates voiding , causing the bladder to contract and the outlet to relax . voiding continues until the bladder empties completely , at which point the bladder relaxes and the outlet contracts to re-initiate storage . the muscles controlling micturition are controlled by the autonomic and somatic nervous systems . during the storage phase , the internal urethral sphincter remains tense and the detrusor muscle relaxed by sympathetic stimulation . during micturition , parasympathetic stimulation causes the detrusor muscle to contract and the internal urethral sphincter to relax . the external urethral sphincter ( sphincter urethrae ) is under somatic control and is consciously relaxed during micturition . in infants , voiding occurs involuntarily ( as a reflex ) . the ability to voluntarily inhibit micturition develops by the age of 2–3 years , as control at higher levels of the central nervous system develops . in the adult , the volume of urine in the bladder that normally initiates a reflex contraction is about . storage phase . during storage , bladder pressure stays low , because of the bladder 's highly compliant nature . a plot of bladder ( intravesical ) pressure against the depressant of fluid in the bladder ( called a cystometrogram ) , will show a very slight rise as the bladder is filled . this phenomenon is a manifestation of the law of laplace , which states that the pressure in a spherical viscus is equal to twice the wall tension divided by the radius . in the case of the bladder , the tension increases as the organ fills , but so does the radius . therefore , the pressure increase is slight until the organ is relatively full . the bladder 's smooth muscle has some inherent contractile activity ; however , when its nerve supply is intact , stretch receptors in the bladder wall initiate a reflex contraction that has a lower threshold than the inherent contractile response of the muscle . action potentials carried by sensory neurons from stretch receptors in the urinary bladder wall travel to the sacral segments of the spinal cord through the pelvic nerves . since bladder wall stretch is low during the storage phase , these afferent neurons fire at low frequencies . low-frequency afferent signals cause relaxation of the bladder by inhibiting sacral parasympathetic preganglionic neurons and exciting lumbar sympathetic preganglionic neurons . conversely , afferent input causes contraction of the sphincter through excitation of onuf 's nucleus , and contraction of the bladder neck and urethra through excitation of the sympathetic preganglionic neurons . diuresis ( production of urine by the kidney ) occurs constantly , and as the bladder becomes full , afferent firing increases , yet the micturition reflex can be voluntarily inhibited until it is appropriate to begin voiding . voiding phase . voiding begins when a voluntary signal is sent from the brain to begin urination , and continues until the bladder is empty . bladder afferent signals ascend the spinal cord to the periaqueductal gray , where they project both to the pontine micturition center and to the cerebrum . at a certain level of afferent activity , the conscious urge to void becomes difficult to ignore . once the voluntary signal to begin voiding has been issued , neurons in pontine micturition center fire maximally , causing excitation of sacral preganglionic neurons . the firing of these neurons causes the wall of the bladder to contract ; as a result , a sudden , sharp rise in intravesical pressure occurs . the pontine micturition center also causes inhibition of onuf 's nucleus , resulting in relaxation of the external urinary sphincter . when the external urinary sphincter is relaxed urine is released from the urinary bladder when the pressure there is great enough to force urine to flow out of the urethra . the micturition reflex normally produces a series of contractions of the urinary bladder . the flow of urine through the urethra has an overall excitatory role in micturition , which helps sustain voiding until the bladder is empty . elsevier after urination , the female urethra empties partially by gravity , with assistance from muscles . urine remaining in the male urethra is expelled by several contractions of the bulbospongiosus muscle , and , by some men , manual squeezing along the length of the penis to expel the rest of the urine . for land mammals over 1 kilogram , the duration of urination does not vary with body mass , being dispersed around an average of 21 seconds ( standard deviation 13 seconds ) , despite a 4 order of magnitude ( 1000× ) difference in bladder volume . new law of urination : mammals take 20 seconds to pee , carrie arnold , national geographic , 23 october 2013 this is due to increased urethra length of large animals , which amplifies gravitational force ( hence flow rate ) , and increased urethra width , which increases flow rate . for smaller mammals a different phenomenon occurs , where urine is discharged as droplets , and urination in smaller mammals , such as mice and rats , can occur in less than a second . the posited benefits of faster voiding are decreased risk of predation ( while voiding ) and decreased risk of urinary tract infection . voluntary control . the mechanism by which voluntary urination is initiated remains unsettled . one possibility is that the voluntary relaxation of the muscles of the pelvic floor causes a sufficient downward tug on the detrusor muscle to initiate its contraction . another possibility is the excitation or disinhibition of neurons in the pontine micturition center , which causes concurrent contraction of the bladder and relaxation of the sphincter . there is an inhibitory area for micturition in the midbrain . after transection of the brain stem just above the pons , the threshold is lowered and less bladder filling is required to trigger it , whereas after transection at the top of the midbrain , the threshold for the reflex is essentially normal . there is another facilitatory area in the posterior hypothalamus . in humans with lesions in the superior frontal gyrus , the desire to urinate is reduced and there is also difficulty in stopping micturition once it has commenced . however , stimulation experiments in animals indicate that other cortical areas also affect the process . the bladder can be made to contract by voluntary facilitation of the spinal voiding reflex when it contains only a few milliliters of urine . voluntary contraction of the abdominal muscles aids the expulsion of urine by increasing the pressure applied to the urinary bladder wall , but voiding can be initiated without straining even when the bladder is nearly empty . voiding can also be consciously interrupted once it has begun , through a contraction of the perineal muscles . the external sphincter can be contracted voluntarily , which will prevent urine from passing down the urethra . experience of urination . the need to urinate is experienced as an uncomfortable , full feeling . it is highly correlated with the fullness of the bladder . in many males the feeling of the need to urinate can be sensed at the base of the penis as well as the bladder , even though the neural activity associated with a full bladder comes from the bladder itself , and can be felt there as well . in females the need to urinate is felt in the lower abdomen region when the bladder is full . when the bladder becomes too full , the sphincter muscles will involuntarily relax , allowing urine to pass from the bladder . release of urine is experienced as a lessening of the discomfort . disorders . . clinical conditions . many clinical conditions can cause disturbances to normal urination , including : urinary incontinence , the inability to hold urine stress incontinence , incontinence as a result of external mechanical disturbances urge incontinence , incontinence that occurs as a result of the uncontrollable urge to urinate mixed incontinence , a combination of the two types of incontinence urinary retention , the inability to initiate urination overactive bladder , a strong urge to urinate , usually accompanied by detrusor overactivity interstitial cystitis , a condition characterized by urinary frequency , urgency , and pain prostatitis , an inflammation of the prostate gland that can cause urinary frequency , urgency , and pain benign prostatic hyperplasia , an enlargement of the prostate that can cause urinary frequency , urgency , retention , and the dribbling of urine urinary tract infection , which can cause urinary frequency and dysuria polyuria , abnormally large production of urine , associated with , in particular , diabetes mellitus ( types 1 and 2 ) , and diabetes insipidus oliguria , low urine output , usually due to a problem with the upper urinary tract anuria refers to absent or almost absent urine output . micturition syncope , a vasovagal response which may cause fainting . paruresis , the inability to urinate in the presence of others , such as in a public toilet . bladder sphincter dyssynergia , a discoordination between the bladder and external urethral sphincter as a result of brain or spinal cord injury a drug that increases urination is called a diuretic , whereas antidiuretics decrease the production of urine by the kidneys . experimentally induced disorders . there are three major types of bladder dysfunction due to neural lesions : ( 1 ) the type due to interruption of the afferent nerves from the bladder ; ( 2 ) the type due to interruption of both afferent and efferent nerves ; and ( 3 ) the type due to interruption of facilitatory and inhibitory pathways descending from the brain . in all three types the bladder contracts , but the contractions are generally not sufficient to empty the viscus completely , and residual urine is left in the bladder . paruresis , also known as shy bladder syndrome , is an example of a bladder interruption from the brain that often causes total interruption until the person has left a public area . as these people may have difficulty urinating in the presence of others and will consequently avoid using urinals directly adjacent to another person . alternatively , they may opt for the privacy of a stall or simply avoid public toilets altogether . deafferentation . when the sacral dorsal roots are cut in experimental animals or interrupted by diseases of the dorsal roots such as tabes dorsalis in humans , all reflex contractions of the bladder are abolished . the bladder becomes distended , thin-walled , and hypotonic , but there are some contractions because of the intrinsic response of the smooth muscle to stretch . denervation . when the afferent and efferent nerves are both destroyed , as they may be by tumors of the cauda equina or filum terminale , the bladder is flaccid and distended for a while . gradually , however , the muscle of the '' decentralized bladder '' becomes active , with many contraction waves that expel dribbles of urine out of the urethra . the bladder becomes shrunken and the bladder wall hypertrophied . the reason for the difference between the small , hypertrophic bladder seen in this condition and the distended , hypotonic bladder seen when only the afferent nerves are interrupted is not known . the hyperactive state in the former condition suggests the development of denervation hypersensitization even though the neurons interrupted are preganglionic rather than postganglionic . spinal cord injury . during spinal shock , the bladder is flaccid and unresponsive . it becomes overfilled , and urine dribbles through the sphincters ( overflow incontinence ) . after spinal shock has passed , a spinally mediated voiding reflex ensues , although there is no voluntary control and no inhibition or facilitation from higher centers . some paraplegic patients train themselves to initiate voiding by pinching or stroking their thighs , provoking a mild mass reflex . in some instances , the voiding reflex becomes hyperactive . bladder capacity is reduced and the wall becomes hypertrophied . this type of bladder is sometimes called the spastic neurogenic bladder . the reflex hyperactivity is made worse , and may be caused , by infection in the bladder wall . techniques . due to the positions where the urethra exits the body , males and females often use different techniques for urination . male urination . most males prefer to urinate standing while others prefer to urinate sitting or squatting . elderly males with prostate gland enlargement may benefit from sitting down while in healthy males , no difference is found in the ability to urinate . for practising muslim men , the genital modesty of squatting is also associated with proper cleanliness requirements or awrah . . female urination . in human females , the urethra opens straight into the vulva . hence , urination can take place while sitting or squatting for defecation . it is also possible for females to urinate while standing , and while clothed . it is common for women in various regions of africa to use this method when they urinate , as do women in laos . herodotus described a similar custom in ancient egypt . an alternative method for women to urinate standing is to use a tool known as a female urination device to assist . , abc 2 news , maryland , 3 september 2009 . young children . a common technique used in many undeveloped nations involves holding the child by the backs of the thighs , above the ground , facing outward , in order to urinate . fetal urination . the fetus urinates hourly and produces most of the amniotic fluid in the second and third trimester of pregnancy . the amniotic fluid is then recycled by fetal swallowing . . urination after injury . occasionally , if a male 's penis is damaged or removed , or a female 's genitals/urinary tract is damaged , other urination techniques must be used . most often in such cases , doctors will reposition the urethra to a location where urination can still be accomplished , usually in a position that would promote urination only while seated/squatting , though a permanent urinary catheter may be used in rare cases . alternative urination tools . sometimes urination is done in a container such as a bottle , urinal , bedpan , or chamber pot ( also known as a gazunder ) . a container or wearable urine collection device may be used so that the urine can be examined for medical reasons or for a drug test , for a bedridden patient , when no toilet is available , or there is no other possibility to dispose of the urine immediately . an alternative solution ( for traveling , stakeouts , etc . ) is a special disposable bag containing absorbent material that solidifies the urine within seconds , making it convenient and safe to store and dispose of later . it is possible for both genders to urinate into bottles in case of emergencies . the technique can help children to urinate discreetly inside cars and in other places without being seen by others . . social and cultural aspects . toilet training . babies have little socialized control over urination within traditions or families that do not practice elimination communication and instead use diapers . toilet training is the process of learning to restrict urination to socially approved times and situations . consequently , young children sometimes suffer from nocturnal enuresis . review of medical physiology , twentieth edition , william f . ganong , md . facilities . it is socially more accepted and more environmentally hygienic for those who are able , to urinate in a toilet . public toilets may have urinals , usually for males , although female urinals exist , designed to be used in various ways . . urination without facilities . acceptability of outdoor urination in a public place other than at a public urinal varies with the situation and with customs . potential disadvantages include a dislike of the smell of urine , and some exposure of genitals . the latter can be unpleasant for the one who exposes them ( modesty , lack of privacy ) and/or those who can see them ; it can be avoided or mitigated by going to a quiet place and/or facing a tree or wall if urinating standing up , or while squatting , hiding the back behind walls , bushes , or a tree . chemical toilets ( port-a-potties ) are frequently placed in outdoor situations where no immediate facility is available . these need to be serviced ( cleaned out ) on a regular basis . urination in a heavily wooded area is generally harmless , actually saves water , and may be condoned for males ( and less commonly , females ) in certain situations as long as common sense is used . examples ( depending on circumstances ) include activities such as camping , hiking , cross country running , rural fishing , amateur baseball , golf , etc . the more developed and crowded a place is , the more public urination tends to be objectionable . in the countryside , it is more acceptable than in a street in a town , where it may be a common transgression . often this is done after the consumption of alcoholic beverages , which causes production of additional urine as well as a reduction of inhibitions . one proposed way to inhibit public urination due to drunkenness is the urilift , which is disguised as a normal manhole by day but raises out of the ground at night to provide a public restroom for bar-goers . in many places , public urination is punishable by fines , though attitudes vary widely by country . in general , women are less likely to urinate in public than men . depending on the culture , adult women , unlike men , are restricted in where they can urinate . the new ourselves , growing older : women aging with knowledge and power , paula brown doress-worters , diana laskin siegal , boston women 's health book collective , simon & schuster , 1994 , page 301 the 5th-century bc historian herodotus , writing on the culture of the ancient persians and highlighting the differences with those of the greeks , noted that to urinate in the presence of others was prohibited among persians . there was a popular belief in the uk , that it was legal for a man to urinate in public so long as it occurred on the rear wheel of his vehicle and he had his right hand on the vehicle , but this is not true . public urination still remains more accepted by males in the uk , although british cultural tradition itself seems to find such practices objectionable . in islamic toilet etiquette , it is haram to urinate while facing the qibla , or to turn one 's back to it when urinating or relieving bowels but modesty requirements for females make it impossible for girls to relieve themselves without facilities . unveiling the breath : one woman 's journey into understanding islam and gender equality , donna kennedy-glans pg . 69 when toilets are unavailable , females can relieve themselves in laos , russia and mongolia in emergency but it remains less accepted for females in india even when circumstances make this a highly desirable option . women and the u.s . constitution : history , interpretation , and practice . sibyl a . schwarzenbach , patricia smith , columbia university press , new york . page 157 . women generally need to urinate more frequently than men due to having smaller bladders . resisting the urge to urinate because of lack of facilities can promote urinary tract infections which can lead to more serious infections and , in rare situations , can cause renal damage in women . female urination devices are available to help women to urinate discreetly , as well to help them urinate while standing . standing versus sitting or squatting . . males . in western culture , the standing position is regarded by some as more comfortable and more masculine than the sitting or squatting option . however , in public restrooms without urinals and sometimes at home , men may be urged to use the sitting position as to diminish spattering of urine . a systematic review meta-analysis of the effect of voiding position on the quality of urination found that in elderly males with benign prostate hyperplasia , the sitting position was superior compared with the standing . russell , j . g . b . '' moulding of the pelvic outlet . '' bjog : an international journal of obstetrics and gynaecology 76.9 ( 1969 ) : 817-20 . print . healthy males were not influenced by voiding position . a literature review found cultural differences in socially accepted voiding positions around the world and found differences in preferred position : in the middle-east and asia , the squatting position was more prevalent , while in the western world the standing and sitting positions were more common . . females . females usually sit or squat for urination , depending on what type of toilet they use : a squat toilet is used for urination in a squatting position . if there is no toilet available then a squatting or a half squat position is common . a partial squatting position ( or '' hovering '' ) is taken up during urination by some women to avoid sitting on a potentially contaminated toilet seat or when using a female urinal . however , this may leave urine behind in the bladder . it can also result in urine landing on the toilet seat . talking about urination . in many societies and in many social classes , even mentioning the need to urinate is seen as a social transgression , despite it being a universal need . even today , many adults avoid stating that they need to urinate . many expressions exist , some euphemism and some vulgar . for example , centuries ago the standard english word ( both noun and verb , for the product and the activity ) was '' piss '' , but subsequently '' pee '' , formerly associated with children , has become more common in general public speech . since elimination of bodily wastes is , of necessity , a subject talked about with toddlers during toilet training , other expressions considered suitable for use by and with children exist , and some continue to be used by adults , e.g . '' weeing '' , '' doing/having a wee-wee '' , '' to tinkle '' , '' go potty '' . other expressions include '' squirting '' and '' taking a leak '' , and , predominantly by younger persons for outdoor female urination , '' popping a squat '' , referring to the position many women adopt in such circumstances . national varieties of english show creativity . american english uses '' to whiz '' . australian english has coined '' i am off to take a music of china lesson '' , derived from the tinkling sound of urination against the china porcelain of a toilet bowl . british english uses '' going to see my aunt '' , '' going to see a man about a dog '' , '' to piddle '' , '' to splash ( one 's ) boots '' , as well as '' to have a slash '' , which originates from the scottish term for a large splash of liquid . one of the most common , albeit old-fashioned , euphemisms in british english is '' to spend a penny '' , a reference to coin-operated pay toilets , which used ( decimal day ) to charge that sum . . use in language . references to urination are commonly used in slang . usage in english includes : wikt : piss off ( to anger someone ; alternatively , to leave somewhere in a hurry ) piss off ! ( to express contempt ; see above ) pissing down ( to refer to heavy rain ) pissing contest ( an unproductive ego-driven battle ) pisshead ( vulgar way to refer to someone who drinks too much alcohol ) piss ant ( a worthless person ; in non-slang usage the term refers to several species of ant whose colonies have a urine-like odor ) pissing up a flagpole ( to partake in a futile activity ) pissing into the wind ( to act in ways that cause self-harm ) piss away ( to squander or use wastefully ) taking the piss ( to take liberties , be unreasonable , or to mock another person ) full of piss and vinegar ( energetic or ambitious late adolescent or young adult male ) piss up ( british expression for drinking to get drunk ) pissed ( drunk in british english or angry in american english ) . urination and sexual activity . urolagnia , a paraphilia , is an inclination to obtain human sexuality by looking at or thinking of urine or urination . urine may be consumed , or the person may bathe in it . drinking urine is known as urophagia , though uraphagia refers to the consumption of urine regardless of whether the context is sexual . involuntary urination during sexual intercourse is common , but rarely acknowledged . in one survey , 24 % of women reported involuntary urination during sexual intercourse ; in 66 % of sufferers urination occurred on penetration , while in 33 % urine leakage was restricted to orgasm . female kob may exhibit urolagnia during sex ; one female will urinate while the other sticks her nose in the stream . kick ( 2001 ) imaginova ( 2007e ) a male patagonian mara , a type of rodent , will stand on his hind legs and urinate on a female 's rump , to which the female may respond by spraying a jet of urine backwards into the face of the male . the male 's urination is meant to repel other males from his partner while the female 's urination is a rejection of any approaching male when she is not receptive . both anal digging and urination are more frequent during the breeding season and are more commonly done by males . a male porcupine urinates on a female porcupine prior to mating , spraying the urine at high velocity . . other species . while the primary purpose of urination is the same across the animal kingdom , urination often serves a social purpose beyond the expulsion of waste material . in dogs and other animals , urination can mark territory or express submissiveness . in small rodents such as rats and mice , it marks familiar paths . the urine of animals of differing physiology or sex sometimes has different characteristics . for example , the urine of birds and reptiles is whitish , consisting of a pastelike suspension of uric acid crystals , and discharged with the feces of the animal via the cloaca , whereas mammals ' urine is a yellowish colour , with mostly urea instead of uric acid , and is discharged via the urethra , separately from the feces . some animals ' ( example : carnivores ' ) urine possesses a strong odour , especially when it is used to mark territory or stallions sometimes exhibit the flehmen response by smelling the urine of a mare in heat . a stallion sometimes scent marks his urination spots to make his position as herd stallion clear . '' the natural horse and unnatural behaviour . '' reproduced with permission from the proceedings of the beva specialist days on behaviour and nutrition . ed . p.a.harris et al . pub . equine veterinary journal ltd . web site accessed 22 june 2007 at effem-equine.com a male horse 's penis is protected by a sheath when it is not in use for urination . '' cut through smegma . '' horse journal , august 2007 , p . 19-20 . ring-tailed lemurs have also been shown to mark using urine . behaviorally , there is a difference between regular urination , where the tail is slightly raised and a stream of urine is produced , and marking behavior , where the tail is held up in display and only a few drops are used . the urine-marking behavior is typically used by females to mark territory , and has been observed primarily at the edges of the troop 's territory and in areas where other troops may frequent . the urine marking behavior is also most frequent during the mating season , and may play a role in reproductive communication between groups . many loris species also use urine for scent-marking . the white-headed capuchin sometimes engages in a practice known as '' urine washing '' , in which the monkey rubs urine on its feet . urine washing , in which urine is rubbed on the hands and feet , is also used by the panamanian night monkey . in some cases , strepsirrhines may also anoint themselves with urine . hyenas do not raise their legs as canids do when urinating , as urination serves no territorial function for them . instead , hyenas mark their territories using their anal glands , a trait found also in viverrids and mustelids , but not canids and felids . unlike other female mammals , female spotted hyenas urinate , copulate , and give birth through an organ called the pseudo-penis . . dog-like mammals ( canidae ) . all canids ( with the possible exception of dholes ) use urine ( combined with preputial gland secretions ) to mark their territories . many species of canids , including hoary foxes , cape foxes , and golden jackals , use a raised-leg posture when urinating . the scent of their urine is usually strongest in the winter , before the mating season . domestic dogs mark their territories by urinating on vertical surfaces ( usually at nose level ) , sometimes marking over the urine of other dogs . when one dog marks over another dog 's urine , this is known as '' counter-marking '' or '' overmarking '' . male dogs urine-mark more frequently than female dogs , typically beginning after the onset of sexual maturity . male dogs , as well as wolves , sometimes lift a leg and attempt to urinate even when their bladders are empty & nbsp ; – this is known as a '' raised-leg display '' , '' shadow-urination '' , or '' pseudo-urination '' . they typically mark their territory due to the presence of new stimuli or social triggers in a dog 's environment , as well as out of anxiety . marking behavior is present in both male and female dogs , and is especially pronounced in male dogs that have not been neutered . raised-leg urination is the most significant form of scent marking in wolves , and is most frequent around the breeding season . wolves urine-mark more frequently when they detect the scent of other wolves , or other canid species . leg-lifting is more common in male wolves than female wolves , although dominant females also use the raised-leg posture . other types of urine-marking in wolves are flu ( flexed-leg urination ) , stu ( standing urination ) , and squ ( squatting urination ) . breeding pairs of wolves will sometimes urinate on the same spot : this is known as '' double-marking '' . double-marking is practiced by both coyotes and wolves . , and also by foxes . coyotes mark their territories by urinating on bushes , trees , or rocks . male coyotes usually lift their legs when scent-marking . wells , michael c . , and marc bekoff . '' an observational study of scent-marking in coyotes , canis latrans . '' ( 1981 ) . however , females sometimes also raise their legs , and males sometimes squat . urine marking is also associated with pair bonding in coyotes coyotes sometimes urinate on their food , possibly to claim ownership over it . red foxes use their urine to mark their territories . a male fox raises one hind leg and his urine is sprayed forward in front of him , whereas a female fox squats down so that the urine is sprayed in the ground between the hind legs . urine is also used to mark empty cache sites , as reminders not to waste time investigating them . red foxes use to urinate , depending on where they are leaving a scent mark . as in most other canids , male bush dogs lift their hind legs when urinating . however , female bush dogs use a kind of handstand posture , which is less common in other canids . when male bush dogs urinate , they create a spray instead of a stream . de mello beisiegel , beatriz , and gerald l . zuercher . '' speothos venaticus . '' ( 2009 ) . both male and female maned wolves use their urine to communicate , e.g . mark their hunting paths or places where they have buried hunted prey . the urine has a very distinctive smell , which some people liken to hops or cannabis . the responsible substance is very likely a pyrazine , which occurs in both plants . ( at the rotterdam zoo , this smell once set the police on a hunt for cannabis smokers . süddeutsche zeitung , 2006-09-02 , p3 ) . cats ( felidae ) . within the felidae , male felids can urinate backwards by curving the tip of the glans penis backward . urine marking by felids is also known as '' spray-urinating '' or '' spray-marking '' . to identify their territories , male tigers mark trees by spraying urine and anal gland secretions , as well as marking trails with scat . males show a grimacing face , called the flehmen response , when identifying a female 's reproductive condition by sniffing their urine markings . lions use urine to mark their territories . they often scrape the ground while urinating , and the urine often flows in short spurts , instead of flowing continuously . they often urinate on vegetation , or on tree trunks at least one meter high . male lions spray 1–20 jets of urine at an angle of 20–30 degrees upward , at a range of up to 4 meters behind them . male cheetahs territorial marking by urinating on objects that stand out , such as trees , logs , or termite mounds . the whole coalition contributes to the scent . males will attempt to kill any intruders , and fights result in serious injury or death . when male cheetahs urine-mark their territories , they stand a meter away from a tree or rock surface with the tail raised , pointing the penis either horizontally backward or 60° upward . the odor of cheetah urine ( unlike that of other large felids ) can not be easily detected by humans . black-footed cats use scent marking throughout their ranges , with males spraying urine up to 12 times an hour . . see also . human positions post micturition convulsion syndrome sanitation . references . further reading . . external links . , describes the neurophysiology of urination '' urination '' at howstuffworks.com