Drosophila melanogaster

immunity . the d . melanogaster immune system can be divided into two responses : humoral and cell-mediated . the former is a systemic response mediated in large part through the toll and imd pathways , which are parallel systems for detecting microbes . other pathways including the stress response pathways jak-stat and p38 , nutritional signalling via foxo , and jnk cell death signalling are all involved in key physiological responses to infection . d . melanogaster has a fat body , which is analogous to the human liver . the fat body is the primary secretory organ and produces key immune molecules upon infection , such as serine proteases and antimicrobial peptides ( amps ) . amps are secreted into the hemolymph and bind infectious bacteria and fungi , killing them by forming pores in their cell walls or inhibiting intracellular processes . the cellular immune response instead refers to the direct activity of blood cells ( hemocytes ) in drosophila , which are analogous to mammalian monocytes/macrophages . hemocytes also possess a significant role in mediating humoral immune responses such as the melanization reaction . the immune response to infection can involve up to 2,423 genes , or 13.7 % of the genome . although the fly 's transcriptional response to microbial challenge is highly specific to individual pathogens , drosophila differentially expresses a core group of 252 genes upon infection with most bacteria . this core group of genes is associated with gene ontology categories such as antimicrobial response , stress response , secretion , neuron-like , reproduction , and metabolism among others . drosophila also possesses several immune mechanisms to both shape the microbiota and prevent excessive immune responses upon detection of microbial stimuli . for instance , secreted pgrps with amidase activity scavenge and degrade immunostimulatory dap-type pgn in order to block imd activation . unlike mammals , drosophila have innate immunity but lack an adaptive immune response . however , the core elements of this innate immune response are conserved between humans and fruit flies . as a result , the fruit fly offers a useful model of innate immunity for disentangling genetic interactions of signalling and effector function , as flies do not have to contend with interference of adaptive immune mechanisms that could confuse results . various genetic tools , protocols , and assays make drosophila a classical model for studying the innate immune system , which has even included immune research on the international space station . . the drosophila toll pathway . the first description of toll-like receptors involved in the response to infection was performed in drosophila . culminating in a nobel prize in 2011 . the toll pathway in drosophila is homologous to toll-like pathways in mammals . this regulatory cascade is initiated following pathogen recognition by pattern recognition receptors , particularly of gram-positive bacteria , parasites , and fungal infection . this activation leads to serine protease signalling cascades ultimately activating the cytokine spätzle . alternatively , microbial proteases can directly cleave serine proteases like persephone that then propagate signalling . the cytokine spatzle then acts as the ligand for the toll pathway in flies . upon infection , pro-spatzle is cleaved by the protease spe ( spatzle processing enzyme ) to become active spatzle , which binds to the toll receptor located on the cell surface of the fat body and dimerizes for activation of downstream nf-κb signaling pathways , including multiple death domain containing proteins and negative regulators such as the ankyrin repeat protein cactus . the pathway culminates with the translocation of the nf-κb transcription factors dorsal and dif ( dorsal-related immunity factor ) into the nucleus . the toll pathway was identified by its regulation of antimicrobial peptides ( amps ) , including the antifungal peptide drosomycin . upon infection , amps increase in expression sometimes by 1000-fold , providing unmistakable readouts of pathway activation . another group of toll-regulated amp-like effectors includes the bomanins , which appear to be responsible for the bulk of toll-mediated immune defence , however bomanins alone do not exhibit antimicrobial activity . it has been proposed that a second spe-like enzyme similarly acts to activate spatzle , as loss of spe does not completely reduce the activity of toll signalling , however no second spe has yet been identified . a number of serine proteases are yet to be characterized , including many with homology to spe . the toll pathway also interacts with renal filtration of microbiota-derived peptidoglycan , maintaining immune homeostasis . mechanistically , nephrocytes endocytose lys-type pgn from systemic circulation and route it to lysosomes for degradation . without this , toll signalling is constitutively activated , resulting in a severe drain on nutrient reserves and a significant stress on host physiology . . the drosophila imd pathway . the imd pathway is orthologous to human tnf receptor superfamily signalling , and is triggered by gram-negative bacteria through recognition by peptidoglycan recognition proteins ( pgrp ) including both soluble receptors and cell surface receptors ( pgrp-le and lc , respectively ) . imd signalling culminates in the translocation of the nf-κb transcription factor relish into the nucleus , leading to the upregulation of imd-responsive genes including the amp diptericin . consequently , flies deficient for amps resemble imd pathway mutants in terms of susceptibility to bacterial infection . imd signalling and relish specifically are also involved in the regulation of immunity at surface epithelia including in the gut and respiratory tracts . the relish transcription factor has also been implicated in processes regarding cell proliferation and neurodegeneration either through autophagy , or autoimmune toxicity . in neurodegenerative models relying on imd signalling , expression of amps in the brain is correlated with brain tissue damage , lesions , and ultimately death . relish-regulated amps such as defensin and diptericin also have anti-cancer properties promoting tumour clearance . the imd-regulated amp diptericin b is also produced by the fat body specifically in the head , and diptericin b is required for long-term memory formation . . jak-stat signalling . multiple elements of the drosophila jak-stat signalling pathway bear direct homology to human jak-stat pathway genes . jak-stat signalling is induced upon various organismal stresses such as heat stress , dehydration , or infection . jak-stat induction leads to the production of a number of stress response proteins including thioester-containing proteins ( teps ) , turandots , and the putative antimicrobial peptide listericin . the mechanisms through which many of these proteins act is still under investigation . for instance , the teps appear to promote phagocytosis of gram-positive bacteria and the induction of the toll pathway . as a consequence , flies lacking teps are susceptible to infection by toll pathway challenges . . the cellular response to infection . circulating hemocytes are key regulators of infection . this has been demonstrated both through genetic tools to generate flies lacking hemocytes , or through injecting microglass beads or lipid droplets that saturate hemocyte ability to phagocytose a secondary infection . flies treated like this fail to phagocytose bacteria upon infection , and are correspondingly susceptible to infection . these hemocytes derive from two waves of hematopoiesis , one occurring in the early embryo and one occurring during development from larva to adult . however drosophila hemocytes do not renew over the adult lifespan , and so the fly has a finite number of hemocytes that decrease over the course of its lifespan . hemocytes are also involved in regulating cell-cycle events and apoptosis of aberrant tissue ( e.g . cancerous cells ) by producing eiger , a tumor necrosis factor signalling molecule that promotes jnk signalling and ultimately cell death and apoptosis . . behavioral genetics and neuroscience . in 1971 , ron konopka and seymour benzer published '' clock mutants of drosophila melanogaster '' , a paper describing the first mutations that affected an animal 's behavior . wild-type flies show an activity rhythm with a frequency of about a day ( 24 hours ) . they found mutants with faster and slower rhythms , as well as broken rhythms—flies that move and rest in random spurts . work over the following 30 years has shown that these mutations ( and others like them ) affect a group of genes and their products that form a biochemical or circadian rhythm . this clock is found in a wide range of fly cells , but the clock-bearing cells that control activity are several dozen neurons in the fly 's central brain . since then , benzer and others have used behavioral screens to isolate genes involved in vision , olfaction , audition , learning/memory , courtship , pain , and other processes , such as longevity . following the pioneering work of alfred sturtevant and others , benzer and colleagues used sexual mosaics to develop a novel fate mapping technique . this technique made it possible to assign a particular characteristic to a specific anatomical location . for example , this technique showed that male courtship behavior is controlled by the brain . mosaic fate mapping also provided the first indication of the existence of pheromones in this species . males distinguish between conspecific males and females and direct persistent courtship preferentially toward females thanks to a female-specific sex pheromone which is mostly produced by the female 's tergites . the first learning and memory mutants ( dunce , rutabaga , etc . ) were isolated by william '' chip '' quinn while in benzer 's lab , and were eventually shown to encode components of an intracellular signaling pathway involving cyclic amp , protein kinase a , and a transcription factor known as creb . these molecules were shown to be also involved in synaptic plasticity in aplysia and mammals . the nobel prize in physiology or medicine for 2017 was awarded to jeffrey c . hall , michael rosbash , michael w . young for their works using fruit flies in understanding the '' molecular mechanisms controlling the circadian rhythm '' . male flies sing to the females during courtship using their wings to generate sound , and some of the genetics of sexual behavior have been characterized . in particular , the fruitless gene has several different splice forms , and male flies expressing female splice forms have female-like behavior and vice versa . the trp channels nompc , nanchung , and inactive are expressed in sound-sensitive johnston 's organ neurons and participate in the transduction of sound . mutating the genderblind gene , also known as cg6070 , alters the sexual behavior of drosophila , turning the flies bisexual . '' homosexuality turned on and off in fruit flies '' flies use a modified version of bloom filters to detect novelty of odors , with additional features including similarity of novel odor to that of previously experienced examples , and time elapsed since previous experience of the same odor . . aggression . as with most insects , aggressive behaviors between male flies commonly occur in the presence of courting a female and when competing for resources . such behaviors often involve raising wings and legs towards the opponent and attacking with the whole body . thus , it often causes wing damage , which reduces their fitness by removing their ability to fly and mate . . acoustic communication . in order for aggression to occur , male flies produce sounds to communicate their intent . a 2017 study found that songs promoting aggression contain pulses occurring at longer intervals . rna-seq from fly mutants displaying over-aggressive behaviors found more than 50 auditory-related genes ( important for transient receptor potentials , calcium signaling , and mechanoreceptor potentials ) to be upregulated in the ab neurons located in johnston 's organ . in addition , aggression levels were reduced when these genes were knocked out via rna interference . this signifies the major role of hearing as a sensory modality in communicating aggression . pheromone signaling . other than hearing , another sensory modality that regulates aggression is pheromone signaling , which operates through either the olfactory system or the taste depending on the pheromone . an example is cva , an anti-aphrodisiac pheromone used by males to mark females after copulation and to deter other males from mating . this male-specific pheromone causes an increase in male-male aggression when detected by another male 's taste . however , upon inserting a mutation that makes the flies irresponsive to cva , no aggressive behaviors were seen . this shows how there are multiple modalities for promoting aggression in flies . competition for food . specifically , when competing for food , aggression occurs based on amount of food available and is independent of any social interactions between males . specifically , sucrose was found to stimulate gustatory receptor neurons , which was necessary to stimulate aggression . however , once the amount of food becomes greater than a certain amount , the competition between males lowers . this is possibly due to an over-abundance of food resources . on a larger scale , food was found to determine the boundaries of a territory since flies were observed to be more aggressive at the food 's physical perimeter . effect of sleep deprivation . however , like most behaviors requiring arousal and wakefulness , aggression was found to be impaired via sleep deprivation . specifically , this occurs through the impairment of octopamine and dopamine signaling , which are important pathways for regulating arousal in insects . due to reduced aggression , sleep-deprived male flies were found to be disadvantaged at mating compared to normal flies . however , when octopamine agonists were administered upon these sleep-deprived flies , aggression levels were seen to be increased and sexual fitness was subsequently restored . therefore , this finding implicates the importance of sleep in aggression between male flies . transgenesis . it is now relatively simple to generate transgenic flies in drosophila , relying on a variety of techniques . one approach of inserting foreign genes into the drosophila genome involves p elements . the transposable p elements , also known as transposons , are segments of bacterial dna that are transferred into the fly genome . transgenic flies have already contributed to many scientific advances , e.g . , modeling such human diseases as parkinson 's , neoplasm , obesity , and diabetes . . vision . the compound eye of the fruit fly contains 760 unit eyes or ommatidia , and are one of the most advanced among insects . each ommatidium contains eight photoreceptor cells ( r1-8 ) , support cells , pigment cells , and a cornea . wild-type flies have reddish pigment cells , which serve to absorb excess blue light so the fly is not blinded by ambient light . eye color genes regulate cellular vesicular transport . the enzymes needed for pigment synthesis are then transported to the cell 's pigment granule , which holds pigment precursor molecules . each photoreceptor cell consists of two main sections , the cell body and the rhabdomere . the cell body contains the nucleus , while the 100-μm-long rhabdomere is made up of toothbrush-like stacks of membrane called microvilli . each microvillus is 1–2 μm in length and about 60 nm in diameter . the membrane of the rhabdomere is packed with about 100 million rhodopsin molecules , the visual protein that absorbs light . the rest of the visual proteins are also tightly packed into the microvillar space , leaving little room for cytoplasm . the photoreceptors in drosophila express a variety of rhodopsin isoforms . the r1-r6 photoreceptor cells express rhodopsin1 ( rh1 ) , which absorbs blue light ( 480 & nbsp ; nm ) . the r7 and r8 cells express a combination of either rh3 or rh4 , which absorb uv light ( 345 & nbsp ; nm and 375 & nbsp ; nm ) , and rh5 or rh6 , which absorb blue ( 437 & nbsp ; nm ) and green ( 508 & nbsp ; nm ) light , respectively . each rhodopsin molecule consists of an opsin protein covalently linked to a carotenoid chromophore , 11-cis-3-hydroxyretinal . as in eye , visual transduction in invertebrates occurs via a g protein-coupled pathway . however , in vertebrates , the g protein is transducin , while the g protein in invertebrates is gq ( dgq in drosophila ) . when rhodopsin ( rh ) absorbs a photon of light its chromophore , 11-cis-3-hydroxyretinal , is isomerized to all-trans-3-hydroxyretinal . rh undergoes a conformational change into its active form , metarhodopsin . metarhodopsin activates gq , which in turn activates a phospholipase cβ ( plcβ ) known as norpa . plcβ hydrolyzes phosphatidylinositol ( 4,5 ) -bisphosphate ( pip 2 ) , a phospholipid found in the cell membrane , into soluble inositol triphosphate ( ip 3 ) and diglyceride ( dag ) , which stays in the cell membrane . dag or a derivative of dag causes a calcium-selective ion channel known as transient receptor potential ( trp ) to open and calcium and sodium flows into the cell . ip 3 is thought to bind to ip 3 receptors in the subrhabdomeric cisternae , an extension of the endoplasmic reticulum , and cause release of calcium , but this process does not seem to be essential for normal vision . calcium binds to proteins such as calmodulin ( cam ) and an eye-specific kinase ( pkc ) known as inac . these proteins interact with other proteins and have been shown to be necessary for shut off of the light response . in addition , proteins called arrestins bind metarhodopsin and prevent it from activating more gq . a sodium-calcium exchanger known as calx pumps the calcium out of the cell . it uses the inward sodium gradient to export calcium at a stoichiometry of 3 na + / 1 ca ++ . trp , inac , and plc form a signaling complex by binding a scaffolding protein called inad . inad contains five binding domains called pdz domain proteins , which specifically bind the c termini of target proteins . disruption of the complex by mutations in either the pdz domains or the target proteins reduces the efficiency of signaling . for example , disruption of the interaction between inac , the protein kinase c , and inad results in a delay in inactivation of the light response . unlike vertebrate metarhodopsin , invertebrate metarhodopsin can be converted back into rhodopsin by absorbing a photon of orange light ( 580 & nbsp ; nm ) . about two-thirds of the drosophila brain is dedicated to visual processing . although the spatial resolution of their vision is significantly worse than that of humans , their temporal resolution is around 10 times better . grooming . drosophila are known to exhibit grooming behaviors that are executed in a predictable manner . drosophila consistently begin a grooming sequence by using their front legs to clean the eyes , then the head and antennae . using their hind legs , drosophila proceed to groom their abdomen , and finally the wings and thorax . throughout this sequence , drosophila periodically rub their legs together to get rid of excess dust and debris that accumulates during the grooming process . grooming behaviors have been shown to be executed in a suppression hierarchy . this means that grooming behaviors that occur at the beginning of the sequence prevent those that come later in the sequence from occurring simultaneously , as the grooming sequence consists of mutually exclusive behaviors . this hierarchy does not prevent drosophila from returning to grooming behaviors that have already been accessed in the grooming sequence . the order of grooming behaviors in the suppression hierarchy is thought to be related to the priority of cleaning a specific body part . for example , the eyes and antennae are likely executed early on in the grooming sequence to prevent debris from interfering with the function of d . melanogaster ’ s sensory organs . . walking . like many other hexapod insects , drosophila typically walk using a tripod gait . this means that three of the legs swing together while the other three remain stationary , or in stance . variability around the tripod configuration appears to be continuous , meaning that flies do not exhibit distinct transitions between different gaits . at fast walking speeds ( 15–30 & nbsp ; mm/s ) , the walking configuration is mostly tripod ( 3 legs in stance ) , but at low walking speeds ( 0–15 & nbsp ; mm/s ) , flies are more likely to have four or five legs in stance . these transitions may help to optimize static stability . because flies are so small , inertial forces are negligible compared with the elastic forces of their muscles and joints or the viscous forces of the surrounding air . in addition to stability , the robustness of a walking gait is also thought to be important in determining the gait of a fly at a particular walking speed . robustness refers to how much offset in the timing of a legs stance can be tolerated before the fly becomes statically unstable . for instance , a robust gait may be particularly important when traversing uneven terrain , as it may cause unexpected disruptions in leg coordination . using a robust gait would help the fly maintain stability in this case . analyses suggest that drosophila may exhibit a compromise between the most stable and most robust gait at a given walking speed . . flight . flies fly via straight sequences of movement interspersed by rapid turns called saccades . during these turns , a fly is able to rotate 90° in less than 50 milliseconds . characteristics of drosophila flight may be dominated by the viscosity of the air , rather than the inertia of the fly body , but the opposite case with inertia as the dominant force may occur . however , subsequent work showed that while the viscous effects on the insect body during flight may be negligible , the aerodynamic forces on the wings themselves actually cause fruit flies ' turns to be damped viscously . . misconceptions . drosophila is sometimes referred to as a pest due to its tendency to live in human settlements , where fermenting fruit is found . flies may collect in homes , restaurants , stores , and other locations . however , because drosophila do not transmit human disease and are essentially harmless , they do not fulfill the criteria to be classified as a vector . the name and behavior of this species of fly has led to the misconception that it is a biological security risk in australia . while other '' fruit fly '' species do pose a risk , the d . melanogaster is attracted to fruit that is already rotting , rather than causing fruit to rot .