Turbulence

examples of turbulence . smoke rising from a cigarette . for the first few centimeters , the smoke is laminar . the smoke plume becomes turbulent as its reynolds number increases with increases in flow velocity and characteristic lengthscale . flow over a golf ball . ( this can be best understood by considering the golf ball to be stationary , with air flowing over it . ) if the golf ball were smooth , the boundary layer flow over the front of the sphere would be laminar at typical conditions . however , the boundary layer would separate early , as the pressure gradient switched from favorable ( pressure decreasing in the flow direction ) to unfavorable ( pressure increasing in the flow direction ) , creating a large region of low pressure behind the ball that creates high form drag . to prevent this , the surface is dimpled to perturb the boundary layer and promote turbulence . this results in higher skin friction , but it moves the point of boundary layer separation further along , resulting in lower drag . clear-air turbulence experienced during airplane flight , as well as poor astronomical seeing ( the blurring of images seen through the atmosphere ) . most of the terrestrial atmospheric circulation . the oceanic and atmospheric mixed layers and intense oceanic currents . the flow conditions in many industrial equipment ( such as pipes , ducts , precipitators , gas scrubbers , dynamic scraped surface heat exchangers , etc . ) and machines ( for instance , internal combustion engines and gas turbines ) . the external flow over all kinds of vehicles such as cars , airplanes , ships , and submarines . the motions of matter in stellar atmospheres . a jet exhausting from a nozzle into a quiescent fluid . as the flow emerges into this external fluid , shear layers originating at the lips of the nozzle are created . these layers separate the fast moving jet from the external fluid , and at a certain critical reynolds number they become unstable and break down to turbulence . biologically generated turbulence resulting from swimming animals affects ocean mixing . snow fences work by inducing turbulence in the wind , forcing it to drop much of its snow load near the fence . bridge supports ( piers ) in water . when river flow is slow , water flows smoothly around the support legs . when the flow is faster , a higher reynolds number is associated with the flow . the flow may start off laminar but is quickly separated from the leg and becomes turbulent . in many geophysical flows ( rivers , atmospheric boundary layer ) , the flow turbulence is dominated by the coherent structures and turbulent events . a turbulent event is a series of turbulent fluctuations that contain more energy than the average flow turbulence . the turbulent events are associated with coherent flow structures such as eddies and turbulent bursting , and they play a critical role in terms of sediment scour , accretion and transport in rivers as well as contaminant mixing and dispersion in rivers and estuaries , and in the atmosphere . in the medical field of cardiology , a stethoscope is used to detect heart sounds and bruits , which are due to turbulent blood flow . in normal individuals , heart sounds are a product of turbulent flow as heart valves close . however , in some conditions turbulent flow can be audible due to other reasons , some of them pathological . for example , in advanced atherosclerosis , bruits ( and therefore turbulent flow ) can be heard in some vessels that have been narrowed by the disease process . recently , turbulence in porous media became a highly debated subject . . features . turbulence is characterized by the following features : ; irregularity : turbulent flows are always highly irregular . for this reason , turbulence problems are normally treated statistically rather than deterministically . turbulent flow is chaotic . however , not all chaotic flows are turbulent . ; diffusivity : the readily available supply of energy in turbulent flows tends to accelerate the homogenization ( mixing ) of fluid mixtures . the characteristic which is responsible for the enhanced mixing and increased rates of mass , momentum and energy transports in a flow is called '' diffusivity '' . ferziger , joel h . ; peric , milovan ( 2002 ) . computational methods for fluid dynamics . germany : springer-verlag berlin heidelberg . pp . 265–307 . turbulent diffusion is usually described by a turbulent diffusion coefficient . this turbulent diffusion coefficient is defined in a phenomenological sense , by analogy with the molecular diffusivities , but it does not have a true physical meaning , being dependent on the flow conditions , and not a property of the fluid itself . in addition , the turbulent diffusivity concept assumes a constitutive relation between a turbulent flux and the gradient of a mean variable similar to the relation between flux and gradient that exists for molecular transport . in the best case , this assumption is only an approximation . nevertheless , the turbulent diffusivity is the simplest approach for quantitative analysis of turbulent flows , and many models have been postulated to calculate it . for instance , in large bodies of water like oceans this coefficient can be found using richardson 's four-third power law and is governed by the random walk principle . in rivers and large ocean currents , the diffusion coefficient is given by variations of elder 's formula . ; rotationality : turbulent flows have non-zero vorticity and are characterized by a strong three-dimensional vortex generation mechanism known as vortex stretching . in fluid dynamics , they are essentially vortices subjected to stretching associated with a corresponding increase of the component of vorticity in the stretching direction—due to the conservation of angular momentum . on the other hand , vortex stretching is the core mechanism on which the turbulence energy cascade relies to establish and maintain identifiable structure function . kundu , pijush k . ; cohen , ira m . ; dowling , david r . ( 2012 ) . fluid mechanics . netherlands : elsevier inc . pp . 537–601 . in general , the stretching mechanism implies thinning of the vortices in the direction perpendicular to the stretching direction due to volume conservation of fluid elements . as a result , the radial length scale of the vortices decreases and the larger flow structures break down into smaller structures . the process continues until the small scale structures are small enough that their kinetic energy can be transformed by the fluid 's molecular viscosity into heat . turbulent flow is always rotational and three dimensional . for example , atmospheric cyclones are rotational but their substantially two-dimensional shapes do not allow vortex generation and so are not turbulent . on the other hand , oceanic flows are dispersive but essentially non rotational and therefore are not turbulent . ; dissipation : to sustain turbulent flow , a persistent source of energy supply is required because turbulence dissipates rapidly as the kinetic energy is converted into internal energy by viscous shear stress . turbulence causes the formation of eddies of many different length scales . most of the kinetic energy of the turbulent motion is contained in the large-scale structures . the energy '' cascades '' from these large-scale structures to smaller scale structures by an inertial and essentially inviscid mechanism . this process continues , creating smaller and smaller structures which produces a hierarchy of eddies . eventually this process creates structures that are small enough that molecular diffusion becomes important and viscous dissipation of energy finally takes place . the scale at which this happens is the kolmogorov microscales . via this energy cascade , turbulent flow can be realized as a superposition of a spectrum of flow velocity fluctuations and eddies upon a mean flow . the eddies are loosely defined as coherent patterns of flow velocity , vorticity and pressure . turbulent flows may be viewed as made of an entire hierarchy of eddies over a wide range of length scales and the hierarchy can be described by the energy spectrum that measures the energy in flow velocity fluctuations for each length scale ( wavenumber ) . the scales in the energy cascade are generally uncontrollable and highly non-symmetric . nevertheless , based on these length scales these eddies can be divided into three categories . ; integral time scale the integral time scale for a lagrangian flow can be defined as : : t \left ( \frac \ , , since the experimental values obtained for the second order structure function only deviate slightly from the value predicted by kolmogorov theory , the value for is very near to ( differences are about 2 % ) . thus the '' kolmogorov − spectrum '' is generally observed in turbulence . however , for high order structure functions the difference with the kolmogorov scaling is significant , and the breakdown of the statistical self-similarity is clear . this behavior , and the lack of universality of the constants , are related with the phenomenon of intermittency in turbulence . this is an important area of research in this field , and a major goal of the modern theory of turbulence is to understand what is really universal in the inertial range .