2002 in literature

events . march 16 – authorities in saudi arabia arrest and jail the poet abdul mohsen musalam and dismiss a newspaper editor following the publication of musalam 's poem '' the corrupt on earth '' , which criticizes the state 's islamic judiciary , accusing some judges of being corrupt and issuing unfair rulings for personal benefit . march 31 – american writers : a journey through history resumes its run on c-span , having been interrupted by the 9/11 attacks and their aftermath . may – the results of a poll of 100 authors conducted in norway are announced , leading to the bokklubben world library beginning publication . october 16 – bibliotheca alexandrina ( designed by snøhetta ) is inaugurated in alexandria , egypt . november – raymond benson releases his final james bond novel , based on the film die another day , bringing to a close an uninterrupted series of novels featuring ian fleming 's character that started in 1981 . new books . fiction . alaa al aswany – the yacoubian building ( عمارة يعقوبيان , ʿimārat yaʿqūbīān ) aaron allston – enemy lines : rebel dream and enemy lines : rebel stand jean m . auel – the shelters of stone paul auster – the book of illusions iain banks – dead air greg bear – vitals raymond benson – die another day and the man with the red tattoo nelson bond – the far side of nowhere william boyd – any human heart mircea cărtărescu – the encyclopedia of dragons ( enciclopedia zmeilor ) stephen l . carter – the emperor of ocean park ted chiang – stories of your life and others bernard cornwell – sharpe 's prey , sharpe 's skirmish and vagabond michael crichton – prey elaine cunningham – dark journey l . sprague de camp – aristotle and the gun and other stories dave eggers – you shall know our velocity janet evanovich – hard eight michel faber – the crimson petal and the white giorgio faletti – io uccido mick farren – underland nancy farmer – the house of the scorpion elena ferrante – i giorni dell'abbandono ( the days of abandonment ) alan dean foster – the approaching storm h . l . gold and l . sprague de camp – none but lucifer jean-christophe grangé – le concile de pierre niall griffiths – sheepshagger john grisham – the summons margaret peterson haddix – among the betrayed peter handke – crossing the sierra de gredos joanne harris – coastliners john d . harvey – the cleansing aleksandar hemon – nowhere man carl hiaasen – hoot rabee jaber – رحلة الغرناطي ( rahlat al-gharnati , '' the journey of the granadian '' ) stephen king – everything 's eventual : 14 dark tales and from a buick 8 rachel klein – the moth diaries dean r . koontz – by the light of the moon and one door away from heaven ursula k . le guin – the birthday of the world ( anthology including paradises lost ) sallie lowenstein – sender unknown robert ludlum – the sigma protocol jon mcgregor – if nobody speaks of remarkable things valerio massimo manfredi – the last legion javier marías – your face tomorrow volume 1 : fever and spear ( tu rostro mañana 1 . fiebre y lanza ) rohinton mistry – family matters haruki murakami ( 村上 春樹 ) – kafka on the shore ( 海辺のカフカ , umibe no kafuka ) taslima nasrin – forashi premik ( french lover ) chuck palahniuk – lullaby orhan pamuk – snow ann patchett – bel canto james patterson – beach house terry pratchett – night watch libby purves – mother country pascal quignard – les ombres errantes kathy reichs – grave secrets nora roberts – face the fire joel c . rosenberg – the last jihad r . a . salvatore – star wars episode ii : attack of the clones samanta schweblin – el núcleo del disturbio alice sebold – the lovely bones åsne seierstad – the bookseller of kabul carol shields – unless vladimir sorokin – ice danielle steel – the cottage david storey – as it happened matthew stover – traitor thomas sullivan – born burning donna tartt – the little friend hồ anh thái – cõi người rung chuông tận thế ( the apocalypse bell tolls in the human world ) william trevor – the story of lucy gault andrew vachss – only child guy vanderhaeghe – the last crossing barbara vine – the blood doctor sarah waters – fingersmith darren williams – angel rock walter jon williams – destiny 's way roger zelazny – the last defender of camelot . children and young people . chris van allsburg – zathura neil gaiman – coraline bob graham – jethro byrd , fairy child kathleen hague ( with michael hague ) – good night , fairies isabel hoving – the dream merchant tony johnston ( with barry moser ) – that summer ulrich karger – geisterstunde im kindergarten ( ghost times in kindergarten , translated as the scary sleepover ) jenny nimmo – midnight for charlie bone margie palatini ( with barry moser ) – earthquack ! christopher paolini ( with john jude palencar ) – eragon ( first in the inheritance cycle of four books ) jerry pinkney – the nightingale jerry pinkney – noah 's ark leander watts – stonecutter . drama . edward albee – the goat , or who is sylvia ? caryl churchill – a number nilo cruz – anna in the tropics zlatko topčić – time out peter verhelst – blush . poetry . neil astley ( ed . ) – staying alive : real poems for unreal times ( anthology ) jim dodge – rain on the river linton kwesi johnson – mi revalueshanary fren grazyna miller – alibi of a butterfly . non-fiction . peter ackroyd – albion : the origins of the english imagination andrew alpern – the new york apartment houses of rosario candela and james carpenter jeffrey archer ( as ff 8282 ) – a prison diary : volume 1 : belmarsh : hell t . j . binyon – pushkin : a biography john brockman ( editor ) – the next fifty years : science in the first half of the twenty-first century stuart christie – granny made me an anarchist alphonse daudet ( died 1897 ) , translated by julian barnes – in the land of pain ( first english translation of la doulou ) gerina dunwich – a witch 's guide to ghosts and the supernatural lindy edwards – how to argue with an economist : reopening political debate in australia koenraad elst – ayodhya dispute tye r . farrell and jeffrey morrow – university of psychogenic fugue aminatta forna – the devil that danced on the water : a daughter 's quest pim fortuyn – de puinhopen van acht jaar paars michael j . fox – lucky man : a memoir stephen j . gould – i have landed peter jennings – in search of america b . b . lal – the sarasvatī flows on : the continuity of indian culture judith levine – harmful to minors gabriel garcía márquez – vivir para contarla ( autobiography ) jeremy paxman – the political animal neil peart – ghost rider arun shourie – worshipping false gods rachel simon – riding the bus with my sister daniel snowman – the hitler émigrés : the cultural impact on britain of refugees from nazism david southwell – dirty cash james b . stewart – heart of a soldier paul theroux – dark star safari rick warren – the purpose driven life alison watt – the last island faculty of arts , 2003 , edna staebler award , wilfrid laurier university , previous winners , alison watt , retrieved 11/27/2012 . deaths . january 12 – lady violet powell , british critic and biographer ( born 1912 ) january 17 – camilo josé cela , nobel-winningspanish writer ( born 1916 ) january 28 – astrid lindgren , swedish children 's author ( born 1907 ) february 8 – joachim hoffmann , german historian ( born 1930 ) february 21 – a . l . barker , english novelist ( born 1918 ) february 27 – spike milligan , indian-born british-irish comedian , screenwriter and poet ( born 1918 ) march 21 – thomas flanagan , american historical novelist ( born 1923 ) april 6 – martin sperr , german dramatist ( born 1944 ) april 24 – ismith khan , trinidad-born novelist ( born 1925 ) may 6 – pim fortuyn , dutch political columnist and writer ( born 1948 ) may 17 – dave berg , american cartoonist ( born 1920 ) may 20 – stephen j . gould , american paleontologist , biologist and writer ( born 1941 ) june 2 – flora lewis , american journalist ( born 1922 ) june 13 – r . w . b . lewis , american critic ( born 1917 ) june 20 timothy findley , canadian novelist and playwright ( born 1930 ) kenneth kantzer , american theologian ( born 1917 ) june 24 – ian niall ( also ian niall ) , scottish novelist and non-fiction writer ( born 1916 ) july 23 – chaim potok , american writer ( born 1929 ) august 25 – dorothy hewett , australian poet and playwright ( born 1923 ) september 17 – eileen colwell , english children 's librarian ( born 1904 ) september 20 – joan littlewood , english theatre director and biographer ( born 1914 ) october 13 – stephen e . ambrose , american historian and biographer ( born 1936 ) october 21 – harbhajan singh , indian punjabi poet and critic ( born 1920 ) october 27 – sesto pals , romanian israeli poet and philosopher ( cancer , born ca . 1912 ) october 28 – sugathapala de silva , sri lankan dramatist , novelist and translator writing in sinhalese ( born 1928 ) november 8 – jon elia , pakistani poet and philosopher writing in urdu ( born 1931 ) december 12 – dee brown , american novelist and historian ( born 1908 ) december 24 – kjell aukrust , norwegian author , poet and artist ( born 1920 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : imre kertész . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : danielle wood , the alphabet of light and dark c . j . dennis prize for poetry : robert gray , afterimages kenneth slessor prize for poetry : alan wearne , the lovemakers mary gilmore prize : geraldine mckenzie , duty miles franklin award : tim winton , dirt music . canada . giller prize : austin clarke , the polished hoe see 2002 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . griffin poetry prize : christian bök , eunoia and alice notley , disobedience edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : tom allen , rolling home faculty of arts , 2002 , edna staebler award , wilfrid laurier university , previous winners , tom allen , retrieved 11/26/2012 . france . prix décembre : pierre michon , abbés and corps du roi prix femina : chantal thomas , les adieux à la reine prix femina ( non-fiction ) : michael barry , massoud prix goncourt : pascal quignard , les ombres errantes prix médicis french : daniel desmarquet , kafka et les jeunes filles prix médicis non-fiction : anne f . garréta , pas un jour prix médicis international : philip roth , the human stain . united kingdom . booker prize : yann martel , life of pi caine prize for african writing : binyavanga wainaina , '' discovering home '' carnegie medal for children 's literature : sharon creech , ruby holler james tait black memorial prize for fiction : jonathan franzen , the corrections james tait black memorial prize for biography : jenny uglow , the lunar men : the friends who made the future 1730–1810 cholmondeley award : moniza alvi , david constantine , liz lochhead , brian patten eric gregory award : caroline bird , christopher james , jacob polley , luke heeley , judith lal , david leonard briggs , eleanor rees , kathryn simmonds samuel johnson prize : margaret macmillan , peacemakers : the paris peace conference of 1919 and its attempt to end war whitbread best book award : philip pullman , the amber spyglass orange prize for fiction : ann patchett , bel canto queen 's gold medal for poetry : peter porter . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : shao wei , pulling a dragon 's teeth aiken taylor award for modern american poetry : grace schulman arthur rense prize for poetry : b.h . fairchild bernard f . connors prize for poetry : timothy donnelly , “ his long imprison 'd thought ” bobbitt national prize for poetry : alice fulton , felt brittingham prize in poetry : anna george meek , acts of contortion compton crook award : wen spencer , alien taste frost medal : galway kinnell hugo award : neil gaiman , american gods national book award for fiction : to three junes by julia glass national book critics circle award : to atonement by ian mcewan newbery medal for children 's literature : linda sue park , a single shard pen/faulkner award for fiction : to bel canto by ann patchett pulitzer prize for drama : suzan-lori parks , topdog/underdog pulitzer prize for fiction : richard russo , empire falls pulitzer prize for poetry : carl dennis , practical gods wallace stevens award : ruth stone whiting awards : : fiction : jeffery renard allen , justin cronin , kim edwards , michelle huneven , danzy senna : plays : melissa james gibson , evan smith : poetry : elizabeth arnold , david gewanter , joshua weiner . other . camões prize : maria velho da costa finlandia prize : kari hotakainen trench street international dublin literary award : michel houellebecq , les particules élémentaires macmillan writers ' prize for africa adult fiction : yvonne vera , stone virgins premio nadal : ángela vallvey , los estados carenciales saarc literary award : laxmi chand gupta . references .