Infrastructure

linguistic origin . the word infrastructure has been used in french since 1875 and in english since 1887 , originally meaning '' the installations that form the basis for any operation or system '' . online etymology dictionary . douglas harper , historian . ( accessed : april 24 , 2008 ) the word was imported from french , where it was already used for establishing a roadbed of substrate material , required before railroad tracks or constructed pavement could be laid on top of it . the word is a combination of the latin prefix '' infra '' , meaning '' below '' , as many of these constructions are underground ( for example , tunnels , water and gas systems , and railways ) , and the french word '' structure '' ( derived from the latin word '' structure '' ) . the army use of the term achieved currency in the united states after the formation of nato in the 1940s , and by 1970 was adopted by urban planning in its modern civilian sense . stephen lewis the ecology of infrastructure and the infrastructure of the internet , blog hag pak sak , posted september 22 , 2008 . this article will explore many aspects of infrastructure , including classification , applications , related concepts , ownership and financing , the developing world , and its sustainable future . classifications . a 1987 us national research council panel adopted the term '' public works infrastructure '' , referring to : '' . & nbsp ; both specific functional modes – highways , streets , roads , and bridges ; mass transit ; airports and airways ; water supply and water resources ; wastewater management ; solid-waste treatment and disposal ; electric power generation and transmission ; telecommunications ; and hazardous waste – and the combined system these modal elements comprise . a comprehension of infrastructure spans not only these public works facilities , but also the operating procedures , management practices , and development policies that interact together with societal demand and the physical world to facilitate the transport of people and goods , provision of water for drinking and a variety of other uses , safe disposal of society 's waste products , provision of energy where it is needed , and transmission of information within and between communities . '' dahms , l . , national council on public works improvement ( u.s . ) . , national research council ( u.s . ) . committee on infrastructure innovation . ( 1987 ) . infrastructure for the 21st century : framework for a research agenda . washington , d.c . : national academy press . the american society of civil engineers publishes a '' infrastructure report card '' which represents the organizations opinion on the condition of various infrastructure every 2–4 years . 2017 infrastructure report , 112pp , american society of civil engineers , 2017 they grade 16 categories , namely aviation , bridges , dams , drinking water , energy , hazardous waste , inland waterways , levees , parks and recreation , ports , rail , roads , schools , solid waste , transit and wastewater . the united states has received a rating of “ d+ ” on its infrastructure . this aging infrastructure is a result of governmental neglect and inadequate funding . as the united states presumably looks to upgrade its existing infrastructure , sustainable measures could be a consideration of the design , build , and operation plans . personal . a way to embody personal infrastructure is to think of it in terms of human capital . human capital is defined by the encyclopædia britannica as “ intangible collective resources possessed by individuals and groups within a given population '' . many were built within the last 50 years , which means many infrastructures are needing substantial maintenance to continue functioning . however , concrete is not sustainable . the production of concrete contributes up to 8 % of the world ’ s greenhouse gas emissions . a tenth of the world ’ s industrial water usage is from producing concrete . even transporting the raw materials to concrete production sites adds to airborne pollution . furthermore , the production sites and the infrastructures themselves all strip away agricultural land that could have been fertile soil or habitats vital to the ecosystem . green infrastructure . green infrastructure is a type of sustainable infrastructure . green infrastructure uses plant or soil systems to restore some of the natural processes needed to manage water and create healthier urban environments . in a more practical sense , it refers to a decentralized network of stormwater management practices , which includes green roofs , trees , bioretention and infiltration , and permeable pavement . green infrastructure has become an increasingly popular strategy in recent years due to its effectiveness in providing ecological , economic , and social benefits -- including positively impacting energy consumption , air quality , and carbon reduction and sequestration . . green roofs . a green roof is a rooftop that is partially or completely covered with growing vegetation planted over a membrane . it also includes additional layers , including a root barrier and drainage and irrigation systems . there are several categories of green roofs , including extensive ( have a growing media depth ranging from two to six inches ) and intensive ( have a growing media with a depth greater than six inches ) . one benefit of green roofs is that they reduce stormwater runoff because of its ability to store water in its growing media , reducing the runoff entering the sewer system and waterways , which also decreases the risk of combined sewer overflows . another benefit is that they reduce energy usage since the growing media provides additional insulation , reduces the amount of solar radiation on the roof ’ s surface , and provides evaporative cooling from water in the plants , which reduce the roof surface temperatures and heat influx . green roofs also reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide since the vegetation sequesters carbon and , since they reduce energy usage and the urban heat island by reducing the roof temperature , they also lower carbon dioxide emissions from electricity generation . this process is depicted in figure 1 below . tree planting . tree planting provides a host of ecological , social , and economic benefits . since trees intercept rain , support infiltration and water storage in soil , diminish the impact of raindrops on barren surfaces , and minimize soil moisture through transpiration , they help reduce stormwater runoff . additionally , trees contribute to recharging local aquifers and improve the health of watershed systems . trees also reduce energy usage by providing shade and releasing water into the atmosphere which cools the air and reduces the amount of heat absorbed by buildings . finally , trees improve air quality by absorbing harmful air pollutants reducing the amount of greenhouse gases . bioretention and infiltration practices . there are a variety of types of bioretention and infiltration practices , including rain gardens and bioswales . a rain garden is planted in a small depression or natural slope and includes native shrubs and flowers . they temporarily hold and absorb rain water and are effective in removing up to 90 % of nutrients and chemicals and up to 80 % of sediments from the runoff . as a result , they soak 30 % more water than conventional gardens . bioswales are planted in paved areas like parking lots or sidewalks and are made to allow for overflow into the sewer system by trapping silt and other pollutants , which are normally left over from impermeable surfaces . both rain gardens and bioswales mitigate flood impacts and prevent stormwater from polluting local waterways ; increase the usable water supply by reducing the amount of water needed for outdoor irrigation ; improve air quality by minimizing the amount of water going into treatment facilities , which also reduces energy usage and , as a result , reduces air pollution since less greenhouse gases are emitted . . smart cities . smart cities utilize innovative methods of design and implementation in various sectors of infrastructure and planning to create communities that operate at a higher level of relative sustainability than their traditional counterparts . in a sustainable city , urban resilience as well as infrastructure reliability must both be present . urban resilience is defined by a city ’ s capacity to quickly adapt or recover from infrastructure defects , and infrastructure reliability means that systems must work efficiently while continuing to maximize their output . when urban resilience and infrastructure reliability interact , cities are able to produce the same level of output at similarly reasonable costs as compared to other non sustainable communities , while still maintaining ease of operation and usage . masdar city . masdar city is a proposed zero emission smart city that will be contracted in the united arab emirates . some individuals have referred to this planned settlement as “ utopia-like ” , due to the fact that it will feature multiple sustainable infrastructure elements , including energy , water , waste management , and transportation . masdar city will have a power infrastructure containing renewable energy methods including solar energy . masdar city is located in a desert region , meaning that sustainable collection and distribution of water is dependent on the city ’ s ability to utilize water at innovative stages of the water cycle . masdar city will use groundwater , greywater , seawater , blackwater , and other water resources to obtain both drinking and landscaping water . initially , masdar city will be waste-free . recycling and other waste management and waste reduction methods will be encouraged . additionally , the city will implement a system to convert waste into fertilizer , which will decrease the amount of space needed for waste accumulation as well as provide an environmentally friendly alternative to traditional fertilizer production methods . no cars will be allowed in masdar city , contributing to low carbon emissions within the city boundaries . instead , alternative transportation options will be prioritized during infrastructure development . this means that a bike lane network will be accessible and comprehensive , and other options will also be available . . see also . airport infrastructure asset management plan green infrastructure infrastructure as a service infrastructure asset management infrastructure security logistics megaproject project finance pseudo-urbanization public capital sustainable architecture sustainable engineering . references . bibliography . koh , jae myong ( 2018 ) green infrastructure financing : institutional investors , ppps and bankable projects , london : palgrave macmillan . nurre , sarah g . '' restoring infrastructure systems : an integrated network design and scheduling ( inds ) problem . '' european journal of operational research . ( 12/2012 ) , 223 ( 3 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 794–806 . larry w . beeferman , '' pension fund investment in infrastructure : a resource paper '' , capital matter ( occasional paper series ) , no . 3 december 2008 a . eberhard , '' infrastructure regulation in developing countries '' , ppiaf working paper no . 4 ( 2007 ) world bank m . nicolas j . firzli and vincent bazi , '' infrastructure investments in an age of austerity : the pension and sovereign funds perspective '' , published jointly in revue analyse financière , q4 2011 issue , pp . & nbsp ; 34–37 and usak/jtw july 30 , 2011 ( online edition ) georg inderst , '' pension fund investment in infrastructure '' , oecd working papers on insurance and private pensions , no . 32 ( 2009 ) . external links . body of knowledge on infrastructure regulation next generation infrastructures international research programme report card on america 's infrastructure