Edward Watkin

early life . watkin was born in salford , lancashire , the son of wealthy cotton merchant absalom watkin , . after a private education , watkin worked in his father 's mill business . watkin 's father was closely involved in the anti-corn law league , and edward soon joined him , rising to become a key league organiser in manchester . through this work , watkin gained the friendship of the radical leader richard cobden , with whom he remained in contact for the rest of cobden 's life . from 1839 to 1840 watkin was one of the directors of the manchester athenaeum . in 1843 he wrote a pamphlet entitled '' a plea for public parks '' and was involved in a committee which successfully sought the provision of parks in manchester and salford . he also took a prominent role in the saturday half-holiday movement . in 1845 , watkin co-founded the manchester examiner , by which time he had become a partner in his father 's business . railways . watkin began to show an interest in railways and in 1845 he took on the secretaryship of the trent valley railway , which was sold the following year to the london and north western railway ( lnwr ) , for £438,000 . he then became assistant to mark huish , general manager of the lnwr . he visited usa and canada and in 1852 he published a book about the railways in these countries . back in great britain he was appointed secretary of the worcester and hereford railway . in january 1854 he became the general manager of the manchester sheffield & lincolnshire railway ( ms & lr ) , a position held until 1861 . in 1863 he was persuaded to return as a director of the company and shortly afterward became chairman , holding the position from 1864 to 1894 . he was knighted in 1868 and made a baronet in 1880 . manager from 1858 , then president 1862–69 , of the grand trunk railway of eastern canada , he promoted the intercolonial railway , which eventually connected halifax with the gtr system in quebec . his grand vision was a transcontinental railway lying largely within canada , but owing to the sparse population west of lake superior , the scheme could not be profitable in the absence of government financial backing . opposition to the idea within the company led to watkin 's ouster . the gtr would later miss various opportunities to build a viable canadian transcontinental railway . abroad , he helped to build the athens–piraeus electric railways , advised on the indian railways and organised transport in the belgian congo . watkin was involved with other railway companies . in 1866 he became a director of the great western railway and in january 1868 the great eastern railway . in fact it was watkin who recommended robert cecil who is credited with leading the ger out of its financial crisis . watkin resigned as a director of the ger in august 1872 . by 1881 he was a director of nine railways and trustee of a tenth . these included the cheshire lines committee , the east london , the manchester , sheffield and lincolnshire , the manchester , south junction & altrincham , the metropolitan , the oldham , ashton & guide bridge , the sheffield & midland joint , the south eastern , the wigan junction and the erie railroad railways . he was instrumental in the creation of the ms & lr 's 'london extension ' , sheffield to marylebone , the great central main line , opened in 1899 . channel tunnel . for watkin , opening an independent route to london was crucial for the long-term survival and development of the ms & lr , but it was also one part of a grander scheme : a line from manchester to paris . his chairmanships of the south eastern railway , the metropolitan railway , in addition to the ms & lr meant that he controlled railways from england 's south coast ports , through london and ( with the london extension ) through the midlands to the industrial cities of the north ; he was also on the board of the chemin de fer du nord , a french railway company based in calais . watkin 's ambitious plan was to develop a railway route which could carry passenger trains directly from liverpool and manchester to paris , crossing from britain to france via a tunnel under the english channel . the great central railway 's main line to london was also built to a comparatively generous structure gauge , but contrary to popular belief it was not built to a 'continental ' gauge , not least because there were no agreed dimensions for such a gauge until the berne gauge convention was signed in 1912 . healy mentions two bridges which were built to '' unusual dimensions . to provide for possible widenings in case the channel tunnel project ever took off '' . in other words , the gcr would have needed enlargement for international trains . watkin started his tunnel works with the south eastern railway in 1880–81 . digging began at shakespeare cliff between folkestone and dover and reached a length of . the project was highly controversial and fears grew of the tunnel being used as a route for a possible french invasion of great britain ; notable opponents of the project were the war office scientific committee , lord wolseley and prince george , duke of cambridge ; queen victoria reportedly found the tunnel scheme '' objectionable '' . watkin was skilled at public relations and attempted to garner political support for his project , inviting such high-profile guests as the prince and princess of wales , liberal party leader william gladstone and the archibald tait to submarine champagne receptions in the tunnel . in spite of his attempts at winning support , his tunnel project was blocked by parliament then cancelled in the interests of national security . the original entrance to watkin 's tunnel works remains in the cliff face but is now closed for safety reasons . . wembley park and watkin 's tower . watkin 's last project was the construction of a large iron tower , called watkin 's tower , in wembley park , north-west london . the tower was to be the centrepiece of a large public amusement park which he opened in may 1894 to attract london passengers onto his metropolitan railway . the park was served by wembley park station , which officially opened in the same month , though it had in fact been open on saturdays since october 1893 to cater for football matches in the pleasure gardens . watkin 's vision of wembley park as a day-out destination for londoners had far reaching consequences , shaping the history and use of the area to the present day . without watkin 's pleasure gardens and station it is unlikely that the british empire exhibition would have been held at wembley , which in turn would have prevented wembley becoming either synonymous with english football or a successful popular music venue . without watkin , it is likely that the district would have simply become inter-war semi-detached suburbia like the rest of west london . the tower was intended to rival the eiffel tower in paris . the foundations of the tower were laid in 1892 , the first stage was completed in september 1895 and it was opened to the public in 1896 . after an initial burst of popularity , the tower failed to draw large crowds . of the 100,000 visitors to the park in 1896 rather less than a fifth paid to go up the tower . furthermore , the marshy site proved unsuitable for such a structure . whether the original design ( which was to have had eight legs ) would have distributed the weight more evenly can not be known , but by 1896 the four-legged tower was clearly tilting . in addition , watkin had retired from the chairmanship of the metropolitan in 1894 after suffering a stroke , so the tower 's enthusiastic champion was gone . in june 1897 the tower was illuminated for queen victoria 's 60th jubilee , but it was never extended beyond the first stage . in 1902 the tower , now known as ‘ watkin 's folly ’ , was declared unsafe ( though this was because of concerns about the safety of the lifts , rather than directly about the subsidence ) and closed to the public . in 1904 it was decided to demolish the structure , a process that ended with the foundations being destroyed by explosives in 1907 , leaving four large holes in the ground . the empire stadium ( later known as wembley stadium ) was built on the site in 1923 . political career . throughout his life , watkin was a strong supporter of manchester liberalism . this did not equate to consistent support for a single party . watkin was first elected liberal member of parliament for great yarmouth ( 1857–1858 ) , and then stockport ( 1864–1868 ) . he unsuccessfully contested the east cheshire seat in 1869 . he was knighted in 1868 and became a baronet in 1880 . he was also high sheriff of cheshire in 1874 . in 1874 , he was elected liberal mp for hythe in kent . he increasingly moved away from the liberal party under william ewart gladstone and in 1880 it was claimed that he had taken the conservative whip . he never stood for election as a conservative and continued to sit with the liberals . between 1880 and 1886 , he was regarded variously as a liberal , a conservative and an independent . in 1886 , he voted against gladstone 's irish home rule bill and was thereafter commonly described as a liberal unionist . the confusion over his status came to the fore when he resigned his hythe seat in 1895 . the liberal unionists and the conservatives were in alliance and each claimed incumbent and the right to nominate his replacement . watkin for his part insisted that he was a liberal , albeit one who had moved away from the official party . the conservative aretas akers-douglas commented that no one knew what his politics were , except that he had voted for anyone or anything to get support for his channel tunnel . the conservatives forced the liberal unionists to back down and won the seat in the 1895 united kingdom general election . personal life . watkin lived at rose hill , northenden , a suburb of manchester , in a house bought by his father in 1832 . he is buried in the churchyard of the church of st wilfrid , northenden , where a memorial plaque commemorates his life . watkin married mary briggs mellor in 1845 , with whom he had two children . their son , alfred mellor watkin , became locomotive superintendent of the south eastern railway in 1876 biographical details of managers , chairmen , etc and member of parliament for the great grimsby constituency in 1877 . a daughter , harriette sayer watkin , was born in 1850 . mary watkin died on 8 march 1888 . after four years a widower , watkin married ann ingram , widow of herbert ingram , on 6 april 1892 . notes .