Hazel R. O'Leary

early life and education . hazel reid was born in newport news , virginia . her parents , russel e . reid and hazel reid , were both physicians . they divorced when she was 18 months old . her father and stepmother , a teacher named mattie pullman reid , raised hazel and her older sister edna reid , primarily in the east end neighborhood . hazel attended school in a segregated school system in newport news for eight years . she and her sister were then sent to live with an aunt in essex county , new jersey , and attend arts high school , an integrated school . she earned a bachelor 's degree at fisk university in nashville in 1959 . she then married carl rollins and had a son before returning to school and earning her bachelor of laws degree from rutgers law school in newark in 1966 . . career . early career . o'leary worked as a prosecutor in new jersey on organized crime cases , later becoming an assistant attorney general for the state . in 1969 , after obtaining a divorce , o'leary moved to washington , d.c . , where she joined the consulting/accounting firm coopers & lybrand . during the carter administration , o'leary was appointed assistant administrator of the federal energy administration , general counsel of the community services administration , and administrator of the economic regulatory administration at the newly created department of energy . at the department of energy , hazel met her third husband , jack o'leary . in 1981 o'leary and her husband established the consulting firm o'leary & associates in morristown , new jersey , where she served as vice president and general counsel . after jack died of cancer , hazel moved to minnesota . from 1989 to 1993 she worked as an executive vice president of the northern states power company , a minnesota-based public utilities . . secretary of energy . in a press conference on december 21 , 1992 , held in little rock , arkansas , then president-elect bill clinton announced his intention to nominate o'leary as secretary of energy . clinton officially made the nomination on january20 , 1993 , and the senate confirmed o'leary by unanimous consent the next day . o'leary became the first woman and first african american to serve as secretary of energy . she was also the first secretary of energy to have worked for an energy company . at the time she led the department of energy , it had an annual budget of 18billion and approximately 18,000 employees . o'leary challenged the way the department had traditionally been run , particularly its focus on developing and testing nuclear weapons . it was also a target for republicans who wanted it eliminated entirely . while reducing the size of the department overall , o'leary shifted resources toward efficient and renewable energy sources , a priority of the clinton administration . in this position , o'leary won praise for declassifying old department of energy documents , including cold war-era records that showed the u.s . government had used american citizens as guinea pigs in human radiation experiments , as had long been rumored . clinton issued executive order 12891 , which created the advisory committee on human radiation experiments ( achre ) to prevent such abuses of power . o'leary also announced a 4.6million settlement payment to the families of victims of past radiation experiments . other declassified documents included facts about plutonium the united states had left in south vietnam . o'leary also pushed to end nuclear testing in the united states . her efforts resulted in clinton signing a test ban on nuclear testing , a ban that other nations joined . early in her tenure as secretary , o'leary met with whistle-blowers who said they faced harassment for raising legitimate health and safety issues within the department of energy . she announced a '' zero tolerance '' policy , prohibiting retaliation against whistle-blowers at nuclear plants . o'leary repeatedly faced criticism during her tenure . the department allocated 43,500 to a washington firm to identify unfriendly media outlets . white house press secretary michael d . mccurry called the project '' unacceptable . '' o'leary claimed the allocation was made without her direct knowledge and defended the research as an attempt to study the efficacy of the department 's messaging . a government accountability office audit of travel criticized her for traveling too frequently and spending excessively on accommodations . she apologized to congressional committees in 1996 for spending that exceeded limits on the funds appropriated to the agency for travel . o'leary resigned from her position effective january20 , 1997 , explaining she did not wish to stay in the job more than four years . in 1997 , johnny chung , a democratic political donor , claimed that o'leary had met with chinese oil officials after he gave 25,000 to o'leary 's favorite charity , africare , in 1995 . in august of that year , attorney general janet reno reviewed chung 's allegations to decide whether to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate o'leary . reno determined there was '' no evidence '' of wrongdoing by o'leary and no basis for a further investigation . some observers , including a lawyer for the government accountability project , saw some fault in o'leary 's conduct but also saw racism and sexism in the way she was treated . . post-government . after leaving the department of energy , o'leary once again served as president of o'leary & associates , her consulting firm . she also sat on the board of the environmental engineering firm icf kaiser international . in 2000 she became president and chief operating officer of an investment banking firm , blaylock & partners . she left that firm in 2002 . . fisk university president . on july 13 , 2004 , o'leary was selected and began work as president of her undergraduate alma mater , fisk university , a historically black college in nashville , tennessee . she was officially installed as the university 's 14th president on october6 , 2005 . before o'leary 's tenure , the university had tried unsuccessfully to increase its enrollment and experienced financial problems . in 2008 fisk had an enrollment of 770 students and 264 faculty and staff members . by 2011 fisk 's enrollment numbers improved , but the school was still operating with a loss in six of the previous nine years . these ongoing financial problems caused the southern association of colleges and schools commission on colleges ( sacscoc ) to place fisk on probation in 2010 over concerns for the university 's finances and prospects . the probation ended in december 2013 . under o'leary 's leadership , fisk went to court in december 2005 seeking a ruling that it could sell a portion of the university 's alfred stieglitz collection . stieglitz 's widow georgia o'keeffe had bequeathed the collection to fisk with restrictions on its sale . at the time the deal was finalized , o'leary said the arrangement was essential to keeping the university open . amidst the public battle over attempts to sell the alfred stieglitz collection , o'leary quietly arranged to sell two other works of art , including a work by florine stettheimer . fisk 's board of trustees approved the sale in 2010 although it was not publicly disclosed until the new york times reported it in 2016 . o'leary defended the decision to sell the artwork , saying it was done out of necessity amid financial difficulties . in 2012 o'leary announced that she would retire at the end of the calendar year . her retirement was effective january31 , 2013 . she was succeeded by h . james williams . . other affiliations . o'leary has served as a director for alchemix corp . and camac international corporation . -- > she also served on the board of directors for nonprofit organizations such as the nashville alliance for public education , the nashville business community for the arts , and the arms control association , and as a trustee on boards of the world wildlife fund , morehouse college , and the andrew young center of international development . . personal life . o'leary has been married three times . her first marriage to carl g . rollins , jr . , ended in divorce . in 1977 she met john f . o'leary , then deputy secretary of energy . they married on april24 , 1980 , and remained married until his death from cancer in 1987 . her son is an attorney . in 1997 o'leary joined a presbyterianism . . see also . list of female united states cabinet secretaries . references . . external links .