Les Nabis

origin of the term . the nabis took their name from a hebrew term which comes from the word nebiim or prophet enclopaedia britannica on-line edition , '' the nabis '' , retrieved 19 april 2020 pierre bonnard , the graphic art , p . 7 burhan 1979 , p . 231 : '' there is , in fact , every reason to believe that the title was chosen by these young painters as a reference to islamic traditions , since when-ever serusier signed a canvas 'nabi , ' . he wrote the word out in arabic script . '' as quoted in pierre bonnard , the graphic art , notes the term was coined in 1888 by the linguist auguste cazalis , brooker , peter ( 2013 ) . the oxford critical and cultural history of modernist magazines , volume 3 , part 1 . oxford : oxford university press . p . 91 . who drew a parallel between the way these painters aimed to revitalize painting ( as 'prophets of modern art ' ) and the way the ancient prophets had rejuvenated israel . oxford english dictionary , headword nabi . beginning . the nabis were a group of young artists of the académie julian in paris , who wanted to transform the foundations of art . one of the artists , paul sérusier , had traveled to pont-aven in october 1888 , where under the guidance of paul gauguin he made a small painting of the port on wood , composed of patches of vivid color assembled to give the feeling of the port . the students called this first nabis painting the talisman , and it eventually became an icon of 20th-century art . in 1889 , the same year of the paris international exposition and the opening of the eiffel tower , the group held its first modest exposition at the café des arts , which was located without the grounds of the exposition . it was titled the impressionist and synthesist group , and included works by two well-known artists , paul gauguin and émile bernard . in august 1890 , maurice denis , then eighteen years old , gave the group a more concrete philosophy . writing under the name pierre louis , he wrote an article in the journal art et critique entitled the definition of neo-traditionalism , which became the manifesto of the movement . the celebrated opening line of the essay was : '' remember that a picture , before being a battle horse , a female nude or some sort of anecdote , is essentially a flat surface covered with colors assembled in a certain order . '' this idea was not original to denis ; the idea had been forward not long before by hippolyte taine in the philosophy of art , where taine wrote : '' a painting is a colored surface , in which the various tones and various degrees of light are placed with a certain choice ; that is its intimate being . '' however , it was the expression of denis which seized the attention of artists . as denis explained , he did not mean that form of the painting was more important than the subject . he wrote , '' the profoundness of our emotions comes from the sufficiency of these lines and these colors to explain themselves.everything is contained in the beauty of the work . '' in his essay , he termed this new movement '' neo-traditionalism '' , in opposition to the '' progressivism '' of the neo-impressionists , led by seurat . the following year , in 1891 , three of the nabis , pierre bonnard , édouard vuillard and maurice denis , took a studio at 28 rue pigalle in paris . it was frequented by other early nabis , including ker-xavier roussel and paul sérusier , as well as journalists and figures from the theatrical and literary world . in 1892 , the nabis branched out into the theatrical world and the decorative arts . paul ranson , assisted by sérusier , bonnard , and vuillard , designed sets for a theatrical presentation of the bateau ivre of the poet arthur rimbaud . maurice denis made costumes and sets for another theatrical production , the trilogy d'antoina at the théatre moderne , and also painted a ceiling for the residence of the art collector and painter henry lerolle . the nabis held a group exhibition in toulouse in june 1894 , and the following year presented their work in siegfried bing 's maison de l'art nouveau , the famous gallery which had given its name to the art nouveau movement . throughout their existence the nabis were a sort of half-serious semi-secret society , who used humorous nicknames and a private vocabulary . even the name of the group was secret until 1897 . they called a studio an 'ergasterium ' and ended their letters with the initials e.t.p.m.v . et m.p . , signifying en ta paume , mon verbe et ma pensée ( '' in your palm , my word and my thoughts '' ) . japanese influence . the graphic art of japan , known as japonism , particularly woodblock prints , was an important influence on the nabis . the style was popularized in france by the art dealer siegfried bing , who traveled to japan to collect prints by hokusai and other japanese artists , and published a monthly art journal , le japon artistique , between may 1888 and april 1891 , which offered color illustrations . in 1900 he organized an exhibit of seven hundred prints at the école des beaux-arts . lacambre , geneviève , la déferlante japonaise , published in les nabis et le décor , beaux arts editions ( march 2019 ) , pp . 38-40 pierre bonnard was particularly influenced by the japanese style ; his nickname among the nabis was '' le plus japonard '' . for one series of four paintings created in 1890–91 , the women in the garden , now in the musée d'orsay , bonnard adapted a japanese format called kamemono with a narrow vertical canvas . the models are his sister andrée and his cousin berthe schaedin . the four figures are presented in curving , serpentine postures , like those in japanese prints . the faces of the women look away from the artist ; the bold patterns of their consumes and the foliage behind them dominate the paintings . he originally conceived the work as a japanese screen , but he finally decided to separate it into four paintings , and to emphasize the decorative aspect , he added a painted border around the canvases . the theme of women in a garden , stylistically adapted from japanese prints , appeared in the work of other nabis , including maurice denis and paul sérusier . denis used the theme of women in gardens in paintings and decorative murals . sérusier adapted the same format in his women at the spring ( 1898 ) , stylistically depicting women descending a hill to take water from a spring . file : femmes au jardin.gif pierre bonnard , women in the garden ( 1890–91 ) , in the japanese kamemono style file : soir de septembre-maurice denis-img 8192.jpg maurice denis , evening in september ( 1891 ) file : édouard vuillard , 1891 , the flowered dress ( o vestido estampado ) , oil on canvas , 38 x 46 cm , museu de arte de são paulo.jpg the printed dress by édouard vuillard ( 1891 ) , museu de arte de são paulo . religion , symbolism , myths and legends . the nabis were influenced by the literature , music and theater of the symbolist movement , and , among some of the nabis , there was a strong current of mysticism and esotericism . their approach to their order was partly humorous and whimsical ; the studio of ranson at 25 boulevard du montparnasse was called their '' temple '' , madame ranson was termed '' the light of the temple '' , and the original nabi painting by sérusier was displayed in the studio like a shrine , and titled the talisman . sérusier whimsically painted paul ranson in a sort of nabic robe , with a staff and a text before him . however , they also had a more serious side . they rejected the materialism of the new industrial age , and admired the poetry of baudelaire , mallarmé and edgar allan poe . they placed themselves in opposition to the current of naturalism expressed in the paintings of courbet and manet and the literature of émile zola . raffali , ludovic , les nabis - un movement symbolist ? in les nabis et le decor , l'objet d'art , march 2019 , pp . 63 , 64 maurice denis and paul sérusier were the nabis who most often painted religious subjects . the work of denis was influenced by the paintings of fra angelico . he often painted scenes and themes taken from the bible , but with the figures in modern costume , in simplified landscapes and surrounded by light , a symbol of faith . in 1895 , he received a commission for a series of seven large paintings called the legend of saint hubert for the paris home of baron cochin . they illustrated the story of saint hubert hunting in the forest of aquitaine , seeing a vision of christ , and being converted to christianity . paul sérusier painted less christian and more mystical scenes , particularly la vision pros du torrent or the rendezvous of fairies ( 1897 ) , showing a group of women in breton costumes passing through the forest , carrying bouquets of flowers to a ceremony , and femmes à la source , depicting a series of women solemnly descending through a mystical forest to a spring . this illustrates the legend of the danaides , who in mythology were condemned to fill and refill leaking jugs of water from a spring . he painted several works of women in breton costumes conducting pagan ceremonies in the forests of brittany . file : maurice denis , 1889 , le calvaire ( climbing to calvary ) , oil on canvas , 41 x 32.5 cm , musée d'orsay.jpg maurice denis , le calvaire ( climbing to calvary ) ( 1889 ) , musée d'orsay file : mauricedenis-lalegendedesthubert-7larriveealermitage.jpg maurice denis , final scene of the legend of saint hubert ( 1897 ) , departmental museum of maurice denis , saint-germain-en-laye ( 1897 ) file : les danaïdes or femmes à la source.png paul sérusier , women at the spring , musée d'orsay ( 1898 ) file : serusier-boissacre.jpg paul sérusier , the sacred woods . interiors . the nabis pierre bonnard , felix vallotton and édouard vuillard , created particularly remarkable paintings depicting the interiors of homes , where the inhabitants of the rooms were almost entirely absorbed into the intense floral decoration and furnishings . in some of the paintings , such as vuillard 's the seamstress and la table de toilet ( 1895 ) , or people in an interior - music , it is difficult to even find and count the individuals in the painting . jolin , camille , les intéieurs de vuillars- entre poésie mystère , l'objet d'art , les nabis et le decor , march 2019 , pp . 52-55 les nabis et le décor - musée du luxembourg , paris file : seamstress by edouard vuillard.jpg édouard vuillard , the seamstress , ( 1893 ) , indianapolis museum of art file : edouard vuillard - woman in a striped dress - google art project.jpg édouard vuillard , woman in a striped dress ( 1895 ) , national gallery of art file : vuilllard interior 1896.jpg édouard vuillard , people in interior- music ( 1896 ) , petit palais museum , paris file : misia at the piano met dt3150.jpg misia at the piano ( c . 1898 ) , édouard vuillard , metropolitan museum of art . women in the garden . one of the most common subjects of the nabis was women in an idyllic garden setting , usually picking flowers or fruit . it appeared in four panels representing the seasons of a young woman 's life by maurice denis ( 1890–91 ) , painted for the bedroom of a young girl , and in the panels of women in the public parks of paris by édouard vuillard ( 1894 ) painted for the residence of his patron alexandre nathanson ; two paintings of women and children picking apples in an orchard by pierre bonnard ( 1894–96 ) ; and in a tapestry by paul ranson , spring , depicting three women picking fruit . all the images are highly stylized , often using the same serpentine forms to represent the women , the trees and the foliage . the young women in the series by denis are shown traveling along a road , dressed in vestal white in the first painting , then in different colors as they reach maturity in the final painting . file : la barrière fleurie , le pouldu 1889 paul serusier.jpg paul sérusier , the flower barrier ( 1889 ) file : denis-road-of-life.jpg april or the road of life by maurice denis , painted for the bedroom of a young girl . ( 1892 ) file : paulelieranson+spring-womenbeneathblossomingtrees+neddlepoint-on-canvas+1895+museed'orsay-paris.jpg women picking flowers in the garden , tapestry by paul ranson ( 1895 ) file:1896 bonnard familie des komponisten claude terrasse anagoria.jpg the bonnard family in the garden , screen by pierre bonnard ( 1896 ) . decorative art . one of the stated objectives of the nabis was to break down the barriers between art and ordinary life , and in particular the distinction between art and decoration . much of the art they created was designed specifically to be decorative , for display in salons and dining rooms . they designed screens , murals , wallpaper , tapestries , dishware , lampshades , and ornament for furniture , as well as theater decor and costume design , and graphic design for advertising posters . paul ranson , working with art nouveau architect henry van de velde made murals to decorate the dining room of art gallery owner siegfried bing . after a visit to the united states , where he saw the stained glass designs of louis comfort tiffany and his firm , bing invited the nabis to submit their own designs for tiffany glass . roussel , vuillard , vallotton , ranson , denis , bonnard , and ibels all made designs , which bing displayed in his gallery in paris in april 1895 , along with designs of non-nabis , including toulouse-lautrec . in the end the windows were not made , but maurice denis continued to create window designs on symbolist themes , with bold designs and vivid colors . in 1895 , vuillard was commissioned to design a series of plates , which featured women in highly stylized costumes . jolin , camille , le beau dans le quotidian , in les nabis et le decor , pp . 29-41 , in l'objet d'art , march 2019 file : edouard vuillard - public gardens - google art project.jpg decorative screen , the public gardens by édouard vuillard ( 1895 ) file : mauricedenis-lechemindelavie.jpg stained glass window , '' the path of life , by maurice denis ( 1895 ) file : mauricedenis-lechelledanslefeuillage.jpg the ladder in the foliage by maurice denis ( 1892 ) , canvas on a wood panel , made for the ceiling of the home of art patron henry lerolle . the same woman on the ladder is seen from four points of view . file : edouard vuillard , piatto con donna con camicia rigata e gon na a balze , 1895.jpg plate depicting a woman in a striped blouse , by édouard vuillard ( 1895 ) . graphic arts . members of les nabis worked in a variety of media , using oils on both canvas and cardboard , and distemper on canvas and wall decoration , and they also produced posters , prints , book illustrations , textiles and furniture . considered to be on the cutting edge of modern art during their early period , their subject matter was representational ( though often symbolist in inspiration ) , but was design-oriented along the lines of the japanese prints they so admired , and art nouveau . however , the artists of the nabis circle were highly influenced by the paintings of the impressionists , and thus while sharing the flatness , page layout , and negative space of art nouveau and other decorative modes , much of lesnabis ' art has a painterly , non-realistic look , with color palettes reminiscent of cézanne and gauguin . bonnard 's posters and lithographs are more firmly in the art nouveau , or toulouse-lautrec manner . after the turn of the century , as modern art moved towards fauvism , expressionism , cubism , and abstraction , lesnabis were viewed as conservatives and , indeed , were among the last group of artists to stick to the roots and artistic ambitions of the impressionists , pursuing these ends almost into the middle of the 20th century . in their later years , these painters also largely abandoned their earlier interests in decorative and applied arts . file : les parisiennes cph.3g10009.jpg pierre bonnard , les parisiennes 1893 , lithograph file : vallotton pour bing.jpg felix vallotton poster for siegfried bing 's gallery ( 1893 ) file : vallotton-raison.gif felix vallotton , la raison probante ( the cogent reason ) , a woodcut from the series intimités ( 1898 ) file : frontispiece , from the album amours met mm77360.jpg maurice denis , frontispiece lithograph from the series amour ( 1899 ) . breakup . in 1897 , the nabis were not present at the well-known salon des independents , but instead held their own exposition at the galerie vollard , more avant-garde than the salon . their final exhibition as a group took place in 1900 at the galerie bernheim , with works of bonnard , denis , ibels , maillol , roussel , sérusier , vallotton and vuillard . after that show , each of the artists went his separate way . looking back in 1909 , denis described the accomplishment of the nabis . '' art is no longer a visual sensation that we gather , like a photograph , as it were , of nature . no , it is a creation of our spirit , for which nature is only the occasion . '' in 1937 , vuillard described the breakup of the nabis . '' . the march of progress was so rapid . society was ready to welcome cubism and surrealism before we had reached what we had imagined as our goal . we found ourselves in a way suspended in the air . '' pierre bonnard and ingid rybeck , chez bonnard a deauville , konstrevy no . 4 , stockholm ( 1937 ) , cited in l'objet de l'art , les nabis et le decor ( march 2019 ) , page 65 . members and associates . pierre bonnard ( 1867–1947 ) , le nabi très japonard maurice denis ( 1870–1943 ) , le nabi aux belles icônes maxime dethomas ( 1869–1929 ) meyer de haan ( 1852–1895 ) , le nabi hollandais hermann-paul ( 1864–1940 ) henri-gabriel ibels ( 1867–1936 ) , le nabi journaliste georges lacombe ( 1868–1916 ) , le nabi sculpteur lugné-poe ( 1869–1940 ) aristide maillol ( 1861–1944 ) paul ranson ( 1864–1909 ) , le nabi plus japonard que le nabi japonard józsef rippl-rónai ( 1861–1927 ) , le nabi hongrois ker-xavier roussel ( 1867–1944 ) paul sérusier ( 1864–1927 ) , le nabi à la barbe rutilante marguérite sérusier , wife of paul sérusier ; a notable decorative painter félix vallotton ( 1865–1925 ) , le nabi étranger jan verkade ( 1868–1946 ) , le nabi obéliscal édouard vuillard ( 1868–1940 ) , le nabi zouave file:115 maurice denis portrait de l'artiste à l'âge de 18 ans.jpg maurice denis , aged eighteen , in 1889 file : édouard vuillard 001.jpg édouard vuillard , self-portrait , 1889 file : self-portrait-1889.jpg pierre bonnard , self-portrait , c . 1889 file : ranson serusier.jpg paul ranson , paul sérusier , and marie-france ranson in paul ranson 's studio , c . 1900 file : ker-xavier roussel , édouard vuillard , romain coolus , felix vallotton 1899.jpg ker-xavier roussel , édouard vuillard , romain coolus , félix vallotton , 1899 file : porträt paul ranson.jpg portrait of paul ranson in nabi costume , by paul sérusier other members of the group included the playwright pierre veber , the musician pierre hermant , and the linguist auguste cazalis , g . l . groom , edouard vuillard : painter-decorator : patrons and projects , 1892-1912 ( yale university press , 1993 ) , p.10 called ( by ranson ) le nabi ben kallyre . many of the attributed nicknames are cited in willibrord ( jan ) verkade , die unruhe zu gott : erinnerungen eines malermönchs , 5th edition ( herder & co . , freiburg im breisgau 1930 ) , pp.67–70 . . gallery . file : félix vallotton , 1893 - la valse.jpg the waltz , félix vallotton , museum of modern art le havre ( 1893 ) file : valloton frau mit dienstmagd beim baden.jpg félix vallotton , the mistress and the servant , 1896 file : paesaggio nabi paul ranson.jpg paul ranson , nabis landscape , 1890 file : georges lacombe-1868-1946-marine bleue , effet de vague , circa 1893 , peinture à l'oeuf sur toile,43x64,2 cm , musée des beaux-arts de rennes.jpg georges lacombe , marine bleue , effet de vagues , 1893 . see also . pont-aven school henry lerolle , patron odilon redon . notes . references . bibliography . cogeval , guy ( 2015 ) . bonnard . paris : hazan , malakoff . ( in french ) . further reading . . external links . the prophets of montmartre , an article on les nabis by alamantra pierre bonnard , the graphic art , an exhibition catalog from the metropolitan museum of art , which contains material on bonnard and others in the les nabis collective