Cosmological principle

definition . astronomer william keel explains : the cosmological principle is usually stated formally as 'viewed on a sufficiently large scale , the properties of the universe are the same for all observers . ' this amounts to the strongly philosophical statement that the part of the universe which we can see is a fair sample , and that the same physical laws apply throughout . in essence , this in a sense says that the universe is knowable and is playing fair with scientists . the cosmological principle depends on a definition of '' observer , '' and contains an implicit qualification and two testable consequences . '' observers '' means any observer at any location in the universe , not simply any human observer at any location on earth : as andrew liddle puts it , '' the cosmological principle means that the universe looks the same whoever and wherever you are . '' the qualification is that variation in physical structures can be overlooked , provided this does not imperil the uniformity of conclusions drawn from observation : the sun is different from the earth , our galaxy is different from a black hole , some galaxies advance toward rather than recede from us , and the universe has a '' foamy '' texture of galaxy clusters and voids , but none of these different structures appears to violate the basic laws of physics . the two testable structural consequences of the cosmological principle are homogeneity and isotropy . homogeneity means that the same observational evidence is available to observers at different locations in the universe ( '' the part of the universe which we can see is a fair sample '' ) . isotropy means that the same observational evidence is available by looking in any direction in the universe ( '' the same physical laws apply throughout '' . the principles are distinct but closely related , because a universe that appears isotropic from any two ( for a spherical geometry , three ) locations must also be homogeneous . origin . the cosmological principle is first clearly asserted in the philosophiæ naturalis principia mathematica ( 1687 ) of isaac newton . in contrast to earlier classical or medieval cosmologies , in which earth rested at the center of universe , newton conceptualized the earth as a sphere in orbital motion around the sun within an empty space that extended uniformly in all directions to immeasurably large distances . he then showed , through a series of mathematical proofs on detailed observational data of the motions of planets and comets , that their motions could be explained by a single principle of '' universal gravitation '' that applied as well to the orbits of the galilean moons around jupiter , the moon around the earth , the earth around the sun , and to falling bodies on earth . that is , he asserted the equivalent material nature of all bodies within the solar system , the identical nature of the sun and distant stars and thus the uniform extension of the physical laws of motion to a great distance beyond the observational location of earth itself . implications . observations show that more distant galaxies are closer together and have lower content of chemical elements heavier than lithium . : image : cmb timeline75.jpg – nasa ( public domain image ) applying the cosmological principle , this suggests that heavier elements were not created in the big bang but were produced by nucleosynthesis in giant stars and expelled across a series of supernovae explosions and new star formation from the supernovae remnants , which means heavier elements would accumulate over time . another observation is that the furthest galaxies ( earlier time ) are often more fragmentary , interacting and unusually shaped than local galaxies ( recent time ) , suggesting evolution in galaxy structure as well . a related implication of the cosmological principle is that the largest discrete structures in the universe are in mechanical equilibrium . homogeneity and isotropy of matter at the largest scales would suggest that the largest discrete structures are parts of a single indiscrete form , like the crumbs which make up the interior of a cake . at extreme cosmological distances , the property of mechanical equilibrium in surfaces lateral to the line of sight can be empirically tested ; however , under the assumption of the cosmological principle , it can not be detected parallel to the line of sight ( see timeline of the universe ) . cosmologists agree that in accordance with observations of distant galaxies , a universe must be non-static if it follows the cosmological principle . in 1923 , alexander friedmann set out a variant of albert einstein 's equations of general relativity that describe the dynamics of a homogeneous isotropic universe . . independently , georges lemaître derived in 1927 the equations of an expanding universe from the general relativity equations . translated by a . s . eddington : thus , a non-static universe is also implied , independent of observations of distant galaxies , as the result of applying the cosmological principle to general relativity . criticism . karl popper criticized the cosmological principle on the grounds that it makes '' our lack of knowledge a principle of knowing something '' . he summarized his position as : : the “ cosmological principles ” were , i fear , dogmas that should not have been proposed . helge kragh : “ the most philosophically of all the sciences ” : karl popper and physical cosmology ( 2012 ) . observations . although the universe is inhomogeneous at smaller scales , it is statistically homogeneous on scales larger than 250 million light years . the cosmic microwave background is isotropic , that is to say that its intensity is about the same whichever direction we look at . however , recent findings have called this view into question . data from the planck mission shows hemispheric bias in 2 respects : one with respect to average temperature ( i.e . temperature fluctuations ) , the second with respect to larger variations in the degree of perturbations ( i.e . densities ) . therefore , the european space agency ( the governing body of the planck mission ) has concluded that these anisotropies are , in fact , statistically significant and can no longer be ignored . . inconsistencies . the cosmological principle implies that at a sufficiently large scale , the universe is homogeneous . based on n-body simulations in a λcdm universe , yadav and his colleagues showed that the spatial distribution of galaxies is statistically homogeneous if averaged over scales 260/h mpc or more . a number of observations have been reported to be in conflict with predictions of maximal structure sizes : the clowes–campusano lqg , discovered in 1991 , has a length of 580 mpc , and is marginally larger than the consistent scale . the sloan great wall , discovered in 2003 , has a length of 423 mpc , which is only just consistent with the cosmological principle . u1.11 , a large quasar group discovered in 2011 , has a length of 780 mpc , and is two times larger than the upper limit of the homogeneity scale . the huge-lqg , discovered in 2012 , is three times longer than , and twice as wide as is predicted possible according to these current models , and so challenges our understanding of the universe on large scales . in november 2013 , a new structure 10 billion light years away measuring 2000–3000 mpc ( more than seven times that of the sgw ) has been discovered , the hercules–corona borealis great wall , putting further doubt on the validity of the cosmological principle . however , as pointed out by seshadri nadathur in 2013 , the existence of structures larger than the homogeneous scale ( 260/h mpc by yadav 's estimation ) does not necessarily violate the cosmological principle ( see huge-lqg dispute ) . while the isotropy of the universe around earth is confirmed at high significance by studies of the cosmic microwave background temperature maps , its homogeneity over cosmological scales is still a matter of debate . . perfect cosmological principle . the perfect cosmological principle is an extension of the cosmological principle , and states that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic in space and time . in this view the universe looks the same everywhere ( on the large scale ) , the same as it always has and always will . the perfect cosmological principle underpins steady state theory and emerges from chaotic inflation theory . . see also . background independence copernican principle end of greatness friedmann–lemaître–robertson–walker metric large scale structure of the cosmos metric expansion of space redshift . references .