News style

overview . newspapers generally adhere to an expository writing style . over time and place , journalism ethics and standards have varied in the degree of objectivity or sensationalism they incorporate . it is considered unethical not to attribute a scoop to the journalist ( s ) who broke a story , even if they are employed by a rival organization . definitions of professionalism differ among news agency ; their reputations , according to both professional standards and reader expectations , are often tied to the appearance of objectivity . in its most ideal form , news writing strives to be intelligible to the majority of readers , engaging , and succinct . within these limits , news stories also aim to be comprehensive . however , other factors are involved , some stylistic and some derived from the media form . among the larger and more respected newspapers , fairness and balance is a major factor in presenting information . commentary is usually confined to a separate section , though each paper may have a different overall slant . editorial policies dictate the use of adjectives , euphemisms , and idioms . newspapers with an international audience , for example , tend to use a more formal style of writing . the specific choices made by a news outlet 's editor or editorial board are often collected in a style guide ; common style guides include the ap stylebook and the us news style book . the main goals of news writing can be summarized by the abcs of journalism : accuracy , brevity , and clarity . . terms and structure . journalistic prose is explicit and precise and tries not to rely on jargon . as a rule , journalists will not use a long word when a short one will do . they use subject-verb-object construction and vivid , active prose ( see grammar ) . they offer anecdotes , examples and metaphors , and they rarely depend on generalizations or abstract ideas . news writers try to avoid using the same word more than once in a paragraph ( sometimes called an '' echo '' or '' word mirror '' ) . headline . the headline ( also heading , head or title , or hed in journalism jargon ) of a story is typically a complete sentence ( e.g . , '' pilot flies below bridges to save divers '' ) , often with auxiliary verbs and articles removed ( e.g . , '' remains at colorado camp linked to missing chicago man '' ) . however , headlines sometimes omit the subject ( e.g . , '' jumps from boat , catches in wheel '' ) or verb ( e.g . , '' cat woman lucky '' ) . . subhead . a subhead ( also sub-headline , subheading , subtitle or deck ) can be either a subordinate title under the main headline , or the heading of a subsection of the article . american heritage dictionary it is a heading that precedes the main text , or a group of paragraphs of the main text . it helps encapsulate the entire piece , or informs the reader of the topic of part of it . long or complex articles often have more than one subheading . subheads are thus one type of entry point that help readers make choices , such as where to begin ( or stop ) reading . billboard . an article billboard is capsule summary text , often just one sentence or fragment , which is put into a sidebar or text box ( reminiscent of an outdoor billboard ) on the same page to grab the reader 's attention as they are flipping through the pages to encourage them to stop and read that article . when it consists of a ( sometimes compressed ) sample of the text of the article , it is known as a call-out or callout , and when it consists of a quotation ( e.g . of an article subject , informant , or interviewee ) , it is referred to as a pulled quotation or pull quote . additional billboards of any of these types may appear later in the article ( especially on subsequent pages ) to entice further reading . journalistic websites sometimes use animation techniques to swap one billboard for another ( e.g . a slide of a call-out may be replaced by a photo with pull quote after some short time has elapsed ) . such billboards are also used as pointers to the article in other sections of the publication or site , or as advertisements for the piece in other publication or sites . lead . the most important structural element of a story is the lead ( also intro or lede in journalism jargon ) , including the story 's first , or leading , sentence or two , which almost always form its own paragraph . the spelling lede , from early modern english ) is also used in american english , originally to avoid confusion with the printing press type formerly made from the metal lead or the related typographical term '' leading '' . charney states that '' an effective lead is a 'brief , sharp statement of the story 's essential facts . ' '' charney 1966:166 the lead is usually the first sentence , or in some cases the first two sentences , and is ideally 20–25 words in length . a lead must balance the ideal of maximum information conveyed with the constraint of the unreadability of a long sentence . this makes writing a lead an optimization problem , in which the goal is to articulate the most encompassing and interesting statement that a writer can make in one sentence , given the material with which he or she has to work . while a rule of thumb says the lead should answer most or all of the five ws , few leads can fit all of these . article leads are sometimes categorized into hard leads and soft leads . a hard lead aims to provide a comprehensive thesis which tells the reader what the article will cover . a soft lead introduces the topic in a more creative , attention-seeking fashion , and is usually followed by a nut graph , a brief summary of facts . ; example of a hard-lead paragraph : nasa is proposing another space project . the agency 's budget request , announced today , included a plan to send another mission to the moon . this time the agency hopes to establish a long-term facility as a jumping-off point for other space adventures . the budget requests approximately 10 billion for the project . ; example of a soft-lead sentence : humans will be going to the moon again . the nasa announcement came as the agency requested 10 billion of appropriations for the project . an '' off-lead '' is the second most important front page news of the day . the off-lead appears either in the top left corner , or directly below the lead on the right . '' explainer : explaining today 's papers , '' by scott shuger , slate , september 7 , 1998 , updated december 14 , 2005 ( retrieved december 28 , 2018 ) to '' bury the lead '' is to begin the article with background information or details of secondary importance to the readers , forcing them to read more deeply into an article than they should have to in order to discover the essential point ( s ) . it is a common mistake in press releases , but a characteristic of an academic writing style . . nutshell paragraph . a nutshell paragraph ( also simply nutshell , or nut 'graph , nut graf , nutgraf , etc . , in journalism jargon ) is a brief paragraph ( occasionally there can be more than one ) that summarizes the news value of the story , sometimes bullet-pointed and/or set off in a box . nut-shell paragraphs are used particularly in feature stories . paragraphs . paragraphs ( shortened as 'graphs , graphs , grafs or pars in journalistic jargon ) form the bulk of an article . common usage is that one or two sentences each form their own paragraph . inverted pyramid structure . journalists usually describe the organization or structure of a news story as an inverted pyramid . the essential and most interesting elements of a story are put at the beginning , with supporting information following in order of diminishing importance . this structure enables readers to stop reading at any point and still come away with the essence of a story . it allows people to explore a topic to only the depth that their curiosity takes them , and without the imposition of details or nuances that they could consider irrelevant , but still making that information available to more interested readers . the inverted pyramid structure also enables articles to be trimmed to any arbitrary length during layout , to fit in the space available . writers are often admonished lead paragraph to ensure that they present the most important facts first , rather than requiring the reader to go through several paragraphs to find them . some writers start their stories with the '' 1-2-3 lead '' , yet there are many kinds of lead available . this format invariably starts with a '' five ws '' opening paragraph ( as described above ) , followed by an indirect quote that serves to support a major element of the first paragraph , and then a direct quote to support the indirect quote . kicker . a kicker can refer to multiple things : the last story in the news broadcast ; a '' happy '' story to end the show . a short , catchy word or phrase accompanying a major headline , '' intended to provoke interest in , editorialize about , or provide orientation '' . feature style . news stories are not the only type of material that appear in newspapers and magazines . longer articles , such as magazine cover articles and the pieces that lead the inside sections of a newspaper , are known as features . feature stories differ from straight news in several ways . foremost is the absence of a straight-news lead , most of the time . instead of offering the essence of a story up front , feature writers may attempt to lure readers in . while straight news stories always stay in third person point of view , it is common for a feature article to slip into first person . the journalist often details interactions with interview subjects , making the piece more personal . a feature 's first paragraphs often relate an intriguing moment or event , as in an '' anecdotal lead '' . from the particulars of a person or episode , its view quickly broadens to generalities about the story 's subject . the section that signals what a feature is about is called the nut graph or billboard . billboards appear as the third or fourth paragraph from the top , and may be up to two paragraphs long . unlike a lead , a billboard rarely gives everything away . it reflects the fact that feature writers aim to hold their readers ' attention to the end , which requires engendering curiosity and offering a '' payoff . '' feature paragraphs tend to be longer than those of news stories , with smoother transitions between them . feature writers use the active-verb construction and concrete explanations of straight news but often put more personality in their prose . feature stories often close with a '' kicker '' rather than simply petering out . other countries . there are broadly similar formats in other cultures , with some characteristics particular to individual countries . japan . written japanese in general , and news writing in particular , places a strong emphasis on brevity , and features heavy use of sino-japanese vocabulary and omission of grammar that would be used in speech . most frequently , two-character kanji compounds are used to concisely express concepts that would otherwise require a lengthy clause if using spoken language . nominalization is also common , often compacting a phrase into a string of kanji . abbreviations are also frequent , reducing a term or kanji compound to just initial characters ( as in acronyms in alphabetic writing systems ) ; these abbreviated terms might not be used in spoken language , but are understandable from looking at the characters in context . furthermore , headlines are written in telegram style , yielding clipped phrases that are not grammatical sentences . larger articles , especially front-page articles , also often have a one-paragraph summary at the beginning . references . notes . . bibliography . linda jorgensen . real-world newsletters ( 1999 ) mark levin . the reporter 's notebook : writing tools for student journalists ( 2000 ) buck ryan and michael o'donnell . the editor 's toolbox : a reference guide for beginners and professionals , ( 2001 ) allan m . siegal and william g . connolly . the new york times manual of style and usage : the official style guide used by the writers and editors of the world 's most authoritative newspaper , ( 2002 ) m . l . stein , susan paterno , and r . christopher burnett , the newswriter 's handbook introduction to journalism ( 2006 ) bryan a . garner . the winning brief : 100 tips for persuasive briefing in trial and appellate court ( 1999 ) philip gerard , creative nonfiction : researching and crafting stories of real life ( 1998 ) steve peha and margot carmichael lester , be a writer : your guide to the writing life ( 2006 ) andrea sutcliffe . new york public library writer 's guide to style and usage , ( 1994 ) bill walsh , the elephants of style : a trunkload of tips on the big issues and gray areas of contemporary american english ( 2004 ) . external links . basic news writing chart – real and fake news ( 2014 ) ( 2016 ) /pew research center