Persuasive technology

taxonomies . functional triad . persuasive technologies can be categorized by their functional roles . b . j . fogg proposes the functional triad as a classification of three '' basic ways that people view or respond to computing technologies '' : persuasive technologies can function as tools , media , or social actors – or as more than one at once . fogg1998 as tools , technologies can increase people 's ability to perform a target behavior by making it easier or restructuring it . fogg2002 for example , an wizard ( software ) can influence task completion – including completing tasks not planned by users ( such as installation of additional software ) . as media , interactive technologies can use both interactivity and narrative to create persuasive experiences that support rehearsing a behavior , empathizing , or exploring causal relationships . fogg2002 for example , simulations and games instantiate rules and procedures that express a point of view and can shape behavior and persuade ; these use procedural rhetoric . technologies can also function as social actors . reeves1996 , turkle1984 this '' opens the door for computers to apply . social influence '' . fogg2002 interactive technologies can cue social responses , e.g . , through their use of language , assumption of established social roles , or physical presence . for example , computers can use embodied conversational agents as part of their interface . or a helpful or disclosive computer can cause users to mindlessly reciprocate . fogg1997b , moon2000 fogg notes that '' users seem to respond to computers as social actors when computer technologies adopt animate characteristics ( physical features , emotions , voice communication ) , play animate roles ( coach , pet , assistant , opponent ) , or follow social rules or dynamics ( greetings , apologies , turn taking ) . '' . direct interaction v . mediation . persuasive technologies can also be categorized by whether they change attitude and behaviors through direct interaction or through a mediating role : oinas-kukkonen_harjumaa2008 do they persuade , for example , through human-computer interaction ( hci ) or computer-mediated communication ( cmc ) ? the examples already mentioned are the former , but there are many of the latter . communication technologies can persuade or amplify the persuasion of others by transforming the social interaction , licklider1968 bailenson2004 providing shared feedback on interaction , dimicco2004 or restructuring communication processes . winograd1986 . persuasion design . persuasion design is the design of messages by analyzing and evaluating their content , using established psychological research theories and methods . andrew chak chak2003 argues that the most persuasive web sites focus on making users feel comfortable about making decisions and helping them act on those decisions . the comfort that a user feels is generally registered subconsciously . . persuasion by social motivators . previous research has also utilized on social motivators like competition for persuasion . by connecting a user with other users , his/her coworkers , friends and families , a persuasive application can apply social motivators on the user to promote behavior changes . social media such as facebook , twitter also facilitate the development of such systems . it has been demonstrated that social impact can result in greater behavior changes than the case where the user is isolated . . persuasive strategies . halko and & nbsp ; kientz made an extensive search in the literature for persuasive strategies and methods used in the field of psychology to modify health-related behaviors . their search concluded that there are eight main types of persuasive strategies , which can be grouped into the following four categories , where each category has two complementary approaches . instruction style . . authoritative . this persuades the technology user through an authoritative agent , for example , a strict personal trainer who instructs the user to perform the task that will meet their goal . non-authoritative . this persuades the user through a neutral agent , for example , a friend who encourages the user to meet their goals . another example of instruction style is customer reviews ; a mix of positive and negative reviews together give a neutral perspective on a product or service . . social feedback . . cooperative . this persuades the user through the notion of cooperating and teamwork , such as allowing the user to team up with friends to complete their goals . competitive . this persuades the user through the notion of competing . for example , users can play against friends or peers and be motivated to achieve their goal by winning the competition . motivation type . . extrinsic . this persuades the user through external motivators , for example , winning a trophy as a reward for completing a task . intrinsic . this persuades the user through internal motivators , such as the good feeling a user would have for being healthy or for achieving a goal . reinforcement type . . negative reinforcement . this persuades the user by removing an unpleasant stimulus . for example , a brown and dying nature scene might turn green and healthy as the user practises more healthy behaviors . positive reinforcement . this persuades the user by adding a positive stimulus . for example , adding flowers , butterflies , and other nice-looking elements to an empty nature scene as a user practises more healthy behaviors . more recently , lieto and & nbsp ; vernero have also shown that arguments reducible to logical fallacies are a class of widely adopted persuasive techniques in both web and mobile technologies . these techniques have also shown their efficacy in large-scale studies about persuasive news recommendations . . reciprocal equality . one feature that distinguishes persuasion technology from familiar forms of persuasion is that the individual being persuaded often can not respond in kind . this is a lack of reciprocal equality . for example , when a conversational agent persuades a user using social influence strategies , the user can not also use similar strategies on the agent . fogg2002 . health behavior change . while persuasive technologies are found in many domains , considerable recent attention has focused on behavior change in health domains . digital health coaching is the utilization of computers as persuasive technology to augment the personal care delivered to patients , and is used in numerous medical settings . elton2007 numerous scientific studies show that online health behaviour change interventions can influence users ' behaviours . moreover , the most effective interventions are modelled on health coaching , where users are asked to set goals , educated about the consequences of their behaviour , then encouraged to track their progress toward their goals . sophisticated systems even adapt to users who relapse by helping them get back on the bandwagon . cugelman2011 maintaining behavior change long term is one of the challenges of behavior change interventions . for instance , as reported , for chronic illness treatment regimens non-adherence rate can be as high as 50 % to 80 % . common strategies that have been shown by previous research to increase long-term adherence to treatment include extended care , skills training , social support , treatment tailoring , self-monitoring , and multicomponent stages . however , even though these strategies have been demonstrated to be effective , there are also existing barriers to implementation of such programs : limited time , resources , as well as patient factors such as embarrassment of disclosing their health habits . to make behavior change strategies more effective , researchers also have been adapting well-known and empirically-tested behavior change theories into such practice . the most prominent behavior change theories that have been implemented in various health-related behavior change research has been self-determination theory , theory of planned behavior , social cognitive theory , transtheoretical model , and social ecological model . each behavior change theory analyses behavior change in different ways and consider different factors to be more or less important . research has suggested that interventions based on behavior change theories tend to yield better result than interventions that do not employ such theories . the effectiveness of them vary : social cognitive theory proposed by bandura , which incorporates the well-known construct of self-efficacy , has been the most widely used method in behavior change interventions as well as the most effective in maintaining long-term behavior change . even though the healthcare discipline has produced a plethora of empirical behavior change research , other scientific disciplines are also adapting such theories to induce behavior change . for instance , behavior change theories have also been used in sustainability , such as saving electricity , and lifestyle , such as helping people drinking more water . these research has shown that these theories , already effectively proven useful in healthcare , is equally powerful in other fields to promote behavior change . interestingly , there have been some studies that showed unique insights and that behavior change is a complex chain of events : a study by chudzynski et al . showed that reinforcement schedule has little effect on maintaining behavior change . a point made in a study by wemyss et al . is that even though people who have maintained behavior change for short term might revert to baseline , their perception of their behavior change could be different : they still believe they maintained the behavior change even if they factually have not . therefore , it is possible self-report measures would not always be the most effective way of evaluating the effectiveness of the intervention . promote sustainable lifestyles . previous work has also shown that people are receptive to change their behaviors for sustainable lifestyles . this result has encouraged researchers to develop persuasive technologies to promote for example , green travels , less waste , etc . one common technique is to facilitate people 's awareness of benefits for performing eco-friendly behaviors . for example , a review of over twenty studies exploring the effects of feedback on electricity consumption in the home showed that the feedback on the electricity consumption pattern can typically result in a 5–12 % saving . besides the environmental benefits such as co2 savings , health benefit , cost are also often used to promote eco-friendly behaviors . . research challenges . despite the promising results of existing persuasive technologies , there are three main challenges that remain present . technical challenges . persuasive technologies developed relies on self-report or automated systems that monitor human behavior using sensors and pattern recognition algorithms . several studies in the medical field have noted that self-report is subject to bias , recall errors and low adherence rates . the physical world and human behavior are both highly complex and ambiguous . utilizing sensors and machine learning algorithms to monitor and predict human behavior remains a challenging problem , especially that most of the persuasive technologies require just-in-time intervention . difficulty in studying behavior change . in general , understanding behavioral changes require long-term studies . as multiple internal and external factors can influence these changes , such as personality type , age , income , willingness to change and more . for that , it becomes difficult to understand and measure the effect of persuasive technologies . ethical challenges . the question of manipulating feelings and desires through persuasive technology remains an open ethical debate . user-centered design guidelines should be developed encouraging ethically and morally responsible designs , and provide a reasonable balance between the pros and cons of persuasive technologies . in addition to encouraging ethically and morally responsible designs , fogg believes education , such as through the journal articles he writes , is a panacea for concerns about the ethical challenges of persuasive computers . fogg notes two fundamental distinctions regarding the importance of education in engaging with ethics and technology : '' first , increased knowledge about persuasive computers allows people more opportunity to adopt such technologies to enhance their own lives , if they choose . second , knowledge about persuasive computers helps people recognize when technologies are using tactics to persuade them . '' another ethical challenge for persuasive technology designers is the risk of triggering persuasive backfires , where the technology triggers the bad behavior that it was designed to reduce . stibe , a . , & cugelman , b . ( 2016 ) . persuasive backfiring : when behavior change interventions trigger unintended negative outcomes . in international conference on persuasive technology ( pp . 65-77 ) . springer , cham . . see also . other subjects which have some overlap or features in common with persuasive technology include : advertising artificial intelligence brainwashing captology coercion collaboration tools ( including wikis ) design for behaviour change personal coaching personal grooming propaganda psychology rhetoric and oratory skills technological rationality wvox notable past programming