Rodeo clown

tasks and skills . the primary job of the rodeo bullfighter is to protect a fallen rider from the bull by distracting it and providing an alternative target for the bull to attack , whether the rider has been bucking or has jumped off the animal . these individuals expose themselves to great danger in order to protect the riders . to this end , they wear bright , loose-fitting clothes that are designed to tear away , with protective gear fitted underneath . groves , melody ; '' ropes , reins and rawhide '' , university of new mexico press , 2006 , rodeo clowns require speed , agility , and the ability to anticipate a bull 's next move . working closely with very large , very powerful animals , rodeo clowns are often injured seriously , and , sometimes , fatally . most rodeos feature a clown , and clowns have become crowd favorites . in some venues , rodeo bullfighters still wear clown make-up and some may also provide traditional clowning entertainment for the crowd between rodeo events , often parodying aspects of cowboy culture . but most modern bullfighters no longer dress as clowns , though they still wear bright , loose-fitting clothing . at larger events in the usa , the job is split , a bullfighter ( sometimes two or more ) protects the riders from the bull , and a barrelman ( sometimes one person , sometimes two ) provide comic humor . some barrelmen provide both comedy and support to bullfighters , but the job of a bullfighter is generally distinct from that of the comic . . history . rodeo clowns date to the beginnings of competitive rodeo in the early 1900s , when promoters hired cowboys to entertain the crowd between events or if the competition was delayed . these individuals began wearing oversized , baggy clothing and eventually developed more outlandish gear . when bull riding competition began to use ill-tempered brahma bulls in the 1920s , the need for a person to distract the bull from fallen riders fell to the rodeo clown . the use of a barrel for protection began during the 1930s when a rodeo clown named jasbo fulkerson began to use a wooden barrel with a solid bottom . hollman , holly . '' clowning around in arena is a century-old tradition '' decatur daily , march 26 , 2007 in 1995 , earl w . bascom was honored at age 89 as the oldest living rodeo clown in the world . vernal express ( august 30 , 1995 ) '' world 's oldest living rodeo clown and bullfighter dies '' bullfighting was reported as wick peth 's profession in 1967 , and jimmy anderson was reported to have begun his career in 1975 . in australia , rodeo clowns were a part of rodeos and agricultural shows for many years . they were hired to entertain the spectators between events and to help manage the bullocks , steers or bulls in the arena . hicks jenny , “ australian cowboys , roughriders & rodeos ” , cqu press , rockhampton , qld , 2000 in the 1930s , with the introduction of aggressive brahman bulls and brahman crossbreds , the job became much more serious . in the late 20th century , acknowledging the great danger faced by the profession , the term bullfighter began to replace the name rodeo clown in formal use . the comedy aspect of clown work , as opposed to protection of rodeo athletes , began to disappear in some parts of the usa by the late 1970s . in 2003 , bullfighters in the professional bull riders ( pbr ) organization stopped wearing traditional rodeo clown make-up & outfits , and traded them for sport jerseys & shorts with corporate sponsor logos . this was also the case for barrelmen in the pbr , but they retained their make-up . technique . the bullfighters enter the rodeo arena on foot , before the bull is released from the cattle crush . they stand on either side of the chute as the bull is released and work as a team to distract the bull and thus protect the rider and each other . their role is particularly important when a rider has been injured , in which case the bullfighter interposes himself between the bull and the rider , or uses techniques such as running off at an angle , throwing a hat , or shouting , so that the injured rider can exit the ring . bullfighters are an extremely important asset to the bull rider , and will at times put their lives on the line to preserve the bull riders . when a rider has been hung up , they face the extremely dangerous task of trying to free him , with one team member going to the bull 's head and the other attempting to release the rider . typically , at larger rodeos , bullfighters work in groups of as little as two , and as many as four . the barrelman uses a large , well-padded steel barrel that he can jump in and out of easily , and the barrel helps to protect him from the bull . in australia , barrelmen generally do not use barrels . all members of the protection team wear loose , baggy clothing . the comic may wear the most outlandish clothing in bright colors , which may include things like wearing an inflatable female costume , and uses noisy colorful props such as rubber chickens and exploding garbage cans . typically , the barrelman carries a microphone and heckles the rodeo announcer , the crowd and anyone else he recognizes . during the bull riding event , the barrelman supports the bullfighters , including taunting the bulls by calling them names and waving props at them , usually from within the safety of the barrel . barrelmen may also tell jokes and use topical humor . freestyle bullfighting . bullfighting has grown in popularity , so that in addition to being a job in its own right , it is a competitive event at rodeos around the united states . when not working to protect bull riders , rodeo bullfighters also have their own performances known as freestyle bullfighting or american bullfighting . professional bullfighters instead of bucking bull , fighting bulls are used in these events . they are turned into the arena and the bullfighter works with the animal , evaluated based upon the aptitude he displays in controlling and maneuvering the bull , precision in jumping the bull , contact with the bull , and handling of the barrel . similar skills are sometimes displayed at traditional rodeos in intermission acts . a typical format is a 60- or 70-second encounter between bull and bullfighter , in which the bullfighter scores points for various maneuvers . in contrast to the older sport of bullfighting , no harm is done to the bull in rodeo bullfighting . . recognition . since 2015 , the bullfighters only tour has crowned a definitive world champion each december in las vegas . from 1981–2000 , wrangler jeans sponsored the bullfighter of the year contest at the national finals rodeo , the california cowboys professional rodeo association designates a bullfighter of the year annually . other titles include the american cowboys association freestyle bullfighting champion and the ultimate challenge freestyle bullfighting champion . schools exist to provide training for potential rodeo bullfighters . . see also . rob smets jimmy anderson flint rasmussen earl w . bascom . references .