King cobra

behaviour and ecology . like other snakes , a king cobra receives chemical information via its forked tongue , which picks up scent particles and transfers them to a sensory receptor ( jacobson 's organ ) located in the roof of its mouth . when it detects the scent of prey , it flicks its tongue to gauge the prey 's location , with the twin forks of the tongue acting in stereo . it senses earth-borne vibration and detects moving prey almost away . following envenomation , it swallows its prey whole . because of its flexible jaws it can swallow prey much larger than its head . it is considered diurnal because it hunts during the day , but has also been seen at night , rarely . . diet . the king cobra 's diet consists primarily of other snakes and lizards , including indian cobra , banded krait , rat snake , pythons , green whip snake , keelback , lycodon fasciatus and blyth 's reticulated snake . it also hunts malabar pit viper and hump-nosed pit viper by following their odour trails . in singapore , one was observed swallowing a clouded monitor . when food is scarce , it also feeds on other small vertebrates , such as birds , and lizards . in some cases , the cobra constricts its prey using its muscular body , though this is uncommon . after a large meal , it lives for many months without another one because of its slow metabolism . . defense . the king cobra is not considered aggressive . it usually avoids humans and slinks off when disturbed , but is known to aggressively defend incubating eggs and attack intruders rapidly . when alarmed , it raises the front part of its body , extends the hood , shows the fangs and hisses loudly . wild king cobras encountered in singapore appeared to be placid , but reared up and struck in self defense when cornered . the king cobra possesses a potent neurotoxic venom and death can occur in as little as 30 minutes after being bitten . most victims bitten by king cobras are snake charmers . hospital records in thailand indicate that bites from king cobras are very uncommon . the king cobra can be easily irritated by closely approaching objects or sudden movements . when raising its body , the king cobra can still move forward to strike with a long distance , and people may misjudge the safe zone . it can deliver multiple bites in a single attack . . growling hiss . the hiss of the king cobra is a much lower pitch than many other snakes and many people thus liken its call to a '' growl '' rather than a hiss . while the hisses of most snakes are of a broad-frequency span ranging from roughly 3,000 to 13,000 & nbsp ; hz with a dominant frequency near 7,500 & nbsp ; hz , king cobra growls consist solely of frequencies below 2,500 & nbsp ; hz , with a dominant frequency near 600 & nbsp ; hz , a much lower-sounding frequency closer to that of a human voice . comparative anatomical morphometric analysis has led to a discovery of tracheal diverticula that function as low-frequency resonating chambers in king cobra and its prey , the rat snake , both of which can make similar growls . . reproduction . the female is gravid for 50 to 59 days . the king cobra is the only snake that builds a nest using dry leaf litter , starting from late march to late may . most nests are located at the base of trees , are up to high in the center and wide at the base . they consist of several layers and have mostly one chamber , into which the female lays eggs . clutch size ranges from 7 to 43 eggs , with 6 to 38 eggs hatching after incubation periods of 66 to 105 days . temperature inside nests is not steady but varies depending on elevation from . females stay by their nests between two and 77 days . hatchlings are between long and weigh . the venom of hatchlings is as potent as that of the adults . they may be brightly marked , but these colours often fade as they mature . they are alert and nervous , being highly aggressive if disturbed . the average lifespan of a wild king cobra is about 20 years . venom . the king cobra 's venom consists of cytotoxins and neurotoxins , including alpha-neurotoxins and three-finger toxins . other components have cardiotoxic effects . it can deliver up to 420 & nbsp ; mg venom in dry weight ( 400-600 & nbsp ; mg overall ) per bite , with a toxicity in mice of 1.28 & nbsp ; mg/kg through intravenous injection , 1.5 to 1.7 & nbsp ; mg/kg through subcutaneous injection , and 1.644 & nbsp ; mg/kg through intraperitoneal injection . the toxins affect the victim 's central nervous system , resulting in severe pain , blurred vision , vertigo , drowsiness , and eventually paralysis . if the envenomation is serious , it progresses to cardiovascular collapse , and the victim falls into a coma . death soon follows due to respiratory failure . the affected person can die within 30 & nbsp ; minutes of envenomation . ohanin , a protein component of the venom , causes hypolocomotion and hyperalgesia in mammals . large quantities of antivenom may be needed to reverse the progression of symptoms . polyvalent antivenom of equine origin is produced by haffkine institute and king institute of preventive medicine and research in india . a polyvalent antivenom produced by the thai red cross society can effectively neutralize venom of the king cobra . in thailand , a concoction of turmeric root has been clinically shown to create a strong resilience against the venom of the king cobra when ingested . proper and immediate treatments are critical to avoid death . successful precedents include a client who recovered and was discharged in 10 & nbsp ; days after being treated by accurate antivenom and inpatient care . not all king cobra bites result in envenomation , but they are often considered of medical importance . clinical mortality rates vary between different regions and depend on many factors , such as local medical advancement . a thai survey reports 10 deaths out of 35 patients received for king cobra bites , whose fatality rate posed ( 28 % ) is higher than those of other cobra species . the department of clinical toxinology of the university of adelaide gives this serpent a general untreated fatality rate of 50–60 % , implying that the snake has about a half chance to deliver bites involving nonfatal quantities of venom . . threats . in southeast asia , the king cobra is threatened foremost by habitat destruction owing to deforestation and expansion of agricultural land . it is also threatened by poaching for its meat , skin and for use in traditional chinese medicine . . conservation . the king cobra is listed in cites appendix ii . it is protected in china and vietnam . in india , it is placed under schedule ii of wildlife protection act , 1972 . killing a king cobra is punished with imprisonment of up to six years . . cultural significance . a ritual in myanmar involves a king cobra and a female snake charmer . the charmer is a priestess who is usually tattooed with three pictograms and kisses the snake on the top of its head at the end of the ritual . members of the pakokku clan tattoo themselves with ink mixed with cobra venom on their upper bodies in a weekly inoculation that potentially might protect them from the snake , though no scientific evidence supports this . snake-stones or pearls are believed by tantrikas to develop from the cobra 's hood . commented out as website does n't work -- >