Henri Coandă

life . early life . born in bucharest , coandă was the second child of a large family . his father was general constantin coandă , a mathematics professor at the national school of bridges and roads . his mother , aida danet , was the daughter of french physician gustave danet , and was born in brittany . coandă recalled later in life that beginning from childhood he was fascinated by the miracle of wind . coandă attended elementary school at the petrache poenaru communal school in bucharest , then ( 1896 ) began his secondary school career at the liceu sf . sava ( saint sava national college ) . after three years ( 1899 ) , his father , who desired a military career for him , had him transferred to the military high school in iaşi where he required four additional years to complete high-school . he graduated in 1903 with the rank of sergeant major , and he continued his studies at the school of artillery , military , and naval engineering in bucharest . sent with an artillery regiment to germany ( 1904 ) , he enrolled in the technische hochschule in charlottenburg , berlin . coandă graduated as an artillery officer , but he was more interested in the technical problems of flight . in 1905 , he built a missile-aeroplane for the romanian army . he continued his studies ( 1907–08 ) at the montefiore institute in liège , belgium , where he met gianni caproni . in 1908 coandă returned to romania to serve as an active officer in the second artillery regiment . his inventor 's spirit did not comport well with military discipline and he obtained permission to leave the army , after which he took advantage of his renewed freedom to take a long automobile trip to isfahan , teheran , and tibet . aviation activities in france . upon his return in 1909 , he travelled to paris , where he enrolled in the newly founded école nationale supérieure d'ingénieurs en construction aéronautique ( now the école nationale supérieure de l'aéronautique et de l'espace , also known as supaero ) . one year later ( 1910 ) he graduated at the head of the first class of aerospace engineering . in 1910 , in the workshop of gianni caproni , he designed and built an aircraft known as the coandă-1910 , which he displayed publicly at the second international aeronautic salon in paris that year . the aircraft used a 4-cylinder piston engine to power a rotary compressor which was intended to propel the craft by a combination of suction at the front and airflow out the rear instead of using a propeller . contemporary sources describe the coandă-1910 as incapable of flight . aircraft ( 1910 ) volume 1 page 367 . years later , after others had developed jet technology , coandă started making claims that it was a motorjet , and that it actually flew . according to charles gibbs-smith : '' there was never any idea of injecting fuel ; the machine never flew ; it was never destroyed on test ; and flight noted that it was sold to a monsieur weyman . '' gibbs-smith continued , '' the claim said that after a disastrous crash ( which never happened ) coandă wished to begin a 'second aircraft ' , but 'his funds were exhausted . ' within a year he was . exhibiting ( in october 1911 ) a brand new propeller-driven machine at the reims concours militaire . '' other aviation writers accepted coandă 's story of his flight tests with the coandă-1910 . quoted in f . h . winter ( 1980 ) coandă 's colleague at huyck corporation , g . harry stine—a rocket scientist , author and '' the father of american model rocketry '' —stated in his book the hopeful future that '' there were several jet-propelled aircraft in existence at an early time-the coandă-1910 jet and the 1938 caproni campini n.1 , the pure jet aircraft flight was made in germany in 1938 '' . rolf sonnemann and klaus krug from the university of technology of dresden , mentioned in passing in their 1987 book technik und technikwissenschaften in der geschichte ( technology and technical sciences in history ) that the coandă-1910 was the world 's first jet . between 1911 and 1914 , he worked as technical manager of the bristol aeroplane company in the united kingdom , where he designed several aeroplanes known as the bristol-coanda monoplanes . in 1912 one of these aircraft won a prize at the british military aeroplane competition . in 1915 , he returned to france where , working during world war i for delaunay-belleville in saint-denis , he designed and built three different models of propeller aeroplane , including the coandă-1916 , with two propellers mounted close to the tail . this design was to be reprised in the 1950s sud aviation caravelle transport aeroplane , for which coandă was a technical consultant . in the years between the wars , he continued travelling and inventing . in 1934 he was granted a french patent related to the coandă effect . during early 1930 he used the same principle as the basis for the design of a disc-shaped aircraft called aerodina lenticulară ( lens-shaped aerodyne ) , a '' flying saucer '' shaped aircraft that used an unspecified source of high-pressure gases to flow through a ring-shaped vent system . in 1936 coandă applied for a patent for his design . coanda , henri . '' propelling device '' . 15 january 1936 no practical full-scale version was built . world war ii . coanda spent world war ii in occupied france where he worked for the nazis to help their war effort by developing the turbopropulseur ( turbopropeller ) drive system from his 1910 biplane into a propulsion system for snow sleds . the german contract concluded after one year , yielding no plans for production . . later work . coandă 's research on the coandă effect was of interest post-war and became the basis for several investigations of entrained or augmented flow . a small stream of a high-velocity fluid could be used to generate a greater mass flow , at lower velocity . although eventually unsuccessful for aircraft propulsion , this effect has been widely used on a smaller scale , from packaging machinery for small pills through to the dyson air multiplier bladeless fan . in 1969 , during the early years of the ceauşescu era , he returned to spend his last days in his native romania , where he served as director of the institute for scientific and technical creation ( increst ) and in 1971 reorganized , along with professor elie carafoli , the department of aeronautical engineering of the polytechnic university of bucharest , spinning it off from the department of mechanical engineering . coandă died in bucharest on 25 november 1972 at the age of 86 . he is buried at bellu cemetery . . honours and awards . 1965 : at the international automation symposium in new york , coandă received the harry diamond laboratories award . he received an honorary fellowship of the royal aeronautical society in 1971 bucharest 's henri coandă international airport is named after him . award and grand gold medal '' vielles tiges '' . unesco award for scientific research the medal of french aeronautics , order of merit , and commander ring . inventions , and discoveries . 1910 : the coandă-1910 , an experimental aircraft powered by a ducted fan . 1911 : an aircraft powered by two engines driving a single propeller 20 july 1916 flight – the configuration cancelled the torque of the engines . he invented a new decorative material for use in construction , beton-bois ; one prominent example of its use is the palace of culture , in iaşi . 1926 : working in romania , coandă developed a device to detect liquids under ground , useful in petroleum prospecting . shortly thereafter , in the persian gulf region , he designed a system for offshore oil drilling . the most famous of coandă 's discoveries is the coanda effect . after more than 20 years studying this phenomenon along with his colleagues , coandă described what albert metral was later to name the '' coandă effect '' . this effect has been utilized in many aeronautical inventions . see coanda effect applications a modular system of sea water desalination and transformation to fresh water , based on solar energy , a clean , ecological and adaptable system . '' grace a l'énergie solaire henri coandà dessale l'eau de mer '' p . 1 , p . 2 . . see also . history of aviation early flying machines list of firsts in aviation list of aviation pioneers . references . bibliography . stine , g . h . , '' the rises and falls of henri-marie coanda '' , air & space smithsonian , sept . 1989 dr henri coanda flight international , 13 january 1973 , p . & nbsp ; 76