1958 in literature

events . january 7 – tennessee williams ' one-act plays suddenly , last summer and something unspoken are premièred off-broadway . january 13 – in one , inc . v . olesen , the supreme court of the united states affirms that homosexual writing is not as such obscene . march 29 – the stage première of max frisch 's dark comedy biedermann und die brandstifter ( known in english as the fire raisers ) takes place at the schauspielhaus zürich . april 28 – the première of harold pinter 's play the birthday party is held at the cambridge arts theatre in england , with richard pearson playing the lead as stanley . may 19 – the london début of the production of pinter 's the birthday party , starring richard pearson , takes place at the lyric theatre ( hammersmith ) . it closes after a week , but its reputation is saved by a review by harold hobson in the sunday times on may 25 . may 27 – the 19-year-old shelagh delaney 's a taste of honey is staged by joan littlewood 's theatre workshop at the theatre royal stratford east in london . littlewood has received the script with a covering letter stating '' a fortnight ago i did n't know the theatre existed '' . spring/summer – london publishers faber introduce their paper-covered editions , including t . s . eliot 's collected poems , william golding 's lord of the flies , j . w . dunne 's an experiment with time and the first of several science fiction anthologies edited by edmund crispin , all with covers designed by berthold wolpe based on the albertus typeface . august 18 – vladimir nabokov 's controversial novel lolita is published in the united states . c . september – herbert marcuse begins teaching at brandeis university , massachusetts . october 14 – brendan behan 's play the hostage is first performed in an english version by joan littlewood 's theatre workshop at the theatre royal stratford east in london . also this year , behan 's autobiography borstal boy is published in london , and on november 12 it is banned in ireland by the censorship of publications board . october 23 – announcement of the award of the nobel prize in literature to boris pasternak leads to denunciation of him in the soviet union and threats to expel him . october 28 – samuel beckett 's monologue krapp 's last tape is first performed by patrick magee at the royal court theatre , london . also this year , beckett 's novel the unnamable is first published in english . november – truman capote 's novella breakfast at tiffany 's is published in this month 's esquire magazine ( having been rejected for july 's harper 's bazaar ) . it appears soon afterwards as the title story in a collection published by random house in new york city . unknown dates the first volume of shelby foote 's military history the civil war : a narrative is published in the united states . jack kerouac writes and narrates the '' beat '' movie , pull my daisy ( released 1959 ) . ken kesey is awarded a woodrow wilson national fellowship to enrol in the creative writing program at stanford university . mervyn peake begins to develop parkinson 's disease . . new books . fiction . chinua achebe – things fall apart kingsley amis – i like it here jorge amado – gabriela , cravo e canela ( gabriela , clove and cinnamon ) louis aragon – la semaine sainte chingiz aytmatov – jamila h . e . bates – the darling buds of may samuel beckett – the unnamable thomas berger – crazy in berlin john bingham – murder plan six james blish – a case of conscience joseph payne brennan – nine horrors and a dream algis budrys man of earth who ? dino buzzati – sessanta racconti truman capote – breakfast at tiffany's john dickson carr – the dead man 's knock rosario castellanos – balún-canán raymond chandler – playback agatha christie – ordeal by innocence richard condon – the oldest confession a . j . cronin the innkeeper 's wife the northern light l . sprague de camp – an elephant for aristotle patrick dennis – around the world with auntie mame august derleth the mask of cthulhu the return of solar pons marguerite duras – moderato cantabile lawrence durrell balthazar mountolive nawal el saadawi – memoirs of a woman doctor ian fleming – dr . no c . s . forester – hornblower in the west indies carlos fuentes – where the air is clear ( first published in spanish as peter george – red alert rumer godden – the greengage summer julien gracq – un balcon en forêt ( a balcony in the forest ) graham greene – our man in havana cyril hare – he should have died hereafter marlen haushofer – we murder stella ( wir töten stella ) georgette heyer – venetia harold l . humes – the underground city emyr humphreys – a toy epic hammond innes – the land god gave to cain rona jaffe – the best of everything anna kavan – a bright green field and other stories jack kerouac – the dharma bums audrey erskine lindop– i thank a fool frances parkinson keyes – victorine giuseppe tomasi di lampedusa – the leopard ( il gattopardo , published posthumously ) manuel lopes – o galo que cantou na baía john d . macdonald – the executioners ross macdonald – the doomsters richard matheson – a stir of echoes alberto moravia – two women ( la ciociara ) m . t . vasudevan nair – naalukettu r . k . narayan – the guide kenzaburō ōe ( 大江 健三郎 ) – nip the buds , shoot the kids ( 芽むしり仔撃ち , memushiri ko-uchi ) barbara pym – a glass of blessings jean raspail – welcome , honourable visitors mary renault – the king must die anya seton – the winthrop woman alan sillitoe – saturday night and sunday morning terry southern ( as maxwell kenton ) – candy rex stout and four to go champagne for one yves thériault – agaguk zaim topčić – lump of sun robert traver – anatomy of a murder leon uris – exodus jack vance – the languages of pao rex warner – young caesar jerome weidman – the enemy camp angus wilson – the middle age of mrs eliot s . yizhar – days of ziklag ( ימי צקלג , yemei tziklag ) . children and young people . raymond abrashkin and jay williams – danny dunn and the homework machine enid blyton – five get into a fix michael bond – a bear called paddington ( introducing paddington bear ) bruce carter – the kidnapping of kensington anne de vries – the new day ( de nieuwe dag , last in the journey through the night – reis door de nacht series ) rumer godden – the greengage summer e . w . hildick – jim starling ( first of a series of seven ) a . a . milne , latin by alexander lenard – winnie ille pu elyne mitchell – the silver brumby ( first in the silver brumby series ) philippa pearce – tom 's midnight garden keith robertson – henry reed inc . ( first in the henry reed series ) dr . seuss – yertle the turtle and other stories elizabeth george speare – the witch of blackbird pond william o . steele – the perilous road catherine storr – marianne dreams rosemary sutcliff – warrior scarlet nigel tranter – spaniard 's isle henry treece – the children 's crusade t . h . white – the once and future king . drama . samuel beckett – krapp 's last tape brendan behan – the hostage bertolt brecht – the resistible rise of arturo ui ( der aufhaltsame aufstieg des arturo ui , written 1941 , first performed ) refik erduran – bir kilo namus ( one kilo honesty ) max frisch – the fire raisers ( biedermann und die brandstifter , first stage adaptation ) jean genet – the blacks ( play ) ( les nègres , clownerie , first published ) kenneth horne – wolf 's clothing n.c . hunter – a touch of the sun ann jellicoe – the sport of my mad mother ronald millar – the big tickle sławomir mrożek – the police ( policja ) heiner müller and inge müller die korrektur ( the correction ) der lohndrücker ( the scab , first performed ) mohan rakesh – ashadh ka ek din ( आषाढ़ का एक दिन , one day in ashadh ) barry reckord – flesh to a tiger elmer rice – cue for passion peter shaffer – five finger exercise n . f . simpson – the hole wole soyinka – the swamp dwellers derek walcott – drums and colours arnold wesker – chicken soup with barley ( first performed ) tennessee williams – suddenly , last summer . poetry . john betjeman – collected poems ko un – hyondae munhak octavio paz – la estación violenta eli siegel – hot afternoons have been in montana : poems clark ashton smith – spells and philtres . non-fiction . henri alleg – la question hannah arendt – the human condition brendan behan – borstal boy shelby foote – the civil war : a narrative – vol 1 : fort sumter to perryville john kenneth galbraith – the affluent society j . edgar hoover – masters of deceit aldous huxley – brave new world revisited claude lévi-strauss – structural anthropology philip o'connor – memoirs of a public baby eric partridge – origins : a short etymological dictionary of modern english john maynard smith – the theory of evolution john steinbeck – once there was a war raymond williams – culture and society 1780–1950 michael young – the rise of the meritocracy . births . march 14 – james robertson , scottish novelist april 6 – graeme base , english-born australian children 's author and illustrator april 15 – benjamin zephaniah , english dub poet may 7 – robert antoni , west indian novelist may 8 – roddy doyle , irish novelist may 21 – taku ashibe ( 芦辺 拓 ) , japanese mystery novelist may 22 – wayne johnston , canadian novelist june 10 – james f . conant , american philosopher june 14 – todur zanet , gagauz poet and translator june 16 – isobelle carmody , australian science fiction , fantasy and children 's writer july 5 – veronica guerin , irish journalist ( murdered 1996 ) october 30 – flora fraser , english biographer november 11 – kathy lette , australian novelist , playwright and activist november 24 – gregory doran , english theater director december 10 - cornelia funke , german children 's author unknown dates lionel fogarty , indigenous australian poet margaret smith , american poet nega mezlekia , ethiopian writer . deaths . february 4 – henry kuttner , american science fiction author ( born 1915 ) february 6 – charles langbridge morgan , english novelist and dramatist ( born 1894 ) march 15 – michael joseph , english publisher ( born 1897 ) march 17 – margiad evans , anglo-welsh writer and poet ( born 1909 ) march 21 – cyril m . kornbluth , american science fiction writer ( born 1923 ) march 24 – seumas o'sullivan , irish poet ( born 1879 ) april 7 – elliot paul , american writer ( born 1892 ) april 8 – ethel turner , english-born australian novelist and children 's author ( born 1873 ) may 5 – james branch cabell , american fantasy author ( born 1879 ) june 4 – eleanor hallowell abbott , american fiction writer and poet ( born 1872 ) june 10 – angelina weld grimké , african-american playwright and poet ( born 1880 ) june 28 – alfred noyes , english poet ( born 1880 ) august 6 – geoffrey willans , english novelist and comic writer ( born 1911 ) august 29 – marjorie flack , american author and illustrator ( born 1897 ) september 11 – robert w . service , english-born canadian comic poet ( born 1874 ) october 24 – g . e . moore , english philosopher ( born 1873 ) october 30 – rose macaulay , english novelist ( born 1881 ) november 9 – dorothy canfield fisher , american activist and novelist ( born 1879 ) december 8 nicolae petrescu-comnen , romanian social scientist , historian and poet ( born 1881 ) peig sayers ( máiréad ó gaoithín ) , irish seanchaí ( traditional storyteller , born 1873 ) december 20 – j . c . squire , english writer and critic ( born 1884 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : philippa pearce , tom 's midnight garden hugo award for best novel : fritz leiber , the big time james tait black memorial prize for fiction : angus wilson , the middle age of mrs . eliot james tait black memorial prize for biography : joyce hemlow , the history of fanny burney miles franklin award : randolph stow , to the islands newbery medal for children 's literature : harold keith , rifles for watie newdigate prize : jon stallworthy nobel prize in literature : boris pasternak premio nadal : j . vidal cadellans , no era de los nuestros pulitzer prize for drama : ketti frings , look homeward , angel pulitzer prize for fiction : james agee , a death in the family pulitzer prize for poetry : robert penn warren , promises : poems 1954-1956 . references .