Walter Sickert

training and early career . sickert was born in munich , germany , on 31 may 1860 , the eldest son of oswald sickert , a danish-german artist , and his wife , eleanor louisa henry , who was an illegitimate daughter of the british astronomer richard sheepshanks . baron et al . 1992 , p . 33 . in 1868 , following the history of schleswig-holstein , the family settled in britain , where oswald 's work had been recommended by freiherrin rebecca von kreusser to ralph nicholson wornum , who was keeper of the national gallery at the time . the family obtained british nationality . the young sickert was sent to university college school from 1870 to 1871 , before transferring to king 's college school , where he studied until the age of 18 . though he was the son and grandson of painters , he first sought a career as an actor ; he appeared in small parts in sir henry irving 's company , before taking up the study of art in 1881 . after less than a year 's attendance at the slade school , sickert left to become a pupil of and etching assistant to james abbott mcneill whistler . baron et al . 1992 , p . 34 . sickert 's earliest paintings were small tonal studies painted alla prima from nature after whistler 's example . thumb in 1883 he travelled to paris and met edgar degas , whose use of pictorial space and emphasis on drawing would have a powerful effect on sickert 's work . he developed a personal version of impressionism , favouring sombre colouration . following degas ' advice , sickert painted in the studio , working from drawings and memory as an escape from '' the tyranny of nature '' . baron et al . 1992 , p . 57 . in 1888 sickert joined the new english art club , a group of french-influenced realist artists . sickert 's first major works , dating from the late 1880s , were portrayals of scenes in london music halls . one of the two paintings he exhibited at the neac in april 1888 , katie lawrence at gatti 's , which portrayed a well known music hall singer of the era , incited controversy '' more heated than any other surrounding an english painting in the late 19th century '' . baron et al . 1992 , pp . 15–17 sickert 's rendering was denounced as ugly and vulgar , and his choice of subject matter was deplored as too tawdry for art , as female performers were popularly viewed as morally akin to prostitutes . baron et al . 1992 , p . 15 the painting announced what would be sickert 's recurring interest in sexually provocative themes . in the late 1880s he spent much of his time in france , especially in dieppe , which he first visited in mid-1885 , and where his mistress , and possibly his illegitimate son , lived . during this period sickert began writing art criticism for various publications , including herbert vivian and ruaraidh erskine 's '' the whirlwind '' . between 1894 and 1904 sickert made a series of visits to venice , initially focusing on the city 's topography ; it was during his last painting trip in 1903–04 that , forced indoors by inclement weather , he developed a distinctive approach to the multiple-figure tableau that he further explored on his return to britain . upstone , 2009 , pp . 9–11 the models for many of the venetian paintings are believed to have been prostitutes , whom sickert might have known through being a client . upstone 2009 , p . 47 sickert 's fascination with urban culture accounted for his acquisition of studios in working-class sections of london , first in cumberland market in the 1890s , then in camden town in 1905 . upstone 2009 , p . 39 the latter location provided an event that would secure sickert 's prominence in the realist movement in britain . baron et al . 1992 , p . 153 on 11 september 1907 , emily dimmock , a prostitute cheating on her partner , was murdered in her home at agar grove ( then st paul 's road ) , camden . after sexual intercourse the man had slit her throat open while she was asleep , then left in the morning . the camden town murder became an ongoing source of prurient sensationalism in the press . for several years sickert had already been painting lugubrious female nudes on beds , and continued to do so , deliberately challenging the conventional approach to life painting— '' the modern flood of representations of vacuous images dignified by the name of 'the nude ' represents an artistic and intellectual bankruptcy '' —giving four of them , which included a male figure , the title the camden town murder , and causing a controversy which ensured attention for his work . these paintings do not show violence , however , but a sad thoughtfulness , explained by the fact that three of them were originally exhibited with completely different titles , one more appropriately being what shall we do for the rent ? , and the first in the series , summer afternoon . while the painterly handling of the works inspired comparison to impressionism , and the emotional tone suggested a narrative more akin to genre painting , specifically degas 's interior , baron et al . 1992 , p . 208 . the documentary realism of the camden town paintings was without precedent in british art . baron et al . 1992 , p . 213 . these and other works were painted in heavy impasto and narrow tonal range . sickert 's best-known work , ennui ( c . 1913 ) , reveals his interest in victorian narrative genres . the composition , which exists in at least five painted versions and was also made into an etching , depicts a couple in a dingy interior gazing abstractedly into empty space , as though they can no longer communicate with each other . just before the first world war he championed the avant-garde artists lucien pissarro , jacob epstein , augustus john and wyndham lewis . at the same time sickert founded , with other artists , the camden town group of british painters , named from the district of london in which he lived . this group had been meeting informally since 1905 , but was officially established in 1911 . it was influenced by post-impressionism and expressionism , but concentrated on scenes of often drab suburban life ; sickert himself said he preferred the kitchen to the drawing room as a scene for paintings . baron et al . 1992 , p . 156 . from 1908 to 1912 , and again from 1915 to 1918 , he was an influential teacher at westminster school of art , where david bomberg , wendela boreel , mary godwin and john doman turner were among his students . he founded a private art school , rowlandson house , in the hampstead road in 1910 . baron and sickert 2006 , p . 80 . it lasted until 1914 ; for most of that period its co-principal and chief financial supporter was the painter sylvia gosse , a former student of sickert . hartley 2013 , pp . 189–90 . he also briefly set up an art school in manchester where his students included harry rutherford . . late period . after the death of his second wife in 1920 , sickert relocated to dieppe , where he painted scenes of casinos and café life until his return to london in 1922 . in 1924 , he was elected an associate of the royal academy ( ara ) . in 1926 he suffered an illness , thought to have been a minor stroke . sickert et al . 1981 , p . 29 . in 1927 , he abandoned his first name in favour of his middle name , and thereafter chose to be known as richard sickert . baron et al . 1992 , p . 283 . his style and subject matter also changed : sickert stopped drawing , and instead painted from snapshots usually taken by his third wife , thérèse lessore , or from news photographs . the photographs were squared up for enlargement and transferred to canvas , with their pencil grids plainly visible in the finished paintings . seen by many of his contemporaries as evidence of the artist 's decline , sickert 's late works are also his most forward-looking , and prefigure the practices of chuck close and gerhard richter . schwartz , sanford . '' the master of the blur '' , the new york review of books , 11 april 2002 , p . 16 . other paintings from sickert 's late period were adapted from illustrations by victorian artists such as georgie bowers and john gilbert . sickert , separating these illustrations from their original context and painting them in poster-like colours so that the narrative and spatial intelligibility partly dissolved , called the resulting works his '' english echoes '' . sickert et al . 1981 , pp . 102–103 . sickert painted an informal portrait of winston churchill in about 1927 . sickert et al . 1981 , p . 93 . churchill 's wife clementine introduced him to sickert , who had been a friend of her family . the two men got along so well that churchill , whose hobby was painting , wrote to his wife that '' he is really giving me a new lease of life as a painter . '' soames 1999 , pp . 308–309 . sickert tutored and mentored students of the east london group , and exhibited alongside them at lefevre gallery in november 1929 . sickert made his last etching in 1929 . shone and curtis 1988 , p . 9 . sickert was president of the royal society of british artists from 1928 to 1930 . he became a royal academician ( ra ) in march 1934 but resigned from the academy on 9 may 1935 in protest against the president 's refusal to support the preservation of jacob epstein 's sculptural reliefs on the british medical association building in the strand . baron 1980 . in the last decade of his life , he depended increasingly on assistants , especially his wife , for the execution of his paintings . sickert et al . 1981 , pp . 97–98 . one of sickert 's closest friends and supporters was newspaper baron lord beaverbrook , who accumulated the largest single collection of sickert paintings in the world . this collection , with a private correspondence between sickert and beaverbook , is in the beaverbrook art gallery in fredericton , new brunswick , canada . in addition to having painted beaverbrook , sickert painted portraits of notables including gwen ffrangcon-davies , hugh walpole , valentine browne , 6th earl of kenmare , and less formal depictions of aubrey beardsley , king george v , and peggy ashcroft . sickert died in bath , somerset in 1942 , at the age of 81 . he had spent much time in the city in his later years , and many of his paintings depict bath 's varied street scenes . he had been married three times : from 1885 until their divorce in 1899 to ellen cobden , a daughter of richard cobden ; from 1911 until her death in 1920 to christine angus ; and from 1926 until his death to the painter thérèse lessore . shone and curtis 1988 , pp . 8–9 . he is buried in the churchyard of the church of st nicholas , bathampton . sickert 's sister was helena swanwick , a feminist and pacifist active in the women 's suffrage movement . style and subjects . for his earliest paintings , sickert followed whistler 's practice of rapid , wet-in-wet execution using very fluid paint . he subsequently adopted a more deliberate procedure of painting pictures in multiple stages , and '' attached a great deal of importance to what he called the 'cooking ' side of painting '' . shone and curtis 1988 , p . 6 . he preferred to paint not from nature but from drawings or , after the mid-1920s , from photographs or from popular prints by victorian illustrators . wilcox et al . 1990 , p . 10 . after transferring the design to canvas by the use of a grid , sickert made a rapid underpainting using two colours , which was allowed to dry thoroughly before the final colours were applied . he experimented tirelessly with the details of his method , always with the goal , according to his biographer wendy baron , of '' painting quickly , in about two sittings , with the maximum economy and minimum of fuss '' . baron et al . 1992 , p . 132 . sickert tended to paint his subjects in series . he is identified particularly with domestic interior scenes , scenes of venice , music hall and theatre scenes , and portraits . he painted very few still lifes . for his music hall subjects , sickert often chose complex and ambiguous points of view , so that the spatial relationship between the audience , performer and orchestra becomes confused , as figures gesture into space and others are reflected in mirrors . baron et al . 1992 , pp . 16–17 the isolated rhetorical gestures of singers and actors seem to reach out to no-one in particular , and audience members are portrayed stretching and peering to see things that lie beyond the visible space . this theme of confused or failed communication between people appears frequently in his art . by emphasising the patterns of wallpaper and architectural decorations , sickert created abstract decorative arabesques and flattened the three-dimensional space . his music hall pictures , like degas ' paintings of dancers and café-concert entertainers , connect the artificiality of art itself to the conventions of theatrical performance and painted backdrops . sickert often professed his distaste for what he termed the '' beastly '' character of thickly textured paint . in an article he wrote for the fortnightly review in 1911 , he described his reaction to the paintings of van gogh : '' i execrate his treatment of the instrument i love , these strips of metallic paint that catch the light like so many dyed straws . my teeth are set on edge '' . in response to alfred wolmark 's work he declared that '' thick oil-paint is the most undecorative matter in the world '' . nonetheless , sickert 's paintings of the camden town murder series of c . 1906–1909 were painted in heavy impasto and narrow tonal range , as were numerous other obese nudes in the pre-world war i period in which the fleshiness of the figures is connected to the thickness of the paint—a device that was later adapted by lucian freud . the influence of these paintings on successive generations of british artists has been noted in the works of freud , david bomberg , francis bacon , frank auerbach , howard hodgkin , and leon kossoff . baron et al . 1992 , p . 6 . in the 1910s and 1920s , the dark , gloomy tones of his early paintings gradually brightened , shone and curtis 1988 , p . 11 . and sickert juxtaposed unexpected tones with a new boldness in works such as brighton pierrots ( 1915 ) and portrait of victor lecourt ( 1921–24 ) . his several self-portraits usually displayed an element of role-playing consistent with his early career as an actor : lazarus breaks his fast ( c . 1927 ) and the domestic bully ( c . 1935–38 ) are examples . sickert 's late works display his preference for thinly scrubbed veils of paint , described by helen lessore as '' a cool colour rapidly brushed over a warm underpainting ( or vice versa ) on a coarse canvas and in a restricted range allowing the undercoat to 'grin through ' '' . sickert et al . 1981 , p . 22 . sickert insisted on the importance of subject matter in art , saying that '' all the greater draughtsmen tell a story '' , but treated his subjects in a detached manner . according to the painter frank auerbach , '' sickert 's detachment became increasingly evident in his uninhibited procedures . he made obvious his frequent reliance on snapshots and press photographs , he copied , used and took over the work of other , dead , artists and made extensive use , also , of the services of his assistants who played a large and increasing part in the production of his work . '' sickert et al . 1981 , p . 7 . . jack the ripper . sickert took a keen interest in the crimes of jack the ripper and believed he had lodged in a room used by the notorious serial killer . he had been told this by his landlady , who suspected a previous lodger . sickert did a painting of the room and titled it jack the ripper 's bedroom ( manchester art gallery ) . it shows a dark , melancholy room with most details obscured . although for over 80 years there was no mention of sickert being a suspect in the ripper crimes , in the 1970s authors began to explore the idea that sickert was jack the ripper or his accomplice . in 1976 stephen knight , in his book jack the ripper : the final solution , maintained that sickert had been forced to become an accomplice in the ripper murders . knight 's information came from joseph gorman , who claimed to be sickert 's illegitimate son . even though gorman later admitted he had lied , knight 's book was responsible for a conspiracy theory that accuses royalty and freemasonry of complicity in the ripper murders . from 1989 to 1998 alan moore and eddie campbell published the graphic novel from hell , holub , christian ( 31 may 2018 ) . '' eddie campbell explains why he 's coloring from hell for the first time '' . entertainment weekly . which was based on stephen knight 's theory . curtis , adam ( 2 april 2014 ) . '' suspicious minds '' . bbc news . retrieved 25 september 2019 . dave windett , jenni scott & guy lawley , '' writer from hell : the alan moore experience '' ( interview ) , comics forum 4 , p . 46 , 1993 in 1990 jean overton fuller , in her book sickert and the ripper crimes , maintained that sickert was the killer . in 2002 crime novelist patricia cornwell , in portrait of a killer : jack the ripper—case closed , maintained that sickert was jack the ripper . a psychological motivation for sickert was said to be a congenital anomaly of his penis . cornwell purchased 31 of sickert 's paintings , and some in the the arts have said that she destroyed one of them in a search for sickert 's dna , but cornwell denies having done this . gibbons , fiachra . '' does this painting by walter sickert reveal the identity of jack the ripper ? '' , the guardian , 8 december 2001 . retrieved 13 september 2008 . cornwell claimed she was able to scientifically prove that mitochondrial dna from one of more than 600 ripper letters sent to scotland yard and mitochondrial dna from a letter written by sickert belong to only one percent of the population . cornwell , patricia . otava , 2004 in 2017 , cornwell published another book on the subject , ripper : the secret life of walter sickert in which she uncovers what she believes to be further evidence for sickert 's guilt . in 2004 the dictionary of national biography , in its article on sickert , dismissed any claim that he was jack the ripper as '' fantasy '' . wendy baron , 'sickert , walter richard ( 1860–1942 ) ’ , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , september 2004 ; online edn , january 2008 accessed 5 may 2010 , in 2019 , an article in science , the journal of the american association for the advancement of science , stated that patricia cornwell 's allegation that sickert was the ripper was based on a dna analysis of letters that '' many experts believe . to be fake '' and that '' another genetic analysis of the letters claimed the murderer could have been a woman '' . file : jack the ripper 's bedroom.jpg jack the ripper 's bedroom , c . 1907 file : sickert.jpg walter sickert , the camden town murder , originally titled , what shall we do for the rent ? , waldemar januszczak . '' walter sickert - murderous monster or sly self-promoter ? '' the times , 4 november 2007 . retrieved 13 september 2008 . alternatively , what shall we do to pay the rent , '' the camden town murder '' , fisher fine arts library image collection . retrieved 13 september 2008 . 1908 . personal papers . walter sickert 's personal papers are held at islington local history centre . additional papers are held at several other archives , particularly the tate gallery archive .