MCA Inc.

history . early years . mca was formed in 1924 by jules stein and william r . goodheart , jr . , as music corporation of america , a music booking agency based in chicago , illinois . mca helped pioneer modern practices of touring bands and name acts . early on , mca booked such prominent artists as king oliver and jelly roll morton for clubs and speakeasy run by legendary notorious chicago mobsters such as al capone and others . lew wasserman joined mca in 1936 at the age of 23 and rose through the ranks of mca for more than four decades , with sonny werblin as his right-hand man . wasserman helped create mca 's radio show , kay kyser 's kollege of musical knowledge , which debuted on nbc radio that same year . following that success , stein installed wasserman in new york city in 1937 , but wasserman convinced him that hollywood was the best place for the company 's growth . the company was guided by a codification of stein 's pet policies known as '' the rules of the road '' . the rules were passed down from the prohibition era , chicago–area mca ( referenced in citizen cohn and the king and queen of hollywood books ) to the 1940s los angeles–area firm , which focused on representing movie actors . the rules were next passed to the 1950s generation of mca talent agents , including jerry perenchio , who later owned and headed a number of businesses including univision from 1992 to 2007 . perenchio is well known for his version of the rules ( now up to twenty rules ) , which vary from year to year and have some internal contradictions ( perenchio pointed out that while there is a '' no nepotism '' rule , he is aware his son was on the board of directors at the time ) . in 1939 , mca 's headquarters moved from chicago to beverly hills , california , creating a movie division and beginning to acquire talent agencies and represent established actors such as james stewart , henry fonda , bette davis , and ronald reagan , whom wasserman became very close with personally . in later decades , wasserman became a guiding force in reagan 's political ambition by helping reagan to win the presidency of the screen actors guild ( sag ) , then election as governor of california in 1966 , and finally president of the united states in 1980 . by the end of the 1930s , mca had become the largest talent agent in the world , with over 700 clients , including movie stars , recording artists , broadway actors , radio stars , producers , and directors . its aggressive acquisition of its clientele in all entertainment sectors earned mca the nickname of the octopus . this behavior led u.s . department of justice agents to investigate not only whether mca was a monopoly breaking antitrust laws , but also its suspected connections to underworld criminal activities . this investigation continued for the next few decades . revue productions and the early days of television . in 1948 , jules stein moved up as mca 's first chairman , giving lew wasserman charge of day-to-day operations of the company as president . that year , stein and wasserman decided to get into a new medium that would soon change the entertainment industry : television . although many motion picture studios would not touch this new medium , thinking it was just a fad and would fade away , mca decided to embrace it . first , however , the company needed to get a waiver from the screen actors guild , which ruled at the time that talent agencies such as mca were prohibited from producing tv shows or films . thanks to the newly elected sag president , ronald reagan , mca was granted a waiver to start producing tv shows . after the waiver was granted , the company formed mca television limited for syndication . in 1950 revue productions , once a live concert promotion division that produced '' stage door canteen '' live events for the uso during world war ii , was re-launched as mca 's television production subsidiary . by 1956 , revue became the top supplier of television for all broadcast networks , spanning three decades of television programs such as armour theater , general electric theater , leave it to beaver , wagon train , and many others . prior to 1958 , all revue 's shows were filmed at the old republic pictures studio lot in studio city , california . in february 1958 , mca acquired paramount pictures ' pre-1950 sound feature film library through a newly created mca subsidiary , emka , ltd . also in 1958 , mca bought the universal studios lot from universal studios for 11 million and renamed it , as well as the actual television unit , revue studios . as part of the deal , mca leased the studios back to universal for 2 million a year , plus unlimited access to mca 's clients such as jimmy stewart , rock hudson , doris day and alfred hitchcock to make films for universal . stein , who by this time was the sole owner of mca , decided to take the company public by giving 51 % of his ownership of mca to his employees , which included a 20 % stake for wasserman . the company went public on the new york stock exchange and was incorporated as mca inc . on november 10 , 1958 . search universal music . new.umusic.com . retrieved on 2013-12-23 . a couple of years later , alfred hitchcock gave mca his rights to psycho and his television anthology in exchange for 150,000 shares , making him the third largest investor in mca , and his own boss at universal . stephen rebello , alfred hitchcock and the making of psycho , soft skull press , berkeley , 1990 . . takeover of universal studios and decca records . in 1962 , mca entered a merger of equals with new york–based american decca records , with mca as the surviving company . decca at the time owned coral records and brunswick records , as well as an 89 % controlling stake in universal pictures company , inc . in order to acquire universal , mca was forced by the department of justice to dissolve its talent agency—which represented most of the industry 's biggest names—because owning both the movie studio and a talent agency would violate antitrust laws . the agents quickly formed several dozen new firms , representing talent . many of these are woven into the corporate fabric of today 's talent management agencies . jerry perenchio 's firm , utm ( united talent management ) , represented elizabeth taylor and muhammad ali . by the end of the year , mca had assumed full ownership of universal upon the completion of the merger . in 1964 , mca entered the music publishing business when it acquired lou levy 's leeds music , and formed universal city studios the same year in effort to merge under one umbrella both universal pictures and its revue productions division , which was later reincorporated as universal television in 1966 . on july 15 , 1964 , mca established the studio tour , which provided guests a sneak peek behind-the-scenes glimpse at movie and television production at the backlot of universal studios . this established a footprint of what is known today as the universal studios hollywood film studio and theme park . over the next few decades , similar parks were built and expanded under mca for universal orlando resort in orlando , florida and universal studios japan in osaka , japan . in 1966 , mca formed uni records in hollywood , california , and in 1967 , mca bought new york–based kapp records . that same year mca also acquired guitar maker danelectro and mall retailer spencer gifts . later years . in 1967 , the mca records label was established outside the united states and canada to issue releases by the mca group of labels . decca , kapp and uni were merged into mca records at universal city , california in 1971 ; the three labels maintained their identities for a short time but were soon retired in favor of the mca label . the first mca records release in the us was former uni artist elton john 's '' crocodile rock '' in 1972 . in 1973 , the final decca pop label release , '' drift away '' , a 5 pop hit by dobie gray , was issued . mca had two failed mergers in 1969 . initially it planned a merger with westinghouse electric but that collapsed in april and in july , they announced a proposed merger with the firestone tire and rubber company but this too was called off in september . in 1973 , stein stepped down from the company he founded and wasserman took over as chairman and chief executive officer , while sidney sheinberg was appointed president and chief operating officer of mca . other executives within mca were lawrence r . barnett , who ran the agency 's live acts division during its glory agency years in the 1950s and 1960s , and ned tanen , head of universal pictures . tanen was behind universal hits such as animal house , john hughes 's sixteen candles and the breakfast club . mca issued soundtrack albums for most films released by universal pictures . in 1975 , the company entered the book publisher business with the acquisition of g . p . putnam 's sons . in 1979 , it acquired abc records along with its subsidiaries paramount records , impulse ! records , and dot records . abc had acquired the paramount and dot labels when it purchased gulf+western 's record labels , then the parent company of paramount pictures . from 1983 to 1989 , irving azoff was chairman of mca records and is credited for turning around the fortunes of the label . e . scott reckard , '' azoff quits as chairman of mca 's music unit '' , ap news archive , september 5 , 1989 the chess records catalog was acquired from the remnants of sugarhill in 1985 . motown records was bought in 1988 ( and sold to polygram in 1993 ) . grp records ( which became for some years mca 's jazz music label and thus began managing the company 's jazz catalogue ) and geffen records ( which served as another mainstream music subsidiary ) were acquired in 1990 . mca also acquired other assets outside of the music industry . it became a shareholder in usa network in 1981 , eventually owning 50 % of the network ( the other half was owned by paramount ) . in 1982 , its publishing division , g . p . putnam 's sons , bought grosset & dunlap from filmways . in 1984 , mca bought walter lantz productions and its characters . in 1985 , mca bought toy and video game company ljn . it also bought a tv station in new york city , wwor-tv ( renamed from wor-tv ) , in 1987 , from rko general , which was in the midst of a licensing scandal . in november 1990 , japanese multinational conglomerate matsushita electric agreed to acquire mca for us 6.59 billion . mca was forced to sell wwor-tv in 1991 by the federal communications commission , because foreign companies could not own over 25 % of a us tv station . in 1995 , seagram acquired 80 % of mca from matsushita . on december 9 , 1996 , the new owners dropped the mca name ; the company became universal studios , inc . , and its music division , mca music entertainment group , was renamed universal music group . mca records continued to live on as a label within the universal music group . the following year , g . p . putnam 's sons was sold to the penguin group . in 1996 , mca filed a lawsuit against viacom over the latter 's launch of the tv land cable network . viacom had purchased paramount in 1994 , and the contract for usa network prohibited either of their owners from owning cable channels outside the joint venture . viacom had owned mtv networks ( the parent of tv land ) since 1985 . the suit was settled when viacom sold mca its half of the joint venture . tv land eventually added shows from the mca/universal library in 1999 . on may 21 , 1998 , seagram acquired polygram from philips and merged it with its music holdings . the european commission approved the merger on september 21 , 1998 . when france-based pernod ricard purchased seagram 's drinks business , pernod sold its media holdings ( including universal ) to vivendi , which became vivendi universal in 2000 . in the spring of 2003 , mca records was folded into geffen records . its country music label , mca nashville records , is still in operation . mca 's classical music catalog is managed by deutsche grammophon . mca 's non-music assets at the time of the company 's renaming , including universal studios and the 50 % interest in usa network , came under ownership of nbcuniversal ( now full owner of usa ) , which was 80 % owned by general electric , and 20 % owned by vivendi . in 2009 , ge struck a deal to buy vivendi 's interest , and sold a controlling 51 % interest to comcast afterwards . the sale completed on january 28 , 2011 , with general electric owning 49 % of the newly formed nbcuniversal . comcast bought ge 's stake two years later . the landmark paul williams–designed beverly hills property that mca once occupied became the headquarters of paradigm talent agency until 2018 . conference rooms inside the building are named after jules stein and lew wasserman in honor of the legendary occupants . see also . laserdisc mca records nbcuniversal seagram vivendi