Swim bladder

structure and function . the swim bladder normally consists of two gas-filled sacs located in the dorsal portion of the fish , although in a few primitive species , there is only a single sac . it has flexible walls that contract or expand according to the ambient pressure . the walls of the bladder contain very few blood vessels and are lined with guanine crystals , which make them impermeable to gases . by adjusting the gas pressurising organ using the gas gland or oval window the fish can obtain neutral buoyancy and ascend and descend to a large range of depths . due to the dorsal position it gives the fish lateral stability . in physostome swim bladders , a connection is retained between the swim bladder and the gut , the pneumatic duct , allowing the fish to fill up the swim bladder by '' gulping '' air . excess gas can be removed in a similar manner . in more derived varieties of fish ( the physoclisti ) the connection to the digestive tract is lost . in early life stages , these fish must rise to the surface to fill up their swim bladders ; in later stages , the pneumatic duct disappears , and the gas gland has to introduce gas ( usually oxygen ) to the bladder to increase its volume and thus increase buoyancy . in order to introduce gas into the bladder , the gas gland excretes lactic acid and produces carbon dioxide . the resulting acidity causes the hemoglobin of the blood to lose its oxygen ( root effect ) which then diffuses partly into the swim bladder . the blood flowing back to the body first enters a rete mirabile where virtually all the excess carbon dioxide and oxygen produced in the gas gland diffuses back to the arteries supplying the gas gland . thus a very high gas pressure of oxygen can be obtained , which can even account for the presence of gas in the swim bladders of deep sea fish like the eel , requiring a pressure of hundreds of bars . elsewhere , at a similar structure known as the oval window , the bladder is in contact with blood and the oxygen can diffuse back out again . together with oxygen , other gases are salted out in the swim bladder which accounts for the high pressures of other gases as well . the combination of gases in the bladder varies . in shallow water fish , the ratios closely approximate that of the atmosphere , while deep sea fish tend to have higher percentages of oxygen . for instance , the eel synaphobranchus has been observed to have 75.1 % oxygen , 20.5 % nitrogen , 3.1 % carbon dioxide , and 0.4 % argon in its swim bladder . physoclist swim bladders have one important disadvantage : they prohibit fast rising , as the bladder would burst . physostomes can '' burp '' out gas , though this complicates the process of re-submergence . the swim bladder in some species , mainly fresh water fishes ( common carp , catfish , bowfin ) is interconnected with the inner ear of the fish . they are connected by four bones called the weberian ossicles from the weberian apparatus . these bones can carry the vibrations to the saccule and the lagena ( anatomy ) . they are suited for detecting sound and vibrations due to its low density in comparison to the density of the fish 's body tissues . this increases the ability of sound detection . the swim bladder can radiate the pressure of sound which help increase its sensitivity and expand its hearing . in some deep sea fishes like the antimora , the swim bladder maybe also connected to the macula of saccule in order for the inner ear to receive a sensation from the sound pressure . in red-bellied piranha , the swimbladder may play an important role in sound production as a resonator . the sounds created by piranhas are generated through rapid contractions of the sonic muscles and is associated with the swimbladder . teleosts are thought to lack a sense of absolute hydrostatic pressure , which could be used to determine absolute depth . however , it has been suggested that teleosts may be able to determine their depth by sensing the rate of change of swim-bladder volume . . evolution . swim bladders are evolutionarily closely related ( i.e . , homologous ) to lungs . traditional wisdom has long held that the first lungs , simple sacs connected to the gut that allowed the organism to gulp air under oxygen-poor conditions , evolved into the lungs of today 's terrestrial vertebrates and some fish ( e.g . , lungfish , gar , and bichir ) and into the swim bladders of the ray-finned fish . in 1997 , farmer proposed that lungs evolved to supply the heart with oxygen . in fish , blood circulates from the gills to the skeletal muscle , and only then to the heart . during intense exercise , the oxygen in the blood gets used by the skeletal muscle before the blood reaches the heart . primitive lungs gave an advantage by supplying the heart with oxygenated blood via the cardiac shunt . this theory is robustly supported by the fossil record , the ecology of extant air-breathing fishes , and the physiology of extant fishes . in embryonal development , both lung and swim bladder originate as an outpocketing from the gut ; in the case of swim bladders , this connection to the gut continues to exist as the pneumatic duct in the more '' primitive '' ray-finned fish , and is lost in some of the more derived teleost orders . there are no animals which have both lungs and a swim bladder . the chondrichthyes ( e.g . , sharks and rays ) split from the other fishes about 420 million years ago , and lack both lungs and swim bladders , suggesting that these structures evolved after that split . correspondingly , these fish also have both protocercal and stiff , wing-like pectoral fins which provide the necessary lift needed due to the lack of swim bladders . teleost fish with swim bladders have neutral buoyancy , and have no need for this lift . kardong , kv ( 1998 ) vertebrates : comparative anatomy , function , evolution2nd edition , illustrated , revised . published by wcb/mcgraw-hill , p . 12 . sonar reflectivity . the swim bladder of a fish can strongly reflect sound of an appropriate frequency . strong reflection happens if the frequency is tuned to the volume resonance of the swim bladder . this can be calculated by knowing a number of properties of the fish , notably the volume of the swim bladder , although the well-accepted method for doing so requires correction factors for gas-bearing zooplankton where the radius of the swim bladder is less than about 0.05 m . this is important , since sonar scattering is used to estimate the biomass of commercially- and environmentally-important fish species . deep scattering layer . sonar operators , using the newly developed sonar technology during world war ii , were puzzled by what appeared to be a false sea floor 300–500 metres deep at day , and less deep at night . this turned out to be due to millions of marine organisms , most particularly small mesopelagic fish , with swimbladders that reflected the sonar . these organisms migrate up into shallower water at dusk to feed on plankton . the layer is deeper when the moon is out , and can become shallower when clouds obscure the moon . ryan p '' deep-sea creatures : the mesopelagic zone '' te ara - the encyclopedia of new zealand . updated 21 september 2007 . most mesopelagic fish make daily vertical migrations , moving at night into the epipelagic zone , often following similar migrations of zooplankton , and returning to the depths for safety during the day . these vertical migrations often occur over large vertical distances , and are undertaken with the assistance of a swim bladder . the swim bladder is inflated when the fish wants to move up , and , given the high pressures in the mesoplegic zone , this requires significant energy . as the fish ascends , the pressure in the swimbladder must adjust to prevent it from bursting . when the fish wants to return to the depths , the swimbladder is deflated . some mesopelagic fishes make daily migrations through the thermocline , where the temperature changes between 10 and 20 & nbsp ; °c , thus displaying considerable tolerance for temperature change . sampling via deep trawling indicates that lanternfish account for as much as 65 % of all deep sea fish biomass . indeed , lanternfish are among the most widely distributed , populous , and diverse of all vertebrates , playing an important ecology role as prey for larger organisms . the estimated global biomass of lanternfish is 550–660 million metric tonnes , several times the entire world fisheries catch . lanternfish also account for much of the biomass responsible for the deep scattering layer of the world 's oceans . sonar reflects off the millions of lanternfish swim bladders , giving the appearance of a false bottom . . human uses . in some asian cultures , the swim bladders of certain large fishes are considered a food delicacy . in china they are known as fish maw , 花膠/鱼鳔 , teresa m . ( 2009 ) a tradition of soup : flavors from china 's pearl river delta page 70 , north atlantic books . and are served in soups or stews . the vanity price of a vanishing kind of maw is behind the imminent extinction of the vaquita , the world 's smallest dolphin species . found only in mexico 's gulf of california , the once numerous vaquita are now critically endangered . vaquita die in gillnets set to catch totoaba ( the world 's largest drum fish ) . totoaba are being hunted to extinction for its maw , which can sell for as much 10,000 per kilogram . swim bladders are also used in the food industry as a source of collagen . they can be made into a strong , water-resistant glue , or used to make isinglass for the clarification of beer . bridge , t . w . ( 1905 ) '' the natural history of isinglass '' in earlier times they were used to make condoms . . swim bladder disease . swim bladder disease is a common ailment in aquarium fish . a fish with swim bladder disorder can float nose down tail up , or can float to the top or sink to the bottom of the aquarium . johnson , erik l . and richard e . hess ( 2006 ) fancy goldfish : a complete guide to care and collecting , weatherhill , shambhala publications , inc . . risk of injury . many anthropogenic activities like pile driving or even seismic waves can create high-intensity sound waves that cause a certain amount of damage to fish that possess a gas bladder . physostomes can release air in order to decrease the tension in the gas bladder that may cause internal injuries to other vital organs , while physoclisti ca n't expel air fast enough , making it more difficult to avoid any major injuries . some of the commonly seen injuries included ruptured gas bladder and renal haemorrhage . these mostly affect the overall health of the fish and did n't affect their mortality rate . investigators used the high-intensity-controlled impedance fluid filled ( hici-ft ) , a stainless-steel wave tube with an electromagnetic shaker . it simulates high-energy sound waves in aquatic far-field , plane-wave acoustic conditions . . similar structures in other organisms . siphonophores have a special swim bladder that allows the jellyfish-like colonies to float along the surface of the water while their tentacles trail below . this organ is unrelated to the one in fish . . gallery . file : melaka-mall-fish-maw-kiosk-2267.jpg swim bladder display in a malacca shopping mall file : fish maw soup.jpg fish maw soup file : goldfish with swim bladder disease.jpg swim bladder disease has resulted in this female ryukin goldfish floating upside down . references . further references . bond , carl e . ( 1996 ) biology of fishes , 2nd ed . , saunders , pp . & nbsp ; 283–290 . pelster , bernd ( 1997 ) '' buoyancy at depth '' in : ws hoar , dj randall and ap farrell ( eds ) deep-sea fishes , pages 195–237 , academic press .