Nauvoo Expositor

background and origins . a group of former members of the church were in open conflict with smith for various doctrinal , economic , and political reasons . although he publicly denied being involved in polygamy , it was known within the church that smith was married to multiple women . in 1842 , former church leader john c . bennett made public allegations of smith 's unorthodox marriages . on august 12 , 1843 , hyrum smith read smith 's revelation concerning plural marriage to the nauvoo high council . william law was a member of the first presidency . according to law , smith had made several proposals to law 's wife jane , under the premise that jane law would enter a polyandry marriage with smith . law 's wife later described smith 's proposals , saying that smith had '' asked her to give him half her love ; she was at liberty to keep the other half for her husband . '' '' wife no . 19 '' , ann eliza young , 1875 , page 61 on january 8 , 1844 , smith removed law from the first presidency . on april 18 , 1844 , law and his wife were excommunicated from the church , cook , lyndon w . '' william law , nauvoo dissenter '' . ( 10.2 mb ) byu studies . winter , 1982 . vol . 22 , no . 1 , p . 47-72 . along with his brother wilson law , a brigadier general in the nauvoo legion . also excommunicated were robert d . foster and howard smith . on may 1 , francis m . higbee filed a legal complaint in the fifth judicial district of illinois , suing smith for slander and requesting damages of five thousand dollars . on may 10 , a newspaper prospectus was circulated , announcing the creation of the nauvoo expositor . on may 18 , the church excommunicated higbee , james blakesley , charles ivins , and austin cowles for apostasy . on may 29 , the high council published a document purporting to show higbee 's brother chauncey had also committed misdeeds . on may 23 , law obtained a grand jury indictment against smith on the charge of polygamy from the hancock county circuit court . law swore that smith had been living with maria lawrence '' in an open state of adultery '' since october 12 , 1843 . the expositor was planned as an exposé of church practices which law and his associates opposed . . creators . the publishers of the expositor were william law of the first presidency , and his brother , brigadier general wilson law of the nauvoo legion , charles ivins , col . francis m . higbee of nauvoo legion , and his brother chauncey l . higbee , brothers robert and charles foster . the editor was sylvester emmons , a non-mormon member of the nauvoo city council . contents . the only issue of the nauvoo expositor , dated june 7 , 1844 , was a four-page publication . in addition to more mundane content such as poetry and marriage announcements , it contained a statement from the '' seceders from the church at nauvoo '' and sworn statements from multiple individuals attesting to the teaching of '' the plurality of wives '' . ; prospectus from publishers in their prospectus , the publishers advocate for major reforms including the repeal of the nauvoo city charter . they vow to '' decry moral imperfections '' wherever found , '' whether in the plebeian , patrician , or self-constituted monarch '' . ; statement from seceders the preamble establishes that despite the schism , the authors maintain their belief in '' the religion of the latter day saints , as originally taught by joseph smith '' . the statement discusses the schism , attributed to '' many items of doctrine , as now taught , some of which , however , are taught secretly , and denied openly '' which they declare '' heretical and damnable '' . they cite the '' false doctrine of many gods '' , saying '' it is contended that there are innumerable gods as much above the god that presides over this universe , as he is above us ; and if he varies from the law unto which he is subjected , he , with all his creatures , will be cast down as was lucifer '' . the statement criticizes the process behind the recent excommunication , writing '' smith has established an inquisition '' —a process they '' contend is contrary to the book of doctrine and covenants , for our law condemnest no man until he is heard . '' the statement suggests that their struggle will be on-going , writing : '' we most solemnly and sincerely declare that the sword of truth shall not depart from the thigh , nor the buckler from the arm , until we can enjoy those glorious privileges which nature 's god and our country 's laws have guarantied to us—freedom of speech , the liberty of the press , and the right to worship god as seemeth us good . '' the authors resolve not to '' acknowledge any man as king or law-giver to the church '' and vow to oppose '' every attempt to unite church and state . '' they accuse smith and other church officials of introducing '' false and damnable doctrines into the church , such as a plurality of gods above the god of this universe , and his liability to fall with all his creations ; the plurality of wives , for time and eternity , the doctrine of unconditional sealing up to eternal life , against all crimes except that of shedding innocent blood . '' ; affidavits the expositor contained affidavits alleging the teaching of a revelation from smith which '' authorized certain men to have more wives than one at a time . '' statements were made by william law , his wife jane , and austin cowles . reception and destruction . smith called a meeting of the city council , where '' he proceeded to put the expositor and its editors on trial , as if that body was of a judicial instead of a legislative character . '' the trial '' lasted all of saturday , june 8 , and a part of monday , june 10 . '' after the city council declared the expositor a public nuisance , smith issued two orders for the expositors destruction . city marshall john p . greene , accompanied by a posse of several hundred , carried out the destruction . the members of the nauvoo municipal government were : mayor joseph smith councilor hyrum smith councilor john taylor councilor sylvester emmons councilor jonhnson councilor benjamin warrington councilor hunter alderman samuel c . bennett alderman elias smith . aftermath of the destruction of the nauvoo expositor . seeking relief from the state courts , francis m . higbee , one of the expositors publishers , gave a sworn statement about the events of june 10 . non-mormons in hancock county were infuriated when they heard of the news of the destruction of the nauvoo expositor , believing that it was an example of mormon disregard for their laws . many of them called for the arrest of the mormon leaders , including the neighboring newspapers quincy whig and warsaw signal . on june 12 , the hancock county justice of the peace issued a warrant for the arrest of smith and 17 other named individuals under the jurisdiction of the hancock county court . specifically named were : joseph smith , samuel bennett , john taylor , william w . phelps , hyrum smith , john p . greene , stephen perry , dimick b . huntington , jonathan dunham , stephen markham , william edwards , jonathan holmes , jesse p . harmon , john lytle , joseph w . coolidge , harvey d . redfield , porter rockwell , and levi richards . first arrest attempt . constable david bettisworth was tasked with arresting smith and conveying him to the hancock county court . on june 12 , bettisworth served smith with the warrant . rather than return with bettisworth to the hancock county court , smith instead petitioned the municipal court of nauvoo to dismiss the charges . on june 12 , a hearing was held in the municipal court of nauvoo . the court dismissed the charges against smith . the following day , smith presided over the municipal court of nauvoo when it dismissed the charges against the others named in the hancock county court warrant . unable to compel smith to return , bettisworth left nauvoo without smith or any of the others named in the arrest warrant . wider response in illinois . on june 13 , citizens of hancock county gathered in the county seat for a mass-meeting in response to the destruction of the expositor . the meeting resolved to seek help from the governor , writing : whereas said smith and others refuse to obey the mandate of said writ ; and whereas in the opinion of this meeting , it is impossible for said officer so raise a posse of sufficient strength to execute said writ ; . it is the opinion of this meeting that the circumstances of the case require the interposition of executive power . therefore , resolved , that a deputation of two discreet men be sent to springfield to solicit such interposition . the following day , the warsaw signal published the resolutions , editorializing that '' repeated attempts have been made to arrest smith , but he has been uniformly screened from the officers of justice , by the aid of the municipal court of nauvoo , which is the tool and echo of himself . '' in response , smith defended the expositors destruction to governor thomas ford , writing : in the investigation it appeared evident to the council that the proprietors were a set of unprincipled men , lawless , debouchees , counterfeiters , bogus makers , gamblers , peace disturbers , and that the grand object of said proprietors was to destroy our constitutional rights and chartered privileges ; to overthrow all good and wholesome regulations in society ; to strengthen themselves against the municipality ; to fortify themselves against the church of which i am a member , and destroy all our religious rights and privileges , by libels , slanders , falsehoods , perjury & sticking at no corruption to accomplish their hellish purposes . and that said paper of itself was libelous of the deepest dye , and very injurious as a vehicle of defamation , —tending to corrupt the morals , and disturb the peace , tranquillity and happiness of the whole community , and especially that of nauvoo . letter from joseph smith to thomas ford ( 14 june 1844 ) smith declared martial law on june 18 and called out the nauvoo legion , an organized city militia of about 5,000 men . paragraph 6 . in response to the crisis , governor ford traveled to hancock county , and on june 21 , he arrived at the county seat in carthage . on june 22 , ford wrote to the mayor and city council of nauvoo , writing : i now express to you my opinion that your conduct in the destruction of the press was a very gross outrage upon the laws and the liberties of the people . it may have been full of libels , but this did not authorize you to destroy it . there are many newspapers in this state which have been wrongfully abusing me for more than a year , and yet such is my regard for the liberty of the press and the rights of a free people in a republican government that i would shed the last drop of my blood to protect those presses from any illegal violence . . the owners of the press obtained . a warrant against the authors of this destruction for a riot ; . they the defendants have ever since refused to be arrested or to submit to a trial at any other place or before any other court , except in the city and before the municipal court of nauvoo . smith fled the jurisdiction to avoid arrest , crossing the mississippi river into iowa . on june 23 , a posse under the command of the governor entered nauvoo to execute an arrest warrant , but they were unable to locate smith . surrender and the death of the smiths . on june 25 , 1844 , joseph and hyrum smith , along with the other fifteen co-defendants , surrendered to bettisworth on the original charge of inciting a riot . an arraignment was held on the rioting charge and justice robert f . smith granted bail of 500 for each of the defendants . after the defendants were granted bail on the riot charge , justice r . f . smith heard testimony from augustine spencer and issued a writ for the arrest of joseph and hyrum smith on the charge of treason against illinois . the smiths were placed under arrest and transported to carthage jail . on june 27 , while awaiting trial , a mob attacked the jail and death of joseph smith ; john taylor was wounded in the attack . repeal of nauvoo charter and exodus . at the next session of the illinois state legislature the following december , the nauvoo charter was repealed by a vote of 25–14 in the senate and 75–31 in the house . this disincorporated the city of nauvoo and dissolved its municipal institutions . nauvoo municipal assets were court-ordered to be placed in receivership . the winter of 1845–46 saw the enormous preparations for the mormon exodus via the mormon trail . in early 1846 , the majority of the latter day saints left the city . after illinois . after the mormon exodus , mormons resettled in the salt lake valley , with brigham young becoming governor of utah territory . public teaching of plural marriage . in 1852 , young publicly acknowledged the mormon teaching of plural marriage . legal analysis . a detailed legal analysis of the nauvoo city council 's actions was undertaken in 1965 by dallin h . oaks , then a professor at the university of chicago law school . oaks has since become a member of the quorum of the twelve apostles of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints . oaks opined that while the destruction of the expositors printing press was legally questionable , under the law of the time the newspaper could have been declared libelous and therefore a public nuisance by the nauvoo city council . as a result , oaks concludes that while under contemporaneous law it would have been legally permissible for city officials to destroy , or '' abate , '' the actual printed newspapers , the destruction of the printing press itself was probably outside of the council 's legal authority , and its owners could have sued for damages . . references . external links . s : nauvoo expositor nauvoo expositor : facsimile of the expositor , with original columns and formatting . s : nauvoo charter s : illinois constitution of 1818