Virginia Satir

early years . virginia satir was born on june 26 , 1916 in neillsville , wisconsin . she was the eldest of five children born to oscar alfred reinnard pagenkopf and minnie happe pagenkopf . when she was five years old , satir suffered from appendicitis . her mother , a devout christian scientist , refused to take her to a doctor . by the time satir 's father decided to overrule his wife , the young girl 's appendix had ruptured . doctors were able to save her life , but satir was forced to stay in the hospital for several months . '' who virginia was and why she mattered , '' virginia satir global network , retrieved july 11 , 2018 . from a young age , satir exhibited great promise and curiosity . when satir was three years old , she taught herself to read and by age nine , she had read all of the books in the library of her small one-room school . from early years , satir demonstrated an interest in family dynamics . when she was five , she decided that she would grow up to be '' a children 's detective on parents , inclinations that would later become true through her therapeutic practices . '' she later explained that '' i did n't quite know what i would look for , but i realized a lot went on in families that did n't meet the eye . '' in 1929 , her mother insisted that the family move from their farm to milwaukee so that satir could attend high school . satir 's high school years coincided with the great depression , and to help her family she took a part-time job and also attended as many courses as she could so that she could graduate early . in 1932 , she received her high school diploma and promptly enrolled in milwaukee state teachers college ( now university of wisconsin–milwaukee . ) to pay for her education she worked part-time for the works projects administration and for gimbels department store and further supplemented her income by babysitting . she graduated with a bachelor 's degree in education , and worked as a teacher for a few years . during her time as a schoolteacher , she recognized that involved and supportive parents not only help students in the classroom but could also heal family dynamics . satir began meeting and cooperating with the parents of her students and saw the family system as a reflection of the world at large , stating “ if we can heal the family , we can heal the world ” beginning in 1937 , for three summers she took courses at northwestern university in chicago . her interest in families led her to enroll full-time at the university of chicago school of social services administration where she obtained a master 's degree in social work . she finished her coursework for her master 's degree in 1943 , and completed her thesis for her degree in 1948 . . career as a therapist . after graduating social work school , satir began working in private practice . she met with her first family in 1951 , and by 1955 was working with illinois psychiatric institute , encouraging other therapists to focus on families instead of individual patients . by the end of the decade she had moved to california , where she cofounded the mental research institute ( mri ) in palo alto , california . mri received a grant from nimh in 1962 , allowing them to begin the first formal family therapy training program ever offered ; satir was hired as its training director . innovation satir ’ s skills and views about the important role the family has and its connection to an individual ’ s problems and/or healing process , led her into becoming a renowned therapist . one of satir 's most novel ideas at the time , was that the '' presenting issue '' or '' surface problem '' itself was seldom the real problem ; rather , how people coped with the issue created the problem . '' satir also offered insights into the particular problems that low self-esteem could cause in relationships . in addition to satir ’ s influence in human sciences , she helped establish organizations with the purpose of educating therapist around the world and granting them with resources to help families and clients . long interested in the idea of networking , satir founded two groups to help individuals find mental health workers or other people who were suffering from similar issues to their own . in 1970 , she organized '' beautiful people , '' which later became known as the '' international human learning resources network . '' in 1977 she founded the avanta network , which was renamed to the virginia satir global network in 2010 . recognition two years later , satir was appointed to the steering committee of the international family therapy association and became a member of the advisory board for the national council for self-esteem . she has also been recognized with several honorary doctorates , including a 1978 doctorate in social sciences from the university of wisconsin–madison . honors and awards received 1976 awarded gold medal of '' outstanding and consistent service to mankind '' by the university of chicago . 1978 awarded honorary doctorate in social sciences from the university of wisconsin–madison . 1982 selected by the west german government as one of the twelve most influential leaders in the world today . 1985 time magazine quotes a colleague , “ she can fill any auditorium in the country ” , after her stellar contribution to the evolution of psychotherapy conference in phoenix , arizona . 1985 selected by the prestigious national academy of practice as one of two members to advise on health concerns to the congress of the united states . 1986 selected as member of the international council of elders , a society developed by the recipients of the nobel peace prize . 1987 named honorary member of the czechoslovakian medical society . she was honored in the california social work hall of distinction . in two national surveys of psychiatrists , psychologists , social workers , and marriage and family therapists , she was voted the most influential therapist . . work and influence . satir 's entire work was done under the umbrella of '' becoming more fully human '' . from the possibility of a nurturing primary triad of father , mother , and child she conceived a process of human validation . she viewed the reconciliation of families as a way to reconcile the world . as she said ( align , 1988 , p . & nbsp ; 20 ) : '' the family is a microcosm . by knowing how to heal the family , i know how to heal the world . '' with this overview she established professional training groups in the satir model in the middle east , the orient , western and eastern europe , central and latin america , and russia . the institute for international connections , avanta network , and the international human learning resources network are concrete examples of teaching people how to connect with one another and then extend the connections . her world impact could be summed up in her universal mantra : peace within , peace between , peace among . in the mid-1970s her work was extensively studied by the co-founders of neuro-linguistic programming , richard bandler and john grinder , who used it as one of the three fundamental models of nlp . robert dilts and roxanna erickson klein ( 2006 ) '' historical : neuro-linguistic programming '' in the milton h . erickson foundation : newsletter summer 2006 , 26 ( 2 ) . bandler and grinder also collaborated with satir to author changing with families for science and behavior books , which bore the subtitle ' a book about further education for being human ' . the virginia satir global network , originally named '' avanta '' by satir , is an international organization that carries on her work and promotes her approach to family therapy . in 1984 , satir encouraged marriage and family therapists to shift their focus to relationship education : steve andreas , one of bandler and grinder 's students , wrote virginia satir : the patterns of her magic ( 1991 ) in which he summarized the major patterns of satir 's work , and then showed how satir applied them in a richly annotated verbatim transcript of a videotaped session titled '' forgiving parents '' . in this session , satir works with a woman who hated her mother , and had difficulty connecting with others as a result . using a variety of role-plays , including a '' family reconstruction '' , this woman came to see her mother as her '' best friend '' , as detailed in a 3½ year follow-up interview . she died in 1988 of pancreatic cancer . . process of change model . another of satir ’ s work that would have lasting impacts on many fields is the process of change model . this model illustrates how individuals go through change and how they can cope with such change to improve their relationship with each other . the process of change model is divided into four stages : late status quo , chaos , practice and integration , and new status quo . in the first stage of change , the late status quo , satir argued the individual is in a predictable environment . status quo involves a set routine , fixed ideas about the world , and an established behavior . this stage is all about predictability and familiarity . the second stage of change is chaos . chaos , as described by satir , occurs when something in the environment or in the individual changes . this change brings a sense of unfamiliarity and the previously stable routine can no longer be held . in the stage of chaos , here are many strong feelings like sadness , fear , confusion , stress , among others . satir argues that in the change stage of chaos , therapists must help families and individuals navigate these emotions . additionally , chaos is important because it brings out creativity in individuals to find solutions . the third stage of change is practice and integration . in this stage new ideas are being implemented and individuals are figuring out what works best . like any other skill , it requires patience and practice . the final stage of change is the new status quo . in this stage , the new ideas , behaviors , and changes are not so new anymore . individuals tend to acclimate to the change , figure out what works , and become better at their new skill . satir points out that this change process is not linear . on some occasions , individuals might have found a temporal coping skill or solution but if it doesn ’ t bring the desired results , they might regress to the stage of chaos . for this reason , it is important that therapists are aware of this process to help guide their clients . . career as author . satir published her first book , conjoint family therapy , in 1964 , developed from the training manual she wrote for students at mri . her reputation grew with each subsequent book , and she travelled the world to speak on her methods . she also became a diplomate of the academy of certified social workers and received the american association for marriage and family therapy 's distinguished service award . satir often integrated meditations and poetic writing into both her public workshops and writings . one of her most well-known works , '' i am me , '' was written by satir in response to a question posed by an angry teenage girl . . i am me . . bibliography . englander-golden ; p ; satir , v . say it straight : from compulsions to choices , science and behavior books , palo alto , ca 1991 . . see also . family systems therapy carl whitaker sally pierone systems psychology . references . further reading . . external links . obituary in the los angeles times , sept . 12 , 1988 brief biography at webster university the virginia satir global network satir institute of the pacific say it straight foundation