White-backed vulture

description . the white-backed vulture is a typical vulture , with only down feathers on the head and neck , very broad wings and short tail feathers . it has a white neck ruff . the adult 's whitish back contrasts with the otherwise dark plumage . juveniles are largely dark . this is a medium-sized vulture ; its body mass is , it is long and has a wingspan . raptors of the world by ferguson-lees , christie , franklin , mead & burton . houghton mifflin ( 2001 ) , like other vultures it is a scavenger , feeding mostly from carcasses of animals which it finds by soaring over the savannah . it also takes scraps from human habitations . it often moves in flocks . it breeds in trees on the savannah of west and eastern and southern africa , laying one egg . the population is mostly resident . status . as it is rarer than previously believed , its conservation status was reassessed from least concern to near threatened in the 2007 iucn red list . see birdlife international ( 2007a . b ) . in 2012 , it was further uplisted to endangered . in october 2015 , its status was changed to critically endangered because the ongoing decline is more severe than previously thought . the population size of the white-backed vulture has been decreasing significantly within the past few decades . in 1922 , the population was estimated at 270,000 . over the past two decades , its population has noticeably decreased . while not much is known about the current population , a recent study found that white-backed vultures have a high survival rate . individual adults have the highest survival rate , while 2 year old birds have the lowest survival rate . across all ages , the survival rate is estimated to be 90.7 % . this means that the deaths of adult vultures will lead to rapid population declines . the loss of adults will cause less reproduction and with younger birds less likely to survive , the population will drop drastically . a major cause of population decrease is the loss of habitat . elephants have been endangering the vultures , since they destroy the trees the vultures live and nest in . vultures tend not to nest in areas with high elephant populations . fires have also caused the destruction of trees . humans also have a large impact . power lines have caused many vultures to be electrocuted . in kenya especially , humans are using a toxic pesticide called furadan , which has led to many vulture deaths . vultures are also being poisoned by humans , although not intentionally . in order to kill hyenas , lions , and other predators , herders add poisons into their livestock . vultures ingest the poison upon eating a deceased animal 's carcass . this poisoning generally occurs outside of protected areas but is a leading factor in the population 's decline . habitats are also being disturbed by human land management and direct nesting persecution patterns . more recent studies have indicated a new plausible factor in the current declination of the vultures . researches have seen that there has been a rise in toxicity in the liver , kidneys , pectoral region , and internal organs . this toxicity is caused by higher levels of lead , cadmium , zinc , and copper . although most of these metals level out as either non harmful or normal levels , the lead concentrate in the liver of the vultures ( 8.56 & nbsp ; µg/g wet weight ) and in the kidneys ( 9.31 & nbsp ; µg/g wet weight ) is higher than the average levels . studies have also been performed on the white-backed vulture and some species of asian vultures within the gyps clade to see the effect of veterinary diclofenac . bamford , et.al . trade-offs between specificity and regional generality in habitat association models : a case study of two species of african vulture . journal of applied ecology , 46 : 853-859 . regardless of whether the vultures were given an oral or intravenous dose of the substance , the effects was nearly identical and the diclofenac eventually poisoned the subjects . naidoo v , wolter k , cuthbert r , duncan n . 2009 . veterinary diclofenac threatens africa 's endangered vulture species . regul toxicol pharmacol 53:205–208 . this chemical is one of the greatest contaminants for the general vulture population because of its presence in livestock : easy food for the vultures . another study shows that there are heightened levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons , hpa 's , which is not as likely a product in the endangerment resultant , but still concerning . hpa 's , also known as polyaromatic hydrocarbons , are formations of hydrogen atoms surrounding rings of carbon . as common as these compounds are—found in foods , engines/incinerators , fires , combustion—there are many forms , and some carcinogenic . although there is no direct correlation of the high levels of hpa 's in the vultures , there is still a plausibility that it can result in a negative outcome for the species . another reason for the decline in the number of white-backed vultures is the decrease in the number of their nesting sites , which they construct in trees in savannah areas and which are roughly 1 meter in diameter . there is an inverse relationship between the amount of human activity ( farming , ranching , etc . ) and the amount of vulture nesting activity in said area , so as the amount of human activity in africa expands , the number of nesting sites available decreases , putting the vultures at jeopardy . bamford , a . j . , monadjem , a . , & hardy , i . c . ( 2008 , september 16 ) . nesting habitat preference of the african white‐backed vulture gyps africanus and the effects of anthropogenic disturbance . retrieved february 23 , 2018 , from on the 20th of june 2019 , the corpses of 468 white-backed vultures , 17 white-headed vultures , 28 hooded vultures , 14 lappet-faced vultures and 10 cape vultures , altogether 537 vultures , besides 2 tawny eagles , were found in northern botswana . it is suspected that they died after eating the corpses of 3 elephants that were poisoned by poachers , possibly to avoid detection by the birds , which help rangers to track poaching activity by circling above where there are dead animals . most of them were new parents , leaving their young orphaned and '' ill-equipped '' for survival . vultures are slow breeders , and losing over 400 on a week is a devastating blow for the species . . diet . the primary food source of white-backed vultures are the carcasses of large , grazing animals found the wooded savannahs where it lives . this includes warthogs , zebras , gazelles , ostriches and even livestock . however , they can only eat animals with soft tissue , as their beak is not adapted for tearing through tough skin . white-backed vultures circle through the sky in search of freshly dead animals , often following other scavenger birds and mammalian carnivores to find it . once a carcass is found , they will begin wheeling in the sky , signalling their discovery to other vultures . after feeding , white-backed vultures often rest with their wings spread and their backs facing the sun , as they have gorged themselves so much they can no longer fly . . breeding . white-backed vultures nest in trees . they typically choose tall trees along riparian habitats and show strong a preference for acacia species . the nests are large , around 1m in diameter , and are made of large sticks and lined with leaves and grasses . white-backed vultures face threats from habitat degradation and poaching ; as such they have been shown to avoid anthropogenically-disturbed areas when selecting nest sites and protection status is also a strong determinant of site selection . white-backed vultures have a long breeding cycle . the incubation period is around 8 weeks and the nestling period is about 4–5 months . . gallery . white-backed vultures eating a dead wildebeest.jpg eating a wildebeest carcass , masai mara national park , kenya white-backed vulture ( gyps africanus ) feeding on elephant leg composite.jpg feeding on elephant leg , matetsi safari area , zimbabwe white-backed vultures ( gyps africanus ) on zebra carcass.jpg feeding on zebra carcass , etosha national park , namibia weißrückengeier_gyps_africanus_hp_l2043.jpg cuando river , chobe national park , botswana african white-backed vulture ( gyps africanus ) flight - flickr - lip kee.jpg adult white-backed vulture ( gyps africanus ) landing composite.jpg adult coming in to land white-backed vulture ( gyps africanus ) sub adult in flight.jpg sub-adult white-backed vulture ( gyps africanus ) juvenile in flight.jpg juvenile white-backed vulture chobe.jpg chobe river , botswana african white-backed vulture ( gyps africanus ) - flickr - lip kee.jpg adult african white-backed vulture - juvenile - flickr - lip kee.jpg immature coming in to land . footnotes .