Josiah Bartlett

personal life . josiah bartlett was born at 276 main street in amesbury , in the province of massachusetts bay , to stephen and hannah-mary ( webster ) bartlett . his father stephen was the son of richard and hannah ( emery ) bartlett . he was their fifth child and fourth son . by age 17 , he had learned some of both latin and greek . he also began the study of medicine , working in the office of dr . ordway of amesbury at the same time . before bartlett turned 21 , in 1750 , he moved to kingston , new hampshire , in rockingham county , and began his practice . goodrich , charles a . ( 1829 ) . lives of the signers to the declaration of independence , pp . 131–38 . new york : william reed & co . kingston at that time was a frontier settlement of only a few hundred families , and bartlett was the only doctor in that part of the county at the time . he purchased land and a farm . on january 15 , 1754 , he married mary bartlett of newton , new hampshire . she was his cousin , the daughter of his uncle , joseph . they would remain married until her death on july 14 , 1789 . josiah and mary had three sons and seven daughters : mary ( 1754 ) , lois ( 1756 ) , miriam ( 1758 ) , rhoda ( 1760 ) , hannah ( who died as an infant in 1762 ) , levi ( 1763 ) , josiah ( 1768 ) , ezra ( 1770 ) , sarah ( 1773 ) , and hannah ( 1776 , also died as an infant ) . all three of his sons and seven of his grandsons would follow him as physicians . political career . bartlett became active in the political affairs of kingston , and in 1765 he was elected to the colonial assembly . in 1767 he became the colonel of his county 's militia and governor john wentworth appointed him justice of the peace . as the revolution neared , his whig policies brought him into opposition with the royal governor , john wentworth . although his lodge is not known , his great-grandson , levi s . bartlett , had a letter written by josiah to his son ezra saying , '' i attended a mason meeting last night , and as soon as you can i wish you would join the masons . '' denslow , william r . ( 1957 ) . 10,000 famous freemasons . columbia , missouri , usa : missouri lodge of research in 1774 , bartlett joined the assembly 's committee of correspondence and began his work with the revolutionary leaders of the other 12 colonies . later that year , when wentworth dismissed , or prorogued , the assembly , josiah was elected to its revolutionary ( and illegal ) successor , the provincial assembly . he also suffered the loss of his home by fire , alleged to have been set by opposition tories . he moved his family out to the farmhouse and began rebuilding immediately . when the assembly appointed bartlett and john pickering as delegates to the continental congress , he declined because he wished to attend to his family , but remained active in new hampshire 's affairs . in one of governor wentworth 's last acts before being expelled from new hampshire in 1775 , he revoked bartlett 's commissions as justice , militia colonel , and assemblyman . continental congress . bartlett was selected as a delegate again in 1775 , and attended that session as well as the meetings in 1776 . indeed , for a time in late 1775 and early 1776 , he was the only delegate attending from new hampshire . much of the work of the congress was carried out in committees . the most important of these had a delegate from each state , which meant that bartlett served on all of them , including those of safety , secrecy , munitions , marine , and civil government . eventually , after his continued letters home to the assembly and committee of safety in new hampshire , william whipple and matthew thornton were added to the delegation in philadelphia . when the question of declaring sovereignty from great britain was officially brought up in 1776 , as a representative of the northernmost colony bartlett was the first to be asked , and answered in the affirmative . he eventually became one of the delegates to sign the declaration of independence . in 1777 , he declined a return to the congress , citing fatigue due to earlier efforts . but when trouble threatened , he used his medical skills and accompanied john stark 's forces to the battle of bennington in august . he was re-elected to congress in 1778 , and served on the committee that drafted the articles of confederation . but , after the articles were adopted , he returned to new hampshire to attend to personal business . this was the last of his federal service . while he was at the congress in 1776 , his wife mary had managed the farm , seen to the completion of rebuilding their house , cared for nine children , and given birth to hannah . later career . although he remained in the state after 1778 , in 1779 he returned to his role as a judge , serving in the court of common pleas . then in 1782 he was appointed to the new hampshire supreme court despite not being a lawyer . in 1788 , bartlett was made the chief justice of the state supreme court . that same year he was a delegate to the new hampshire convention for adoption of the constitution , serving part of the time as its chairman . he argued for ratification , which finally took place on june 21 , 1788 . the legislature of the new state of new hampshire selected him to be a u . s . senator , but he declined the office . as governor . in 1790 bartlett secured legislation recognizing the new hampshire medical society . he was also elected chief executive of new hampshire . he served in 1791 and 1792 as president . then when the new state constitution took effect in 1792 he continued , now as governor . he resigned in 1794 after four years because of declining health ; he died the next year . during his tenure , he oversaw the installation of a new state constitution , compilation of the laws and statutes in force , and provision for the early payment of the state 's debt . he actively promoted agriculture and manufacturing , the improvement of roads , and saw the start of projects to build canals . medical career . bartlett actively practiced medicine for 45 years , after having apprenticed with another doctor and then establishing his own practice at the age of 20 . around 1735 , the area around kingston suffered an epidemic of a fever and canker called throat distemper . for adults it was a serious illness , and for children it was frequently fatal , especially among the very young . when the illness struck again in 1754 , bartlett experimented with therapy using several available drugs , and empirically discovered that peruvian bark would relieve symptoms long enough to allow recovery . bartlett founded and was the first president of the new hampshire medical society . in 1790 , he delivered the commencement address at dartmouth college when his son ezra graduated . though the honor was in part due to his signing of the declaration of independence and his new selection as president of the new hampshire medical society , it was in large measure a recognition of his medical career . josiah bartlett was awarded an honorary m.d . ( doctor of medicine ) the same day his son was awarded the same degree . . death and legacy . bartlett retired to his home in kingston and died there on may 19 , 1795 . the cause of death was paralysis . he is buried next to his wife mary in the plains cemetery , also at kingston . relatives of bartlett still live in his home ; the josiah bartlett house was declared a national historic landmark in 1971 . a bronze statue of bartlett stands in the town square of amesbury , massachusetts . his portrait hangs in the state house in concord , new hampshire , drawn from an original by john trumbull . bartlett , new hampshire , a town just north of conway , is named in his honor , and the josiah bartlett elementary school is a visible presence on its major roadway . bartlett is featured on a new hampshire historical marker ( number 46 ) along new hampshire route 111 in kingston . the bartlett school in amesbury , which operated from 1870 until it was closed in 1968 , operates as the bartlett museum , inc . , a nonprofit museum . in popular culture . bartlett is a character in both the 1969 stage musical 1776 as well as the 1972 american musical film 1776 directed by peter h . hunt . he was played by paul-richard davis in broadway production and daniel keyes in the film . the fictional u.s . president on the west wing , a popular nbc television drama series , is named '' josiah bartlet '' . despite the spelling difference , the character ( played by martin sheen ) , who is also a former governor of new hampshire and congressman from new hampshire , is a fictional direct descendant of this new hampshire signer of the declaration of independence . in one episode , the fictional bartlet is getting ready for his official presidential portrait and asks , '' no chance john trumbull is available to do this ? '' . dr . mark craig , the st . elsewhere character portrayed by william daniels , who was the original broadway cast 's john adams in the musical , 1776 , often drops the name of dr . josiah bartlett , a bigwig at '' boston general , '' the tv series ' fictional equivalent of massachusetts general hospital . references . leach , frank willing . descendants of the signers of the declaration of independence . salt lake city , ut : filmed by the genealogical society of utah , 1966 . print . further reading . '' papers of josiah bartlett '' ; 1979 , olympic marketing corporation ; . external links . biography by rev . charles a . goodrich , 1856 society of descendants of the signers of the declaration of independence the papers of josiah bartlett at dartmouth college library