Min Chinese

history . the min homeland of fujian was opened to chinese settlement by the defeat of the minyue state by the armies of emperor wu of han in 110 bc . the area features rugged mountainous terrain , with short rivers that flow into the south china sea . most subsequent migration from north to south china passed through the valleys of the xiang and gan rivers to the west , so that min varieties have experienced less northern influence than other southern groups . as a result , whereas most varieties of chinese can be treated as derived from middle chinese , the language described by rime dictionary such as the qieyun ( 601 ad ) , min varieties contain traces of older distinctions . linguists estimate that the oldest layers of min dialects diverged from the rest of chinese around the time of the han dynasty . however , significant waves of migration from the north china plain occurred : the uprising of the five barbarians during the jin dynasty , particularly the disaster of yongjia in 311 ad , caused a tide of immigration to the south . in 669 , chen zheng and his son chen yuanguang from gushi county in henan set up a regional administration in fujian to suppress an insurrection by the she people . wang chao was appointed governor of fujian in 893 , near the end of the tang dynasty , and brought tens of thousands of troops from henan . in 909 , following the fall of the tang dynasty , his son wang shenzhi founded the min kingdom , one of the ten kingdoms in the five dynasties and ten kingdoms period . jerry norman identifies four main layers in the vocabulary of modern min varieties : a non-chinese substratum from the original languages of minyue , which norman and mei tsu-lin believe were austroasiatic . the earliest chinese layer , brought to fujian by settlers from zhejiang to the north during the han dynasty . a layer from the northern and southern dynasties period , which is largely consistent with the phonology of the qieyun dictionary . a literary layer based on the koiné of chang'an , the capital of the tang dynasty . laurent sagart ( 2008 ) disagrees with norman and mei tsu-lin 's analysis of an austroasiatic substratum in min . the hypothesis proposed by jerry norman and tsu-lin mei arguing for an austroasiatic homeland along the middle yangtze has been largely abandoned in most circles , and left unsupported by the majority of austroasiatic specialists . chamberlain , james r . ( 2016 ) . '' kra-dai and the proto-history of south china and vietnam '' , p . 30 . in journal of the siam society , vol . 104 , 2016 . . geographic location and subgrouping . : min is usually described as one of seven or ten groups of varieties of chinese but has greater dialectal diversity than any of the other groups . the varieties used in neighbouring counties , and in the mountains of western fujian even in adjacent villages , are often mutually unintelligible . early classifications , such as those of li fang-kuei in 1937 and yuan jiahua in 1960 , divided min into northern and southern subgroups . however , in a 1963 report on a survey of fujian , pan maoding and colleagues argued that the primary split was between inland and coastal groups . a key discriminator between the two groups is a group of words that have a lateral initial in coastal varieties , and a voiceless fricative or in inland varieties , contrasting with another group having in both areas . norman reconstructs these initials in proto-min as voiceless and voiced laterals that merged in coastal varieties . coastal min . the coastal varieties have the vast majority of speakers , and have spread from their homeland in fujian and eastern guangdong to the islands of taiwan and hainan , to other coastal areas of southern china and to southeast asia . pan and colleagues divided them into three groups : eastern min ( min dong ) , centered around the city of fuzhou , the capital of fujian province , with fuzhou dialect as the prestige form . pu-xian min is spoken in the city of putian and the county of xianyou county . li rulong and chen zhangtai examined 214 words , finding 62 % shared with quanzhou dialect ( southern min ) and 39 % shared with fuzhou dialect ( eastern min ) , and concluded that pu-xian was more closely related to southern min . southern min ( min nan ) originates from the south of fujian and the eastern corner of guangdong . in popular usage , southern min usually refers to dialects of the hokkien type , which originated in southern fujian ( around quanzhou , zhangzhou and xiamen ) and spread to southeast asia , where they are known as hokkien , and taiwan , where they are known as taiwanese . zhenan min of cangnan county in southern zhejiang is also of this type . the dialects of the chaoshan region of eastern guangdong , including teochew and shantou dialects , have difficult mutual intelligibility with the amoy dialect . most thai chinese speak teochew varieties . the language atlas of china ( 1987 ) distinguished two further groups , which had previously been included in southern min : leizhou min , spoken on the leizhou peninsula in southwestern guangdong . hainanese , spoken on the island of hainan . these dialects feature drastic changes to initial consonants , including a series of implosive consonants , that have been attributed to contact with the tai–kadai languages spoken on the island . coastal varieties feature some uniquely min vocabulary , including pronouns and negatives . all but the hainan dialects have complex tone sandhi systems . inland min . although they have far fewer speakers , the inland varieties show much greater variation than the coastal ones . pan and colleagues divided the inland varieties into two groups : northern min ( min bei ) is spoken in nanping prefecture in fujian , with jian'ou dialect taken as typical . central min ( min zhong ) , spoken in sanming prefecture . the language atlas of china ( 1987 ) included a further group : shao-jiang min , spoken in the northwestern fujian counties of shaowu and jiangle , were classified as hakka by pan and his associates . however , jerry norman suggested that they were inland varieties of min that had been subject to heavy gan or hakka influence . although coastal varieties can be derived from a proto-language with four series of stops or affricates at each point of articulation ( e.g . , , , and , inland varieties contain traces of two further series , which norman termed '' softened stops '' due to their reflexes in some varieties . inland varieties use pronouns and negatives cognate with those in hakka and yue . inland varieties have little or no tone sandhi . vocabulary . most min vocabulary corresponds directly to cognates in other chinese varieties , but there is also a significant number of distinctively min words that may be traced back to proto-min . in some cases a semantic shift has occurred in min or the rest of chinese : tiaŋ b 鼎 '' wok '' . the min form preserves the original meaning '' cooking pot '' , but in other chinese varieties this word ( mc tengx > dǐng ) has become specialized to refer to ancient ceremonial tripods . dzhən a '' rice field '' . in min this form has displaced the common chinese term tián 田 . many scholars identify the min word with chéng 塍 ( mc zying ) '' raised path between fields '' , but norman argues that it is cognate with céng 層 ( mc dzong ) '' additional layer or floor '' , reflecting the terraced fields commonly found in fujian . tšhio c 厝 '' house '' . norman argues that the min word is cognate with shù 戍 ( mc syuh ) '' to guard '' . tshyi c 喙 '' mouth '' . in min this form has displaced the common chinese term kǒu 口 . it is believed to be cognate with huì 喙 ( mc xjwojh ) '' beak , bill , snout ; to pant '' . norman and mei tsu-lin have suggested an austroasiatic origin for some min words : -dəŋ a '' shaman '' may be compared with vietnamese đồng ( /ɗoŋ 2 / ) '' to shamanize , to communicate with spirits '' and mon doŋ '' to dance ( as if ) under demonic possession '' . kiɑn b 囝 '' son '' appears to be related to vietnamese con ( /kɔn/ ) and mon kon '' child '' . however , norman and mei tsu-lin 's suggestion is rejected by laurent sagart ( 2008 ) . moreover , the austroasiatic predecessor of modern vietnamese language has been proven to originate in the mountainous region in central laos and vietnam , rather than in the region north of the red river delta . chamberlain , j.r . 1998 , '' the origin of sek : implications for tai and vietnamese history '' , in the international conference on tai studies , ed . s . burusphat , bangkok , thailand , pp . 97-128 . institute of language and culture for rural development , mahidol university . . in other cases , the origin of the min word is obscure . such words include khau a 骹 '' foot '' , -tsiɑm b 䭕 '' insipid '' and dzyŋ c 𧚔 '' to wear '' . writing system . when using chinese characters to write a non-mandarin form , a common practice is to use characters that correspond etymologically to the words being represented , and for words with no evident etymology , to either invent new characters or borrow characters for their sound or meaning . written cantonese has carried this process out to the farthest extent of any non-mandarin variety , to the extent that pure cantonese vernacular can be unambiguously written using chinese characters . contrary to popular belief , a vernacular written in this fashion is not in general comprehensible to a mandarin speaker , due to significant changes in grammar and vocabulary and the necessary use of large number of non-mandarin characters . for most min varieties , a similar process has not taken place . for hokkien , competing systems exist . given that min combines the chinese of several different periods and contains some non-chinese substrate vocabulary , an author literate in mandarin ( or even classical chinese ) may have trouble finding the appropriate chinese characters for some min vocabulary . in the case of taiwanese , there are also indigenous words borrowed from formosan languages ( particularly for place names ) , as well as a substantial number of loan words from japanese . the min spoken in singapore and malaysia has borrowed heavily from malay and , to a lesser extent , from english and other languages . the result is that adapting chinese characters to write min requires a substantial effort to choose characters for a significant portion of the vocabulary . other approaches to writing min rely on romanization or phonetic systems such as taiwanese phonetic symbols . some min speakers use the church romanization . for hokkien the romanization is called pe̍h-ōe-jī ( poj ) and for fuzhou dialect called foochow romanized ( bàng-uâ-cê , buc ) . both systems were created by foreign missionaries in the 19th century ( see min nan and : cdo : ) . there are some uncommon publications in mixed writing , using mostly chinese characters but using the latin alphabet to represent words that can not easily be represented by chinese characters .