Joe Versus the Volcano

plot . joe banks is a downtrodden everyman from staten island , working a clerical job in a dreary factory for an unpleasant , demanding boss , frank waturi . joyless , listless and chronically sick , banks regularly visits doctors who can find nothing wrong with him . finally , a dr . ellison diagnoses an incurable disease called a '' brain cloud '' , which has no symptoms , but will kill him within five or six months . ellison says that the symptoms he has been experiencing are actually psychosomatic , caused by trauma in his previous job as a firefighter . ellison advises him , '' you have some life left . live it well . '' joe tells his boss off , quits his job , and asks former coworker dede out on a date . their date is a success , but when joe tells dede that he is dying , she tells him she can not deal with the revelation and leaves . the next day , a wealthy industrialist named samuel graynamore makes joe an unexpected proposition . graynamore needs '' bubaru '' , a mineral essential for manufacturing superconductors . there are deposits of it on the tiny pacific island of waponi woo , but the resident waponis will only let him mine it if he solves a problem for them . they believe that the fire god of the volcano on their island must be appeased by a voluntary human sacrifice once every century , but none of them are willing to volunteer this time around . graynamore offers to pay for whatever joe wants to enjoy his final days , as long as he jumps into the volcano within 20 days . with nothing to lose , joe accepts . joe spends a day and a night out on the town in new york city , where he solicits advice on everything from style to living life to the fullest from his chauffeur marshall . he also purchases four top-of-the-line , waterproof steamer trunks from a fanatically dedicated luggage salesman . joe then flies to los angeles , where he is met by one of graynamore 's daughters , angelica , a flighty socialite who labels herself a '' flibbertigibbet '' . the next morning , angelica takes joe to her father 's yacht , the tweedledee . the captain is her half-sister patricia . patricia reluctantly agreed to take joe to waponi woo after graynamore promised to give her the yacht in return . after an awkward beginning , joe and patricia begin to bond . then they run into a typhoon . patricia is knocked unconscious and flung overboard . after joe jumps in to rescue her , lightning strikes , sinking the yacht . joe is able to construct a raft by lashing together his steamer trunks . patricia does not regain consciousness for several days . joe doles out the small supply of fresh water to her , while he gradually becomes delirious from thirst . he experiences a revelation during his delirium and thanks god for his life . when patricia finally awakens , she is deeply touched by joe 's self-sacrifice . they then find that they have luckily drifted to their destination . the waponis treat them to a grand feast . their leader , chief tobi , asks one last time if anyone else will volunteer , but there are no takers and joe heads to the volcano . patricia tries to stop him , declaring her love for him . he admits he loves her as well , '' but the timing stinks . '' patricia persuades joe to have the chief marry them . afterwards , patricia refuses to be separated from her new husband . when joe is unable to dissuade her , they jump in together , but the volcano erupts at that moment , blowing them out into the ocean . the island sinks , but joe and patricia land near their trusty steamer trunks . at first ecstatic about their miraculous salvation , joe tells patricia about his fatal brain cloud . she recognizes the name of joe 's doctor as that of her father 's crony and realizes that joe has been set up . he is not dying and they can live happily ever after . cast . in addition , two other notable actors in smaller roles are nathan lane as baw , the waponi advance man , and carol kane , inexplicably credited as lisa leblanc , as a hairdresser . reception . on rotten tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 61 % based on 31 reviews , with an average rating of 5.53/10 . the website 's critical consensus reads : '' joe versus the volcano erupts with plenty of screwball energy and thoughtful observations about living to the fullest , but its existential ambition may prove too goofy for some audiences . '' at metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 45 out of 100 , based on 18 critics , indicating '' mixed or average reviews . '' audiences surveyed by cinemascore gave the film a grade '' c+ '' on scale of a to f . vincent canby wrote : '' not since howard the duck has there been a big-budget comedy with feet as flat as those of joe versus the volcano . many gifted people contributed to it , but there 's no disbelieving the grim evidence on the screen . '' upon its release , time called it a '' wan bit of whimsy . that makes no more sense than its synopsis , though meg ryan beguiles in three different roles . '' fifteen years later , time critic richard schickel listed it as one of his '' guilty pleasures '' ; while acknowledging '' there are people who think this film . may be the worst big budget film of modern times , '' schickel disagreed , saying '' if you set aside the routine comic expectations its marketing encouraged , you may find yourself entranced by a movie that is utterly sui generis . '' roger ebert gave it 3.5 out of 4 stars and called it '' new and fresh and not shy of taking chances '' ; the film '' achieves a kind of magnificent goofiness . hanks and ryan are the right actors to inhabit it , because you can never catch them going for a gag that is n't there : they inhabit the logic of this bizarre world and play by its rules . '' he later brought the film to ebertfest 2012 and wondered '' why he gave 3.5 stars instead of 4 . '' . soundtrack . the soundtrack , composed by georges delerue , was released in very limited numbers as a promotional item . only 3000 copies were manufactured in 1990 , the year of the movie 's release . because of delerue 's strong following , varèse sarabande re-released the cd in 2002 . shanley wrote two songs for the film , '' marooned without you '' and '' the cowboy song '' , the former used thematically throughout and the latter performed by hanks on the ukulele . eric burdon 's version of merle travis 's '' sixteen tons '' was used at the beginning of the film . after joe leaves the doctor 's office , an edited version of ray charles 's version of '' ol ' man river '' plays . '' mas que nada '' by sérgio mendes brasil '66 accompanies joe while he is driven around new york city . a spanish version of '' on the street where you live '' is sung while joe is on his date with dede . elvis presley 's version of '' blue moon '' plays as joe spends his final night before departing on his journey . on the boat trip , the young rascals ' '' good lovin ' '' , the del vikings '' come go with me '' , and the ink spots ' version of '' i cover the waterfront '' are heard . waponi tribal music includes the melodies '' when johnny comes marching home '' and '' hava nagila . '' . home media . the film was first released on home video in late 1990 and was later released on dvd by warner home video in april 2002 . the manufacture-on-demand blu-ray was released through warner archive collection on june 20 , 2017 , and it received positive reviews for the quality . . stage musical . in 2012 , san diego 's lambs players theatre presented the world premiere of a musical based on the film . directed by robert smyth , it featured a book , music and lyrics by scott hafso and darcy phillips , with musical direction by jon lorenz and additional musical arrangements by taylor peckham . . references . external links .