Ferdinand Christian Baur

early years . baur was born at schmiden , near cannstatt . after training at the theological seminary of blaubeuren , he went in 1809 to the university of tübingen . here he studied for a time under ernst bengel , grandson of the eminent new testament critic , johann albrecht bengel , and at this early stage in his career he seems to have been under the influence of the old tübingen school . but at the same time the philosophers johann gottlieb fichte and friedrich schelling were creating a wide and deep impression . in 1817 baur returned to the theological seminary at blaubeuren as professor . this move marked a turning-point in his life , for he now set to work on the investigations on which his reputation rests . he had already , in 1817 , written a review of g . kaiser 's biblische theologie for bengel 's archiv für theologie ( ii . 656 ) ; its tone was moderate and conservative . early works . when , a few years after his appointment at blaubeuren , he published his first important work , symbolik und mythologie oder die naturreligion des altertums ( '' symbol and mythology : the natural religion of antiquity '' , 1824–1825 ) , it became evident that he had made a deeper study of philosophy , and had come under the influence of schelling and more particularly of friedrich schleiermacher . the learning of the work was fully recognized , and in 1826 the author was called to tübingen as professor of theology . it is with tübingen that his greatest literary achievements are associated . his earlier publications here treated of mythology and the history of dogma . das manichäische religionssystem ( '' the manichaean religious system '' ) appeared in 1831 , apollonius of tyana in 1832 , die christliche gnosis ( '' christian gnosis '' ) in 1835 , and über das christliche im platonismus oder socrates und christus ( '' on christianity in platonism : socrates and christ '' ) in 1837 . as otto pfleiderer ( pflederer 1890 p . & nbsp ; 285 ) observes , '' the choice not less than the treatment of these subjects is indicative of the large breadth of view and the insight of the historian into the comparative religion . '' . simon magus and paul . baur rested his ideas about the new testament on the clementines , and his ideas about the clementines on st . epiphanius , who found the writings used by an ebionite sect in the 4th century . this judeo-christian sect at that date rejected st . paul as an apostate . it was assumed that this 4th century opinion represented the christianity of the twelve apostles ; paulinism was originally a heresy , and a schism from the jewish christianity of james and peter and the rest ; marcion was a leader of the pauline sect in its survival in the 2nd century , using only the pauline gospel , st . luke ( in its original form ) , and the epistles of st . paul ( without the pastoral epistles ) . the clementine literature had its first origin in the apostolic age , and belonged to the original jewish , petrine , legal church . it is directed wholly against st . paul and his sect . simon magus never existed ; it is a nickname for st . paul . the acts of the apostles , compiled in the 2nd century , have borrowed their mention of simon from the earliest form of the clementines . catholicism under the presidency of rome was the result of the adjustment between the petrine and pauline sections of the church in the second half of the 2nd century . the fourth gospel is a monument of this reconciliation , in which rome took a leading part , having invented the fiction that both peter and paul were the founders of her church , both having been martyred at rome , and on the same day , in perfect union . throughout the middle of the 19th century this theory , in many forms , was dominant in germany . the demonstration , mainly by english scholars , of the impossibility of the late dates ascribed to the new testament documents ( four epistles of st . paul and the apocalypse were the only documents generally admitted as being of early date ) , and the proofs of the authenticity of the apostolic fathers and of the use of st . john 's gospel by justin , papias , and ignatius , gradually brought baur 's theories into discredit . of the original school , adolf hilgenfeld may be considered the last survivor ( died 1907 ) . he was induced to admit that simon magus was a real personage , though he persisted that in the clementines he is meant for st . paul . in 1847 hilgenfeld dated the original nucleus of the clementine literature ( kerygmata petrou ) soon after the jewish war of 70 ; successive revisions of it were anti-basilidian , anti-valentinian , and anti-marcionite respectively . baur placed the completed form , ‘ ‘ h ’ ’ , soon after the middle of the 2nd century , and schliemann ( 1844 ) agreed , placing ‘ ‘ r ’ ’ , as a revision , between 211 and 230 . other writers dated both ‘ ‘ h ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ r ’ ’ to between the 2nd and 4th centuries : r . 2nd century : sixtus senensis ( sixtus of siena ) ( 1520-1569 ) , david blondel ( david blondellus catalaunensis ) ( 1590-1655 ) , jean-baptiste cotelier ( 1629-1686 ) , william cave ( 1637-1713 ) , casimir oudin ( 1638-1717 ) , noël alexandre ( natalis alexander ) ( 1639-1724 ) , denis-nicolas le nourry ( nourri ) ( 1647-1724 ) , johann georg heinsius ( d . 1733 ) , ernst friedrich karl rosenmüller ( 1768-1835 ) , christian wilhelm flügge ( 1773-1828 ) , karl gottlieb bretschneider ( 1776-1848 ) , johann georg veit engelhardt ( 1791-1855 ) , johann karl ludwig gieseler ( 1792-1854 ) , friedrich august gottreu tholuck ( 1799-1877 ) , and august friedrich gfrörer ( 1803-1861 ) . r . 2nd or 3rd century : schröck , stark , lumper , krabbe , locherer , gersdorf . r . 3rd century : strunzius ( on bardesanes , 1710 ) , weismann ( 17l8 ) , mosheim , kleuker , schmidt ( kirchengesch . ) r . 4th century : corrodi , lentz ( dogmengesch . ) . h . 2nd century ( beginning ) : credner , bretschneider , kern , rothe . h . 2nd century : clericus , beausobre , flügge , münscher , hoffmann , döllinger , hilgers ; ( middle of 2nd ) hase . h . end of 2nd century : schröck , cölln , gieseler ( 3rd ed . ) , schenkel , gfrörer , lücke . h . 3rd century : mill , mosheim , gallandi , gieseler ( 2nd ed . ) . h . 2nd or 3rd century : neander , krabbe , baur , ritter , paniel , dähne . h . 4th century : lentz . hegel 's influence . meantime baur had exchanged one master in philosophy for another , schleiermacher for hegel . in doing so , he had adopted completely the hegelian philosophy of history . '' without philosophy , '' he has said , '' history is always for me dead and dumb . '' the change of view is illustrated clearly in the essay , published in the tübinger zeitschrift for 1831 , on the christ-party in the apollos , die christuspartei in der korinthischen gemeinde , der gegensatz des paulinischen und petrinischen christentums in der ältesten kirche , der apostel petrus in rom , the trend of which is suggested by the title ( in english , 'the christ party in the corinthian community , the opposition of pauline and petrine christianity in the earliest church , the apostle peter in rome ' ) . baur contends that the apostle paul was opposed in corinth by a jewish christian party that wished to set up its own form of christian religion instead of his universal christianity . he found traces of a keen conflict of parties in the post-apostolic age , which have passed into the mainstream of early christian historiography . pauline epistles . the theory is further developed in a later work ( 1835 , the year in which david strauss ' leben jesu was published ) , über die sogenannten pastoralbriefe . in this baur attempts to prove that the false teachers mentioned in the second epistle to timothy and epistle to titus are the gnostics , particularly the marcionites , of the 2nd century , and consequently that the pastoral epistles were produced in the middle of the 2nd century in opposition to gnosticism . he next proceeded to investigate other pauline epistles and the acts of the apostles in the same manner , publishing his results in 1845 under the title paulus , der apostel jesu christi , sein leben und wirken , seine briefe und seine lehre . in this he contends that only the epistle to the galatians , first and second epistle to the corinthians and epistle to the romans are genuinely pauline , and that the paul of the acts of the apostles is a different person from the paul of these genuine epistles , the author being a paulinist who , with an eye to the different parties in the church , is at pains to represent peter as far as possible as a paulinist and paul as far as possible as a petrinist . early christian conflicts . baur was prepared to apply his theory to the whole of the new testament ; in the words of h . s . nash , '' he carried a sweeping hypothesis into the examination of the new testament . '' he considers those writings alone genuine in which the conflict between jewish-christians and gentile-christians is clearly marked . in his kritische untersuchungen über die kanonischen evangelien , ihr verhältniss zu einander , ihren charakter und ursprung ( 1847 ) he turns his attention to the gospels , and here again finds that the authors were conscious of the conflict of parties ; the gospels reveal a mediating or conciliatory tendency ( tendenz ) on the part of the writers or redactors . the gospels , in fact , are adaptations or redactions of an older gospel , such as the gospel of the hebrews , of peter , of the egyptians , or of the ebionites . the petrine matthew bears the closest relationship to this original gospel ( urevangelium ) ; the pauline luke is later and arose independently ; mark represents a still later development according to baur ; the account in john is idealistic : it '' does not possess historical truth , and can not and does not really lay claim to it . '' baur 's theory starts with the supposition that christianity was gradually developed out of judaism , see also list of events in early christianity . before it could become a universal religion , it had to struggle with jewish limitations and to overcome them . the early christians were jewish-christians , to whom jesus was the messiah . paul , on the other hand , represented a supersessionism . thus there was some antagonism between the jewish apostles peter , james and john , and paul the '' apostle to the gentiles '' , and this struggle continued down to the middle of the 2nd century . in short , the conflict between petrinism and paulinism is , as karl schwarz puts it , the key to the literature of the 1st and 2nd century . theology . baur was a theologian and historian as well as a biblical critic . as early as 1834 he published a strictly theological work , gegensatz des katholicismus und protestantismus nach den prinzipien und hauptdogmen der beiden lehrbegriffe , a strong defence of protestantism on the lines of schleiermacher 's glaubenslehre , and a vigorous reply to j . möhler 's symbolik ( 1833 ) . this was followed by his larger histories of dogma , die christliche lehre von der versöhnung in ihrer geschichtlichen entwicklung bis auf die neueste zeit ( 1838 ) , die christliche lehre von der dreieinigkeit und menschwerdung gottes in ihrer geschichtlichen entwicklung ( 3 vols . , 1841–1843 ) , and the lehrbuch der christlichen dogmengeschichte ( 1847 ) . the value of these works is impaired somewhat by baur 's habit of making the history of dogma conform to the formulae of hegel 's philosophy , a procedure '' which only served to obscure the truth and profundity of his conception of history as a true development of the human mind '' ( pfleiderer ) . baur , however , soon came to attach more importance to personality , and to distinguish more carefully between religion and philosophy . the change is noticeable in his epochen der kirchlichen geschichtschreibung ( 1852 ) , das christenthum und die christiche kirche der drei ersten jahrhunderte ( 1853 ) , and die christliche kirche von anfang des vierten bis zum ende das sechsten jahrhunderts ( 1859 ) , works preparatory to his kirchengeschichte , in which the change of view is specially pronounced . death and posthumous publication . baur died , aged 68 , in tübingen . the kirchengeschichte was published in five volumes during the years 1853-1863 , partly by baur himself , partly by his son , ferdinand baur , and his son-in-law , eduard zeller , from notes and lectures which the author left behind him . pfleiderer describes this work , especially the first volume , as a classic for all time . '' taken as a whole , it is the first thorough and satisfactory attempt to explain the rise of christianity and the church on strictly historical lines , i.e . as a natural development of the religious spirit of our race under the combined operation of various human causes '' ( development of theology , p . & nbsp ; 288 ) . baur 's lectures on the history of dogma , ausführlichere vorlesungen uber die christliche dogmengeschichte , were published later by his son ( 1865–1868 ) . tübingen school . the tübingen school was at the height of its influence in the 1840s , but lost ground to later historical analysis . since adolf von harnack proposed very early dates for the synoptics and acts ( c . 1910 ) , the tübingen school has been generally abandoned . '' harnack , adolf '' and '' tübingen school . '' cross , f . l . , ed . the oxford dictionary of the christian church . new york : oxford university press . 2005 . references . sources . otto pfleiderer ( 1890 ) . development of theology . further reading . . external links . paul , the apostle of jesus christ , his life and work , his epistles and his doctrine translated by eduard zeller church history of the first three centuries vol 1 1878 english translation church history of the first three centuries vol 2 english a philological introduction to greek and latin for students translated by paul kegen 1879 f.c . baur on the higher criticism ; a brief quote tubingen school , summary