Dennis Brain

family tradition . dennis brain was born in london to a family already well known for producing fine horn players . his grandfather alfred edwin brain , sr . ( 4 february 1860 – 25 october 1925 ) was considered one of the top horn soloists of his time , while his uncle alfred edwin brain jr . ( 24 october 1885 – 29 march 1966 ) had a successful career playing horn in the united states with the new york philharmonic and later as a soloist in hollywood . brain 's father aubrey ( 12 july 1893 – 21 september 1955 ) was a teacher and held the principal horn position in the bbc symphony orchestra , producing the first mozart horn concerto recording in 1927 . brain 's mother marion brain was also a composer and wrote cadenzas to the first and third mozart horn concerti which her husband then performed . the family tradition also extended to his brother leonard brain ( 1915–1975 ) , an oboe who performed with dennis in a wind quintet that dennis formed . tina brain , one of leonard 's children , also became a professional horn player . musical career . early years . at an early age , brain was allowed to blow a few notes on his father 's horn every saturday morning . aubrey brain held the belief that students should not study the horn seriously until the later teenage years , when the teeth and embouchure became fully developed . during these years , brain studied piano and organ . it was not until the age of 15 that dennis was to transfer from st paul 's school to the royal academy of music to study horn , under his father 's tutelage . while there , he continued his piano studies under max pirani and organ under g . d . cunningham . brain debuted in performance on 6 october 1938 , playing second horn under his father with the busch chamber players at the queen 's hall . they performed johann sebastian bach 's brandenburg concertos . brain 's first recording was of mozart 's divertimento in d major , k.334 in february 1939 with the léner quartet . again , he played second under his father . at the age of 21 , brain was appointed to the first horn position in the national symphony orchestra . this tenure did not last long as he was soon conscripted into the armed forces with his brother in world war ii . both brothers joined the central band of the royal air force . when the royal air force symphony orchestra was formed , brain joined it . that ensemble went on a goodwill tour of the united states . during the tour , a number of orchestral conductors invited brain to join their groups after the war , including leopold stokowski of the philadelphia orchestra . in 1943 , brain 's solo career truly began when benjamin britten wrote his serenade for tenor , horn and strings for peter pears and brain . a february 1944 recording of the beethoven horn sonata reveals a twenty-two-year-old dennis brain of extraordinary lyric virtuosity , fluidity , and musical instinct , able to caress notes uncannily and soar effortlessly . brain originally played a french instrument , a raoux piston-valve horn , similar to that used by his father . this type of instrument has a particularly fluid tone and a fine legato , but a less robust sound than the german-made instruments which were becoming common . in 1951 he switched to an alexander single b instrument , complaining that '' they want me to play the right notes all of the time ! '' the alexander had a custom lead pipe which was narrower than the usual , and offered a sound which , if not comparable to the raoux , at least gave a nod in the direction of the lighter french instrument . later years . by 1945 , brain was the most sought-after horn player in england . he was 24 years old at the time . his father injured himself in a fall and lost much of his stamina to play . after the war , walter legge and thomas beecham founded the philharmonia and the royal philharmonic orchestra , respectively . brain filled the position as principal horn in both . along with jack brymer ( clarinet ) , gwydion brooke ( bassoon ) , richard walton ( trumpet ) , terence macdonagh ( oboe ) , and gerald jackson ( flute ) , he was a member of the '' royal family '' of wind instrumentalists of the royal philharmonic orchestra . later , he found that he did not have enough time to fill both positions and resigned from the royal philharmonic orchestra . expanding his interest in the neglected area of chamber music , brain formed a wind quintet with his brother in 1946 . this group eventually grew in size and toured in ( germany ) , italy and austria . brain also founded a trio with pianist wilfrid parry and violinist jean pougnet . the trio toured scotland twice and made plans to tour australia in the winter of 1957 . briefly , brain put together a chamber ensemble consisting of his friends so that he could conduct music . in november 1953 , under the direction of herbert von karajan , and accompanied by the philharmonia orchestra , brain recorded the mozart horn concertos nos . 1–4 for emi . in july 1954 , again conducted by karajan , brain performed the organ part in a recording of the easter hymn from pietro mascagni 's cavalleria rusticana . he played with karl haas 's london baroque ensemble , both on recordings ( notably dittersdorf 's partita in d , dvořák 's serenade in d minor for winds , op . 44 , and handel 's aria for two horns , oboes and bassoon ) and in concert . brain produced a radio programme entitled the early horn in 1955 . in it , he emphasized the importance of the player over the instrument in the production of the perfect tone . showing off his humorous style , brain performed a leopold mozart horn concerto on a rubber hose pipe at a gerard hoffnung music festival in 1956 , trimming the hose to length with garden shears to achieve the correct tuning . brain was notoriously careless ; his instrument for many years was a french-made piston valve horn with an impressive array of dents , and benjamin britten autographed one score '' for dennis – in case he loses the other one '' . but sir thomas beecham described brain as a '' prodigy '' harold rutland , musical times , 1957 and noël goodin characterised him as '' the genius who tamed the horn '' ; his old-fashioned and ill-treated instrument was the same as can be heard in many classic recordings of the time . dennis brain resided for several years in hampstead at 37 frognal . death . on 1 september 1957 , at the age of 36 , brain was killed driving home to london after performing the tchaikovsky symphony no . 6 , pathetique with the philharmonia under eugene ormandy at the edinburgh festival . raymond leppard on music : an anthology of critical and personal writings by raymond leppard , thomas p . lewis he had driven his triumph tr2 sports car off the road and into a tree on the a1 road opposite the north gate of the hatfield aerodrome at hatfield . brain was a noted enthusiast of fast cars and was known for keeping autocar magazine on his stand as he played the mozart concertos from memory during recording sessions . he was scheduled for a recording session of strauss 's capriccio with the conductor wolfgang sawallisch the next morning in london . liner notes from dennis brain spielt mozart , beethoven , schumann und dukas , dacapo he was interred at hampstead cemetery in london . his headstone is engraved with a passage from hindemith 's declamation section from his horn concerto : my call transforms the hall to autumn-tinted groves what is into what has been . one of his favourite horns ( by alexander of mainz : a single b-flat horn with an f extension as a tuning slide ) was badly damaged in his fatal crash . it has since been restored by paxman brothers of london and is on public display in the york gate collections at the royal academy of music , london . . influence on the horn repertoire . new works and commemorations . brain often asked composers to write new works for him to perform . many composers offered their services to brain without even being asked . among them were benjamin britten ( serenade for tenor , horn and strings , canticle iii ) , malcolm arnold ( horn concerto no . 2 ) , paul hindemith ( concerto for horn and orchestra ) , york bowen ( concerto for horn , strings and timpani ) , peter racine fricker ( horn sonata ) , gordon jacob ( horn concerto ( jacob ) ) , gamble , pp . 171–173 . mátyás seiber ( notturno for horn and strings ) , humphrey searle ( aubade for horn and strings ) , ernest tomlinson ( rhapsody and rondo for horn and orchestra , romance and rondo for horn and orchestra ) , lennox berkeley ( trio for horn , violin and piano ) and elisabeth lutyens . francis poulenc wrote elegie for horn and piano to commemorate brain 's death . he happened to be in london when brain was killed , and he wrote the elegie the next day . it was premiered on 1 september 1958 , exactly one year after brain 's death , by neill sanders and with poulenc himself on piano . to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of his death , a new work , fanfare : a salute to dennis brain was commissioned from sir peter maxwell davies , and premiered in nottingham on 15 march 2007 by michael thompson . fifty horn players subscribed £50 each towards this commission , underwritten by windblowers of nottingham . another work commissioned to mark this anniversary is sequence , for two solo horns and horn quartet , by robin wedderburn , peter gritton and ben parry . michael thompson also took part in this work 's premiere , along with richard watkins . revived works . brain collaborated with karajan to produce recordings of the four mozart horn concerti , works now considered to be the basis of the solo horn repertory . the concerti were originally written for joseph leutgeb , a viennese natural horn player . evidence of brain 's skill at composition was shown when he composed the cadenzas for the first and third concerti for his recordings . brain also popularized the two richard strauss horn concerti . he was the third to perform the horn concerto no . 2 publicly with the vienna philharmonic in 1948 . in 1951 , brain became the first person in modern times to perform joseph haydn 's horn concerto no . 1 . legacy . the beauty of brain 's music and the tragedy of his death captured the public imagination like no british horn player before or since . giovanni punto inspired beethoven to write for horn ; brain inspired benjamin britten , malcolm arnold and michael tippett . he popularised the classical horn repertoire and his brief career coincided with a renaissance of english classical performance and composition ; like his contemporary james galway he made the transition from orchestra to soloist , and his death further boosted his status as a musical legend . recordings from the 1950s are still available and many still consider the brain / karajan recordings ( made in london in 1953 ) as the definitive edition of the mozart horn concerti . brain was both a great horn player and a figure in popular culture , from his recordings of the mozart concerti to his ridiculous playing of the hosepipe ( perfectly in pitch ) in one of gerard hoffnung 's surreal musical extravaganzas . his mozart recordings inspired flanders and swann 's ill wind and his classical playing inspired future generations of horn players . references . sources . concertonet.com , instruments of mass seduction ii : the horn ; 11 may 2004 review by malcolm walker for naxos records petitt , stephen . dennis brain : a biography . london : robert hale , 1976 . excerpt from the horn call meckna , michael . the legacy of dennis brain . the horn call , vol . xxi , no . 2 , april 1991 . marshall , robert l . dennis brain on record : a comprehensive discography of his solo , chamber and orchestral recordings . newton , ma : margun music , inc . 1996 . an updated version of this discography can be downloaded at : dennis brain ( 1921-1957 ) - ihs online gamble , stephen and william c . lynch . '' dennis brain – a life in music '' . denton , tx : university of north texas press , 2011 . dressler , john c . '' dennis brain – a bibliography '' . '' the horn call '' , vol . xxii , no . 1 , october 1991 . external links . william c . lynch dennis brain collection ( ars.0138 ) , stanford archive of recorded sound