AFL–CIO

constituency groups . constituency groups are nonprofit organizations chartered and funded by the afl–cio as voter registration and mobilization bodies . these groups conduct research , host training and educational conferences , issue research reports and publications , lobby for legislation and build coalitions with local groups . each constituency group has the right to sit in on afl–cio executive council meetings , and to exercise representational and voting rights at afl–cio conventions . the afl–cio 's seven constituency groups include the a . philip randolph institute , the afl–cio union veterans council , the asian pacific american labor alliance , the coalition of black trade unionists , the coalition of labor union women , the labor council for latin american advancement and pride at work . allied organizations . the working for america institute started out as a department of the afl–cio . established in 1958 , it was previously known as the human resources development institute ( hrdi ) . john sweeney renamed the department and spun it off as an independent organization in 1998 to act as a lobbying group to promote economic development , develop new economic policies , and lobby congress on economic policy . gilroy , tom . '' labor to stress get-out-the-vote among members in fall elections , '' labor relations week , october 21 , 1998 . the american center for international labor solidarity started out as the free trade union committee ( ftuc ) , which internationally promoted free labor-unions . under afl-cio president lane kirkland , the free trade union committee had four units : the american institute for free labor development ( aifld ) , which covered latin america ; the african-american labor center ( aalc ) ; the asian-american free labor institute ( aafli ) ; and the free trade union institute ( ftui ) , which was active europe . these four units were merged into the american center for international labor solidarity in 1997 . other organizations that are allied with the afl–cio include : alliance for retired americans solidarity center american rights at work international labor communications association jobs with justice labor heritage foundation labor and working-class history association national day laborer organizing network united students against sweatshops working america working for america institute ohio organizing collaborative . programs . programs are organizations established and controlled by the afl–cio to serve certain organizational goals . programs of the afl–cio include the afl–cio building investment trust , the afl-cio employees federal credit union , the afl–cio housing investment trust , the national labor college and union privilege . international policy . the afl–cio is affiliated to the brussels-based international trade union confederation , formed november 1 , 2006 . the new body incorporated the member organizations of the international confederation of free trade unions , of which the afl–cio had long been part . the afl–cio had had a very active foreign policy in building and strengthening free trade unions . during the cold war it vigorously opposed communist unions in latin america and europe . in opposing communism , it helped split the cgt in france and helped create the anti-communist workers ' force . robert anthony waters and geert van goethem , eds . , american labor 's global ambassadors : the international history of the afl-cio during the cold war ( palgrave macmillan ; 2014 ) according to the cybersecurity firm area 1 , hackers working for the people 's liberation army strategic support force compromised the networks of the afl–cio in order to gain information on negotiations for the trans-pacific partnership . . history . civil rights . the afl–cio has a long relationship with civil rights struggles . one of the major points of contention between the afl and the cio , particularly in the era immediately after the cio split off , was the cio 's willingness to include black workers ( excluded by the afl in its focus on craft unionism . ) herman , arthur . freedom 's forge : how american business produced victory in world war ii , p . 184 , random house , new york , ny . later , blacks would also criticize the cio for abandoning their interests , particularly after the merger with the afl . king hoped for a coalition between civil rights and labor that would improve the situation for the entire working class by ending racial discrimination . however , king also criticized the afl–cio for its tolerance of unions that excluded black workers . '' i would be lacking in honesty , '' he told the delegates of the 1965 illinois afl–cio convention during his keynote address , '' if i did not point out that the labor movement of thirty years ago did more in that period for civil rights than labor is doing today.our combined strength is potentially enormous , but we have not used a fraction of it for our own good or the needs of society as a whole . '' soderstrom , carl ; soderstrom , robert ; stevens , chris ; burt , andrew ( 2018 ) . forty gavels : the life of reuben soderstrom and the illinois afl-cio . 3 . peoria , il : cws publishing . pp . 261-261 . king and the afl–cio diverged further in 1967 , when king announced his opposition to the vietnam war , which the afl–cio strongly supported . the afl–cio endorsed the civil rights act of 1964 . in the 21st century , the afl–cio has been criticized by campaigners against police violence for its affiliation with the international union of police associations ( iupa ) . on may 31 , 2020 , the afl–cio offices in washington , d.c . were set on fire during the george floyd protests taking place in the city . in response , afl–cio president richard trumka condemned both the murder of george floyd and the destruction of the offices , but did not address demands to end the organization 's affiliation with the iupa . . new unity partnership . in 2003 , the afl–cio began an intense internal debate over the future of the labor movement in the united states with the creation of the new unity partnership ( nup ) , a loose coalition of some of the afl–cio 's largest unions . this debate intensified in 2004 , after the defeat of labor-backed candidate john kerry in the u.s . presidential election , 2004 . the nup 's program for reform of the federation included reduction of the central bureaucracy , more money spent on organizing new members rather than on electoral politics , and a restructuring of unions and locals , eliminating some smaller locals and focusing more along the lines of industrial unionism . in 2005 , the nup dissolved and the change to win federation ( ctw ) formed , threatening to secede from the afl–cio if its demands for major reorganization were not met . as the afl–cio prepared for its 50th anniversary convention in late july , three of the federations ' four largest unions announced their withdrawal from the federation : the service employees international union ( seiu ) , the international brotherhood of teamsters ( '' the teamsters '' ) , and the united food and commercial workers international union ( ufcw ) . greenhouse , steven . '' third union is leaving a.f.l.-c.i.o . '' new york times . july 30 , 2005 . unite here disaffiliated in mid-september 2005 , greenhouse , steven . '' 4th union quits a.f.l.-c.i.o . in a dispute over organizing . '' new york times . september 15 , 2005 . the united farm workers left in january 2006 , greenhouse , steven . '' washington : united farm workers quit a.f.l.-c.i.o . '' new york times . january 13 , 2006 . and the laborers ' international union of north america disaffiliated on june 1 , 2006 . '' laborers ' announce official split with afl-cio as of june 1 . '' engineering news-record . may 29 , 2006 ; '' laborer 's to make afl-cio break official . '' chicago sun times . may 23 , 2006 . two unions later left ctw and rejoined the afl–cio . after a bitter internal leadership dispute that involved allegations of embezzlement and accusations that seiu was attempting to raid the union , larrubia , evelyn . '' unite here faction sets vote on leaving union . '' los angeles times . march 7 , 2009 ; mishak , michael . '' unite here even more split as co-leader resigns in huff . '' las vegas sun . may 31 , 2009 ; greenhouse , steven . '' infighting distracts unions at crucial time . '' new york times . july 8 , 2009 . a substantial number of unite here members formed their own union ( workers united ) while the remainder of unite here reaffiliated with the afl–cio on september 17 , 2009 . greenhouse , steve . '' union rejoining a.f.l.-c.i.o . '' new york times . september 17 , 2009 ; stutz , howard . '' culinary parent unite here rejoins afl-cio , ending four-year separation . '' las vegas review-journal . september 18 , 2009 . the laborers ' international union of north america said on august 13 , 2010 , that it would also leave change to win and rejoin the afl–cio in october 2010 . '' construction workers ' union to rejoin a.f.l.-c.i.o . '' associated press . august 14 , 2010 . . ilwu disaffiliation . in august 2013 , the international longshore and warehouse union ( ilwu ) disaffiliated from the afl–cio . the ilwu said that members of other afl–cio unions were crossing its picket lines , and the afl–cio had done nothing to stop it . the ilwu also cited the afl–cio 's willingness to compromise on key policies such as labor law reform , immigration reform , and health care reform . the longshoremen 's union said it would become an independent union . '' longshore union pulls out of national afl–cio . '' associated press . august 31 , 2013 . accessed 2013-08-31 . . presidents . george meany ( 1955–1979 ) lane kirkland ( 1979–1995 ) thomas r . donahue ( 1995 ) john j . sweeney ( 1995–2009 ) richard trumka ( 2009– )