Radio direction finder

history . early mechanical systems . the earliest experiments in rdf were carried out in 1888 when heinrich hertz discovered the directionality of an loop antenna used as an antenna . when the antenna was aligned so it pointed at the signal it produced maximum gain , and produced zero signal when face on . this meant there was always an ambiguity in the location of the signal , it would produce the same output if the signal was in front or back of the antenna . later experimenters also used dipole antennas , which worked in the opposite sense , reaching maximum gain at right angles and zero when aligned . rdf systems using mechanically swung loop or dipole antennas were common by the turn of the 20th century . prominent examples were patented by john stone stone in 1902 ( u.s . patent 716,134 ) and lee de forest in 1904 ( u.s . patent 771,819 ) , among many other examples . by the early 1900s , many experimenters were looking for ways to use this concept for locating the position of a transmitter . early radio systems generally used medium wave and longwave signals . longwave in particular had good long-distance transmission characteristics due to their limited interaction with the ground , and thereby provided excellent great circle route ground wave propagation that pointed directly to the transmitter . methods of performing rdf on longwave signals was a major area of research during the 1900s and 1910s . antennas are generally sensitive to signals only when they have a length that is a significant portion of the wavelength , or larger . most antennas are at least ¼ of the wavelength , more commonly ½ - the half-wave dipole is a very common design . for longwave use , this resulted in loop antennas tens of feet on a side , often with more than one loop connected together to improve the signal . another solution to this problem was developed by the marconi company in 1905 . this consisted of a number of horizontal wires or rods arranged to point outward from a common center point . a movable switch could connect opposite pairs of these wires to form a dipole , and by rotating the switch the operator could hunt for the strongest signal . the us navy overcame this problem , to a point , by mounting antennas on ships and sailing in circles . such systems were unwieldily and impractical for many uses . bellini-tosi . a key improvement in the rdf concept was introduced by ettore bellini and alessandro tosi in 1909 ( u.s . patent 943,960 ) . their system used two such antennas , typically triangular loops , arranged at right angles . the signals from the antennas were sent into coils wrapped around a wooden frame about the size of a pop can , where the signals were re-created in the area between the coils . a separate loop antenna located in this area could then be used to hunt for the direction , without moving the main antennas . this made rdf so much more practical that it was soon being used for navigation on a wide scale , often as the first form of aerial navigation available , with ground stations homing in on the aircraft 's radio set . bellini-tosi direction finders were widespread from the 1920s into the 1950s . early rdf systems were useful largely for long wave signals . these signals are able to travel very long distances , which made them useful for long-range navigation . however , when the same technique was being applied to higher frequencies , unexpected difficulties arose due to the reflection of high frequency signals from the ionosphere . the rdf station might now receive the same signal from two or more locations , especially during the day , which caused serious problems trying to determine the location . this led to the 1919 introduction of the adcock antenna ( uk patent 130,490 ) , which consisted of four separate monopole antennas instead of two loops , eliminating the horizontal components and thus filtering out the sky waves being reflected down from the ionosphere . adcock antennas were widely used with bellini-tosi detectors from the 1920s on . the us army air corps in 1931 tested a primitive radio compass that used commercial stations as the beacon . '' broadcast station can guide flyer '' , april 1931 , popular science . huff-duff . a major improvement in the rdf technique was introduced by robert watson-watt as part of his experiments to locate lightning strikes as a method to indicate the direction of thunderstorms for sailors and airmen . he had long worked with conventional rdf systems , but these were difficult to use with the fleeting signals from the lightning . he had early on suggested the use of an oscilloscope to display these near instantly , but was unable to find one while working at the met office . when the office was moved , his new location at a radio research station provided him with both an adcock antenna and a suitable oscilloscope , and he presented his new system in 1926 . in spite of the system being presented publicly , and its measurements widely reported in the uk , its impact on the art of rdf seems to be strangely subdued . development was limited until the mid-1930s , when the various british forces began widespread development and deployment of these '' high-frequency direction finding '' , or '' huff-duff '' systems . to avoid rdf , the germans had developed a method of broadcasting short messages under 30 seconds , less than the 60 seconds that a trained bellini-tosi operator would need to determine the direction . however , this was useless against huff-duff systems , which located the signal with reasonable accuracy in seconds . the germans did not become aware of this problem until the middle of the war , and did not take any serious steps to address it until 1944 . by that time huff-duff had helped in about one-quarter of all successful attacks on the u-boat fleet . post-war systems . several developments in electronics during and after the second world war led to greatly improved methods of comparing the phase of signals . in addition , the phase-locked loop ( pll ) allowed for easy tuning in of signals , which would not drift . improved vacuum tubes and the introduction of the transistor allowed much higher frequencies to be used economically , which led to widespread use of vhf and uhf signals . all of these changes led to new methods of rdf , and its much more widespread use . in particular , the ability to compare the phase of signals led to phase-comparison rdf , which is perhaps the most widely used technique today . in this system the loop antenna is replaced with a single square-shaped ferrite core , with loops wound around two perpendicular sides . signals from the loops are sent into a phase comparison circuit , whose output phase directly indicates the direction of the signal . by sending this to any manner of display , and locking the signal using pll , the direction to the broadcaster can be continuously displayed . operation consists solely of tuning in the station , and is so automatic that these systems are normally referred to as automatic direction finder . other systems have been developed where more accuracy is required . pseudo-doppler radio direction finder systems use a series of small dipole antennas arranged in a ring and use electronic switching to rapidly select dipoles to feed into the receiver . the resulting signal is processed and produces an audio tone . the phase of that audio tone , compared to the antenna rotation , depends on the direction of the signal . doppler rdf systems have widely replaced the huff-duff system for location of fleeting signals . operation . radio direction finding works by comparing the signal strength of a directional antenna pointing in different directions . at first , this system was used by land and marine-based radio operators , using a simple rotatable loop antenna linked to a degree indicator . this system was later adopted for both ships and aircraft , and was widely used in the 1930s and 1940s . on pre-world war ii aircraft , rdf antennas are easy to identify as the circular loops mounted above or below the fuselage . later loop antenna designs were enclosed in an aerodynamic , teardrop-shaped fairing . in ships and small boats , rdf receivers first employed large metal loop antennas , similar to aircraft , but usually mounted atop a portable battery-powered receiver . in use , the rdf operator would first tune the receiver to the correct frequency , then manually turn the loop , either listening or watching an s meter to determine the direction of the null ( the direction at which a given signal is weakest ) of a long wave ( lw ) or medium wave ( am ) broadcast beacon or station ( listening for the null is easier than listening for a peak signal , and normally produces a more accurate result ) . this null was symmetrical , and thus identified both the correct degree heading marked on the radio 's compass rose as well as its 180-degree opposite . while this information provided a baseline from the station to the ship or aircraft , the navigator still needed to know beforehand if he was to the east or west of the station in order to avoid plotting a course 180-degrees in the wrong direction . by taking bearings to two or more broadcast stations and plotting the intersecting bearings , the navigator could locate the relative position of his ship or aircraft . later , rdf sets were equipped with rotatable ferrite loopstick antennas , which made the sets more portable and less bulky . some were later partially automated by means of a motorized antenna ( adf ) . a key breakthrough was the introduction of a secondary vertical whip or loop antenna that substantiated the correct bearing and allowed the navigator to avoid plotting a bearing 180 degrees opposite the actual heading . the u.s . navy rdf model se 995 which used a sense antenna was in use during world war i . gebhard , louis a '' evolution of naval radio-electronics and contributions of the naval research laboratory '' ( 1979 ) after world war ii , there were many small and large firms making direction finding equipment for mariners , including apelco , aqua guide , bendix , gladding ( and its marine division , pearce-simpson ) , ray jefferson , raytheon , and sperry . by the 1960s , many of these radios were actually made by japanese electronics manufacturers , such as panasonic , fuji onkyo , and yoji ito in aircraft equipment , bendix and sperry-rand were two of the larger manufacturers of rdf radios and navigation instruments . usage in maritime and aircraft navigation . radio transmitters for air and sea navigation are known as beacons and are the radio equivalent to a lighthouse . the transmitter sends a morse code transmission on a long wave ( 150 – 400 & nbsp ; khz ) or medium wave ( 520 – 1720 & nbsp ; khz ) frequency incorporating the station 's identifier that is used to confirm the station and its operational status . since these radio signals are broadcast in all directions ( omnidirectional ) during the day , the signal itself does not include direction information , and these beacons are therefore referred to as non-directional beacons , or ndbs . as the commercial medium wave broadcast band lies within the frequency capability of most rdf units , these stations and their transmitters can also be used for navigational fixes . while these commercial radio stations can be useful due to their high power and location near major cities , there may be several miles between the location of the station and its transmitter , which can reduce the accuracy of the 'fix ' when approaching the broadcast city . a second factor is that some am radio stations are omnidirectional during the day , and switch to a reduced power , directional signal at night . rdf was once the primary form of aircraft and marine navigation . strings of beacons formed '' airways '' from airport to airport , while marine ndbs and commercial am broadcast stations provided navigational assistance to small watercraft approaching a landfall . in the united states , commercial am radio stations were required to broadcast their station identifier once per hour for use by pilots and mariners as an aid to navigation . in the 1950s , aviation ndbs were augmented by the vor system , in which the direction to the beacon can be extracted from the signal itself , hence the distinction with non-directional beacons . use of marine ndbs was largely supplanted in north america by the development of loran in the 1970s . today many ndbs have been decommissioned in favor of faster and far more accurate gps navigational systems . however the low cost of adf and rdf systems , and the continued existence of am broadcast stations ( as well as navigational beacons in countries outside north america ) has allowed these devices to continue to function , primarily for use in small boats , as an adjunct or backup to gps . see also . automatic direction finder ( adf ) acronyms and abbreviations in avionics amateur radio direction finding battle of the beams cardioid direction finding hf/df radio navigation real-time locating system traffic analysis vor/dme wullenweber . notes . references . boffa p . d . , sistemi per la radionavigazione , ed . siderea , 1985 v . piazzi , sistemi radioelettrici di navigazione , vol v , a.a . r . trebbi , strumenti e navigazione , ed . aviabooks f . francescotti , avionica , ed . aviolibri alessandro tosi , il radiogoniometro bellini-tosi alla esposizione di storia della scienza in firenze , taranto , a . dragone & c . , 1929 alessandro tosi , l ' enciclopedia italiana e radiosistema a radiogoniometro , pisa : pacini mariotti , 1932 alessandro tosi , contributo della marina all'avvento del radiogoniometro , roma , e . pinci , 1929 apparati r.t . di bordo e radiogoniometro , ministero dell'aeronautica ispettorato scuole , roma , 1937 impiego pratico del radiogoniometro d . f . m . 3 sulle navi mercantili , ministero delle poste e delle telecomunicazioni , roma , ist . poligr . dello stato , 1950 musella , francesco , il radiogoniometro ed il radiofaro nella navigazione , roma , ist . poligr . dello stato , 1934 radiogoniometro marconi per uso di bordo , tipo 11 f , roma , tip . radio , 1926 catalogo illustrato per radiogoniometro p 57 n campale , siemens s . a . , ministero della guerra , direzione superiore del servizio studi ed esperimenti del genio , milano , tip . l . toffaloni , 1942 istruzioni per l'uso dell'alimentatore tf . 109 per radiogoniometro e ricevitore , a cura della siemens , ministero dell'aeronautica , ufficio centrale delle telecomunicazioni e dell'assistenza del volo , milano , 1941 catalogo illustrato per impianto radiogoniometro e 393 n . , : siemens s . n . , ministero della guerra . direzione superiore del servizio studi ed esperimenti del genio , milano , tip . l . toffaloni , 1942 21 : il radiogoniometro marconi per stazioni terrestri : tipo 12 a , roma , ufficio marconi , 1923 tosi , a . , il radiosistema bellini-tosi a radiogoniometro : l'ultima fase , taranto , arti grafiche dragone , 1930 23 : radiogoniometro marconi per aeromobili : tipo 14 : codice airder , roma , ufficio marconi , e genova , officine radiotelegrafiche marconi , 1923 il radiogoniometro e la radiotelegrafia direttiva , ufficio marconi , roma , tip . unione ed . , 1920 radiogoniometro marconi per uso di bordo : descrizione , funzionamento , manutenzione , impiego nella condotta della navigazione , genova : tip . radio , 1923 radiogoniometro marconi r : g . m . 3 . istruzioni per l'uso e la manutenzione del segnale d'allarme automatico senza regolaggio tipo s . f . r , roma : ist . profess . g . marconi , 1950 radiogoniometro marconi r : g . m . 3 . istruzioni per l'uso e la manutenzione del segnale d'allarme automatico senza regolaggio tipo s . f . r , roma , ist . professionale di radiotelegrafia g . marconi , 1949 radiogoniometro indicatore di rotta tipo p 63 n : descrizione ed istruzioni per l'uso , ministero dell'aeronautica , divisione generale delle costruzioni e degli approvvigionamenti , milano , toffaloni , 1941 impiego pratico del radiogoniometro d.f.m.3 sulle navi mercantili , ministero delle comunicazioni , direzione generale delle poste e dei telegrafi , roma , ist . poligr . stato , 1932 vincenzo nastro , gabriella messina , '' navigazione radiogoniometrica '' , in navigazione aerea , milano , hoepli , 2002 , pp . & nbsp ; 213–262 . external links . flash based radio-magnetic indicator ( rmi ) simulator a free online vor and adf simulator