Heat exchanger

flow arrangement . left image : heat_exc_1-1.svg fig . 1 : shell and tube heat exchanger , single pass ( 1–1 parallel flow ) image : heat_exc_2-1.png fig . 2 : shell and tube heat exchanger , 2-pass tube side ( 1–2 crossflow ) image : heat_exc_2-2.png fig . 3 : shell and tube heat exchanger , 2-pass shell side , 2-pass tube side ( 2-2 countercurrent ) there are three primary classifications of heat exchangers according to their flow arrangement . in parallel-flow heat exchangers , the two fluids enter the exchanger at the same end , and travel in parallel to one another to the other side . in counter-flow heat exchangers the fluids enter the exchanger from opposite ends . the counter current design is the most efficient , in that it can transfer the most heat from the heat ( transfer ) medium per unit mass due to the fact that the average temperature difference along any unit length is higher . see countercurrent exchange . in a cross-flow heat exchanger , the fluids travel roughly perpendicular to one another through the exchanger . for efficiency , heat exchangers are designed to maximize the surface area of the wall between the two fluids , while minimizing resistance to fluid flow through the exchanger . the exchanger 's performance can also be affected by the addition of fins or corrugations in one or both directions , which increase surface area and may channel fluid flow or induce turbulence . the driving temperature across the heat transfer surface varies with position , but an appropriate mean temperature can be defined . in most simple systems this is the '' log mean temperature difference '' ( lmtd ) . sometimes direct knowledge of the lmtd is not available and the ntu method is used . types . double pipe heat exchangers are the simplest exchangers used in industries . on one hand , these heat exchangers are cheap for both design and maintenance , making them a good choice for small industries . on the other hand , their low efficiency coupled with the high space occupied in large scales , has led modern industries to use more efficient heat exchangers like shell and tube or plate . however , since double pipe heat exchangers are simple , they are used to teach heat exchanger design basics to students as the fundamental rules for all heat exchangers are the same . 1.double-pipe heat exchanger ( a ) when the other fluid flows into the annular gap between two tubes , one fluid flows through the smaller pipe . the flow may be a current flow or parallel flow in a double pipe heat exchanger . ( b ) parallel flow , where at the same point , the hot and cold liquids join , flow in the same direction and exit at the same end . ( c ) counter flow , where at opposite ends , hot and cold fluids join , flow in the opposite direction and exit at opposite ends . the figure above illustrates the parallel and counter-flow flow directions of the fluid exchanger . if this is done under comparable conditions , more heat is transferred to the counter-flow device than to the parallel flow heat exchanger . owing to the large temperature differential arising from the high thermal voltage , the temperature profiles of the two heat exchangers display two significant disadvantages in the parallel-flow design . which indicates that the partnership is a distinct disadvantage if it is intended a design is to increase the cold fluid temperature . where two fluids are expected to be taken to exactly the same temperature , the parallel flow configuration is beneficial . while the counter flow heat exchanger has more significant advantages compare to parallel flow design . where it can reduce thermal stress and produce more uniform rate of heat transfer . 2.shell-and-tube heat exchanger the main constituents of this type of heat exchanger seem to be the tube box , shell , the front rear end headers , and baffles or fins . the baffles are used to support the tubes , direct the fluid flow to the tubes in an approximately natural manner , and maximize the turbulence of the shell fluid . there is many various kinds of baffles , and the choice of baffle form , spacing , and geometry depending on the allowable flow rate of the drop in shell-side force , the need for tube support , and the flow-induced vibrations . there are several variations of shell-and-tube exchangers available ; the differences lie in the arrangement of flow configurations and details of construction . in application to cool air with shell-and-tube technology ( such as intercooler / charge air cooler for combustion engines ) , fins can be added on the tubes to increase heat transfer area on air side and create a tubes & fins configuration . 3.plate heat exchanger a plate heat exchanger contains an amount of thin shaped heat transfer plates bundled together . the gasket arrangement of each pair of plates provides two separate channel system . each pair of plates form a channel where the fluid can flow through . the pairs are attached by welding and bolting methods . the following shows the components in the heat exchanger . in single channels the configuration of the gaskets enables flow through . thus , this allows the main and secondary media in counter-current flow . a gasket plate heat exchanger has a heat region from corrugated plates . the gasket function as seal between plates and they are located between frame and pressure plates . fluid flows in a counter current direction throughout the heat exchanger . an efficient thermal performance is produced . plates are produced in different depths , sizes and corrugated shapes . there is different type of plates available which includes plate and frame , plate and shell and spiral plate heat exchangers . the distribution area guarantees the flow of fluid to the whole heat transfer surface . this helps to prevent stagnant area that can cause accumulation of unwanted material on solid surfaces . high flow turbulence between plates results in a greater transfer of heat and a decrease in pressure . 4.condensers and boilers heat exchangers using a two-phase heat transfer system are condensers , boilers and evaporators . condensers are instruments that take and cool hot gas or vapor to the point of condensation and transform the gas into a liquid form . the point at which liquid transforms to gas is called vaporization and vice versa is called condensation . surface condenser is the most common type of condenser where it includes a water supply device . figure 5 below displays a two-pass surface condenser . the pressure of steam at the turbine outlet is low where the steam density is very low where the flow rate is very high . to prevent a decrease in pressure in the movement of steam from the turbine to condenser , the condenser unit is placed underneath and connected to the turbine . inside the tubes the cooling water runs in a parallel way , while steam moves in a vertical downward position from the wide opening at the top and travel through the tube . furthermore , boilers are categorized as initial application of heat exchangers . the word steam generator was regularly used to describe a boiler unit where a hot liquid stream is the source of heat rather than the combustion products . depending on the dimensions and configurations the boilers are manufactured . several boilers are only able to produce hot fluid while on the other hand the others are manufactured for steam production . shell and tube heat exchanger . thumb shell and tube heat exchangers consist of a series of tubes which contain fluid that must be either heated or cooled . a second fluid runs over the tubes that are being heated or cooled so that it can either provide the heat or absorb the heat required . a set of tubes is called the tube bundle and can be made up of several types of tubes : plain , longitudinally finned , etc . shell and tube heat exchangers are typically used for high-pressure applications ( with pressures greater than 30 bar and temperatures greater than 260 & nbsp ; °c ) . saunders , e . a . ( 1988 ) . heat exchanges : selection , design and construction . new york : longman scientific and technical . this is because the shell and tube heat exchangers are robust due to their shape . several thermal design features must be considered when designing the tubes in the shell and tube heat exchangers : there can be many variations on the shell and tube design . typically , the ends of each tube are connected to plenums ( sometimes called water boxes ) through holes in tubesheets . the tubes may be straight or bent in the shape of a u , called u-tubes . tube diameter : using a small tube diameter makes the heat exchanger both economical and compact . however , it is more likely for the heat exchanger to foul up faster and the small size makes mechanical cleaning of the fouling difficult . to prevail over the fouling and cleaning problems , larger tube diameters can be used . thus to determine the tube diameter , the available space , cost and fouling nature of the fluids must be considered . tube thickness : the thickness of the wall of the tubes is usually determined to ensure : there is enough room for corrosion that flow-induced vibration has resistance axial strength availability of spare parts hoop strength ( to withstand internal tube pressure ) buckling strength ( to withstand overpressure in the shell ) tube length : heat exchangers are usually cheaper when they have a smaller shell diameter and a long tube length . thus , typically there is an aim to make the heat exchanger as long as physically possible whilst not exceeding production capabilities . however , there are many limitations for this , including space available at the installation site and the need to ensure tubes are available in lengths that are twice the required length ( so they can be withdrawn and replaced ) . also , long , thin tubes are difficult to take out and replace . tube pitch : when designing the tubes , it is practical to ensure that the tube pitch ( i.e . , the centre-centre distance of adjoining tubes ) is not less than 1.25 times the tubes ' outside diameter . a larger tube pitch leads to a larger overall shell diameter , which leads to a more expensive heat exchanger . tube corrugation : this type of tubes , mainly used for the inner tubes , increases the turbulence of the fluids and the effect is very important in the heat transfer giving a better performance . tube layout : refers to how tubes are positioned within the shell . there are four main types of tube layout , which are , triangular ( 30° ) , rotated triangular ( 60° ) , square ( 90° ) and rotated square ( 45° ) . the triangular patterns are employed to give greater heat transfer as they force the fluid to flow in a more turbulent fashion around the piping . square patterns are employed where high fouling is experienced and cleaning is more regular . are used in shell and tube heat exchangers to direct fluid across the tube bundle . they run perpendicularly to the shell and hold the bundle , preventing the tubes from sagging over a long length . they can also prevent the tubes from vibrating . the most common type of baffle is the segmental baffle . the semicircular segmental baffles are oriented at 180 degrees to the adjacent baffles forcing the fluid to flow upward and downwards between the tube bundle . baffle spacing is of large thermodynamic concern when designing shell and tube heat exchangers . baffles must be spaced with consideration for the conversion of pressure drop and heat transfer . for thermo economic optimization it is suggested that the baffles be spaced no closer than 20 % of the shell 's inner diameter . having baffles spaced too closely causes a greater pressure drop because of flow redirection . consequently , having the baffles spaced too far apart means that there may be cooler spots in the corners between baffles . it is also important to ensure the baffles are spaced close enough that the tubes do not sag . the other main type of baffle is the disc and doughnut baffle , which consists of two concentric baffles . an outer , wider baffle looks like a doughnut , whilst the inner baffle is shaped like a disk . this type of baffle forces the fluid to pass around each side of the disk then through the doughnut baffle generating a different type of fluid flow . tubes & fins design : in application to cool air with shell-and-tube technology ( such as intercooler / charge air cooler for combustion engines ) , the difference in heat transfer between air and cold fluid can be such that there is a need to increase heat transfer area on air side . for this function fins can be added on the tubes to increase heat transfer area on air side and create a tubes & fins configuration . fixed tube liquid-cooled heat exchangers especially suitable for marine and harsh applications can be assembled with brass or aluminium shells , copper or copper-nickel tubes , brass baffles , and forged brass integral end hubs . ( see : copper in heat exchangers ) . thumb thumb thumb . plate heat exchangers . another type of heat exchanger is the plate heat exchanger . these exchangers are composed of many thin , slightly separated plates that have very large surface areas and small fluid flow passages for heat transfer . advances in gasket and brazing technology have made the plate-type heat exchanger increasingly practical . in hvac applications , large heat exchangers of this type are called plate-and-frame ; when used in open loops , these heat exchangers are normally of the gasket type to allow periodic disassembly , cleaning , and inspection . there are many types of permanently bonded plate heat exchangers , such as dip-brazed , vacuum-brazed , and welded plate varieties , and they are often specified for closed-loop applications such as refrigeration . plate heat exchangers also differ in the types of plates that are used , and in the configurations of those plates . some plates may be stamped with '' chevron '' , dimpled , or other patterns , where others may have machined fins and/or grooves . when compared to shell and tube exchangers , the stacked-plate arrangement typically has lower volume and cost . another difference between the two is that plate exchangers typically serve low to medium pressure fluids , compared to medium and high pressures of shell and tube . a third and important difference is that plate exchangers employ more countercurrent flow rather than cross current flow , which allows lower approach temperature differences , high temperature changes , and increased efficiencies . plate and shell heat exchanger . a third type of heat exchanger is a plate and shell heat exchanger , which combines plate heat exchanger with shell and tube heat exchanger technologies . the heart of the heat exchanger contains a fully welded circular plate pack made by pressing and cutting round plates and welding them together . nozzles carry flow in and out of the platepack ( the 'plate side ' flowpath ) . the fully welded platepack is assembled into an outer shell that creates a second flowpath ( the 'shell side ' ) . plate and shell technology offers high heat transfer , high pressure , high operating temperature , compact size , low fouling and close approach temperature . in particular , it does completely without gaskets , which provides security against leakage at high pressures and temperatures . adiabatic wheel heat exchanger . a fourth type of heat exchanger uses an intermediate fluid or solid store to hold heat , which is then moved to the other side of the heat exchanger to be released . two examples of this are adiabatic wheels , which consist of a large wheel with fine threads rotating through the hot and cold fluids , and fluid heat exchangers . plate fin heat exchanger . this type of heat exchanger uses '' sandwiched '' passages containing fins to increase the effectiveness of the unit . the designs include crossflow and counterflow coupled with various fin configurations such as straight fins , offset fins and wavy fins . plate and fin heat exchangers are usually made of aluminum alloys , which provide high heat transfer efficiency . the material enables the system to operate at a lower temperature difference and reduce the weight of the equipment . plate and fin heat exchangers are mostly used for low temperature services such as natural gas , helium and oxygen liquefaction plants , air separation plants and transport industries such as motor and aircraft engines . advantages of plate and fin heat exchangers : high heat transfer efficiency especially in gas treatment larger heat transfer area approximately 5 times lighter in weight than that of shell and tube heat exchanger . able to withstand high pressure disadvantages of plate and fin heat exchangers : might cause clogging as the pathways are very narrow difficult to clean the pathways aluminium alloys are susceptible to mercury liquid embrittlement failure . pillow plate heat exchanger . a pillow plate heat exchanger is commonly used in the dairy industry for cooling milk in large direct-expansion stainless steel bulk tanks . the pillow plate allows for cooling across nearly the entire surface area of the tank , without gaps that would occur between pipes welded to the exterior of the tank . the pillow plate is constructed using a thin sheet of metal spot-welded to the surface of another thicker sheet of metal . the thin plate is welded in a regular pattern of dots or with a serpentine pattern of weld lines . after welding the enclosed space is pressurised with sufficient force to cause the thin metal to bulge out around the welds , providing a space for heat exchanger liquids to flow , and creating a characteristic appearance of a swelled pillow formed out of metal . fluid heat exchangers . this is a heat exchanger with a gas passing upwards through a shower of fluid ( often water ) , and the fluid is then taken elsewhere before being cooled . this is commonly used for cooling gases whilst also removing certain impurities , thus solving two problems at once . it is widely used in espresso machines as an energy-saving method of cooling super-heated water to use in the extraction of espresso . waste heat recovery units . a waste heat recovery unit ( whru ) is a heat exchanger that recovers heat from a hot gas stream while transferring it to a working medium , typically water or oils . the hot gas stream can be the exhaust gas from a gas turbine or a diesel engine or a waste gas from industry or refinery . large systems with high volume and temperature gas streams , typical in industry , can benefit from steam rankine cycle ( src ) in a waste heat recovery unit , but these cycles are too expensive for small systems . the recovery of heat from low temperature systems requires different working fluids than steam . an organic rankine cycle ( orc ) waste heat recovery unit can be more efficient at low temperature range using refrigerants that boil at lower temperatures than water . typical organic refrigerants are ammonia , pentafluoropropane ( r-245fa and r-245ca ) , and toluene . the refrigerant is boiled by the heat source in the evaporator to produce super-heated vapor . this fluid is expanded in the turbine to convert thermal energy to kinetic energy , that is converted to electricity in the electrical generator . this energy transfer process decreases the temperature of the refrigerant that , in turn , condenses . the cycle is closed and completed using a pump to send the fluid back to the evaporator . dynamic scraped surface heat exchanger . another type of heat exchanger is called '' dynamic scraped surface heat exchanger '' . this is mainly used for heating or cooling with high-viscosity products , crystallization processes , evaporation and high-fouling applications . long running times are achieved due to the continuous scraping of the surface , thus avoiding fouling and achieving a sustainable heat transfer rate during the process . phase-change heat exchangers . thumb thumb in addition to heating up or cooling down fluids in just a single phase , heat exchangers can be used either to heat a liquid to evaporate ( or boil ) it or used as condensers to cool a vapor and condense it to a liquid . in chemical plants and refineries , reboilers used to heat incoming feed for distillation towers are often heat exchangers . distillation set-ups typically use condensers to condense distillate vapors back into liquid . power plants that use steam-driven turbines commonly use heat exchangers to boil water into steam . heat exchangers or similar units for producing steam from water are often called boilers or steam generators . in the nuclear power plants called pressurized water reactors , special large heat exchangers pass heat from the primary ( reactor plant ) system to the secondary ( steam plant ) system , producing steam from water in the process . these are called steam generators . all fossil-fueled and nuclear power plants using steam-driven turbines have surface condensers to convert the exhaust steam from the turbines into condensate ( water ) for re-use . air pollution control orientation course from website of the air pollution training institute energy savings in steam systems figure 3a , layout of surface condenser ( scroll to page 11 of 34 pdf pages ) to conserve energy and cooling capacity in chemical and other plants , regenerative heat exchangers can transfer heat from a stream that must be cooled to another stream that must be heated , such as distillate cooling and reboiler feed pre-heating . this term can also refer to heat exchangers that contain a material within their structure that has a change of phase . this is usually a solid to liquid phase due to the small volume difference between these states . this change of phase effectively acts as a buffer because it occurs at a constant temperature but still allows for the heat exchanger to accept additional heat . one example where this has been investigated is for use in high power aircraft electronics . heat exchangers functioning in multiphase flow regimes may be subject to the ledinegg instability . direct contact heat exchangers . direct contact heat exchangers involve heat transfer between hot and cold streams of two phases in the absence of a separating wall . coulson , j . & richardson , j . ( 1983 ) , chemical engineering – design ( si units ) , volume 6 , pergamon press , oxford . thus such heat exchangers can be classified as : gas – liquid immiscible liquid – liquid solid-liquid or solid – gas most direct contact heat exchangers fall under the gas – liquid category , where heat is transferred between a gas and liquid in the form of drops , films or sprays . such types of heat exchangers are used predominantly in air conditioning , humidification , industrial hot water heating , water cooling and condensing plants . hewitt g , shires g , bott t ( 1994 ) , process heat transfer , crc press inc , florida . _1 is known as the log mean temperature difference , and is a measure of the effectiveness of the heat exchanger in transferring heat energy . see also . architectural engineering chemical engineering cooling tower copper in heat exchangers heat pipe heat pump heat recovery ventilation jacketed vessel log mean temperature difference ( lmtd ) marine heat exchangers mechanical engineering micro heat exchanger moving bed heat exchanger packed bed and in particular packed columns pumpable ice technology reboiler recuperator , or cross plate heat exchanger regenerator run around coil steam generator ( nuclear power ) surface condenser toroidal expansion joint thermosiphon thermal wheel , or rotary heat exchanger ( including enthalpy wheel and desiccant wheel ) tube tool waste heat . references . coulson , j . and richardson , j ( 1999 ) . chemical engineering- fluid flow . heat transfer and mass transfer- volume 1 ; reed educational & professional publishing ltd dogan eryener ( 2005 ) , ‘ thermoeconomic optimization of baffle spacing for shell and tube heat exchangers ’ , energy conservation and management , volume 47 , issue 11–12 , pages 1478–1489 . g.f.hewitt , g.l.shires , t.r.bott ( 1994 ) process heat transfer , crc press , inc , united states of america . external links . integrity testing on plate and tubular heat exchangers shell and tube heat exchanger design software for educational applications ( pdf ) eu pressure equipment guideline a thermal management concept for more electric aircraft power system application ( pdf )