Basic Laws of Sweden

instrument of government . the most important of the fundamental laws is the instrument of government . it sets out the basic principles for political life in sweden defining rights and freedoms . the 1974 instrument of government grants the power to commission a prime minister to the riksdag , at the nomination of the speaker of the riksdag , who following a vote in the riksdag signs the letter of commission on behalf of the riksdag . the prime minister is appointed when the majority of the riksdag does not vote against the nominee , thus making it possible to form minority governments . the prime minister appoints members of the government , including heads of ministries . the government collectively decides on issues after hearing the report of the head of the ministry concerned . at least five members of the government need to be present for a decisional quorum to be made . in practice , reports are written and discussions very rare during formal cabinet meetings . constitutional functions for the head of state , i.e . the monarch , include heading the cabinet councils ( the king plus the members of the government ) , heading the council on foreign affairs , recognizing new cabinets ( in the council of state ) , and opening the annual session of the riksdag . the monarch is to be continuously briefed on governmental issues—in the council of state or directly by the prime minister . the first constitutional instrument of government was enacted in 1719 , marking the transition from autocracy to parliamentarism . sweden 's bloodless coup d'état of 1772 was legitimized by the riksdag of the estates in new versions of the instrument of government , swedish constitution of 1772 and the union and security act from 1789 , making the king a '' constitutional autocrat '' . when the ancient swedish land in 1809 was split into two parts , and the grand duchy of finland was created as an autonomous part of the russian empire , this constitutional autocracy was very well fitted for finland and remained in force until finland 's independence in 1917 . in sweden , the loss of virtually half the realm led to another bloodless revolution , a new royal dynasty , and the instrument of government of 6 june 1809 ( as well as a new freedom of press act and act of succession ) . the new instrument of government established a separation of powers between the executive branch ( the king ) and the legislative branch ( the riksdag of the estates ) and gave the king and the riksdag of the estates joint power over legislation , with the king still playing a central role in government but no longer independently of the privy council . the king was free to choose councillors , but was bound to decide on governmental matters only in presence of the privy council , or a subset thereof , and after report of the councillor responsible for the matter in question . the councillor had to countersign a royal decision , unless it was unconstitutional , whereby it gained legal force . the councillor was legally responsible for his advice and was obliged to note his dissension in case he did not agree with the king 's decision . this constitution put a considerable de jure power in the king , but which was increasingly followed the councillors ' advice . from 1917 , the king adhered to principles of parliamentarism by choosing councillors possessing direct or indirect support from a majority of the riksdag . after over fifty years of de facto parliamentarism , it was written into the instrument of government of 1974 , which , although technically adherent to constitutional monarchy , created the government of sweden in its present constitutional form . . amendment of 2009 . in 2009 , the riksdag approved proposition 2009/10:80 , '' a reformed constitution '' , making substantial amendments to the instrument of government , and related acts . the amendment modernized and simplified the text in general , and strengthened several fundamental rights and freedoms . protection against unfair discrimination was extended to include discrimination based on sexual orientation . the amendment affirmed the responsibility of public authorities to protect children 's rights , and to promote the preservation and development of ethnic minorities ' culture and language , making special mention of the sami people . it also strengthens judicial powers to make it easier to determine whether new laws contravene the constitution or the charter of fundamental rights of the european union . these amendments took effect on 1 january 2011 . freedom of the press and freedom of expression . the other two acts define the freedom of the press and freedom of expression . they are separated into two separate laws mainly to maintain the tradition of the freedom of the press act from 1766 , largely the work of proto-liberal cap party politician anders chydenius , which abolished censorship and restricted limitations to retroactive legal measures for criticism of the swedish church and the royal house exclusively . the freedom of the press act was changed several times since its first incarnation ; following gustav iii 's coup d'etat in 1772 , the act was amended in order to curtail freedom of the press , but restored in 1810 following the overthrow of his son , and later amended to ensure this fact in 1812 , 1949 and 1982 . the option to revoke publishing licenses was retained until the late rule of charles xiv john and used widely against liberal papers such as aftonbladet , which saw its license revoked ten times in 1838 alone . publisher lars johan hierta solved this by adding a different numeral to the name aftonbladet , thus publishing a formally different newspaper . the right to revoke was finally abolished in 1844 . jacobson ( 2002 ) , s . 83-84 the 1766 act held for example that freedom of expression was to be uninhibited , except for '' violations '' , which included blasphemy and criticism of the state . the fundamental law on freedom of expression of 1991 is a lengthier document defining freedom of expression in all media except for written books and magazines ( such as radio , television , the internet , etc . ) . principle of public access . in the 18th century , after over 40 years of mixed experiences with parliamentarism , public access to public documents was one of the main issues with the freedom of the press act of 1766 . although the novelty was put out of order 1772–1809 , it has since remained central in the swedish mindset , seen as a forceful means against corruption and government agencies ' unequal treatment of the citizens , increasing the perceived legitimacy of ( local and central ) government and politicians . the principle of public access , as the collection of rules are commonly referred to , provides that all information and documents created or received by a '' public authority '' ( local or central government , and all publicly operated establishments ) must be available to all members of the public . it also states that all public authorities must provide information promptly ( skyndsamt ) upon request . exemptions from the right to access to public documents are defined in the public access to information and secrecy act ( offentlighets- och sekretesslagen ) public access to information and secrecy act at the riksdag ( in swedish ) which succeeded the secrecy act ( sekretesslagen ) secrecy act ( repealed ) by the riksdag ( in swedish ) in 2009 . the act details which information government agencies can keep secret , under what circumstances , and towards whom . according to the chapter 2 , article 2 of the freedom of the press act : '' the right of access to official documents may be restricted only if restriction is necessary having regard to the security of the realm or its relations with a foreign state or an international organization ; the central finance policy , monetary policy , or foreign exchange policy of the realm ; the inspection , control or other supervisory activities of a public authority ; the interest of preventing or prosecuting crime ; the public economic interest ; the protection of the personal integrity or economic conditions of private subjects ; the preservation of animal or plant species . '' this list is exhaustive and the parliament may not legislate about restrictions outside the scope of this list , and any restrictions have to be legislated into the public access to information and secrecy act previously mentioned . secrecy is limited to a maximum time of 70 years ( when relating to individuals that is 70 years after the person 's death ) . act of succession . sweden 's switch from elective to hereditary monarchy in 1544 gave reason to sweden 's first law of constitutional character , in form of a treaty between the royal dynasty and the realm represented by the four estates to be valid for all times . accordingly , the current 1810 act of succession is a treaty between the riksdag of the estates and the house of bernadotte regulating the right to accede to the swedish throne . in 1980 , the old principle of agnatic primogeniture , which meant that the throne was inherited by the eldest male child of the preceding monarch , was replaced by the principle of absolute primogeniture . this meant that the throne will be inherited by the eldest child without regard to sex . thereby princess victoria , the eldest child of king carl xvi gustaf of sweden , was created heiress apparent to the swedish throne over her younger brother , until then crown prince carl philip . former lutheran state church . in 1593 , after 70 years of reformation and counter-reformation in sweden , adherence to the augsburg confession was decided and given constitution at the uppsala synod . references to uppsala synod have since then been worked into the fundamental laws , notably the act of succession . in 1999 , the church was separated from the state and became an independent organization , but the ruling body of the church is still decided by public voting ( among members of the church ) , and mostly consists of the political parties . the church of sweden is often classified as a semi-state church . this because of its formal separation from the state but its lasting ties with the official sweden most notably the riksdag and the monarch . the church of sweden is also the only religious organization regulated by its own law , the church of sweden act , which stipulates that the church of sweden has to be a democratic , lutheran , folk church . as a result of the separation , people born in sweden where the parents are members of the church of sweden since 1999 no longer become members of the church automatically at birth . amendments . amendments of the fundamental laws must be adopted twice by the riksdag with a majority of the votes cast , with intervening elections . within 15 days of an amendment 's first enactment , at least one-tenth of all mps may bring a motion for a referendum which must be support by at least one-third of all mps . the referendum is held simultaneously with riksdag elections and the amendment is deemed rejected if a simple majority of voters reject it , provided the majority is a majority of all valid votes . if the people do not dismiss a change , it still has to be ratified by the newly elected riksdag . such a referendum has never been used . . see also . instrument of government ( 1634 ) instrument of government ( 1719 ) instrument of government ( 1772 ) law of sweden . references . . external links . regeringsform ( 1974 ) – at wikisource ( in swedish ) swedish historical documents – at wikisource the constitution – at the website of the riksdag the constitution – at the government.se web portal