Sir Leo Hielscher Bridges

history . thumb thumb construction on the gateway bridge commenced on 5 june 1980 . the construction of the bridge started before the design was completed , to fast track its construction . it was officially commissioned on 11 january 1986 . on this day 200,000 people crossed the bridge by foot as part of the opening activities . in 1986 the bridge carried an average of 12,500 vehicles per day . in 2001 the bridge was crossed by 27 million vehicles ( approximately 73,975 vehicles per day ) . in early 2010 the single bridge was carrying an average of 100,000 vehicles per day . the annual bridge to brisbane fun run has begun from the southern entrance to the bridge for the past decade . . design . in 1979 a tender was called by the queensland main roads department for a new bridge crossing of the brisbane river . the conforming design main span was designed as a balanced cantilever with two raised post tensioned concrete compression stays located on the median and over each of the two main piers to support the 260-metre span . due to the proximity of the brisbane airport , an overall structural height constraint was provided due to aircraft flight path and clearances . this constraint ruled out the possibility of a conventional cable-stayed bridge due to the height of the pylons that would be required . due to cost considerations , an alternative design concept was proposed by bruce ramsay ( manager engineering ) of vsl . this alternative design required a world record main span of 260 & nbsp ; m for a free cantilever , concrete box girder bridge . the concept was adopted by one of the tenderers – transfield queensland pty.ltd . who was subsequently awarded the project on the basis of this alternative . it held the record span of 260 & nbsp ; m for over 15 years . the box girder is still the largest prestressed concrete , single box in the world , measuring 15 & nbsp ; m deep at the pier , with a box width of 12 & nbsp ; m and an overall deck width for the six lanes of 22 & nbsp ; m . as stated above the bridge owes its distinctive shape to aviation requirements restricting its height to under above sea level ( all features of the bridge including light poles ) coupled with shipping needs requiring a navigational clearance of . the bridge has six lanes ( originally three lanes in each direction , which were subsequently reconfigured to six lanes of northbound traffic after opening of the duplicate bridge ) . the bridge was financed by funds borrowed by the queensland government , and as a result , users of the bridge pay a toll when crossing the bridge in either direction . the bridge is operated and maintained by queensland motorways , which is a queensland government-owned enterprise . the total length is 1,627 metres ( 5,337 & nbsp ; ft ) . this is divided into a southern approach of 376 & nbsp ; metres ( 1,234 & nbsp ; ft ) , a northern approach of 731 & nbsp ; metres ( 2,398 & nbsp ; ft ) and the three central spans of 520 metres ( 1,706 & nbsp ; ft ) . the record main span is 260 metres ( 853 & nbsp ; ft ) long by 64.5 metres ( 212 & nbsp ; ft ) high , which is equivalent to a 20-storey building . a total of 150,000 tonnes ( 165,000 & nbsp ; short tons ) of concrete was used to construct the bridge . the original design did not include a safety fence to prevent suicide attempts and base jumping . three-metre high safety fences attached to the top of the concrete traffic barrier were later installed to prevent these incidents occurring . anti-climbing screens are part of the second bridge 's security features . . duplication . image : gateway bridge - construction view from paringa rd.jpg thumb gateway bridges from south bank of brisbane river ( rivergate marina ) in 2005 , a major upgrade of the gateway motorway was announced . leighton contractors and joint venture partner abigroup won the contract to upgrade the motorway . the a 1.88 & nbsp ; billion gateway upgrade project includes the duplication of the gateway bridge and upgrades to of the gateway motorway from mt gravatt-capalaba road in the south to nudgee road in the north . the bridge duplication was the largest bridge and road development in queensland 's history . the duplicate bridge was specified to have a design life of 300 years . to the south , the upgrade included widening of the gateway motorway from 4 & nbsp ; to & nbsp ; 6 & nbsp ; lanes . to the north , it involved the construction of the gateway motorway deviation , an entirely new six-lane motorway between the gateway bridge and nudgee road . the deviation runs east of the original motorway through brisbane airport corporation land and provides an alternative means of access to brisbane airport ( the only effective access from the south ) . the new bridge provides a bicycle path unlike the first crossing . the wynnum road upgrade was completed on 13 july 2007 and 2 additional southbound lanes between the port of brisbane motorway and wynnum road completed in late 2007 . four of six lanes of the new gateway motorway deviation were opened in july 2009 . all works south of the river were complete by the end of 2009 after 10 years of constant roadwork and traffic disruption . the final concrete pour linking the sides of the new bridge was made in late october 2009 . a total of 748 concrete segments , which are supported by 17 & nbsp ; piers , were placed for the new bridge . the duplicate bridge was completed in may 2010 along with the remaining lanes of the gateway motorway deviation . in october 2010 , then minister for main roads , craig wallace , announced that the original course of the gateway motorway via eagle farm would be renamed to southern cross way , after sir charles kingsford smith 's aircraft , the southern cross , which landed at eagle farm in 1928 , and so as to avoid confusion with the newly opened gateway motorway deviation . the new gateway motorway deviation was given the name gateway motorway . however , like the renaming of the bridges themselves , the change to southern cross way was not without controversy , attracting criticism from the then shadow minister for main roads and transport , fiona simpson . refurbishment of the existing bridge was completed in november 2010 . . awards . in 2009 as part of the q150 celebrations , the gateway bridge was announced as one of the q150 icons of queensland for its role as a '' structure and engineering feat '' . . see also . list of australian freeways list of bridges metroad . references . external links . gateway upgrade project website queensland motorways website webcam of gateway bridge google earth ( version 4 ) 3d model