Herophilos

life . herophilos was born in chalcedon in asia minor ( now kadiköy , turkey ) , c . & nbsp ; 335 bc . not much is known about his early life other than he moved to alexandria at a fairly young age to begin his schooling . as an adult herophilos was a teacher , and an author of at least nine texts ranging from his book titled , on pulses , which explored the flow of blood from the heart through the arteries , to his book titled midwifery , which discussed duration and phases of childbirth . in alexandria , he practiced vivisection , often publicly so that he could explain what he was doing to those who were fascinated . erasistratus was his contemporary . together , they worked at a medical school in alexandria that is said to have drawn people from all over the ancient world due to herophilos ' fame . his works are lost but were much quoted by galen in the second century ad . herophilos was the first scientist to systematically perform scientific dissections of human cadavers . dissections of human cadavers were banned in most places at the time , except for alexandria . celsus in de medicina and the church leader tertullian state that he vivisected at least 600 live prisoners , though there is no direct evidence for this . after the death of herophilos in 280 bc , his anatomical findings lived on in the works of other important physicians , notably galen . even though dissections were performed in the following centuries and medieval times , only a few insights were added . dissecting with the purpose to gain knowledge about human anatomy started again in early modern times ( vesalius ) , more than 1600 years after herophilos ' death . medicine . he emphasised the use of the experimental method in medicine , for he considered it essential to found knowledge on empirical bases . he was a forerunner of the empiric school of medicine , founded by herophilos ' pupil philinus of cos , bernardino fantini western medical thought from antiquity to the middle ages p 109 which combined herophilos ' empirical impulses with critical tools borrowed from pyrrhonism philosophy . however , the empirics found herophilos wanting , mounting two chief attacks against him : that anatomy was useless to the therapeutic and clinical practice of medicine , as demonstrated by herophilos ' own acceptance of humoral pathology . it was useless and epistemologically unsound to try to find causal explanations from the evident to the non-evident . bernardino fantini western medical thought from antiquity to the middle ages p 91 conventional medicine of the time revolved around the theory of the four humors in which an imbalance between bile , black bile , phlegm , and blood led to sickness or disease . veins were believed to be filled with blood and a mixture of air and water . through dissections , herophilus was able to deduce that veins only carried blood . after studying the flow of blood , he was able to differentiate between arteries and veins . he noticed that as blood flowed through arteries , they pulsed or rhythmically throbbed . he worked out standards for measuring a pulse and could use these standards to aid him in diagnosing sicknesses or diseases . to measure this pulse , he made use of a water clock . his work on blood and its movements led him to study and analyse the brain . he proposed that the brain housed the intellect rather than the heart . he was the first person to differentiate between the cerebrum and the cerebellum , and to place individual importance on each portion . he looked more in depth into the network of nerves located in the cranium . he described the optic nerve and the oculomotor nerve for sight and eye movement . through his dissection of the eye , he discovered the different sections and layers of the eye : the cornea , the retina , the iris , and the choroid , also known as the choroid coat . further study of the cranium led him to describe the calamus scriptorius , which he believed was the seat of the human soul . analysis of the nerves in the cranium allowed him to differentiate between nerves and blood vessels and to discover the differences between motor and sensory nerves . he believed that the sensory and motor nerves shot out from the brain and that the neural transmissions occurred by means of pneuma . part of his belief system regarding the human body involved the pneuma , which he believed was a substance that flowed through the arteries along with the blood . playing off of medical beliefs at the time , herophilos stated that diseases occurred when an excess of one of the four humors impeded the pneuma from reaching the brain . herophilos also introduced many of the scientific terms used to this day to describe anatomical phenomena . he was among the first to introduce the notion of conventional terminology , as opposed to use of '' natural names '' , using terms he created to describe the objects of study , naming them for the first time . a confluence of sinuses in the skull was originally named torcular herophili after him . torcular is a latin translation of herophilos ' label , ληνός - lenos , 'wine vat ' or 'wine press' . he also named the duodenum , which is part of the small intestine . other areas of his anatomical study include the liver , the pancreas , and the alimentary tract , as well as the salivary glands and genitalia . herophilos is credited with learning extensively about the physiology of the female reproductive system . in his book midwifery , he discussed phases and duration of pregnancy as well as causes for difficult childbirth . the aim of this work was to help midwives and other doctors of the time more fully understand the process of procreation and pregnancy . he is also credited with the discovery of the ovum , connell , s . & nbsp ; m . '' aristotle and galen on sex difference and reproduction : a new approach to an ancient rivalry '' . studies in history and philosophy of science part & nbsp ; a 31 ( 3 ) : 405-27 , september 2000 and was the first to make a scientific description of what would later be called skene 's gland , and in 2001 was renamed the female prostate . herophilos believed that exercise and a healthy diet were integral to the bodily health of an individual . herophilos once said that '' when health is absent , wisdom can not reveal itself , art can not become manifest , strength can not be exerted , wealth is useless , and reason is powerless '' . see also . timeline of medicine and medical technology alcmaeon of croton . references . sources . von staden h . ( ed . trans . ) herophilos : the art of medicine in early alexandria . cambridge university press , 1989 simon hornblower and anthony spawford , '' herophilos '' , the oxford classical dictionary . ( new york : oxford university press , 1999 ) 699 . '' herophilus '' , encyclopedia of world biography , supplement vol . 25 thomson gale . ( michigan : gale ) . adrian wills , '' herophilus , erasistratus , and the birth of neuroscience '' , the lancet . ( november 13 , 1999 ) : 1719 expanded academic asap . gale , 30 nov . 2008 . '' on the localisation of the functions of the brain with special reference to the faculty of language '' , anthropological review , vol . 6 , ( oct . , 1868 ) 336 . galen . on the natural faculties . brock a . & nbsp ; j . ( trans . ) heinemann , london 1916 . p . xii , 233 . further reading .