Hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis

anatomy . the key elements of the hpa axis are : the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus , which contains neuroendocrine neurons which synthesize and secrete vasopressin and corticotropin-releasing hormone ( crh ) . these two peptides regulate : the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland . in particular , crh and vasopressin stimulate the secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone ( acth ) , once known as corticotropin . acth in turn acts on : the adrenal cortex , which produces glucocorticoid hormones ( mainly cortisol in humans ) in response to stimulation by acth . glucocorticoids in turn act back on the hypothalamus and pituitary ( to suppress crh and acth production ) in a negative feedback cycle . crh and vasopressin are released from neurosecretory nerve terminals at the median eminence . crh is transported to the anterior pituitary through the portal blood vessel system of the hypophyseal stalk and vasopressin is transported by axonal transport to the posterior pituitary . there , crh and vasopressin act synergistically to stimulate the secretion of stored acth from corticotrope cells . acth is transported by the blood to the adrenal cortex of the adrenal gland , where it rapidly stimulates biosynthesis of corticosteroids such as cortisol from cholesterol . cortisol is a major stress hormone and has effects on many tissues in the body , including the brain . in the brain , cortisol acts on two types of receptor – mineralocorticoid receptors and glucocorticoid receptors , and these are expressed by many different types of neurons . one important target of glucocorticoids is the hypothalamus , which is a major controlling centre of the hpa axis . vasopressin can be thought of as '' water conservation hormone '' and is also known as '' antidiuretic hormone . '' it is released when the body is dehydrated and has potent water-conserving effects on the kidney . it is also a potent vasoconstrictor . important to the function of the hpa axis are some of the feedback loops : cortisol produced in the adrenal cortex will negatively feedback to inhibit both the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland . this reduces the secretion of crh and vasopressin , and also directly reduces the cleavage of proopiomelanocortin ( pomc ) into acth and β-endorphins . epinephrine and norepinephrine ( e/ne ) are produced by the adrenal medulla through sympathetic stimulation and the local effects of cortisol ( upregulation enzymes to make e/ne ) . e/ne will positively feedback to the pituitary and increase the breakdown of pomcs into acth and β-endorphins . function . release of corticotropin-releasing hormone ( crh ) from the hypothalamus is influenced by stress , physical activity , illness , by blood levels of cortisol and by the sleep/wake cycle ( circadian rhythm ) . in healthy individuals , cortisol rises rapidly after wakening , reaching a peak within 30–45 minutes . it then gradually falls over the day , rising again in late afternoon . cortisol levels then fall in late evening , reaching a trough during the middle of the night . this corresponds to the rest-activity cycle of the organism . an abnormally flattened circadian cortisol cycle has been linked with chronic fatigue syndrome , insomnia and burnout . the hpa axis has a central role in regulating many homeostatic systems in the body , including the metabolic system , cardiovascular system , immune system , reproductive system and central nervous system . the hpa axis integrates physical and psychosocial influences in order to allow an organism to adapt effectively to its environment , use resources , and optimize survival . anatomical connections between brain areas such as the amygdala , hippocampus , prefrontal cortex and hypothalamus facilitate activation of the hpa axis . sensory information arriving at the lateral aspect of the amygdala is processed and conveyed to the amygdala 's central nucleus , which then projects out to several parts of the brain involved in responses to fear . at the hypothalamus , fear-signaling impulses activate both the sympathetic nervous system and the modulating systems of the hpa axis . increased production of cortisol during stress results in an increased availability of glucose in order to facilitate fighting or fleeing . as well as directly increasing glucose availability , cortisol also suppresses the highly demanding metabolic processes of the immune system , resulting in further availability of glucose . glucocorticoids have many important functions , including modulation of stress reactions , but in excess they can be damaging . atrophy of the hippocampus in humans and animals exposed to severe stress is believed to be caused by prolonged exposure to high concentrations of glucocorticoids . deficiencies of the hippocampus may reduce the memory resources available to help a body formulate appropriate reactions to stress . immune system . there is bi-directional communication and feedback between the hpa axis and the immune system . a number of cytokines , such as il-1 , il-6 , il-10 and tnf-alpha can activate the hpa axis , although il-1 is the most potent . the hpa axis in turn modulates the immune response , with high levels of cortisol resulting in a suppression of immune and inflammatory reactions . this helps to protect the organism from a lethal overactivation of the immune system , and minimizes tissue damage from inflammation . the cns is in many ways '' immune privileged '' , but it plays an important role in the immune system and is affected by it in turn . the cns regulates the immune system through neuroendocrine pathways , such as the hpa axis . the hpa axis is responsible for modulating inflammation that occur throughout the body . during an immune response , proinflammatory cytokines ( e.g . il-1 ) are released into the peripheral circulation system and can pass through the blood brain barrier where they can interact with the brain and activate the hpa axis . interactions between the proinflammatory cytokines and the brain can alter the metabolic activity of neurotransmitters and cause symptoms such as fatigue , depression , and mood changes . deficiencies in the hpa axis may play a role in allergies and inflammatory/ autoimmune diseases , such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis . when the hpa axis is activated by stressors , such as an immune response , high levels of glucocorticoids are released into the body and suppress immune response by inhibiting the expression of proinflammatory cytokines ( e.g . il-1 , tnf alpha , and ifn gamma ) and increasing the levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines ( e.g . il-4 , il-10 , and il-13 ) in immune cells , such as monocytes and neutrophils the relationship between chronic stress and its concomitant activation of the hpa axis , and dysfunction of the immune system is unclear ; studies have found both immunosuppression and hyperactivation of the immune response . . stress . stress and disease . the hpa axis is involved in the neurobiology of mood disorders and functional illnesses , including anxiety disorder , bipolar disorder , insomnia , posttraumatic stress disorder , borderline personality disorder , adhd , major depressive disorder , burnout , chronic fatigue syndrome , fibromyalgia , irritable bowel syndrome , and alcoholism . antidepressants , which are routinely prescribed for many of these illnesses , serve to regulate hpa axis function . sex differences are prevalent in humans with respect to psychiatric stress-related disorders such as anxiety and depression , where women experience these disorders more often than men . particularly in rodents , it has been shown that females may lack the ability to tolerate as well as process stress ( particularly for chronic stress ) due to possible down regulation of gr expression as well as a deficiency of fkbp51 binding protein in the cytosol . by constantly activating the hpa axis , this could lead to higher instances of stress and disorders that would only get worse with chronic stress . specifically in rodents , females show greater activation of the hpa axis following stress than males . these differences also likely arise due to the opposing actions that certain sex steroids have , such as testosterone and oestrogen . oestrogen functions to enhance stress-activated acth and cort secretion while testosterone functions to decrease hpa axis activation and works to inhibit both acth and cort responses to stress . however , more studies are required to better understand the underlying basis of these sex differences . experimental studies have investigated many different types of stress , and their effects on the hpa axis in many different circumstances . stressors can be of many different types—in experimental studies in rats , a distinction is often made between '' social stress '' and '' physical stress '' , but both types activate the hpa axis , though via different pathways . several monoamine neurotransmitters are important in regulating the hpa axis , especially dopamine , serotonin and norepinephrine ( noradrenaline ) . there is evidence that an increase in oxytocin , resulting for instance from positive social interactions , acts to suppress the hpa axis and thereby counteracts stress , promoting positive health effects such as wound healing . the hpa axis is a feature of mammals and other vertebrates . for example , biologists studying stress in fish showed that subordinate leads to chronic stress , related to reduced aggression interactions , to impulsivity , and to the constant threat imposed by dominant fish . serotonin ( 5ht ) appeared to be the active neurotransmitter involved in mediating stress responses , and increases in serotonin are related to increased blood α-msh levels , which causes skin darkening ( a social signal in salmonoid fish ) , activation of the hpa axis , and inhibition of aggression . inclusion of the amino acid l-tryptophan , a precursor of 5ht , in the feed of rainbow trout made the trout less aggressive and less responsive to stress . however , the study mentions that plasma cortisol was not affected by dietary l -tryptophan . the drug ly354740 ( also known as eglumegad , an agonist of the metabotropic glutamate receptors 2 and 3 ) has been shown to interfere in the hpa axis , with chronic oral administration of this drug leading to markedly reduced baseline cortisol levels in bonnet macaques ( macaca radiata ) ; acute infusion of ly354740 resulted in a marked diminution of yohimbine-induced stress response in those animals . studies on people show that the hpa axis is activated in different ways during chronic stress depending on the type of stressor , the person 's response to the stressor and other factors . stressors that are uncontrollable , threaten physical integrity , or involve trauma tend to have a high , flat diurnal profile of cortisol release ( with lower-than-normal levels of cortisol in the morning and higher-than-normal levels in the evening ) resulting in a high overall level of daily cortisol release . on the other hand , controllable stressors tend to produce higher-than-normal morning cortisol . stress hormone release tends to decline gradually after a stressor occurs . in post-traumatic stress disorder there appears to be lower-than-normal cortisol release , and it is thought that a blunted hormonal response to stress may predispose a person to develop ptsd . it is also known that hpa axis hormones are related to certain skin diseases and skin homeostasis . there is evidence shown that the hpa axis hormones can be linked to certain stress related skin diseases and skin tumors . this happens when hpa axis hormones become hyperactive in the brain . . stress and development . . prenatal stress . there is evidence that prenatal stress can influence hpa regulation . in animal experiments , exposure to prenatal stress has been shown to cause a hyper-reactive hpa stress response . rats that have been prenatally stressed have elevated basal levels and abnormal circadian rhythm of corticosterone as adults . additionally , they require a longer time for their stress hormone levels to return to baseline following exposure to both acute and prolonged stressors . prenatally stressed animals also show abnormally high blood glucose levels and have fewer glucocorticoid receptors in the hippocampus . in humans , prolonged maternal stress during gestation is associated with mild impairment of intellectual activity and language development in their children , and with behaviour disorders such as adhd , schizophrenia , anxiety and depression ; self-reported maternal stress is associated with a higher irritability , emotional and attentional problems . there is growing evidence that prenatal stress can affect hpa regulation in humans . children who were stressed prenatally may show altered cortisol rhythms . for example , several studies have found an association between maternal depression during pregnancy and childhood cortisol levels . prenatal stress has also been implicated in a tendency toward depression and short attention span in childhood . there is no clear indication that hpa dysregulation caused by prenatal stress can alter adult behavior . early life stress . the role of early life stress in programming the hpa axis has been well-studied in animal models . exposure to mild or moderate stressors early in life has been shown to enhance hpa regulation and promote a lifelong resilience to stress . in contrast , early-life exposure to extreme or prolonged stress can induce a hyper-reactive hpa axis and may contribute to lifelong vulnerability to stress . in one widely replicated experiment , rats subjected to the moderate stress of frequent human handling during the first two weeks of life had reduced hormonal and behavioral hpa-mediated stress responses as adults , whereas rats subjected to the extreme stress of prolonged periods of maternal separation showed heightened physiological and behavioral stress responses as adults . several mechanisms have been proposed to explain these findings in rat models of early-life stress exposure . there may be a critical period during development during which the level of stress hormones in the bloodstream contribute to the permanent calibration of the hpa axis . one experiment has shown that , even in the absence of any environmental stressors , early-life exposure to moderate levels of corticosterone was associated with stress resilience in adult rats , whereas exposure to high doses was associated with stress vulnerability . another possibility is that the effects of early-life stress on hpa functioning are mediated by maternal care . frequent human handling of the rat pups may cause their mother to exhibit more nurturant behavior , such as licking and grooming . nurturant maternal care , in turn , may enhance hpa functioning in at least two ways . first , maternal care is crucial in maintaining the normal stress hypo responsive period ( shrp ) , which in rodents , is the first two weeks of life during which the hpa axis is generally non-reactive to stress . maintenance of the shrp period may be critical for hpa development , and the extreme stress of maternal separation , which disrupts the shrp , may lead to permanent hpa dysregulation . another way that maternal care might influence hpa regulation is by causing epigenetic changes in the offspring . for example , increased maternal licking and grooming has been shown to alter expression of the glutocorticoid receptor gene implicated in adaptive stress response . at least one human study has identified maternal neural activity patterns in response to video stimuli of mother-infant separation as being associated with decreased glucocorticoid receptor gene methylation in the context of post-traumatic stress disorder stemming from early life stress . schechter ds , moser da , paoloni-giacobino a , stenz a , gex-fabry m , aue t , adouan w , cordero mi , suardi f , manini a , sancho rossignol a , merminod g , ansermet f , dayer ag , rusconi serpa s ( epub may 29 , 2015 ) . methylation of nr3c1 is related to maternal ptsd , parenting stress and maternal medial prefrontal cortical activity in response to child separation among mothers with histories of violence exposure . frontiers in psychology . yet clearly , more research is needed to determine if the results seen in cross-generational animal models can be extended to humans . though animal models allow for more control of experimental manipulation , the effects of early life stress on hpa axis function in humans has also been studied . one population that is often studied in this type of research is adult victims of childhood abuse . adult victims of childhood abuse have exhibited increased acth concentrations in response to a psychosocial stress task compared to healthy controls and subjects with depression but not childhood abuse . in one study , adult victims of childhood abuse that are not depressed show increased acth response to both exogenous crf and normal cortisol release . adult victims of childhood abuse that are depressed show a blunted acth response to exogenous crh . a blunted acth response is common in depression , so the authors of this work posit that this pattern is likely to be due to the participant 's depression and not their exposure to early life stress . heim and colleagues have proposed that early life stress , such as childhood abuse , can induce a sensitization of the hpa axis , resulting in particular heightened neuronal activity in response to stress-induced crf release . with repeated exposure to stress , the sensitized hpa axis may continue to hypersecrete crf from the hypothalamus . over time , crf receptors in the anterior pituitary will become down-regulated , producing depression and anxiety symptoms . this research in human subjects is consistent with the animal literature discussed above . the hpa axis was present in the earliest vertebrate species , and has remained highly conserved by strong positive selection due to its critical adaptive roles . the programming of the hpa axis is strongly influenced by the perinatal and early juvenile environment , or “ early-life environment . ” maternal stress and differential degrees of caregiving may constitute early life adversity , which has been shown to profoundly influence , if not permanently alter , the offspring 's stress and emotional regulating systems . widely studied in animal models ( e.g . licking and grooming/lg in rat pups ) , the consistency of maternal care has been shown to have a powerful influence on the offspring 's neurobiology , physiology , and behavior . whereas maternal care improves cardiac response , sleep/wake rhythm , and growth hormone secretion in the neonate , it also suppresses hpa axis activity . in this manner , maternal care negatively regulates stress response in the neonate , thereby shaping his/her susceptibility to stress in later life . these programming effects are not deterministic , as the environment in which the individual develops can either match or mismatch with the former 's “ programmed ” and genetically predisposed hpa axis reactivity . although the primary mediators of the hpa axis are known , the exact mechanism by which its programming can be modulated during early life remains to be elucidated . furthermore , evolutionary biologists contest the exact adaptive value of such programming , i.e . whether heightened hpa axis reactivity may confer greater evolutionary fitness . various hypotheses have been proposed , in attempts to explain why early life adversity can produce outcomes ranging from extreme vulnerability to resilience , in the face of later stress . glucocorticoids produced by the hpa axis have been proposed to confer either a protective or harmful role , depending on an individual 's genetic predispositions , programming effects of early-life environment , and match or mismatch with one 's postnatal environment . the predictive adaptation hypothesis ( 1 ) , the three-hit concept of vulnerability and resilience ( 2 ) and the maternal mediation hypothesis ( 3 ) attempt to elucidate how early life adversity can differentially predict vulnerability or resilience in the face of significant stress in later life . these hypotheses are not mutually exclusive but rather are highly interrelated and unique to the individual . ( 1 ) the predictive adaptation hypothesis : this hypothesis is in direct contrast with the diathesis stress model , which posits that the accumulation of stressors across a lifespan can enhance the development of psychopathology once a threshold is crossed . predictive adaptation asserts that early life experience induces epigenetic change ; these changes predict or “ set the stage ” for adaptive responses that will be required in his/her environment . thus , if a developing child ( i.e . , fetus to neonate ) is exposed to ongoing maternal stress and low levels of maternal care ( i.e . , early life adversity ) , this will program his/her hpa axis to be more reactive to stress . this programming will have predicted , and potentially be adaptive in a highly stressful , precarious environment during childhood and later life . the predictability of these epigenetic changes is not definitive , however – depending primarily on the degree to which the individual 's genetic and epigenetically modulated phenotype “ matches ” or “ mismatches ” with his/her environment ( see : hypothesis ( 2 ) ) . ( 2 ) three-hit concept of vulnerability and resilience : this hypothesis states that within a specific life context , vulnerability may be enhanced with chronic failure to cope with ongoing adversity . it fundamentally seeks to explicate why , under seemingly indistinguishable circumstances , one individual may cope resiliently with stress , whereas another may not only cope poorly , but consequently develop a stress-related mental illness . the three “ hits ” – chronological and synergistic – are as follows : genetic predisposition ( which predispose higher/lower hpa axis reactivity ) , early-life environment ( perinatal – i.e . maternal stress , and postnatal – i.e . maternal care ) , and later-life environment ( which determines match/mismatch , as well as a window for neuroplastic changes in early programming ) . ( figure 1 ) 6 the concept of match/mismatch is central to this evolutionary hypothesis . in this context , it elucidates why early life programming in the perinatal and postnatal period may have been evolutionarily selected for . specifically , by instating specific patterns of hpa axis activation , the individual may be more well equipped to cope with adversity in a high-stress environment . conversely , if an individual is exposed to significant early life adversity , heightened hpa axis reactivity may “ mismatch ” him/her in an environment characterized by low stress . the latter scenario may represent maladaptation due to early programming , genetic predisposition , and mismatch . this mismatch may then predict negative developmental outcomes such as psychopathologies in later life . ultimately , the conservation of the hpa axis has underscored its critical adaptive roles in vertebrates , so , too , various invertebrate species over time . the hpa axis plays a clear role in the production of corticosteroids , which govern many facets of brain development and responses to ongoing environmental stress . with these findings , animal model research has served to identify what these roles are – with regards to animal development and evolutionary adaptation . in more precarious , primitive times , a heightened hpa axis may have served to protect organisms from predators and extreme environmental conditions , such as weather and natural disasters , by encouraging migration ( i.e . fleeing ) , the mobilization of energy , learning ( in the face of novel , dangerous stimuli ) as well as increased appetite for biochemical energy storage . in contemporary society , the endurance of the hpa axis and early life programming will have important implications for counseling expecting and new mothers , as well as individuals who may have experienced significant early life adversity . . see also . ; other major neuroendocrine systems hypothalamic–neurohypophyseal system hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis hypothalamic–pituitary–thyroid axis ; related topics conditions : addison 's disease adrenal insufficiency cushing 's syndrome . references . external links . mind-body-health.net page on hpa axis hpa axis : explanation of the body 's central stress response system w/diagram