Hans Blix

life and career . blix was born in uppsala , sweden . he is the son of professor gunnar blix and hertha wiberg , and grandson of professor magnus blix . he comes from a family of jämtland origin . blix studied at uppsala university and columbia university , earning his phd from the university of cambridge ( trinity hall ) . 2002 friedmann award given to dr . hans blix - retrieved 21 march 2007 in 1959 , he earned a juris doctor in international law at stockholm university , where he was appointed associate professor in international law the next year . hans blix has two sons , mårten and göran , who both have doctoral degrees . between 1962 and 1978 blix was a member of the swedish delegation at the disarmament conference in geneva . he held several other positions in the swedish administration between 1963 and 1976 , and from 1961 to 1981 , he served on the swedish delegation to the united nations . from 1978 to 1979 , blix was the swedish foreign minister . blix chaired the swedish liberal party 's campaign during the 1980 referendum on nuclear power , campaigning in favour of retention of the swedish nuclear energy program . head of the international atomic energy agency ( 1981–1997 ) . blix became director general of the international atomic energy agency between 1981 and 1997 after sigvard eklund . blix personally made repeated inspection visits to the iraqi nuclear reactor osiraq before its attempted destruction by the iranians , in 1980 , and its eventual destruction by the israeli air force in 1981 during operation opera . although most agreed that iraq was years away from being able to build a nuclear weapon , the iranians and the israelis felt any raid must occur well before nuclear fuel was loaded to prevent nuclear fallout . the attack was regarded as being in breach of the united nations charter ( s/res/487 ) and was widely condemned . iraq was alternately praised and admonished by the iaea for its cooperation and lack thereof . it was only after the first gulf war that the full extent of iraq 's nuclear programs , which had switched from a plutonium based weapon design to a highly enriched uranium design after the destruction of osiraq , became known . another significant event during his time as head of the iaea was the chernobyl disaster on 26 april 1986 , a nuclear accident rated at the highest level 7 on the iaea 's international nuclear event scale . iraq disarmament crisis ( 2002–2003 ) . during the iraq disarmament crisis before the 2003 invasion of iraq , blix was called back from retirement by un secretary general kofi annan to lead the united nations monitoring , verification and inspection commission in charge of monitoring iraq . kofi annan originally recommended rolf ekéus , who worked with unscom in the past , but russia and france vetoed his appointment . blix personally admonished saddam for '' cat and mouse '' games and warned iraq of '' serious consequences '' if it attempted to hinder or delay his mission . in his report to the un security council on 14 february 2003 , blix claimed that '' so far , unmovic has not found any such weapons of mass destruction , only a small number of empty chemical munitions . '' in 2004 blix gave a statement that '' there were about 700 inspections , and in no case did we find weapons of mass destruction . '' blix 's statements about the iraq wmd program came to contradict the claims of the george w . bush administration , and attracted a great deal of criticism from supporters of the invasion of iraq . in an interview on bbc 1 on 8 february 2004 , blix accused the us and british governments of dramatizing the threat of weapons of mass destruction in iraq , in order to strengthen the case for the 2003 war against the government of saddam hussein . ultimately , u.s . troops found no active manufacturing of weapons of mass destruction , but found roughly 5,000 chemical warheads , shells , or aviation bombs that had been manufactured prior to 1991 . in an interview with the guardian newspaper , blix said , '' i have my detractors in washington . there are bastards who spread things around , of course , who planted nasty things in the media . '' in 2004 , blix published a book , disarming iraq , where he gives his account of the events and inspections before the coalition began its invasion . cia investigation . senior u.s . officials ordered the u.s . central intelligence agency ( cia ) to investigate blix to gather '' sufficient ammunition to undermine '' him so that the u.s . could start the invasion of iraq . the u.s . officials were upset that the cia did not uncover such information . the institute for public accuracy , 24 april 2002 , '' chemical weapons agency 'coup ' '' ? blix said he suspected his home and office were bugged by the united states , while he led teams searching for saddam hussein 's supposed weapons of mass destruction . although these suspicions were never directly substantiated , evidence of a request for bugging of un security council representatives around the time the us was seeking approval from the council came to light after a british government translator leaked a document '' allegedly from an american national security agency '' requesting that british intelligence put wiretaps on delegates to the un security council . . weapons of mass destruction commission . since 2003 blix has been chairman of the weapons of mass destruction commission ( wmdc ) , an independent body funded by the swedish government and based in stockholm . in december 2006 , the weapons of mass destruction commission said in a report that pakistan 's nuclear scientist abdul qadeer khan could not have acted alone when passing on nuclear data and designs '' without the awareness of the pakistan government . '' '' a q khan did not act alone says hans blix team '' . deccan herald . 8 december 2006 . retrieved 29 december 2014 . . president of wfuna . in 2006 hans blix was elected president of the world federation of united nations associations at its 38th plenary assembly . humanitarian initiatives . in 2009 blix joined the project soldiers of peace , an anti-war film . . head of advisory board for united arab emirates nuclear program . blix chairs a panel of advisors who oversee the establishment of the uae 's dh150 billion atomic energy programme . he leads the nine-person board , which meets twice a year . the international advisory board ( iab ) oversees progress of the nation 's nuclear energy plan and issue reports on potential improvements to the scheme . . honours . doctorate honoris causa of the university of moscow in 1987 . recipient of the henry dewolf smyth nuclear statesman award in 1988 . honorary membership in the cambridge union society . gold medal for distinguished service in the field of nuclear affairs by the uranium institute ( now world nuclear association ) in 1997 . otto hahn prize in 1998 . doctorate honoris causa of the vrije universiteit brussel in 2003 . commander of the legion of honour in 2004 . doctorate honoris causa of the university of padova in 2004 . sydney peace prize in 2007 . doctorate honoris causa of the university of cambridge in 2007 . elected as honorary president of the world federation of united nations associations in 2009 . elected as president of the world federation of united nations associations in buenos aires in 2006 and served until 2009 . awarded the golden doves for peace journalistic prize issued by the italian research institute archivio disarmo , in 2004 . awarded the fulbright prize in 2014 . . in media . blix appeared in the documentaries the world according to bush , and europe & usa : behind the scenes of a political rupture . a marionette version of blix was eaten by a nurse shark in the film team america : world police . bibliography . disarming iraq : the search for weapons of mass destruction . hans blix , pantheon ( 9 march 2004 ) . why nuclear disarmament matters . hans blix , the mit press ( 30 april 2008 ) . see also . international conference on nuclear disarmament iraq and weapons of mass destruction iraq disarmament crisis hans corell operation rockingham dag hammarskjöld mohamed elbaradei v . r . raghavan , commissioner on the independent commission on weapons of mass destruction . references . external links . wmd commission biography un maxims biography united nations biography hans blix column archives at the guardian