Kansai dialect

kyoto . kyōto-ben ( 京都弁 ) or kyō-kotoba ( 京言葉 ) is characterized by development of politeness and indirectness expressions . kyoto-ben is often regarded as elegant and feminine dialect because of its characters and the image of gion 's geisha ( geiko-han and maiko-han in kyoto-ben ) , the most conspicuous speakers of traditional kyoto-ben . ryoichi sato ed ( 2009 ) . kyoto-ben is divided into the court dialect called gosho kotoba ( 御所言葉 ) and the citizens dialect called machikata kotoba ( 町方言葉 ) . the former was spoken by court noble before moving the emperor to tokyo , and some phrases inherit at a few monzeki . the latter has subtle difference at each social class such as old merchant families at nakagyo , craftsmen at nishijin and geiko at hanamachi ( gion , miyagawa-chō etc . ) kyoto-ben was the de facto standard japanese from 794 until the 18th century and some kyoto people are still proud of their accent ; they get angry when tokyo people treat kyoto-ben as a provincial accent . however , traditional kyoto-ben is gradually declining except in the world of geisha , which prizes the inheritance of traditional kyoto customs . for example , a famous kyoto copula dosu , instead of standard desu , is used by a few elders and geisha now . nobusuke kishie and fumiko inoue ( 1997 ) . the verb inflection -haru is an essential part of casual speech in modern kyoto . in osaka and its environs , -haru has a certain level of politeness above the base ( informal ) form of the verb , putting it somewhere between the informal and the more polite -masu conjugations . however , in kyoto , its position is much closer to the informal than it is to the polite mood , owing to its widespread use . kyoto people , especially elderly women , often use -haru for their family and even for animals and weather . kayoko tsuji ( 2009 ) . 。 tango-ben ( 丹後弁 ) spoken in northernmost kyoto prefecture , is too different to be regarded as kansai dialect and usually included in chūgoku dialect . for example , the copula da , the tokyo-type accent , the honorific verb ending -naru instead of -haru and the peculiarly diphthong such as for akai '' red '' . hyogo . hyōgo prefecture is the largest prefecture in kansai , and there are some different dialects in the prefecture . as mentioned above , tajima-ben ( 但馬弁 ) spoken in northern hyōgo , former tajima province , is included in chūgoku dialect as well as tango-ben . ancient vowel sequence /au/ changed in many japanese dialects , but in tajima , tottori and izumo dialects , /au/ changed . accordingly , kansai word ahō '' idiot '' is pronounced ahaa in tajima-ben . the dialect spoken in southwestern hyōgo , former harima province alias banshū , is called banshū-ben . as well as chūgoku dialect , it has the discrimination of aspect , -yoru in progressive and -toru in perfect . banshū-ben is notable for transformation of -yoru and -toru into -yō and -tō , sometimes -yon and -ton . another feature is the honorific copula -te ya , common in tanba , maizuru and san'yō dialects . in addition , banshū-ben is famous for an emphatic final particle doi or doiya and a question particle ke or ko , but they often sound violent to other kansai speakers , as well as kawachi-ben . kōbe-ben ( 神戸弁 ) spoken in kobe , the largest city of hyogo , is the intermediate dialect between banshū-ben and osaka-ben and is well known for conjugating -yō and -tō as well as banshū-ben . awaji-ben ( 淡路弁 ) spoken in awaji island , is different from banshū/kōbe-ben and mixed with dialects of osaka , wakayama and tokushima prefectures due to the intersecting location of sea routes in the seto inland sea and the tokushima domain rule in edo period . mie . the dialect in mie prefecture , sometimes called mie-ben ( 三重弁 ) , is made up of ise-ben ( 伊勢弁 ) spoken in mid-northern mie , shima-ben ( 志摩弁 ) spoken in southeastern mie and iga-ben ( 伊賀弁 ) spoken in western mie . ise-ben is famous for a sentence final particle ni as well as de . shima-ben is close to ise-ben , but its vocabulary includes many archaic words . iga-ben has a unique request expression -te daako instead of standard -te kudasai . they use the normal kansai accent and basic grammar , but some of the vocabulary is common to the nagoya dialect . for example , instead of -te haru ( respectful suffix ) , they have the nagoya-style -te mieru . conjunctive particles de and monde '' because '' is widely used instead of sakai and yotte . the similarity to nagoya-ben becomes more pronounced in the northernmost parts of the prefecture ; the dialect of nagashima and kisosaki , for instance , could be considered far closer to nagoya-ben than to ise-ben . in and around ise , mie , some variations on typical kansai vocabulary can be found , mostly used by older residents . for instance , the typical expression ōkini is sometimes pronounced ōkina in ise . near the isuzu river and naikū shrine , some old men use the first-person pronoun otai . wakayama . kishū-ben ( 紀州弁 ) or wakayama-ben ( 和歌山弁 ) , the dialect in old province kii province , present-day wakayama prefecture and southern parts of mie prefecture , is fairly different from common kansai dialect and comprises many regional variants . it is famous for heavy confusion of z and d , especially on the southern coast . the ichidan verb negative form -n often changes -ran in wakayama such as taberan instead of taben ( '' not eat '' ) ; -hen also changes -yan in wakayama , mie and nara such as tabeyan instead of tabehen . wakayama-ben has specific perticles . yō is often used as sentence final particle . ra follows the volitional conjugation of verbs as iko ra yō ! ( '' let 's go ! '' ) . noshi is used as soft sentence final particle . yashite is used as tag question . local words are akana instead of akan , omoshai instead of omoroi , aga '' oneself '' , teki '' you '' , tsuremote '' together '' and so on . wakayama people hardly ever use keigo , which is rather unusual for dialects in kansai . shiga . shiga prefecture is the eastern neighbor of kyoto , so its dialect , sometimes called shiga-ben ( 滋賀弁 ) or ōmi-ben ( 近江弁 ) or gōshū-ben ( 江州弁 ) , is similar in many ways to kyoto-ben . for example , shiga people also frequently use -haru , though some people tend to pronounce -aru and -te yaaru instead of -haru and -te yaharu . some elderly shiga people also use -raru as a casual honorific form . the demonstrative pronoun so- often changes to ho- ; for example , so ya becomes ho ya and sore ( that ) becomes hore . in nagahama , people use the friendly-sounding auxiliary verb -ansu and -te yansu . nagahama and hikone dialects has a unique final particle hon as well as de . nara . the dialect in nara prefecture is divided into northern including nara city and southern including totsukawa . the northern dialect , sometimes called nara-ben ( 奈良弁 ) or yamato-ben ( 大和弁 ) , has a few particularities such as an interjectory particle mii as well as naa , but the similarity with osaka-ben increases year by year because of the economic dependency to osaka . on the other hand , southern nara prefecture is a language island because of its geographic isolation with mountains . the southern dialect uses tokyo type accent , has the discrimination of grammatical aspect , and does not show a tendency to lengthen vowels at the end of monomoraic nouns .