Thomas Arne

early life . arne was born to a church of england father and a roman catholic mother in covent garden and baptised at st paul 's , covent garden . arne 's father and grandfather were both upholstery and both held office in the worshipful company of upholders of the city of london . his grandfather fell on hard times and died in the marshalsea prison . his father earned enough money not only to rent 31 king street , a large house in covent garden , but also to have arne educated at eton college . but in later life , he too lost most of his money and had to supplement his income by acting as a numberer of the boxes ( ticket counter ) at the drury lane theatre . arne was so keen on music that he smuggled a spinet into his room and , damping the sounds with his handkerchief , would secretly practise during the night while the rest of the family slept . he also dressed up as a liveryman in order to gain access to the gallery of the italian opera . it was at the opera that arne first met the musician and composer michael festing , who was a major influence on him . festing not only taught him to play the violin , but also took him to various musical events , including going to compete against thomas roseingrave for the post of organist at hanover square , and a visit to oxford in 1733 to hear george frideric handel 's oratorio athalia . upon leaving school , arne was articled to a solicitor for three years . however , arne 's father discovered his son leading a group of musicians at what was probably one of festing 's musical gatherings . following this disclosure of his son 's real interest and talent , he was persuaded ( again probably by festing ) to allow the young arne to give up his legal career and to pursue music as a living . musical career . between 1733 and 1776 , arne wrote music for about 90 stage works , including plays , masques , pantomimes , and operas . many of his dramatic scores are now lost , probably in the disastrous fire at the royal opera house , covent garden in 1808 . thomas and sally , or the sailor 's return , opera . : information and much more from answers.com arne 's sister , susannah maria arne , was a famous contralto , who performed in some of his works , including his first opera , rosamund . with her marriage to the drury lane actor theophilus cibber susannah became known professionally as '' mrs cibber '' . she and their brother richard would often perform arne 's works together . arne 's catholicism has the result that he never composed music for the church of england , unlike most other leading english composers of his time . todd gilman , '' arne , handel , the beautiful , and the sublime , '' eighteenth-century studies 42 , no . 2 ( summer 2009 ) : 539 . arne was a freemason website reference at the united grand lodge of england . and active in the organisation , which has long been centred in the covent garden area of london , where arne lived for many years . like mozart , who also lived in the 1700s , arne lived before the catholic hierarchy had banned membership in the lodges in all countries . on 15 march 1737 , arne married singer cecilia young , whose sister , isabella was the wife of john frederick lampe . during this period arne 's operas and masques became increasingly popular , and he received the patronage of frederick , prince of wales , at whose country home , cliveden , the masque of alfred , featuring '' rule britannia '' , was debuted in 1740 . in 1741 , arne filed a complaint in chancery pertaining to a breach of musical copyright and claimed that some of his theatrical songs had been printed and sold by henry roberts and john johnson , the london booksellers and music distributors . the matter was settled out of court . arne was one of the first composers to have appealed to the law over copyright issues . arne , handel , walsh , and music as intellectual property : two eighteenth-century lawsuits : ronald j . rabin and steven zohn , journal of the royal musical association , vol . 120 , no . 1 ( 1995 ) , pp . 112–145 in 1742 arne went with his wife to dublin , where he remained two years and produced his oratorio the death of abel , of which only the melody known as the hymn of eve survives , and some stage works ; he also gave a number of successful concerts . on his return to london in 1744 he was engaged as leader of the band at drury lane theatre , and the following year as composer at vauxhall gardens . in 1750 , after an argument with david garrick , susannah left drury lane for covent garden theatre , and arne followed . in 1755 during another period spent in dublin , he separated from cecilia , who , he alleged , was mentally ill . he began a relationship with one of his pupils , charlotte brent , a soprano and former child prodigy . brent performed in several of arne 's works , including the role of sally in his 1760 opera thomas and sally and mandane in his 1762 opera artaxerxes . eventually brent and arne went their separate ways and she married a violinist named thomas pinto in 1766 . during the 1760s arne transferred his services to royal opera house , and frequently collaborated with the irish writer isaac bickerstaffe . thomas and sally was the first english comic opera to be sung throughout ( it contained no spoken dialogue ) . artaxerxes was one of the most successful and influential english operas of the 18th century and is the only known attempt to write an italianate , metastasio opera seria , in the english language , using recitative instead of spoken dialogue . artaxerxes mozart saw it in 1764 when he visited london and said that it influenced his operas . it was frequently performed in london into the 1830s and , other than michael william balfe 's the bohemian girl , it was the most popular full-length english opera before the 20th century . the oxford companion to english literature , 6th edition . edited by margaret drabble , oxford university press , 2000 pp 41 in a 1791 visit to london , joseph haydn was impressed by a performance of artaxerxes he attended and admitted that he had no idea such an opera existed in the english language . artaxerxes : the opera that time forgot music the guardian in 1769 arne composed the song soft flowing avon , with lyrics by garrick , for the shakespeare jubilee held by garrick in stratford-upon-avon to commemorate the life of william shakespeare . in 1773 , in a performance of judith arne introduced women 's voices into the choruses for the first time . in 1777 , shortly before his death , arne and his wife were reconciled . they had one son , michael arne , who was also a composer . arne is buried at st paul 's , covent garden , london . a blue plaque , unveiled in 1988 , commemorates arne at 31 king street in covent garden . '' thomas arne , london , england , uk '' at flickr.com . see also . list of compositions by thomas arne . references . sources . mcveigh , simon . concert life in london from mozart to haydn . cambridge university press , 1993 ( 2006 reprint ) . external links . family history page by a descendant of arne thomas augustine arne on the classical composers database works by thomas arne in the university of north texas virtual rare book room sheet music