Calabi–Yau manifold

definitions . the motivational definition given by shing-tung yau is of a compact kähler manifold with a vanishing first chern class , that is also ricci flat . yau and nadis ( 2010 ) there are many other definitions of a calabi & ndash ; yau manifold used by different authors , some inequivalent . this section summarizes some of the more common definitions and the relations between them . a calabi & ndash ; yau n-fold or calabi & ndash ; yau manifold of ( complex ) dimension n is sometimes defined as a compact n-dimensional kähler manifold m satisfying one of the following equivalent conditions : the canonical bundle of m is trivial . m has a holomorphic n-form that vanishes nowhere . the structure group of the tangent bundle of m can be reduced from u ( n ) to su ( n ) . m has a kähler metric with global holonomy contained in su ( n ) . these conditions imply that the first integral chern class c_1 ( m ) of m vanishes . nevertheless , the converse is not true . the simplest examples where this happens are hyperelliptic surfaces , finite quotients of a complex torus of complex dimension 2 , which have vanishing first integral chern class but non-trivial canonical bundle . for a compact n-dimensional kähler manifold m the following conditions are equivalent to each other , but are weaker than the conditions above , though they are sometimes used as the definition of a calabi & ndash ; yau manifold : m has vanishing first real chern class . m has a kähler metric with vanishing ricci curvature . m has a kähler metric with local holonomy contained in su ( n ) . a positive power of the canonical bundle of m is trivial . m has a finite cover that has trivial canonical bundle . m has a finite cover that is a product of a torus and a simply connected manifold with trivial canonical bundle . if a compact kähler manifold is simply connected , then the weak definition above is equivalent to the stronger definition . enriques surfaces give examples of complex manifolds that have ricci-flat metrics , but their canonical bundles are not trivial , so they are calabi–yau manifolds according to the second but not the first definition above . on the other hand , their double covers are calabi–yau manifolds for both definitions ( in fact , k3 surfaces ) . by far the hardest part of proving the equivalences between the various properties above is proving the existence of ricci-flat metrics . this follows from yau 's proof of the calabi conjecture , which implies that a compact kähler manifold with a vanishing first real chern class has a kähler metric in the same class with vanishing ricci curvature . ( the class of a kähler metric is the cohomology class of its associated 2-form . ) calabi showed such a metric is unique . there are many other inequivalent definitions of calabi–yau manifolds that are sometimes used , which differ in the following ways ( among others ) : the first chern class may vanish as an integral class or as a real class . most definitions assert that calabi–yau manifolds are compact , but some allow them to be non-compact . in the generalization to non-compact manifolds , the difference ( \omega\wedge\bar\omega - \omega^n/n ! ) must vanish asymptotically . here , \omega is the kähler form associated with the kähler metric , g . some definitions put restrictions on the fundamental group of a calabi–yau manifold , such as demanding that it be finite or trivial . any calabi–yau manifold has a finite cover that is the product of a torus and a simply-connected calabi–yau manifold . some definitions require that the holonomy be exactly equal to su ( n ) rather than a subgroup of it , which implies that the hodge numbers h^^4 equipped with a complex manifold structure . enriques surfaces and hyperelliptic surfaces have first chern class that vanishes as an element of the real cohomology group , but not as an element of the integral cohomology group , so yau 's theorem about the existence of a ricci-flat metric still applies to them but they are sometimes not considered to be calabi & ndash ; yau manifolds . abelian surfaces are sometimes excluded from the classification of being calabi & ndash ; yau , as their holonomy ( again the trivial group ) is a subgroup of su ( 2 ) , instead of being isomorphic to su ( 2 ) . however , the enriques surface subset do not conform entirely to the su ( 2 ) subgroup in the string theory landscape . cy threefolds . in three complex dimensions , classification of the possible calabi & ndash ; yau manifolds is an open problem , although yau suspects that there is a finite number of families ( albeit a much bigger number than his estimate from 20 years ago ) . in turn , it has also been conjectured by miles reid that the number of topological types of calabi–yau 3-folds is infinite , and that they can all be transformed continuously ( through certain mild singularizations such as conifolds ) one into another & mdash ; much as riemann surfaces can . one example of a three-dimensional calabi & ndash ; yau manifold is a non-singular quintic threefold in cp 4 , which is the algebraic variety consisting of all of the zeros of a homogeneous quintic polynomial in the homogeneous coordinates of the cp 4 . another example is a smooth model of the barth–nieto quintic . some discrete quotients of the quintic by various z 5 actions are also calabi & ndash ; yau and have received a lot of attention in the literature . one of these is related to the original quintic by mirror symmetry . for every positive integer n , the zero set , in the homogeneous coordinates of the complex projective space cp n+1 , of a non-singular homogeneous degree n & nbsp ; + & nbsp ; 2 polynomial in n & nbsp ; + & nbsp ; 2 variables is a compact calabi–yau n-fold . the case n & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 1 describes an elliptic curve , while for n & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 2 one obtains a k3 surface . more generally , calabi–yau varieties/orbifolds can be found as weighted complete intersections in a weighted projective space . the main tool for finding such spaces is the adjunction formula . all hyper-kähler manifolds are calabi–yau manifolds . applications in superstring theory . calabi & ndash ; yau manifolds are important in superstring theory . essentially , calabi & ndash ; yau manifolds are shapes that satisfy the requirement of space for the six '' unseen '' spatial dimensions of string theory , which may be smaller than our currently observable lengths as they have not yet been detected . a popular alternative known as large extra dimensions , which often occurs in braneworld models , is that the calabi & ndash ; yau is large but we are confined to a small subset on which it intersects a d-brane . further extensions into higher dimensions are currently being explored with additional ramifications for general relativity . in the most conventional superstring models , ten conjectural dimensions in string theory are supposed to come as four of which we are aware , carrying some kind of fibration with fiber dimension six . compactification on calabi & ndash ; yau n-folds are important because they leave some of the original supersymmetry unbroken . more precisely , in the absence of fluxes , compactification on a calabi & ndash ; yau 3-fold ( real dimension 6 ) leaves one quarter of the original supersymmetry unbroken if the holonomy is the full su ( 3 ) . more generally , a flux-free compactification on an n-manifold with holonomy su ( n ) leaves 2 1−n of the original supersymmetry unbroken , corresponding to 2 6−n supercharges in a compactification of type ii supergravity or 2 5−n supercharges in a compactification of type i . when fluxes are included the supersymmetry condition instead implies that the compactification manifold be a generalized calabi & ndash ; yau , a notion introduced by . these models are known as flux compactifications . f-theory compactifications on various calabi & ndash ; yau four-folds provide physicists with a method to find a large number of classical solutions in the so-called string theory landscape . connected with each hole in the calabi–yau space is a group of low-energy string vibrational patterns . since string theory states that our familiar elementary particles correspond to low-energy string vibrations , the presence of multiple holes causes the string patterns to fall into multiple groups , or families . although the following statement has been simplified , it conveys the logic of the argument : if the calabi–yau has three holes , then three families of vibrational patterns and thus three families of particles will be observed experimentally . logically , since strings vibrate through all the dimensions , the shape of the curled-up ones will affect their vibrations and thus the properties of the elementary particles observed . for example , andrew strominger and edward witten have shown that the masses of particles depend on the manner of the intersection of the various holes in a calabi–yau . in other words , the positions of the holes relative to one another and to the substance of the calabi–yau space was found by strominger and witten to affect the masses of particles in a certain way . this is true of all particle properties . . see also . quintic threefold g2 manifold calabi–yau algebra . references . citations . . beginner articles . an overview of calabi-yau elliptic fibrations lectures on the arxiv:2001.01212 arxiv:1708.07907 - ( complete intersection calabi-yau ) . bibliography . im , mee seong ( 2008 ) '' singularities-in-calabi-yau-varieties.pdf singularities in calabi & ndash ; yau varieties '' yau , shing-tung and nadis , steve ; the shape of inner space , basic books , 2010 . external links . calabi & ndash ; yau homepage is an interactive reference which describes many examples and classes of calabi & ndash ; yau manifolds and also the physical theories in which they appear . spinning calabi & ndash ; yau space video . calabi & ndash ; yau space by andrew j . hanson with additional contributions by jeff bryant , wolfram demonstrations project . ( similar to