Oil drop experiment

background . image : robert-millikan2.jpg right thumb robert a . millikan in 1891 226x226px starting in 1908 , while a professor at the university of chicago , millikan , with the significant input of fletcher , and after improving his setup , published his seminal study in 1913 . this remains controversial since papers found after fletcher 's death describe events in which millikan coerced fletcher into relinquishing authorship as a condition for receiving his phd . in return , millikan used his influence in support of fletcher 's career at bell labs . millikan and fletcher 's experiment involved measuring the force on oil droplets in a glass chamber sandwiched between two electrodes , one above and one below . with the electrical field calculated , they could measure the droplet 's charge , the charge on a single electron being . at the time of millikan and fletcher 's oil drop experiments , the existence of subatomic particles was not universally accepted . experimenting with cathode rays in 1897 , j . j . thomson had discovered negatively charged '' corpuscles '' , as he called them , with a mass about 1/1837 times smaller than that of a hydrogen atom . similar results had been found by george fitzgerald and walter kaufmann . most of what was then known about electricity and magnetism , however , could be explained on the basis that charge is a continuous variable ; in much the same way that many of the properties of light can be explained by treating it as a continuous wave rather than as a stream of photons . the elementary charge e is one of the fundamental physical constants and thus the accuracy of the value is of great importance . in 1923 , millikan won the nobel prize in physics , in part because of this experiment . aside from the measurement , the beauty of the oil drop experiment is that it is a simple , elegant hands-on demonstration that charge is quantized . thomas edison , who had previously thought of charge as a continuous variable , became convinced after working with millikan and fletcher 's apparatus . this experiment has since been repeated by generations of physics students , although it is rather expensive and difficult to conduct properly . in the last two decades , several computer-automated experiments have been conducted to search for isolated fractionally charged particles . as of 2015 , no evidence for fractional charge particles has been found after measuring over 100 million drops . . experimental procedure . apparatus . right right millikan 's and fletcher 's apparatus incorporated a parallel pair of horizontal metal plates . by applying a potential difference across the plates , a uniform electric field was created in the space between them . a ring of insulating material was used to hold the plates apart . four holes were cut into the ring , three for illumination by a bright light , and another to allow viewing through a microscope . a fine mist of oil droplets was sprayed into a chamber above the plates . the oil was of a type usually used in vacuum apparatus and was chosen because it had an extremely low vapour pressure . ordinary oil would evaporate under the heat of the light source causing the mass of the oil drop to change over the course of the experiment . some oil drops became electrically charged through friction with the nozzle as they were sprayed . alternatively , charging could be brought about by including an ionising radiation source ( such as an x-ray tube ) . the droplets entered the space between the plates and , because they were charged , could be made to rise and fall by changing the voltage across the plates . method . thumb initially the oil drops are allowed to fall between the plates with the electric field turned off . they very quickly reach a terminal velocity because of friction with the air in the chamber . the field is then turned on and , if it is large enough , some of the drops ( the charged ones ) will start to rise . ( this is because the upwards electric force f e is greater for them than the downwards gravitational force f g , in the same way bits of paper can be picked by a charged rubber rod ) . a likely looking drop is selected and kept in the middle of the field of view by alternately switching off the voltage until all the other drops have fallen . the experiment is then continued with this one drop . the drop is allowed to fall and its terminal velocity v 1 in the absence of an electric field is calculated . the drag force acting on the drop can then be worked out using stokes ' law : : f_ . . fraud allegations . some controversy was raised by historian gerald holton ( 1978 ) who pointed out that millikan recorded more measurements in his journal than he included in his final results . holton suggested these data points were omitted from the large set of oil drops measured in his experiments without apparent reason . this claim was disputed by allan franklin , a high energy physics experimentalist and philosopher of science at the university of colorado . franklin contended that millikan 's exclusions of data did not substantively affect his final value of e , but did reduce the statistical error around this estimate e . this enabled millikan to claim that he had calculated e to better than one half of one percent ; in fact , if millikan had included all of the data he had thrown out , the standard error of the mean would have been within 2 % . while this would still have resulted in millikan having measured e better than anyone else at the time , the slightly larger uncertainty might have allowed more disagreement with his results within the physics community . while franklin left his support for millikan 's measurement with the conclusion that concedes that millikan may have performed '' cosmetic surgery '' on the data , david goodstein investigated the original detailed notebooks kept by millikan , concluding that millikan plainly states here and in the reports that he included only drops that had undergone a '' complete series of observations '' and excluded no drops from this group of complete measurements . reasons for a failure to generate a complete observation include annotations regarding the apparatus setup , oil drop production , and atmospheric effects which invalidated , in millikan 's opinion ( borne out by the reduced error in this set ) , a given particular measurement . millikan 's experiment as an example of psychological effects in scientific methodology . in a commencement address given at the california institute of technology ( caltech ) in 1974 ( and reprinted in surely you 're joking , mr . feynman ! in 1985 as well as in the pleasure of finding things out in 1999 ) , physicist richard feynman noted : ( adapted from the 1974 california institute of technology commencement address ) , donald simanek 's pages , lock haven university , rev . december 2017 . the value of the elementary charge is defined to be exactly . before that , the most recent ( 2014 ) accepted value was , where the ( 98 ) indicates the uncertainty of the last two decimal places . in his nobel lecture , millikan gave his measurement as , which equals . the difference is less than one percent , but is six times greater than millikan 's standard error , so the disagreement is significant .