Walla Walla University

history . in 1887 , w.w . prescott became the first education secretary of the general conference of seventh-day adventists . he noticed that seventh-day adventist schools were opening all over the place without a plan for long-term success , and decided to encourage these new adventist schools to consolidate into larger , regional institutions that would stand a better chance of survival . in 1890 , prescott visited the pacific northwest and asked the three adventist schools there to merge ; and after overcoming local opposition , the adventist schools in coquille , portland , and milton , all in oregon , agreed to merge . a committee chose to place the new school on forty acres of land located just west of walla walla , washington that were donated for the school . the new school opened on december 7 , 1892 , named walla walla college , and prescott was named the first president . however , prescott was also president of two other institutions at the time , so edward a . sutherland , the principal , took over running the school 's day-to-day activities and eventually became the second president of the college . on the first day , walla walla college offered all education from elementary up to the first two years of college ; total enrollment was 101 , with six teachers . all classes were run out of the four-storey tall administration building , deliberately built tall so that it could be seen from the city of walla walla . sutherland focused on following the counsels of adventist prophetess ellen g . white as closely as possible , and under his direction the school became the first to offer an exclusively vegetarian diet . likewise , he emphasized manual labour for the students . initially school finances were shaky , but the manual labour of the students eventually provided sufficient income to stabilize the school 's finances . the school 's first graduation was held in 1896 ; three students graduated . the school quickly celebrated a number of important milestones . in 1895 , the school became the first adventist institution to allow a brass band to play during church services . in 1899 , the first college bakery opened . in 1901 , walla walla college was incorporated . in 1905 , marion e . cady became the school 's eighth president , and under his leadership the school expanded its college course offerings to a full four-year college program ; by 1909 , the college celebrated its first baccalaureate graduate . cady also stabilized the school 's finances , which resulted in the college paying off its debt in 1909 . however , in 1910 the school suffered the first of many fires , when the power plant burned down . in 1911 , ernest kellogg took over as president , and under his leadership the academic program of the college was further strengthened ; elementary and high school classes were moved to separate buildings , and the school received accreditation from the university of washington in 1913 for its high school ; in that same year , enrollment reached 400 students . kellogg designed the school 's seal , and under kellogg , the first yearbook was published , the first student newspaper was published , the student association was founded , and the alumni association was created . the first school gym opened when kellogg retired in 1917 ; the current cafeteria building is named after him . in 1919 , a fire destroyed the top floor of the school 's administration building . in the 1920s , walla walla college pursued accreditation for its college program , receiving accreditation for the first two years of its college program and also winning accreditation for its teacher training program . however , the college met opposition from the church over its pursuit of accreditation , and suspended its application . during this time period , ops and aga ( dorm clubs ) were founded , the johnson music conservatory was built , and a fire burned down the women 's dorm . in the 1930s , walla walla college again pursued accreditation , and by 1935 it received accreditation for its full college program ; in this same year , the high school separated from the college and became walla walla valley academy , leaving the school strictly a college . by this time , walla walla college was the largest seventh-day adventist college in the world . walla walla 's success however led to further conflicts with the church , when several theology professors were fired in 1938 and the college president was forced to resign . in 1939 , the columbia auditorium opened , a popular performing arts venue . in the 1940s , a number of important developments helped found some of walla walla 's most popular programs . an airfield was built in 1942 which led to the start of walla walla 's aviation program . in 1944 , the present library building was completed , and in 1947 the present boys dorm was built . in 1945 , the village that had grown up to support the college was incorporated as the city of college place , washington . in 1947 , the university opened up the first school of engineering in the seventh-day adventist church , and the first physical education program started around the same time . also in 1947 , the school opened its first satellite campus , when it began its school of nursing at the portland sanitarium , today adventist health portland . in 1948 , the college 's first master 's degree was offered in biology , and a master 's degree in education began two years later . a second satellite campus was opened in 1954 at rosario beach in anacortes , washington , for the marine biology program . enrollment more than doubled in the post-war years , reaching 1,300 by 1950 . growth slowed in the 1960s as the college matured . a church was built in 1962 , the present-day university church . the college radio station , kgts , began broadcasting in 1963 , as the first fm-radio station in the walla walla valley . several buildings were built towards the end of the decade . the college also began to liberalize its rules , allowing its female students more freedom in how they dressed , and also hired its first full-time black professor . in 1971 , the university 's engineering school was granted accreditation . in the 1970s , the college ran into financial difficulties , and a number of college industries were closed , sold , or privatized in an effort to keep the school 's finances under control . to make matters worse , a fire damaged the women 's dorm , and in 1978 a fire burned the columbia auditorium to the ground . however , enrollment reached 2,000 by the middle of the decade . in the 1980s , wwc reached out to alumni to help the school out , and an endowment fund began in 1987 . also in 1987 , a graduate program in social work began . in the 2000s , the original administration building was condemned and torn down ; a new administration building was built to replace it , designed to look as close as possible to the original administration building . in 2007 , the school was renamed walla walla university in light of the school 's long-time status as a university . today enrollment fluctuates just under 2,000 students who are served by over 200 faculty and staff , across the university 's five campuses . . presidents . past presidents of walla walla university : w . w . prescott ( 1892–1894 ) edward a . sutherland ( 1894–1897 ) emmett j . hibbard ( 1897–1898 ) walter r . sutherland ( 1898–1900 ) edwin l . stewart ( 1900–1902 ) charles c . lewis ( 1902–1904 ) joseph l . kay ( 1904–1905 ) marion e . cady ( 1905–1911 ) ernest c . kellogg ( 1911–1917 ) walter i . smith ( 1917–1930 ) john e . weaver ( 1930–1933 ) william m . landeen ( 1933–1938 ) george w . bowers ( 1938–1955 ) percy w . christian ( 1955–1964 ) william h . shephard ( 1964–1968 ) robert l . reynolds ( 1968–1976 ) n . clifford sorenson ( 1976–1985 ) h . j . bergman ( 1985–1990 ) niels-erik andreasen ( 1990–1994 ) w . g . nelson ( 1994–2001 ) john c . brunt ( 2001 ) n . clifford sorenson ( 2001–2002 ) jon dybdahl ( 2002–2006 ) john k . mcvay ( 2006-2012 ) steve rose ( 2012 ) john k . mcvay ( 2013–present ) . academics . walla walla university is accredited by the northwest commission on colleges and universities , and also by the adventist accrediting association . some of wwu 's schools and departments are also accredited by agencies specific to their field . wwu has authorization from both the state of washington and the state of oregon . wwu offers pre-professional programs , associate degrees , bachelor 's degrees , and master 's degrees . the largest undergraduate programs are the nursing , engineering , business , biology , and education schools . walla walla university is administratively divided into six schools and several departments . . school of business . the school of business offers a bachelor of business administration among many other bachelor 's degree programs , and is accredited by the accreditation council of business schools & programs . the school employs ten faculty , and currently operates from bowers hall . . school of education and psychology . the school of education and psychology offers bachelor 's degrees in education and psychology , and also offers master 's degrees in education . they also work with high school education candidates who are taking a major in their subject area . the school prepares students to graduate with a washington state teacher 's certificate , but also offers the option to receive an adventist education certificate . the school employs 16 professors and support staff , and can be found in smith hall . . edward f . cross school of engineering . the edward f . cross school of engineering was founded in 1947 by edward f . cross , for whom the school was later named . it is the first engineering school in the adventist education system . it has been accredited by the engineering accreditation commission of abet since 1971 . the school offers a bachelor of engineering with four possible concentrations : civil , mechanical , electrical , and computer ; and also offers a major in bioengineering . the school employs 12 full-time professors and operates from the chan shun pavilion . the school also sponsors a chapter of engineers without borders . . school of nursing . the nursing school was founded in 1947 . it is accredited by the commission on collegiate nursing education . the school offers a bachelor of nursing , which involves two years of study at the college place campus , followed by two years of study at the portland nursing campus , where nursing students get experience at adventist health portland . . wilma hepker school of social work and sociology . the school of social work and sociology offers bachelors , masters , and doctoral degrees in social work , and a major in sociology . founded in 1975 by wilma hepker , the school has been accredited by the council on social work education since 1980 , and operates satellite campuses in billings and missoula in montana for its master 's degree program . . school of theology . the school of theology is one of walla walla university 's oldest programs . it offers majors in theology , religion , and biblical languages . it has employed a number of important seventh-day adventist theologians throughout its history , including alden thompson ; and has graduated others , including charles scriven . it employs nine professors and can be found inside the walla walla university administration building . . other programs . walla walla university 's department of biological sciences is one of its most popular programs , and is important to the university due to its operation of the rosario beach marine campus as well as being the university 's oldest master 's degree program . additionally , the department of music is historically important to walla walla university as one of its first bachelor 's degree programs . . campuses . walla walla university has five campuses . they are located in washington , oregon , and montana . . college place main campus . the first campus of walla walla university remains its central campus . located just outside of walla walla , washington , the campus was initially 40 acres before being expanded to the present-day 83 acres , in addition to 592 total acres in the local area . the city of college place , washington sprung up shortly after the founding of the campus in 1892 to support the students and workers of the university . nearly the entire undergraduate program of walla walla university is located on this campus , and the graduate program in education is also located on this campus . the oldest building on campus is village hall , which was built in 1920 as the original university church ; today , it is used to put on drama productions , and the student development center operates from its basement . other old buildings on campus include bowers hall ( 1924 ) , which currently houses the school of business ; and conard hall ( 1934 ) , one of the women 's dorms . the campus includes martin airfield , opened in 1942 for the aviation department ; and kgts , the campus radio station , which heads the positive life radio network that operates across washington , oregon , and idaho . . portland nursing campus . the school of nursing operates a campus in portland , oregon adjacent to adventist health portland , where third and fourth-year nursing students complete their practicum . opened in 1947 , the campus includes a small dormitory for nursing students , named hansen hall . . rosario beach marine laboratory . the department of biology operates a 40-acre campus on rosario beach , next to anacortes , washington . the campus operates during the summer , offering courses in biology and marine biology . the campus also supports courses in scuba diving . the campus was purchased in 1954 . . montana campuses . the school of social work and sociology operates two campuses in montana , at missoula and billings , in support of its graduate program in social work . the missoula campus opened in 1997 , and the billings campus opened in 2001 . . student government . the associated students of walla walla university ( aswwu ) was founded in 1914 as the collegiate association . they were renamed aswwc in 1922 and have only changed their name once since then , to match the renaming of the school from a college to a university in 2007 . they have published the school yearbook , mountain ash , beginning in 1915 as the western collegian , and since 1917 under its current title . they have published the school newspaper , the collegian , published under that title since 1916 . aswwu has also published the school directory , the mask , since 1954 . adam hagele , president ; omar alfaro , executive vice president ; matthew cosaert , spiritual vice president ; and tim kosaka , social vice president ; served as 2017-2018 officers . katelyn folkenberg , president ; evelyn ouro-rodrigues , vice president ; lindsey haffner , spiritual vice president ; and madilyn malott , social vice president followed as the first all female elected officers during the 2018-2019 year . omicron pi sigma ( ops ) is the men 's dorm club ; it was founded in 1927 . it is responsible for organizing the annual mud bowl game—a football match played in a mud pit—as well as amateur hour . aleph gamel ain ( aga ) is the women 's dorm club ; it was founded in 1928 . it is responsible for organizing the annual aga weekend on mother 's day , when mothers are invited to visit their daughters in university . students who live off-campus are part of the village club . . athletics . walla walla university 's athletic teams are called the wolves and are part of the national association of intercollegiate athletics ( naia ) . the wolves joined the cascade collegiate conference at the start of the 2015-16 athletic calendar . the wolves formerly competed in the united states collegiate athletic association ( uscaa ) from 2004-05 to 2013-14 ; and the national christian college athletic association ( nccaa ) from 1997-98 to 2007-08 . men 's sports include basketball , soccer , cross-country , and golf ; while women 's sports include basketball , volleyball , cross-country and golf . unofficially , walla walla university was also affiliated with a men 's ice hockey team , called the wolfpack . . campus ministries . the chaplain 's office of the university includes departments of campus ministries and student missions . student missions . while walla walla university students have been involved in mission work from the very beginning , the modern walla walla university student missions program began in 1960 when they sent out their first student missionary overseas . today , walla walla university sends out between 50-90 student missionaries ( sms ) each year , to locations around the world . many seventh-day adventist schools in micronesia are staffed primarily by walla walla university student missionaries . . notable people . alumni of wwu include business people such as jeri ellsworth , peter adkison and forrest preston , ornithologist pamela c . rasmussen , ophthalmologist and order of canada recipient howard gimbel , theologian alden thompson , incumbent president of la sierra university randal wisbey and former lieutenant governor of guam michael cruz . gallery . file : wwcc-steeple-up wl.jpg the steeple of the university church file : wwc-village-hall-up wl.jpg village hall , the original church , now serves as a theater file : wwusign.jpg walla walla university sign file : kretchmar_building.jpg engineering department . see also . kgts list of seventh-day adventist colleges and universities seventh-day adventist education . references . external links . official website official athletics website