The Spy Who Came In from the Cold

background . the spy who came in from the cold occurs during the heightened tensions that characterised the late 1950s and early 1960s cold war , when a warsaw pact–nato war sparked in germany seemed likely . the story begins and concludes in berlin , about a year after the completion of the berlin wall and around the time when double-agent heinz felfe was exposed and tried . le carré 's debut novel , call for the dead , introduced two of the books characters , george smiley and hans-dieter mundt . in the story , smiley investigates the suicide of samuel fennan . he quickly establishes a link between the hauptverwaltung aufklärung and the deceased , and learns that mundt , an assassin , killed the man after a misunderstanding between fennan and their controller , dieter frey . mundt escaped from england shortly after , getting back into east germany before smiley and guillam can catch him . the spy who came in from the cold picks up two years later , where mundt has had a somewhat meteoric rise to become the head of the abteilung , because of his success with counter-intelligence operations against british networks , as well as a member of the presidium of the socialist unity party . characters and events from the spy who came in from the cold are reinvestigated in a legacy of spies , le carré 's 2017 novel centering on an aging guillam . plot . alec leamas , a former soe operative during world war ii who fought in the nazi-occupied netherlands and norway , the spy who came in from the cold , p . 65 . is recalled from his posting as station head of berlin station , west berlin operational branch of the circus , and returns to london in despair after watching the death of his final undercover operative , karl riemeck , a member of the praesidium in east germany socialist unity party , at the hands of hans-dieter mundt . mundt , formerly a lower level intelligence operative who is known to the circus for his involvement in the murder of foreign office official samuel fennan a few years earlier , has risen to become the head of the east german abteilung on account of his brilliant counterintelligence aptitude , a skill demonstrated with his liquidation of leamas ' entire network . finding himself with no operatives left , leamas visits circus chief control and expresses a desire to get out of the intelligence community and '' come in from the cold '' . control asks him to instead stay '' in the cold '' for one last mission : defect to east germany and frame mundt as a double agent for sis . mundt 's deputy , josef fiedler , control explains , is beginning to believe that mundt may be a turncoat , and could be a useful target for leamas in this endeavour . in exchange for this , leamas will keep anything he makes on the mission , in addition to a pension pot , and will be granted leave to retire from the service . in order to convince the east germans ' of leamas ' potential defection , the circus demotes leamas to the finance department , where he starts to exhibit signs of alcoholism . he eventually is sacked abruptly on rumours he was stealing money from the circus ' accounts to support the small pension he was granted by his superiors , and is forced to go on the dole . eventually he takes a job in a small run-down library , whilst living in a low quality flat . whilst there , he meets liz gold , the secretary of her local communist party of great britain organisation , and the two gradually strike up a friendship , and eventually become lovers . after a period of illness reveals the extent of liz 's feelings for him , leamas confides in her that a day is coming where he will say goodbye and she must not look for him . a few days later , he says goodbye , and takes the '' final plunge '' into control 's plan , getting arrested for assault and sentenced to three months in prison . before fully involving himself in the scheme , he makes control promise to leave liz alone and out of the remit of the circus . upon his release , leamas is approached by an east german recruiter who claims to know him from his time in berlin . he lets him stay at his home , and introduces him to a contact who takes him across to the netherlands on a faked passport . whilst there , an intelligence agent from the east interviews him heavily on his past in the circus at a safe house in the netherlands , before then taking him across into east germany and gradually meeting more senior officials of the abteilung , all the while dropping occasional hints about payments to a potential double agent . whilst this occurs , liz is suddenly visited by the retired circus agent george smiley , who tells her to come to him should she need anything , enquires about her relationship with leamas , and pays off the outstanding rent on leamas ' flat . now in east germany , leamas is finally introduced to fiedler , where he is held under guard in a sparsely decorated home in the middle of nowhere . his days consist largely of extended discussion about his past circus work , combined with walking in the local countryside and hills with fiedler or a guard . the two men often end up in philosophical debate , particularly on the topic of leamas ' more pragmatic view of life in comparison to fiedler 's idealism ideological views about life in east germany . these conversations reveal what leamas observes as a fear about both the righteousness of fiedler 's motivations , as well as the morality of what he does for his country . in contrast , mundt , is a brutal opportunist , also mercenary-like in manner , who left the nazis after the war out of convenience and joined the communists . fiedler also notes his suspicions about mundt as the men get closer , and fiedler conveys his fears about mundt 's antisemitism affecting him , a jewish man . towards the end of leamas ' tenure in interrogation with fiedler , the extent of the power struggle in the abteilung is exposed when mundt abruptly arrests fiedler and leamas . in the panic leamas inadvertently kills an east german guard , and awakes in mundt 's facility , where he interrogates and tortures both men . it is then revealed , however , that fiedler had also submitted an arrest warrant for mundt , leading the east german régime to intervene and convene a court . fiedler and mundt are both released , and then summoned to present their cases to a tribunal convened in camera . during the trial , leamas further elaborates on previous mentions of undercover payments to a foreign agent in bank accounts which match locations that mundt had travelled to , whilst fiedler presents other evidence implicating mundt to be a british agent . whilst he is away , liz receives an invitation from the east germans to participate in an exchange of party members with the british communist party . surprisingly , she is summoned by mundt 's attorney as a witness and forced to testify at the tribunal . she then admits smiley paid the apartment lease , and that smiley offered help should she need it . she also confesses that leamas made her promise not to look for him , and that he said goodbye immediately before he assaulted the grocer . leamas , realising his cover has been blown , offers to tell them about the mission in exchange for liz 's freedom , but realises the true nature of the scheme during the course of the tribunal . fiedler is then arrested at the tribunal 's end . immediately after the trial , mundt subtly locates and then releases leamas and liz from jail , and gives them a car to get from their current location to the berlin wall . during the drive , leamas explains the entire situation to a bemused liz . mundt is actually a british double agent , who reports to smiley , who is actually undercover in the mission and pretending to be retired . mundt was turned against the east germans before he returned following the murder of samuel fennan a few years earlier , and the missions true target was fiedler , who was closing on exposing mundt as a double agent . on account of leamas and liz 's intimate relationship , however , mundt ( and smiley ) were provided with the means of discrediting leamas ' ability to provide evidence to the tribunal , and as such discredit fiedler . liz , however , is shaken , and realises that to her horror , her actions have enabled the circus to protect their asset mundt at the expense of the thoughtful and idealistic fiedler . when asked what will become of fiedler , leamas replies that he will most likely be shot . although disgusted , liz overcomes this on account of her love for leamas . the two drive to the berlin wall , and make a break for west germany by ascending over the wall and through a section of sabotaged barbed wire atop the wall . leamas reaches the top , but as he reaches down to help liz , she is shot and killed by one of mundt 's operatives . she falls back down , and as smiley calls to leamas from the other side of the wall , he hesitates , before eventually descending the wall on the east german side to die . characters . alec leamas : a british field agent in charge of east german espionage hans-dieter mundt : leader of the east german secret service , the abteilung josef fiedler : east german spy , and mundt 's deputy liz gold : english librarian and member of the communist party control : head of the circus george smiley : british spy , supposedly retired peter guillam : british spy karl riemeck : east german bureaucrat turned british spy . cultural impact . at its publication during the cold war , the moral presentation of the spy who came in from the cold rendered it a revolutionary spy fiction by showing the intelligence services of both the eastern and western nations as engaging in the same expedient amorality in the name of national security . le carré also presented his western spy as a morally burnt-out case . the espionage world of alec leamas portrays love as a three-dimensional emotion that can have disastrous consequences for those involved . good does not always vanquish evil in leamas 's world , a defeatist attitude that was criticised in the times . see , e.g . , barley , tony . taking sides : the fiction of john le carré . open university press , 1986 , p . 22 . the times , 13 september 1968 . in 1990 , the crime writer 's association ranked the novel 3rd in their list the top 100 crime novels of all time . five years later in a similar list by mystery writers of america the novel was ranked 6th . time magazine , while including the spy who came in from the cold in its top 100 novels list , stated that the novel was '' a sad , sympathetic portrait of a man who has lived by lies and subterfuge for so long , he 's forgotten how to tell the truth . '' grossman , lev . all-time 100 novels , time magazine , 2005 . retrieved 29 october 2007 . the book also headed the publishers weeklys list of 15 top spy novels in 2006 . edward brown noted that '' contrary to the well-established ( and often justified ) image of communist regimes and their judicial systems , the trial scene at the heart of the book is no show trial . to be sure , east german judges and lawyers take for granted that communism is good and capitalism is bad , and all their arguments are based on this premise . but still , the outcome is far from predetermined , and the judges are genuinely concerned to hear testimonies , weigh evidence and establish the truth . le carre 's courtroom scene is as tense and dramatic as any set in a western court '' . edward g . brown , '' the descendants of perry mason - courtroom scenes in 20th century literature '' in barbara herbert ( ed . ) '' lawyers and judges in fiction - a multidisciplinary round table of jurists and literary critics '' . adaptations . in 1965 , martin ritt directed the film adaptation , with richard burton as leamas , oskar werner as fiedler , and claire bloom as liz/nan . paramount television and the ink factory — who produced television adaptations of le carré 's the night manager and the little drummer girl — are developing a limited series based on the spy who came in from the cold , with simon beaufoy as the writer . on 14 january 2017 , amc and the bbc joined with the ink factory for the series . . awards and nominations . le carré 's book won a 1963 gold dagger award from the crime writers ' association for '' best crime novel '' . two years later the us edition was awarded the edgar award from the mystery writers of america for '' best mystery novel '' . it was the first work to win the award for '' best novel '' from both mystery writing organizations . screenwriters paul dehn and guy trosper , who adapted the book for the 1965 movie , received an edgar the following year for '' best motion picture screenplay '' for an american movie . in 2005 , the fiftieth anniversary of the dagger awards , the spy who came in from the cold was awarded the '' dagger of daggers , '' a one-time award given to the golden dagger winner regarded as the stand-out among all fifty winners over the history of the crime writers ' association . footnotes . external links . le carré describes how he came to write the book ( in an article published in the guardian newspaper ( april 2013 ) on the novel 's 50th anniversary ) : '' after a decade in the intelligence service , john le carré 's political disgust and personal confusion 'exploded ' in the spy who came in from the cold . ''