Chocobo

character design . the chocobo was created and designed by koichi ishii , a video game director who worked on various final fantasy titles . the chocobo appears remarkably similar to and was likely inspired by the prehistoric bird gastornis . hiromichi tanaka has speculated that the chocobo concept may have come from kyorochan , a character in television advertisements for morinaga & company 's chocolate candy , which is also a bird with the call of '' kweh '' . morinaga has also released a tie-in product , . another likely inspiration was hayao miyazaki 's horseclaws , which appear in the manga nausicaä of the valley of the wind and the anime film of the same name , which final fantasy creator hironobu sakaguchi once cited as an influence on his series . in turn , miyazaki 's horseclaws were inspired by the extinct gastornis species . chocobos are typically portrayed with yellow feathers , but there are rare chocobo breeds that are capable of giving birth to different-colored chicks . appearances . final fantasy series . most chocobos dwell in forests ( although those from final fantasy vii live in grasslands and snowfields ) . while timid in the wild and vicious if threatened , they tame rather easily and act as vehicles , as well as quick and effective cavalry . in this role they tend to be capable of crossing shallow water and are noted for their high speeds . most often they can be caught in the wild and ridden without fear of random encounters , escaping after the player dismounts . a common food for chocobos , usually used to help tame the bird , are gysahl greens , named after a town in final fantasy iii . final fantasy ii was the first installment to have chocobos play a role in the plot . boko ( sometimes translated as boco ) went on to become a recurring chocobo name in later installments . in final fantasy iv , the party also encounters a black species of chocobo which is capable of flight . in final fantasy xiii , the character sazh katzroy has a baby chocobo for a pet . within final fantasy xi , the raising and breeding of chocobos was a long-requested activity , and was enabled in the summer 2006 update . chocobo racing began in march 2007 . players were allowed to race player-raised chocobos against non-player characters . winning racers earn '' chocobucks '' , which can be used to buy items that assist chocobo breeding . chocobos have appeared in all numbered installments except the first , in addition to the final fantasy tactics series . chocobos appear as a summon in final fantasy iii , iv , v , vii , and viii . a fat chocobo appears in final fantasy iii , iv , v , vii , viii , ix , xiv and xv . the chocobo boko appears in final fantasy v and viii , and final fantasy tactics . black chocobos , which sometimes possess the ability to fly , are found in final fantasy iv , v , vii , xi , xii , xiv , final fantasy tactics , final fantasy tactics a2 , and final fantasy fables : chocobo 's dungeon . final fantasy mystic quest features several chocobo-shaped weather vanes in the town of windia . in final fantasy crystal chronicles one can obtain the chocobo shield and the chocobo pocket items , and are included in final fantasy crystal chronicles : the crystal bearers . in the animated sequel to final fantasy v , final fantasy : legend of the crystals , one of the main characters can summon pink , featherless chocobos . in addition , final fantasy adventure featured a chocobo egg which hatched to aid the player . chocobos are common in the anime series final fantasy : unlimited , and one named chobi joins the cast in their adventure . final fantasy : the spirits within and final fantasy vii : advent children both have chocobo-related easter eggs . chocobo series . the chocobo series is a spin-off series of games first developed by square co . , and later by square enix , featuring a chibi version of the final fantasy series mascot , the chocobo , as the protagonist . these games include mystery dungeon installments and a variety of minigame collections , over a wide variety of video game consoles . other games . chocobos appear frequently in other square and square enix games , notably in the mana series . a chocobo serves as a mount in seiken densetsu ( final fantasy adventure ) , and is later changed into a 'chocobot ' . it was removed from the 2003 remake sword of mana in favor of the 'cannon ball travel ' which originated in secret of mana ; however , a chocobo can be seen in sword of mana by waiting for a certain period of time after the completion of the game . wild black chocobos appear as monsters in legend of mana , while tame yellow chocobos can be hatched by the player from eggs to assist in battle . there is a chocobo courier in dota 2 , which came with the purchase of final fantasy type-0™ hd in 2015 in secret of evermore , a chocobo egg is a rare item . in kingdom hearts , there is a keyblade/keychain ( '' metal chocobo '' ) and a gummi ship design that are both named and modeled after a chocobo ; there is also a drawing of a chocobo in the cave on the destiny islands . in parasite eve , a banner depicting a chocobo hangs over the entrance to the american museum of natural history , while a chocobo skeleton can be found nearby . in tobal 2 , a chocobo is obtainable as a combatant . web-based minigames starring chocobos are also featured on square enix 's member site . an undead creature appears in the battle for wesnoth , described as '' ostrich-like large birds once used as mounts by a lost civilization '' . a minecraft mod exists called '' chococraft '' which adds various breeds of chocobos and various breeding mechanisms , and is a part of several adventure/exploration-oriented modpacks , like hexxit . a stardew valley texture mod exists which replaces the horse sprite with a chocobo . it was made by chucklefish user kitsutsune . in super smash bros . for nintendo 3ds and wii u it appears as a costume for the mii fighters . this costume returns in super smash bros . ultimate and also appears as a spirit with moogle . assassin 's creed : origins features a '' kweh '' mount which is a camel outfitted to look like a chocobo . . other media . the chocobo signature theme is an upbeat ditty that is present in one form or another in all final fantasy games since their introduction in final fantasy ii , frequently as variants or remixes : for instance , the final fantasy vii chocobo races have a frantic version , while the futuristic final fantasy viii has a more modern one . these songs are titled with the suffix '' de chocobo '' and prefixed by the name of the style in which they are played . for example , '' techno de chocobo '' from final fantasy vi features a dance remix inspired by yellow magic orchestra 's '' technopolis '' , while '' cinco de chocobo '' from final fantasy vii features a jazz remix ( in 5/4 time , cinco being spanish and portuguese for the number five ) . a newer version of the theme , titled '' swing de chocobo '' , was created by nobuo uematsu for the concerts voices and play ! . it has been performed by a number of different orchestras between 2005 and today . music composed for chocobo appearances in the final fantasy games was used in the distant worlds : music from final fantasy concert tour . chocobos are found in the anime series dog days as the main form of transportation in the fantasy world of flonyard . these giant birds are called chocobos in the series though there appears to be no relation to the chocobos in final fantasy or square enix . . cultural impact . merchandise . chocobo merchandise has been released , including a rubber duck , a plush baby chocobo , '' playstation : the official magazine holiday gift guide '08 , '' playstation : the official magazine 13 ( holiday 2008 ) : 37 . and coffee mugs . square enix designed a chocobo mascot for the release of chocobo tales . . reception . in 2008 , boko the chocobo from final fantasy v was voted by joystiq as the 20th most desired character to be placed in the final fantasy fighting game dissidia : final fantasy . in 2007 , the chocobo was listed by ign as one of the most likely square enix characters that could appear in the super smash bros . series , comparing them to the slime from dragon quest and saying that '' the chocobo could be an excellent enemy for yoshi '' . that same year , ugo.com ranked them at number seven on the list of the best video game companions . for final fantasy vii , the site anime news network regarded the caring for chocobos as an appealing sidequest due to the benefits that come from it and thus wanted the remake to have it . . see also . music of the chocobo series . references . external links . official chocobo game series website for japan