Arthur Dent

arthur 's story . along with ford prefect , arthur dent barely escapes the earth 's destruction as it is demolished to make way for a hyperspace bypass . arthur spends the next several years , still wearing his bathrobe , helplessly launched from crisis to crisis while trying to straighten out his lifestyle . he rather enjoys tea , but seems to have trouble obtaining it in the far reaches of the galaxy . in time , he learns how to fly and carves a niche for himself as a sandwich-maker . in most versions of the series , arthur and ford eventually find themselves back on earth , but two million years in the past , marooned with a third of the golgafrincham population ( consisting of hairdressers , account executives , film makers , security guards , telephone sanitisers , and the like ) . the golgafrincham arrival spurs the extinction of the native '' cavemen '' ( although , as ford prefect pointed out , they did not live in caves , to which a witty repartee was that they 'might have been getting their caves redecorated ' ) , resulting in the human race 's eventual replacement by a shipload of middle managers , telephone sanitisers and hairdressers . the original radio series and the television series end at this point , although a second radio series was made in which ford and arthur are rescued by ford 's cousin zaphod beeblebrox and have further adventures , and which ends with arthur stealing zaphod 's spaceship , the heart of gold ( which zaphod had himself stolen ) and striking out with only marvin the paranoid android , eddie the shipboard computer , a cloned archaeologist named lintilla , a bunch of appliances with genuine people personalities , and a rather battered copy of the hitchhiker 's guide to the galaxy for companionship . in the novels and the new ( series 3 and onwards ) radio series ( the latter of which dismisses the events of the second radio series as one of zaphod 's '' psychotic episodes '' ) , ford and arthur escape prehistoric earth via an eddy in the space-time continuum and a time-travelling chesterfield sofa that deposits them in the middle of lord 's cricket ground at the climax of the final ( in more ways than one , it turns out ) match in the ashes series , the day before the destruction of earth by the vogons . having escaped the destruction of earth once more and survived further adventures , arthur eventually finds himself once more back on earth ( or rather an alternative earth founded by the dolphins to save the human race from extinction ) . here he falls in love with a woman named fenchurch and seems set to live happily ever after – at least until the following – and final – novel , mostly harmless . by the end of this fifth novel , earth and all of its possible permutations and alternate versions are destroyed once and for all , and everybody dies , at least as far as the novel goes . however it is subtly hinted that arthur , his friends , and a few earths might have survived . in the quintessential phase of the radio series , there are multiple alternative endings after the final destruction of all possible earths . the final ending here consists of the babel fish carried by arthur , trillian , ford , and random having a sense for self-preservation , i.e . at the last minute they teleport the person they are inhabiting , and anyone nearby ( namely tricia mcmillan ) , to safety . they are teleported to milliways where they meet up with zaphod , both trillians merge , leaving her with her british accent but her blonde-american hair . marvin has been rebuilt as his warranty has yet to expire and is parking cars at milliways again ( he has been promoted , he remarks ; he now has his own bucket ) . finally , they meet up with fenchurch again who was teleported to milliways after we last saw her in the quandary phase and has been working as waitress there , waiting for arthur . they all settle in together , leaving the series on an upbeat note and allowing for further adventures . in the latest book , and another thing . , it is revealed that there are other arthur dents in the different dimensions of the book series , but they are all deceased , due to various mishaps of fate , so that only the arthur who was rescued from earth remains . one actually briefly appears in the book , wearing arthur 's traditional dressing gown and slippers , and is destroyed with the rest of earth by the grebulons . ford almost sees him , but searches for a drink and misses him being vaporized . arthur 's '' death '' . arthur dies in the fifth installment of the book series , mostly harmless , in a club called beta ( owned by stavro mueller ) when the earth and all its duplicates are seemingly destroyed by the grebulons . adams frequently expressed his disdain for this ending in retrospect , claiming that it was too depressing and came about as the result of him having a bad year . in the radio series , arthur is saved by the babel fish , which can teleport itself , along with its carrier , out of danger . arthur and the others who died in the books are instead teleported by their babel fish to somewhere safer than sector zz9 plural z alpha . this is also used in trillian 's dream sequence , as the reason for their escape . in and another thing . , written by eoin colfer , arthur was put into a dream sequence ( presumably referring to the epilogue of the radio series ) and then frozen in time by the guide mk.2 . the guides batteries soon run out , however , so all the main characters are re-awakened on the exploding earth , at the exact point where mostly harmless left off . zaphod then rescues them in the heart of gold . all alternative arthurs are killed . in the end , arthur dent traveling in hyperspace on an interstellar passenger ship , looked to the seat next to him to find fenchurch sitting there talking to him as arthur himself vanishes out of existence . cultural references . in the 2005 christmas special of doctor who , '' the christmas invasion '' , the tenth doctor , played by david tennant , after having just finished saving the world still dressed in night clothes and a dressing-gown , compares himself to arthur dent whom he describes as a '' nice man '' which quite possibly suggests that the doctor has at some point been present in the same universe as the characters of the hitchhiker 's guide . incidentally , the fourth doctor in the episode '' destiny of the daleks '' was seen to be reading and criticising a book by oolon colluphid , a reference douglas adams apparently inserted himself while working as a script editor on the show . the radio drama adventures in odyssey uses the character arthur dent in the novacom saga arthur dent - adventures in odyssey wiki . aiowiki.com ( 16 january 2012 ) . retrieved on 7 september 2013 . who embodies the characteristics of outright ignoring , at first , the deception and weirdness that is occurring around him . in the 4th episode of season 4 of farscape , john crichton , trapped in a far corner of the universe by a wormhole , compares himself to characters from star trek , characters from comics , dorothy from the wizard of oz , and finally to arthur dent . see also . 18610 arthurdent quintessential phase . notes . external links . bbci 's page on arthur dent the sadgeezers guide to the hitchhiker 's guide to the galaxy : arthur dent