Gabriela Mistral

characteristics of her work . mistral 's work is characterized by including gray tones in her literature ; sadness and bitterness are recurrent feelings on it . these are evoked in her writings as the reflection of a hard childhood , plagued by deprivation coupled with a lack of affection in her home . however , since her youth as a teacher in a rural school , gabriela mistral had a great affection for children that shows throughout her writing . religion was also reflected in her literature as catholicism had great influence in her life . nevertheless , she always reflected a more neutral stance regarding the concept of religion . thus we can find the religious combined with feelings of love and piety , making her into one of the worthiest representatives of latin american literature of twentieth century . dario , r . , & mistral , g . ( 2018 ) . gabriela mistral y su obra poética author ( s ) : salvador dinamarca published by : american association of teachers of spanish and portuguese stable url : 41 ( 1 ) , 48–50 . . death , posthumous tributes and legacy . during the 1970s and 1980s , the image of gabriela mistral was appropriated by the military dictatorship of pinochet presenting her as a symbol of '' submission to the authority '' and '' social order '' . views of her as a saint-like celibate and suffering heterosexual woman were first challenged by author licia fiol-matta who contends that she was rather a lesbian . the suspicions about her eventual lesbianism were reaffirmed with the discovery of her archive in 2007 , after the death of her claimed last romantic partner , doris dana , in 2006 . dana had kept thousands of documents , including letters between mistral and her various occasional female lovers . the publication of the letters she wrote to dana herself in the volume niña errante ( 2007 ) , edited by pedro pablo zegers , reaffirmed the idea that the two had a long-lasting romantic relationship that supported mistral in her latest years . the letters were translated into english by velma garcía and published by university of new mexico press in 2018 . regardless of these hypotheses about the claimed romance between them , doris dana , who was 31 years younger than mistral , denied explicitly in her last interview that her relationship with mistral was romantic or erotic , and described it as the relationship between a stepmother and her stepdaughter . dana denied being lesbian and in her opinion it is unlikely that gabriela mistral was lesbian . mistral had diabetes and heart problems . eventually she died of pancreatic cancer in hempstead hospital in new york city on 10 january 1957 , at 67 years of age , with doris dana by her side . themes . gabriela mistral has been an influential part for latin american poetry . a powerful speech given by a member of the swedish academy , a swedish writer hjalmar gullberg set the stage to understand the perspective and the emotions of who is gabriela mistral . discussing how the first foreign verses of french poet frédéric mistral were not able to be understood by his own mother , gulberg explained how the old language of troubadours became the language of poetry . ten years later with the birth of gabriela mistral , the language of the poets will continue to thrive and be heard for many years to come . the voice emitted from the mouth of gabriela mistral was able to shake the world and create a dent to society that opened the eyes and cleared the ears of those who are willing to hear her voice . gullberg states , “ she lifted her cry to the heaven1… ” , after experiencing the loss of her first love through suicide the young poet became gabriela mistral and her poetic words would begin to spread over all south america and other parts of the world . since very little is known of her first love , we do know that his betrayal helped to create mistral 's poems filled with themes of death and despair , perhaps hatred toward god . in memory of her first love and later after the loss of a nephew who she loved like a son her collection of poems titled desolación , would begin to impact many others . the fifteenth poem found in desolación , shed tears for the loss of a child that will never be born to that of a dead man . these tears are commonly shed from the eyes of parents who love their children but suffer having them be taken away so soon , theme of loss for those who are loved . themes of death , desolation and loss do not entirely fill the pages of gabriela mistral 's books . other themes such as love and motherhood , not just the love for her beloved railroad employee and nephew ( son ) , were transferred to the very children she taught . it comes to no surprise that the name of her collection of songs and rounds is titled ternura , to express her feelings of love she has for the children of her school . printed in madrid in 1924 , her next collection of love filled words was felt and well received by four thousand mexican children who would honor her by singing her very own collection of heart-felt words . thanks to the hard work and profound dedication to her children she became known as the poet of motherhood . having lived through two world wars and many other violent wars , paved the path for a third large collection , tala ( a title that was said to mean “ ravage ” by gullberg ) . the poems in tala contains a mixture of sacred hymn naïve song for children , poems that talk about water , corn , salt and wine . gullberg continues to pay homage to gabriela mistral , who he says has become the great singer of sorrow and motherhood for latin america . gabriela mistral 's wonderful collections of poems and songs have created an atmosphere that expresses her care for children and all her sorrows that she has had to endure throughout her years as a teacher and a poet for latin america . themes of sorrow and motherhood that can be felt with every word that is expressed in her work . . awards and honors . 1914 : juegos florales , sonetos de la muerte 1945 : nobel prize in literature 1951 : chilean national prize for literature the venezuelan writer and diplomat who worked under the name lucila palacios took her nom de plume in honour of mistral 's original name . tomado de los libros : '' ¿qué celebramos hoy ? '' de vinicio romero martínez y segunda edición '' dicionario de historia de venezuela '' . fundación polar . 4.º tomo . segunda edición . works . 1914 : sonetos de la muerte ( '' sonnets of death '' ) web page titled '' the nobel prize in literature 1945/gabriela mistral/biography '' , at the nobel prize website . retrieved 22 september 2010 . 1922 : desolación ( '' despair '' ) , including '' decalogo del artista '' , new york : instituto de las españas web page titled '' the nobel prize in literature 1945/gabriela mistral/bibliography '' , nobel prize website . retrieved 22 september 2010 . 1923 : lecturas para mujeres ( '' readings for women '' ) tapscott , stephen , editor , selected prose and prose-poems by gabriela mistral , page x , university of texas press , 2002 , , retrieved via google books on 22 september 2010 1924 : ternura : canciones de niños , madrid : saturnino calleja 1934 : nubes blancas y breve descripción de chile ( 1934 ) 1938 : tala ( '' harvesting '' tapscott , stephen , editor , twentieth-century latin american poetry : a bilingual anthology , p 79 , austin : university of texas press , 1996 ( 2003 , fifth paperback printing ) , , retrieved via google books on 22 september 2010 ) , buenos aires : sur 1941 : antología : selección de gabriela mistral , santiago , chile : zig zag web page titled '' bibliografia '' , at the gabriela mistral foundation website . retrieved 22 september 2010 . 1952 : los sonetos de la muerte y otros poemas elegíacos , santiago , chile : philobiblion 1954 : lagar , santiago , chile 1957 : recados : contando a chile , santiago , chile : editorial del pacífico croquis mexicanos ; gabriela mistral en méxico , méxico city : costa-amic 1958 : poesías completas , madrid : aguilar 1967 : poema de chile ( '' poem of chile '' ) , published posthumously web page titled '' gabriela mistral/cronologia 1946–1967 '' , at the centro virtual cervantes website . retrieved 22 september 2010 . 1992 : lagar ii , published posthumously , santiago , chile : biblioteca nacional horan , elizabeth , '' gabriela mistral '' article , '' selected works '' section , p 557 , in smith , verity , editor , encyclopedia of latin american literature , chicago : fitzroy dearborn publishers , 1997 , retrieved via google books , 22 september 2010 . works translated into other languages . english . several selections of mistral 's poetry have been published in english translation , including those by doris dana , langston hughes , and ursula k . le guin . . nepali . some of mistral 's poems are translated into nepali by suman pokhrel , and collected in an anthology titled manpareka kehi kavita . . see also . barnard college , repository for part of mistral 's personal library , given by doris dana in 1978 . land of poets list of female nobel laureates . references . external links . gabriela mistral 's heritage life and poetry of gabriela mistral gabriela mistral foundation gabriela mistral poems list of works gabriela mistral – university of chile about her basque origin gabriela mistral ( 1889-1957 ) - memoria chilena gabriela mistral reads eighteen poems from her collected volumes : ternura , lagar , and tala . recorded at library of congress , hispanic division on december 12 , 1950 .