1983 in literature

events . april – the russian samizdat poet irina ratushinskaya is sentenced to imprisonment in a labor camp for dissident activity . while there she continues to write poetry clandestinely . june 2 – the francophone senegalese poet and politician léopold sédar senghor becomes the first black african writer elected as a member of the académie française . july – barbara cartland , who reaches the age of 82 , writes 23 romantic novels this year . november – bruce bethke 's short story cyberpunk , written in 1980 , is published in amazing stories magazine in the united states and as a novel online , giving a name to the entire science fiction subgenre of cyberpunk . unknown date – salvage for the saint by peter bloxsom and john kruse is published , as the final book in a series of novels , novellas and short stories featuring the leslie charteris creation '' the saint '' , which started in 1928 . ( an attempt to revive the series in 1997 is unsuccessful . ) . new books . fiction . nelson algren ( posthumous ) – the devil 's stocking isaac asimov – the robots of dawn greg bear – the wind from a burning woman samuel beckett – worstward ho thomas berger – the feud thomas bernhard – the loser ( der untergeher ) jorge luis borges – shakespeare 's memory ( la memoria de shakespeare , short stories ) marion zimmer bradley – the mists of avalon morley callaghan – a time for judas raymond carver – cathedral sandra cisneros – the house on mango street hugo claus – the sorrow of belgium ( het verdriet van belgië ) j . m . coetzee – life and times of michael k jackie collins – hollywood wives basil copper – the house of the wolf bernard cornwell sharpe 's sword sharpe 's enemy bernard cornwell ( as susannah kells ) – a crowning glory györgy dalos – 1985 l . sprague de camp the reluctant king the unbeheaded king jim dodge – fup stephen r . donaldson – white gold wielder : book three of the second chronicles of thomas covenant nora ephron – heartburn ken follett – on wings of eagles ernest j . gaines – a gathering of old men john gardner – icebreaker haidar haidar – walimah li a'ashab al-bahr ( وليمة لأعشاب البحر , a feast for the seaweeds ) maarten 't hart – de kroongetuige mark helprin – winter 's tale amado v . hernandez – luha ng buwaya ( crocodile 's tear ) susan hill – the woman in black elfriede jelinek – the piano teacher ( die klavierspielerin ) elizabeth jolley & ndash ; woman in a lamp shade jo jung-rae – the tae baek mountains ( 태백산맥 , publication begins ) ernst jünger – aladdin 's problem william kennedy – ironweed stephen king – christine danilo kiš – the encyclopedia of the dead ( enciklopedija mrtvih ) dean r . koontz – phantoms louis l'amour – the lonesome gods derek lambert – the judas code john le carré – the little drummer girl mary mackey – the last warrior queen norman mailer – ancient evenings james a . michener – poland r . k . narayan – a tiger for malgudi robert b . parker – the widening gyre ellis peters the sanctuary sparrow the devil 's novice tim powers – the anubis gates terry pratchett – the colour of magic satyajit ray – shonku ekai aksho ( shonku , all in all , collected professor shonku stories ) salman rushdie – shame joanna russ – the zanzibar cat danielle steel – changes walter tevis – the queen 's gambit gore vidal – duluth evangeline walton – the sword is forged fay weldon – the life and loves of a she-devil a . n . wilson – scandal robert anton wilson – prometheus rising christa wolf – cassandra ( kassandra ) roger zelazny – unicorn variations ( stories and essays ) . children and young people . chris van allsburg – the wreck of the zephyr jeanne-marie leprince de beaumont ( with willi glasauer ) – beauty and the beast roald dahl – the witches mem fox – possum magic rumer godden four dolls the valiant chatti-maker dick king-smith – the sheep-pig ( also as babe , the gallant pig ) harold lamb ( with george barr and alicia austin ) - the sea of the ravens astrid lindgren – the runaway sleigh ride ! ( titta madicken , det snöar ! ) bill peet – no such things jean giono ( with willi glasauer ) – the man who planted trees . drama . samuel beckett – nacht und träume ( television play , first broadcast ) ray cooney – run for your wife david mamet – glengarry glen ross tom murphy – the gigli concert christina reid – tea in a china cup larry shue – the foreigner neil simon – brighton beach memoirs botho strauß – the park ( der park ) . poetry . paul durcan – jumping the train tracks with angela grace nichols – i is a long-memoried woman . non-fiction . benedict anderson – imagined communities pascal bruckner – the tears of the white man l . sprague de camp – the fringe of the unknown l . sprague de camp , catherine crook de camp and jane whittington griffin – dark valley destiny tom dardis – harold lloyd : the man on the clock terry eagleton – literary theory : an introduction anthony grey – the prime minister was a spy shantabai kamble – majya jalmachi chittarkatha ( the kaleidoscopic story of my life ) susan oliver – odyssey : a daring transatlantic journey renée richards – second serve anna rosmus – widerstand und verfolgung am beispiel passau 1933–1945 ( resistance and persecution – the case of passau 1933–1945 ) nawal el saadawi – mudhakkirâtî fî sijn an-nisâʾ ( memoirs from the women 's prison ) colin thubron – among the russians julia urquidi – lo que varguitas no dijo ( what little vargas did not say ) a . n . wilson – the life of john milton : a biography . births . july 2 – tao lin ( 林韬 ) , chinese novelist and poet november 17 – christopher paolini , american fantasy novelist unknown date – sarah howe , hong kong-born poet writing in english . deaths . january 5 – chapman grant , american historian and publisher ( born 1887 ) february 14 – brita von horn , swedish theater director , dramatist and novelist ( born 1886 ) february 25 – tennessee williams ( thomas lanier williams iii ) , american playwright ( born 1911 ) march 3 – hergé ( georges prosper remi ) , belgian comics creator ( born 1907 ) april 12 – desmond bagley , english novelist ( complications from stroke , born 1923 ) ) may 4 – shūji terayama ( 寺山 修司 ) , japanese poet , dramatist , and film director ( cirrhosis , born 1935 ) may 21 – amal abul-qassem donqol , egyptian poet ( born 1940 ) june 19 – vilmundur gylfason , icelandic historian , poet and politician ( suicide , born 1948 ) june 27 – alden nowlan , canadian poet , novelist and playwright ( born 1933 ) august 12 – mikey smith , jamaican dub poet ( stoned to death ; born 1954 ) september 16 – roy andries de groot , english-born american food writer ( born 1910 ) december 5 – john robinson , english religious writer and bishop ( born 1919 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : william golding . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : jenny summerville , shields of trell kenneth slessor prize for poetry : vivian smith , tide country miles franklin award : no award presented . canada . see 1983 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : frédérick tristan , les égarés prix médicis french : jean echenoz , cherokee prix médicis international : kenneth white , la route bleue . spain . miguel de cervantes prize : rafael alberti . united kingdom . booker prize : j . m . coetzee -life and times of michael k carnegie medal for children 's literature : jan mark , handles cholmondeley award : john fuller , craig raine , anthony thwaite eric gregory award : martin stokes , hilary davies , michael o'neill , lisa st aubin de teran , deidre shanahan james tait black memorial prize for fiction : jonathan keates , allegro postillions james tait black memorial prize for biography : alan walker , franz liszt : the virtuoso years newdigate prize : peter mcdonald 1983 whitbread awards : john fuller , flying to nowhere . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : kate daniels , the white wave nebula award : david brin , startide rising newbery medal for children 's literature : cynthia voigt , dicey 's song pulitzer prize for drama : marsha norman , 'night , mother pulitzer prize for fiction : alice walker – the color purple pulitzer prize for poetry : galway kinnell – selected poems pulitzer prize for history : the transformation of virginia , 1740–1790 by rhys isaac pulitzer prize for general non-fiction : is there no place on earth for me ? by susan sheehan . elsewhere . hugo award for best novel : foundation 's edge by isaac asimov premio nadal : salvador garcía aguilar , regocijo en el hombre . references .