Robert Fludd

early life . he was born at milgate house , bearsted , kent , not too long before 17 january 1573/4 . he was the son of sir thomas fludd , a high-ranking governmental official ( queen elizabeth i 's treasurer for war in europe ) , and member of parliament . his mother was elizabeth andrews fludd . . education . he entered st john 's college , oxford as a commoner in 1591 , graduating with a b.a . in 1597 and an m.a . in 1598 . st john ’ s college , oxford was one of the few in england with any provision for fellowship ( medicine ) ; william huffman suggests that the presence of a medical fellow at st john 's college , oxford influenced fludd 's interest in studying medicine . during fludd ’ s time at st john ’ s college , the medical fellow in residence was matthew gwinne ; gwinne had previously produced a tract indicating that , while he practiced galen , he was also familiar with the main paracelsus medical work . fludd may have encountered gwinne , or his writing , during his time at oxford , providing an additional influence for his later medical philosophy and practice . career . between 1598 and 1604 , fludd studied medicine , chemistry and hermeticism on the european mainland following his graduation . his itinerary is not known in detail . debus pp . 207–8 . on his own account he spent a winter in the pyrenees studying theurgy ( the practice of rituals ) with the jesuits . furthermore , he indicated that he travelled throughout spain , italy and germany following his time in france . upon returning to england in 1604 , fludd matriculated to christ church , oxford . he intended to take a degree in medicine . the main requirements to obtain this , at the time , included demonstrating that he ( the supplicant ) had read and understood the required medical texts—primarily those by galen and hippocrates . fludd defended three theses following these texts , and on 14 may 1605 , fludd made his supplication . he graduated with his m.b . and m.d . on 16 may 1605 . after graduating from christ church , fludd moved to london , settling in fenchurch street , and making repeated attempts to enter the college of physicians . fludd encountered problems with the college examiners , both because of his unconcealed contempt for traditional medical authorities ( he had adopted the views of paracelsus ) , and because of his attitude to authority—especially those of the ancients like galen . after at least six failures , he was admitted in september 1609 . he became a prosperous london doctor , serving as censor of the college four times ( 1618 , 1627 , 1633 , and 1634 ) . he also participated in an inspection of the london apothecaries put on by the college in 1614 , and helped to author the pharmacopoeia londinensis in 1618—a directory of standardized pharmaceutical preparations given by the london college of physicians . he became such an established figure within the college that he was included in seventeenth-century critiques of the college , including those by nicholas culpepper and peter coles . subsequently , both his career and his standing in the college took a turn very much for the better . he was on good terms with sir william paddy . fludd was one of the first to support in print the theory of the circulation of the blood of the college 's william harvey . to what extent fludd may have actually influenced harvey is still debated , in the context that harvey 's discovery is hard to date precisely . the term '' circulation '' was certainly ambiguous at that time . allen g . debus , robert fludd and the circulation of the blood , j hist med allied sci ( 1961 ) xvi ( 4 ) : 374-393 . doi : 10.1093/jhmas/xvi.4.374 . occult interest . while he followed paracelsus in his medical views rather than the ancient authorities , he was also a believer that real wisdom was to be found in the writings of natural magicians . his view of these mystical authorities was inclined towards the great mathematicians , and he believed , like pythagoras and his followers , that numbers contained access to great hidden secrets . certainty in religion could be discovered only through serious study of numbers and ratios . this view later brought fludd into conflict with johannes kepler . mystical theory of nature . tripartite division of matter . much of fludd 's writing , and his pathology of disease , centered around the sympathies found in nature between man , the terrestrial earth , and the divine . while paracelsian in nature , fludd 's own theory on the origin of all things posited that , instead of the tria prima , all species and things stemmed from first , dark chaos , then divine light which acted upon the chaos , which finally brought forth the waters . this last element was also called the spirit of the lord , and it made up the passive matter of all other substances , including all secondary elements and the four qualities of the ancients . moreover , the fluddean tripartite theory concluded that paracelsus ' own conception of the three primary principles—sulphur , salt and mercury—eventually derived from chaos and light interacting to create variations of the waters , or spirit . the trinitarian division is important in that it reflects a mystical framework for biology . fludd was heavily reliant on scripture ; in the bible , the number three represented the principium formarum , or the original form . furthermore , it was the number of the holy trinity . thus , the number three formed the perfect body , paralleling the trinity . this allowed man and earth to approach the infinity of god , and created a universality in sympathy and composition between all things . macrocosm-microcosm relationship . fludd 's application of his mystically inclined tripartite theory to his philosophies of medicine and science was best illustrated through his conception of the macrocosm and microcosm relationship . the divine light ( the second of fludd ’ s primary principles ) was the '' active agent '' responsible for creation . this informed the development of the world and the sun , respectively . fludd concluded , from a reading of psalm 19:4— '' in them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun '' —that the spirit of the lord was contained literally within the sun , placing it central to fludd ’ s model of the macrocosm . remained in manuscript . debus , p . 255 . as the sun was to the earth , so was the heart to mankind . the sun conveyed spirit to the earth through its rays , which circulated in and about the earth giving it life . likewise , the blood of man carried the spirit of the lord ( the same spirit provided by the sun ) , and circulated through the body of man . this was an application of the sympathies and parallels provided to all of god ’ s creation by fludd ’ s tripartite theory of matter . the blood was central to fludd 's conception of the relationship between the microcosm and macrocosm ; the blood and the spirit it circulated interacted directly with the spirit conveyed to the macrocosm . the macrocosmal spirit , carried by the sun , was influenced by astral bodies and changed in composition through such influence . comparatively , the astral influences on the macrocosmal spirit could be transported to the microcosmal spirit in the blood by the active commerce assumed between the macrocosm and the microcosm . fludd extended this interaction to his conception of disease : the movement of spirit between the macrocosm and microcosm could be corrupted and invade the microcosm as disease . like paracelsus , fludd conceived of disease as an external invader , rather than a complexional imbalance . death . fludd died on 8 september 1637 in london . he was buried in holy cross church , bearsted . controversial works . fludd 's works are mainly controversial . in succession he defended the rosicrucians against andreas libavius , debated with kepler , argued against french natural philosophers including gassendi , and engaged in the discussion of the weapon-salve . . defence of rosicrucianism . fludd was not a member of the rosicrucians , as often alleged , but he defended their thoughts as expressed in numerous manifestos and pamphlets . william h . huffman , robert fludd and the end of the renaissance ( routledge london & new york , 1988 ) he produced a quick work , the apologia compendiaria , against the claims of libavius that the rosicrucians indulged in heresy , diabolical magic and sedition , made in his analysis confessionis fraternitatis de rosea cruce ( analysis of the confession of the rosy cross ) of 1615 . fludd returned to the subject at greater length , the following year . apologia compendiaria , fraternitatem de rosea cruce suspicionis … maculis aspersam , veritatis quasi fluctibus abluens , & c . , leyden , 1616 . against libavius . tractatus apologeticus integritatem societatis de rosea cruce defendens , & c . , leyden , 1617 . tractatus theologo-philosophicus , & c . , oppenheim , 1617 . the date is given in a chronogram . this treatise '' a rudolfo otreb britanno '' ( where rudolf otreb is an anagram of robert floud ) is dedicated to the rosicrucian fraternity . it consists of three books , de vita , de morte , and de resurrectione . in the third book fludd contends that those filled with the spirit of christ may rise before his second coming . it is now seriously doubted that any formal organisation identifiable as the '' brothers of the rose cross '' ( rosicrucians ) ever actually existed in any extant form . the theological and philosophical claims circulating under this name appear , to these outsiders , to have been more an intellectual fashion that swept europe at the time of the counter reformation . these thinkers suppose that in claiming to be part of a secret cult , scholars of alchemy , the occult , and hermeticism , merely sought that additional prestige by being able to promote their views while claiming exclusive adherence to some revolutionary pan-european secret society . by this logic , some suppose the society itself to never have existed . between 1607 and 1616 , two anonymous rosicrucian manifestos were published by some anonymous person or group , first in germany and later throughout europe . these were the fama fraternitatis , ( the fame of the brotherhood of rc ) , and the confessio fraternitatis , ( the confession of the brotherhood of rc ) . the first manifesto was influenced by the work of the respected hermetic philosopher heinrich khunrath , of hamburg , author of the amphitheatrum sapientiae aeternae ( 1609 ) who himself had borrowed generously from the work of john dee . it referred favourably to the role played by the illuminati and it featured a convoluted manufactured history dating back to archaic mysteries of the middle east , with references to the kabala and the persian magi . the second manifesto had decidedly anti-catholic views which were popular at the time of the counter reformation . these manifestos were re-issued several times , and were both supported and countered by numerous pamphlets from anonymous authors : about 400 manuscripts and books were published on the subject between 1614 and 1620 . the peak of the rosicrucianism came in 1622 with mysterious posters appearing on the walls of paris , and occult philosophers such as michael maier , robert fludd and thomas vaughan interested themselves in the rosicrucian world view . others intellectuals and authors later claimed to have published rosicrucian documents in order to ridicule their views . the furore faded out and the rosicrucians disappeared from public life until 1710 when the secret cult appears to have been revived as a formal organisation . it is claimed that the work of john amos comenius and samuel hartlib on early education in england were strongly influenced by rosicrucian ideas , but this has not been proven , and it appears unlikely except in the similarity in their anti-catholic views and emphasis on science education . rosicrucianism is also said to have been influential at the time when operative masonry ( a guild of artisans ) was being transformed to speculative masonry—freemasonry—which was a social fraternity , which also originally promoted the scientific and educative view of comenius , hartlib , isaac newton and francis bacon . rosicrucian literature became the sandbox of theosophists , and charlatans , who claimed to be connected with the mysterious brotherhood . robert fludd led the battle . it is said by some that he was '' the great english mystical philosopher of the seventeenth century , a man of immense erudition , of exalted mind , and , to judge by his writings , of extreme personal sanctity '' . the real history of the rosicrucians , by arthur edward waite , & 91 ; 1887 & 93 ; , it has also been said that what fludd did was to liberate occultism , both from traditional aristotelian philosophy , and from the coming ( cartesian ) philosophy of his time . . against kepler . johannes kepler criticised fludd 's theory of cosmic harmony in an appendix to his harmonice mundi ( 1619 ) . veritatis proscenium frankfort , 1621 . reply to kepler . in it fludd argued from a platonist point of view ; and he claims that the hermetic or '' chemical '' approach is deeper than the mathematical . monochordon mundi symphoniacum frankfort , 1622 . reply to kepler 's mathematice , 1622 . anatomiæ amphitheatrum , frankfort , 1623 . includes reprint of the monochordon . . against the natural philosophers . according to brian copenhaver , '' kepler accused fludd of being a theosophist , and kepler was right '' . fludd was well-read in the tradition coming through francesco giorgi . marin mersenne attacked him in quæstiones celebres in genesim ( 1623 ) . sophiæ cum moria certamen , frankfort , 1629 . reply to mersenne . summum bonum , frankfort , 1629 . under the name joachim frizius , this was a further reply to mersenne , who had accused fludd of magic . pierre gassendi took up the controversy in an examen philosophiæ fluddanæ ( 1630 ) . this was at mersenne 's request . gassendi attacked fludd 's neo-platonic position . he rejected the syncretic move that placed alchemy , cabbala and christian religion on the same footing ; and fludd 's anima mundi . further he dismissed fludd 's biblical exegesis . fludd also wrote against the tillage of light ( 1623 ) of patrick scot ; scot like mersenne found the large claims of hermetic alchemy to be objectionable . fludd defended alchemy against the criticisms of scot , who took it to be merely allegorical . this work , truth 's golden harrow , remained in manuscript . . the weapon-salve controversy . '' doctor fludds answer vnto m . foster , or , the sqvesing of parson fosters sponge '' , & c . , london , 1631 , ( defence of weapon-salve , against the hoplocrisma-spongus , 1631 , of william foster , of hedgerley , buckinghamshire ) ; an edition in latin , '' responsum ad hoplocrisma-spongum '' , & c . , gouda , 1638 . the idea that certain parallel actions could be initiated and linked by 'sympathetic ' mysterious forces was widespread at this time , probably arising mainly from the actions of the magnet , shown by william gilbert to always point towards some point in the northern sky . the idea owed a lot of the older aristotelian and neo-platonic views about soul-like forces . cosmology and other works . fludd 's philosophy is presented in utriusque cosmi , maioris scilicet et minoris , metaphysica , physica , atque technica historia ( the metaphysics , physical , and technical history of the two worlds , namely the greater and the lesser , published in germany between 1617 and 1621 ) ; karsten kenklies , wissenschaft als ethisches programm . robert fludd und die reform der bildung im 17 . jahrhundert ( jena , 2005 ) according to frances yates , his memory system ( which she describes in detail in the art of memory , pp . & nbsp ; 321–341 ) may reflect the layout of shakespeare 's globe theatre ( the art of memory , chapter xvi ) . in 1618 , fludd wrote de musica mundana ( mundane music ) which described his theories of music , including his mundane ( also known as '' divine '' or '' celestial '' ) monochord . manly p . hall , the secret teachings of all ages : an encyclopedic outline of masonic , hermetic , qabbalistic , and rosicrucian symbolical philosophy ( h.s . crocker company , inc . , 1928 ) in 1630 , fludd proposed many perpetual motion machines . people were trying to patent variations of fludd 's machine in the 1870s . fludd 's machine worked by recirculation by means of a water wheel and archimedean screw . the device pumps the water back into its own supply tank . his main works are : utriusque cosmi . metaphysica , physica atque technica historia , & c . , oppenheim and frankfort , 1617–24 . ( it has two dedications , first to the deity , secondly to james i , and copperplates ; it was to have been in two volumes , the first containing two treatises , the second three ; it was completed as far as the first section of the second treatise of the second volume . ) philosophia sacra et vere christiana , & c . , frankfort , 1626 ; dedicated to john williams . medicina catholica , & c . , frankfort , 1629–31 , in five parts ; the plan included a second volume , not published . posthumous were : philosophia moysaica , & c . , gouda , 1638 ; an edition in english , mosaicall philosophy , & c . , london , 1659 . religio exculpata , & c . ratisbon , 1684 ( autore alitophilo religionis fluctibus dudum immerso , tandem … emerso ; preface signed j . n . j . ; assigned to fludd ) . tractatus de geomantia , & c . ( four books ) , included in fasciculus geomanticus , & c . , verona , 1687 . an unpublished manuscript , copied by an amanuensis , and headed declaratio breuis , & c . , is in the royal manuscripts , british library , 12 c . ii . fludd 's opera consist of his folios , not reprinted , but collected and arranged in six volumes in 1638 ; appended is a clavis philosophiæ et alchimiæ fluddanæ , frankfort , 1633 . . reception . william t . walker , reviewing two books on fludd in the sixteenth century journal ( by joscelyn godwin , and william huffman ) , writes that '' fludd relied on the bible , the cabbala , and the traditions of alchemy and astrology . many of his contemporaries labelled fludd a magician and condemned him for his sympathy for the occult . '' he cites godwin 's book as arguing that fludd was part of the tradition of christian esotericism that includes origen and meister eckhart . he finds convincing the argument in huffman 's book that fludd was not a rosicrucian but was '' a leading advocate of renaissance christian neo-platonism . fludd 's advocacy of an intellectual philosophy in decline has done much to assure his general neglect . '' . notes . references . allen g . debus ( 2002 ) , the chemical philosophy . further reading . allen g . debus , the english paracelsians , new york : watts , 1965 . tita french baumlin , '' robert fludd , '' the dictionary of literary biography , volume 281 : british rhetoricians and logicians , 1500–1660 , second series , detroit : gale , 2003 , pp . & nbsp ; 85–99 . james brown craven , doctor fludd ( robertus de fluctibus ) , the english rosicrucian : life and writings , kirkwall : william peace & son , 1902 . frances a . yates , the art of memory , london : routledge , 1966 . william h . huffman , ed . , robert fludd : essential readings , london : aquarian/thorsons , 1992 . johannes rösche , robert fludd . der versuch einer hermetischen alternative zur neuzeitlichen naturwissenschaft ( göttingen , vandenhoeck & ruprecht , 2008 ) . karsten kenklies , wissenschaft als ethisches programm . robert fludd und die reform der bildung im 17 . jahrhundert ( jena , 2005 ) . external links . guariento , luca ( 2016 ) life , friends , and associations of robert fludd : a revised account robert fludd biography at levity fludd 's magnum opus , 'utriusque cosmi maioris salicet et minoris metaphysica . ' ( 1617–1619 ) is available as zip or pdf download . a large section of 'utriusque cosmi maioris salicet et minoris metaphysica . ' is available as page images at the university of utah . jr ritman library : treasures from the bibliotheca philosophica hermetica robert fludd chronology utriusque cosmi maioris salicet et minoris metaphysica ( 1617 ) at the internet archive article by urszula szulakowska on the religious imagery of utriusque cosmi , including gallery and links to online public domain copies .