Alan Lomax

fbi investigations . from 1942 to 1979 lomax was repeatedly investigated and interviewed by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , although nothing incriminating was ever discovered and the investigation was eventually abandoned . scholar and jazz pianist ted gioia uncovered and published extracts from alan lomax 's 800-page fbi files . ted gioia , '' the red-rumor blues '' , los angeles times , april 23 , 2006 . the investigation appears to have started when an anonymous informant reported overhearing lomax 's father telling guests in 1941 about what he considered his son 's communism sympathies . looking for leads , the fbi seized on the fact that , at the age of 17 in 1932 while attending harvard for a year , lomax had been arrested in boston , massachusetts , in connection with a political demonstration . in 1942 the fbi sent agents to interview students at harvard 's freshman dormitory about lomax 's participation in a demonstration that had occurred at harvard ten years earlier in support of the immigration rights of one edith berkman , a jewish woman , dubbed the '' red flame '' for her trade union activities among the textile workers of lawrence , massachusetts , and threatened with deportation as an alleged '' communist agitator '' . see the ann burlak papers at the archives of smith college . miss berkman was defended by a lawyer from the international labor defense , the same organization that later defended the scottsboro boys . see '' edith berkman will fight deportation '' , lewiston daily sun clip for july 29 , 1931 . lomax had been charged with disturbing the peace and fined 25 . berkman , however , had been cleared of all accusations against her and was not deported . nor had lomax 's harvard academic record been affected in any way by his activities in her defense . nevertheless , the bureau continued trying vainly to show that in 1932 lomax had either distributed communist literature or made public speeches in support of the communist party . according to ted gioia : lomax must have felt it necessary to address the suspicions . he gave a sworn statement to an fbi agent on april 3 , 1942 , denying both of these charges . he also explained his arrest while at harvard as the result of police overreaction . he was , he claimed , 15 at the time – he was actually 17 and a college student – and he said he had intended to participate in a peaceful demonstration . lomax said he and his colleagues agreed to stop their protest when police asked them to , but that he was grabbed by a couple of policemen as he was walking away . '' that is pretty much the story there , except that it distressed my father very , very much '' , lomax told the fbi . '' i had to defend my righteous position , and he could n't understand me and i could n't understand him . it has made a lot of unhappiness for the two of us because he loved harvard and wanted me to be a great success there . '' lomax transferred to the university of texas the following year . lomax left harvard , after having spent his sophomore year there , to join john a . lomax and john lomax , jr . in collecting folk songs for the library of congress and to assist his father in writing his books . in withdrawing him ( in addition to not being able to afford the tuition ) , the elder lomax had probably wanted to separate his son from new political associates that he considered undesirable . but alan had also not been happy there and probably also wanted to be nearer his bereaved father and young sister , bess , and to return to the close friends he had made during his first year at the university of texas . in june 1942 the fbi approached the librarian of congress , archibald mcleish , in an attempt to have lomax fired as assistant in charge of the library 's archive of american folk song . at the time , lomax was preparing for a field trip to the mississippi delta on behalf of the library , where he would make landmark recordings of muddy waters , son house , and david '' honeyboy '' edwards , among others . mcleish wrote to hoover , defending lomax : '' i have studied the findings of these reports very carefully . i do not find positive evidence that mr . lomax has been engaged in subversive activities and i am therefore taking no disciplinary action toward him . '' nevertheless , according to gioia : yet what the probe failed to find in terms of prosecutable evidence , it made up for in speculation about his character . an fbi report dated july 23 , 1943 , describes lomax as possessing '' an erratic , artistic temperament '' and a '' bohemian attitude . '' it says : '' he has a tendency to neglect his work over a period of time and then just before a deadline he produces excellent results . '' the file quotes one informant who said that '' lomax was a very peculiar individual , that he seemed to be very absent-minded and that he paid practically no attention to his personal appearance . '' this same source adds that he suspected lomax 's peculiarity and poor grooming habits came from associating with the '' hillbillies who provided him with folk tunes . lomax , who was a founding member of people 's songs , was in charge of campaign music for henry a . wallace 's 1948 presidential run on the progressive party ticket on a platform opposing the arms race and supporting civil rights for jews and african americans . subsequently , lomax was one of the performers listed in the publication red channels as a possible communist sympathizer and was consequently blacklisted from working in us entertainment industries . a 2007 bbc news article revealed that in the early 1950s , the british mi5 placed alan lomax under surveillance as a suspected communist . its report concluded that although lomax undoubtedly held '' left wing '' views , there was no evidence he was a communist . released september 4 , 2007 ( file ref kv 2/2701 ) , a summary of his mi5 file reads as follows : noted american folk music archivist and collector alan lomax first attracted the attention of the security service when it was noted that he had made contact with the romanian press attaché in london while he was working on a series of folk music broadcasts for the bbc in 1952 . correspondence ensued with the american authorities as to lomax ' suspected membership of the communist party , though no positive proof is found on this file . the service took the view that lomax ' work compiling his collections of world folk music gave him a legitimate reason to contact the attaché , and that while his views ( as demonstrated by his choice of songs and singers ) were undoubtedly left wing , there was no need for any specific action against him . the file contains a partial record of lomax ' movements , contacts and activities while in britain , and includes for example a police report of the '' songs of the iron road '' concert at st pancras in december 1953 . his association with blacklisted american film director joseph losey is also mentioned ( serial 30a ) . the fbi again investigated lomax in 1956 and sent a 68-page report to the cia and the attorney general 's office . however , william tompkins , assistant attorney general , wrote to hoover that the investigation had failed to disclose sufficient evidence to warrant prosecution or the suspension of lomax 's passport . then , as late as 1979 , an fbi report suggested that lomax had recently impersonated an fbi agent . the report appears to have been based on mistaken identity . the person who reported the incident to the fbi said that the man in question was around 43 , about 5 feet 9 & nbsp ; inches and 190 pounds . the fbi file notes that lomax stood tall , weighed 240 pounds and was 64 at the time : lomax resisted the fbi 's attempts to interview him about the impersonation charges , but he finally met with agents at his home in november 1979 . he denied that he 'd been involved in the matter but did note that he 'd been in new hampshire in july 1979 , visiting a film editor about a documentary . the fbi 's report concluded that '' lomax made no secret of the fact that he disliked the fbi and disliked being interviewed by the fbi . lomax was extremely nervous throughout the interview . the fbi investigation was concluded the following year , shortly after lomax 's 65th birthday . awards . alan lomax received the national medal of arts from president ronald reagan in 1986 ; a library of congress living legend award in 2000 ; and was awarded an honorary doctorate in philosophy from tulane university in 2001 . he won the national book critics circle award and the ralph j . gleason music book award in 1993 for his book the land where the blues began , connecting the story of the origins of blues music with the prevalence of forced labor in the pre-world war ii south ( especially on the mississippi levees ) . lomax also received a posthumous grammy trustees award for his lifetime achievements in 2003 . jelly roll morton : the complete library of congress recordings by alan lomax ( rounder records , 8 cds boxed set ) won in two categories at the 48th annual grammy awards ceremony held on february 8 , 2006 alan lomax in haiti : recordings for the library of congress , 1936–1937 , issued by harte records and made with the support and major funding from kimberley green and the green foundation , and featuring 10 cds of recorded music and film footage ( shot by elizabeth lomax , then nineteen ) , a bound book of lomax 's selected letters and field journals , and notes by musicologist gage averill , was nominated for two grammy awards in 2011 . . world music and digital legacy . brian eno wrote of lomax 's later recording career in his notes to accompany an anthology of lomax 's world recordings : he later turned his intelligent attentions to music from many other parts of the world , securing for them a dignity and status they had not previously been accorded . the '' world music '' phenomenon arose partly from those efforts , as did his great book , folk song style and culture . i believe this is one of the most important books ever written about music , in my all time top ten . it is one of the very rare attempts to put cultural criticism onto a serious , comprehensible , and rational footing by someone who had the experience and breadth of vision to be able to do it . brian eno , in liner notes to the alan lomax collection sampler ( rounder records , 1997 ) in january 2012 , the american folklife center at the library of congress , with the association for cultural equity , announced that they would release lomax 's vast archive in digital form . lomax spent the last 20 years of his life working on an interactive multimedia educational computer project he called the global jukebox , which included 5,000 hours of sound recordings , 400,000 feet of film , 3,000 videotapes , and 5,000 photographs . '' the premiere of the global jukebox '' . radio interview with don fleming by john hockenberry on pri 's the takeaway . by february 2012 , 17,000 music tracks from his archived collection were expected to be made available for free streaming , and later some of that music may be for sale as cds or digital downloads . as of march 2012 this has been accomplished . approximately 17,400 of lomax 's recordings from 1946 and later have been made available free online . this is material from alan lomax 's independent archive , begun in 1946 , which has been digitized and offered by the association for cultural equity . this is '' distinct from the thousands of earlier recordings on acetate and aluminum discs he made from 1933 to 1942 under the auspices of the library of congress . this earlier collection – which includes the famous jelly roll morton , woody guthrie , lead belly , and muddy waters sessions , as well as lomax 's prodigious collections made in haiti and eastern kentucky ( 1937 ) – is the provenance of the american folklife center '' at the library of congress . on august 24 , 1997 , at a concert at wolf trap , vienna , virginia , bob dylan had this to say about lomax , who had helped introduce him to folk music and whom he had known as a young man in greenwich village : there is a distinguished gentlemen here who came … i want to introduce him – named alan lomax . i do n't know if many of you have heard of him audience applause . yes , he 's here , he 's made a trip out to see me . i used to know him years ago . i learned a lot there and alan … alan was one of those who unlocked the secrets of this kind of music . so if we 've got anybody to thank , it 's alan . thanks , alan . bob dylan , quoted in jeffrey greenberg , liner notes to alan lomax : popular songbook , rounder 82161-1863-2t , on website album liner notes.com in 1999 electronica musician moby released his fifth album play . it extensively used samples from field recordings collected by lomax on the 1993 box set sounds of the south : a musical journey from the georgia sea islands to the mississippi delta . the album went on to be certified platinum in more than 20 countries . . bibliography . a partial list of books by alan lomax includes : l'anno piu ' felice della mia vita ( the happiest year of my life ) , a book of ethnographic photos by alan lomax from his 1954–55 fieldwork in italy , edited by goffredo plastino , preface by martin scorsese . milano : il saggiatore , m2008 . alan lomax : mirades miradas glances . photos by alan lomax , ed . by antoni pizà ( barcelona : lunwerg / fundacio sa nostra , 2006 ) alan lomax : selected writings 1934–1997 . ronald d . cohen , editor ( includes a chapter defining all the categories of cantometrics ) . new york : routledge : 2003 . brown girl in the ring : an anthology of song games from the eastern caribbean compiler , with j . d . elder and bess lomax hawes . new york : pantheon books , 1997 ( cloth , ; new york : random house , 1998 ( cloth ) . the land where the blues began . new york : pantheon , 1993 . cantometrics : an approach to the anthropology of music : audiocassettes and a handbook . berkeley : university of california media extension center , 1976 . folk song style and culture . with contributions by conrad arensberg , edwin e . erickson , victor grauer , norman berkowitz , irmgard bartenieff , forrestine paulay , joan halifax , barbara ayres , norman n . markel , roswell rudd , monika vizedom , fred peng , roger wescott , david brown . washington , d.c . : colonial press inc , american association for the advancement of science , publication no . 88 , 1968 . penguin book of american folk songs ( 1968 ) 3000 years of black poetry . alan lomax and raoul abdul , editors . new york : dodd mead company , 1969 . paperback edition , fawcett publications , 1971 . the leadbelly songbook . moses asch and alan lomax , editors . musical transcriptions by jerry silverman . foreword by moses asch . new york : oak publications , 1962 . folk songs of north america . melodies and guitar chords transcribed by peggy seeger . new york : doubleday , 1960 . the rainbow sign . new york : duell , sloan and pierce , 1959 . leadbelly : a collection of world famous songs by huddie ledbetter . edited with john a . lomax . hally wood , music editor . special note on lead belly 's 12-string guitar by pete seeger . new york : folkways music publishers company , 1959 . harriet and her harmonium : an american adventure with thirteen folk songs from the lomax collection . illustrated by pearl binder . music arranged by robert gill . london : faber and faber , 1955 . mister jelly roll : the fortunes of jelly roll morton , new orleans creole and '' inventor of jazz '' . drawings by david stone martin . new york : duell , sloan and pierce , 1950 . folk song : usa . with john a . lomax . piano accompaniment by charles and ruth crawford seeger . new york : duell , sloan and pierce , c.1947 . republished as best loved american folk songs , new york : grosset and dunlap , 1947 ( cloth ) . freedom songs of the united nations . with svatava jakobson . washington , d.c . : office of war information , 1943 . our singing country : folk songs and ballads . with john a . lomax and ruth crawford seeger . new york : macmillan , 1941 . check-list of recorded songs in the english language in the archive of american folk song in july 1940 . washington , d.c . : music division , library of congress , 1942 . three volumes . american folksong and folklore : a regional bibliography . with sidney robertson cowell . new york , progressive education association , 1942 . reprint , temecula , california : reprint services corp . , 1988 ( 62 pp . & nbsp ; . negro folk songs as sung by lead belly . with john a . lomax . new york : macmillan , 1936 . american ballads and folk songs . with john avery lomax . macmillan , 1934 . film . lomax the songhunter , documentary directed by rogier kappers , 2004 ( issued on dvd 2007 ) . american patchwork television series , 1990 ( five dvds ) . oss oss wee oss 1951 ( on a dvd with other films related to the padstow may day ) . rhythms of earth . four films ( dance & human history , step style , palm play , and the longest trail ) made by lomax ( 1974–1984 ) about his choreometric cross-cultural analysis of dance and movement style . two-and-a-half hours , plus one-and-a-half hours of interviews and 177 pages of text . the land where the blues began , expanded , thirtieth-anniversary edition of the 1979 documentary by alan lomax , filmmaker john melville bishop , and ethnomusicologist and civil rights activist worth long , with 3.5 hours of additional music and video . ballads , blues and bluegrass , an alan lomax documentary released in 2012 . his assistant carla rotolo was seen in the film . southern journey ( revisited ) , this 2020 documentary retraces the route of an iconic song-collecting trip from the late 1950s - alan lomax 's so-called '' southern journey '' . see also . notable alumni of st . mark 's school of texas ian brennan ( music producer ) cantometrics the singing street . footnotes . further reading . john szwed . alan lomax : the man who recorded the world . new york : viking press , 2010 ( 438 pp . : / london : william heinemann , 2010 ( 438 pp . ; . comprehensive biography . barton , matthew . '' the lomaxes '' , pp . & nbsp ; 151–169 , in spenser , scott b . the ballad collectors of north america : how gathering folksongs transformed academic thought and american identity ( american folk music and musicians series ) . plymouth , uk : scarecrow press . 2011 . the american song collecting of john a . and alan lomax in historical perspective . sorce keller , marcello . “ kulturkreise , culture areas , and chronotopes : old concepts reconsidered for the mapping of music cultures today ” , in britta sweers and sarah h . ross ( eds . ) cultural mapping and musical diversity . sheffield uk/bristol ct : equinox publishing ltd . 2020 , 19-34 . external links . nathan salsburg , curator of the alan lomax archive , on lomax 's '' list of american folk songs on commercial recordings '' ( 1940 ) , root hog or die , sept 24 , 2012 . first methodological research into the pre-war commercial record companies ' documentation of rural vernacular music . nathan salsburg writes : '' although compilers alan lomax , pete seeger , and bess lomax hawes had little . access to titles from the gennett or okeh catalogs . it proved to be a highly influential road-map for at least two of the earliest and most influential collectors of this music : harry smith and james mckune . '' two-hour npr streaming radio podcast , '' the sonic journey of alan lomax : recording america and the world '' , american routes ( march 13 , 2013 ) . nick spitzer , host . follows the journey of lomax in documenting the diversity of traditional music of america in the face of what he felt was the increased threat of the '' monoculture '' and as recordist , cultural theorist , radio host , and shaper of 20th-century pop culture through his discoveries . features interviews with lomax biographer john szwed , daughter anna lomax wood , nephew john lomax iii , folksinger pete seeger , and some past interviews of alan lomax himself . alan lomax collection , the american folklife center , library of congress association for cultural equity ( ace ) – alan lomax pages '' remembrances of alan lomax , 2002 '' by guy carawan '' alan lomax : citizen activist '' , by ronald d . cohen interview of shirley collins reminiscing about alan lomax on perfect sound forever . alan lomax films for viewing online – appalachian journey , cajun country , dreams and songs of the noble old , jazz parades : feet do n't fail me now , the land where the blues began at folkstreams . lomax : the songhunter from p.o.v . august 22 , 2006 . discussion guide , streaming radio sampler , discussion board . taken from lomax the songhunter , a musical documentary that travels the world to meet people whom lomax recorded , and portrays his life through interviews with relatives . to hear your banjo play ( 1947 ) , documentary film written by alan lomax , narrated by pete seeger , with texas gladden , woody guthrie , baldwin hawes , cisco houston , brownie mcghee , sonny terry , and the margot mayo square dancers ( the american square dance group ) on google video oss oss wee oss by alan lomax and peter kennedy , a filmed documentary of the 'obby 'oss festival ( 1951 ) at documentary educational resources . adam fisher , '' blues travelers '' , t magazine , the new york times , may 17 , 2012 . article about families of otha turner , exponent of african- influenced colonial-style fife-and-drum playing , whom alan lomax recorded in 1942 , 1959 , and 1978 , in gravel springs , northern mississippi , and regarded as one of his greatest discoveries . turner made his first cd at the age of 90 , see bill ellis , '' fife master , rural blues legend otha turner dies ; was 94 '' , commercial appeal ( memphis , tennessee ) , february 27 , 2003 . turner 's music was featured in martin scorsese 's film gangs of new york . books by john a . and alan lomax articles by alan lomax alan lomax discography alan lomax filmography alan lomax radio programs the v.d . radio project at the wnyc archives lomax and lead belly together link