Three Kings (1999 film)

plot . following the end of the gulf war , u.s . soldiers are sent over to tie up loose ends . the soldiers are bored from the lack of action and throw parties at night . major archie gates , a u.s . army special forces soldier , is trading sex for stories with a journalist , cathy daitch , when he is interrupted by adriana cruz , the television reporter he is assigned to escort . while disarming and searching an iraqi officer , u.s . army reserve sergeant first class troy barlow , his best friend private first class conrad vig , and their unit find a map between the officer 's butt cheeks . troy goes to staff sergeant chief elgin to help translate the map . major gates appears , after tracking down a lead from adriana . archie convinces them that the document is a map of bunkers near karbala , containing gold bullion stolen from kuwait , which they decide to steal in turn . to keep adriana off his back , gates sends specialist walter wogeman to aid her on a false lead . they set off the next day and , among other goods plundered from kuwait , find the gold , and stumble on the interrogation of amir abdullah . as they are leaving , amir 's wife pleads with them not to abandon the anti-saddam dissidents , but she is executed by the iraqi republican guard . the group decides to free the iraqi prisoners , triggering a firefight . they pull out just as iraqi reinforcements arrive , and as they try to evade a cs gas attack , they blunder into a minefield and get separated . iraqi soldiers capture troy while a group of rebels rescue the other americans and take them to their underground hideout . there , conrad , chief and archie agree to help the rebels and their families reach the iranian border , after they rescue troy . troy gets taken back to the bunker , and is thrown in a room full of kuwaiti cell phones . he manages to call his wife back home and tells her to report his location to his local army reserve unit . his call is cut short when he is dragged to an interrogation room where he is interrogated by iraqi captain sa誰d . the americans with the rebels go to a band of iraqi army deserters , who are persuaded to sell them luxury cars stolen from kuwait . the cars are outfitted as saddam 's entourage , in a ruse to scare away the bunker 's defenders . after storming the bunker , they free troy , who spares sa誰d , and find more shia islam in iraq held in a dungeon . a few of the soldiers who ran away return , and shoot conrad and troy . conrad dies ; troy 's pneumothorax , but he survives . archie radios walter and adriana and arranges transport , while the hapless officers in the camp try to locate the trio after getting the message from troy 's wife . each of the rebels is given a bar of gold and the rest is buried as they wait for the transport to arrive . the convoy goes to the iranian border , where the three americans intend to escort the rebels across to protect them from the iraqi soldiers guarding the crossing . but the american officers arrive and stop the group , arresting the trio while the rebels are recaptured . archie offers the buried gold to the american officers in exchange for letting the refugees through . the commanding officer acquiesces to assisting the rebels get into iran , but still states that charges ( of being absent without leave and disobeying orders by contradicting american post-war policy ) and court martial will be convened against archie , troy , and chief elgin . as an epilogue , the film states that the three surviving soldiers ( archie , troy , and chief elgin ) are cleared of the charges and honorably discharged , thanks to adriana 's reporting . the epilogue goes on to show that archie goes to work as a military adviser for hollywood action films , chief leaves his airport job to work with archie , and troy returns to his wife and baby to run his own carpet store . the stolen gold was returned to kuwait , which claimed that some was missing , implying that the rebels managed to keep the gold they had been given . cast . george clooney as major archie gates a career u.s . army special forces officer close to retirement , who is disillusioned with the war . mark wahlberg as sergeant first class troy barlow an office worker with a wife and baby daughter at home . he wears the usacapoc patch and identifies himself as a civil affairs reservist . ice cube as staff sergeant chief elgin an airline baggage handler who believes he is protected by a ring of '' jesus-fire '' , also wears the u.s . army civil affairs and psychological operations patch . spike jonze as private first class conrad vig a jobless , semi-literate soldier from a group home who idolizes troy ; also wears the u.s . army civil affairs and psychological operations patch . cliff curtis as amir abdullah a shi'ite iraqi rebel who has been captured by saddam 's troops . educated in the u.s . at bowling green state university , he was an entrepreneur in baghdad , running several cafes before they were destroyed by coalition bombs . nora dunn as adriana cruz a tough cable news correspondent who is determined to get a good story . jamie kennedy as specialist walter wogeman a bumbling soldier whom archie uses to distract adriana . sa誰d taghmaoui as sa誰d an iraqi interrogator who tortures barlow with electric shocks after he is captured . mykelti williamson as colonel ron horn archie 's superior officer , who discovers the plan to steal the gold . holt mccallany as captain doug van meter troy 's superior officer , an obstreperous stickler for the rules . judy greer as cathy daitch a journalist competing with adriana who has sex with archie early in the film . alia shawkat as amir 's daughter . jim gaffigan as cuts troy 's cuff soldier . production . three kings was filmed in the deserts of casa grande , arizona , california and mexico , with many of the extras played by actual iraqi refugees . according to russell , two of the cast members had '' personally defaced 300 murals of saddam . '' after one of the military advisers to the film died during production , russell said the death was '' perhaps due to gulf war syndrome in the gulf . '' . script controversy . former stand-up comic john ridley had originally written the screenplay , then titled spoils of war , as an experiment to see how fast he could write and sell a film . the writing took him seven days , and warner bros . bought the script 18 days later . when the studio showed a list of their purchased scripts to russell , the one-sentence description of spoils of war , '' heist set in the gulf war '' , appealed to him . although russell claimed he never read ridley 's script , so as not '' to pollute my own idea '' , he admits that '' john gets credit where it 's due . the germ of the idea that i took was his . '' ridley maintains that russell shut him out of the process , saying '' i never heard a word while he was shooting the movie . never saw any of the script changes . and then finally , a year later , i get a copy of the script , and my name is n't even on it . '' although warner bros . worked out a deal to give ridley a '' story by '' credit , ridley remains unhappy with the experience , and has blocked russell 's efforts to publish the three kings screenplay in book form . . casting . russell penned the script with several actors in mind . although spike jonze had never acted in a film before , russell wrote the part of conrad vig specifically for him , and the two practised conrad 's southern accent over the phone while jonze directed his first feature film , being john malkovich . although russell had to convince a wary warner bros . to cast an inexperienced actor in such a large role , he eventually won out . russell said jonze 's lack of previous acting work was beneficial to the film , citing the '' chaos that a nonactor brings to the set.he really shakes things up . '' co-star george clooney also expressed initial reservations about the choice of jonze . '' it 's always worrisome when somebody says , ' i got a friend , ' and you 've never heard of them . but within five minutes of meeting spike , you just go , 'oh , he 's perfect for the part . ' '' the part of archie gates was originally planned for clint eastwood , but russell decided to rewrite it as a younger character . george clooney eventually saw a copy of the script and was '' blown away '' by it . when he heard the part was being re-written , he jumped at the chance to get involved . at this point in clooney 's career , he was best known for his role as the handsome dr . doug ross on the popular television drama er . clooney was ready to pursue a role in film . unfortunately , russell seemed unwilling to cast clooney in the role . persistent , clooney sent a humorously self-deprecating letter signed '' george clooney , tv actor '' to russell asking for the part , and showed up at russell 's new york city apartment to plead his case . russell still was n't satisfied that clooney could portray the character . he instead convinced nicolas cage to play the role . however , when cage became unavailable after being cast in martin scorsese 's bringing out the dead , russell gave the part to clooney . russell later stated that clooney '' was meant to play the part . '' many of the iraqi roles were played by actual iraqi refugees in the united states . film techniques . much to the chagrin of warner bros . , russell decided to use a number of experimental cinematic techniques in the film . handheld cameras and steadicam shots were used to give the film a journalistic feel . russell shot a majority of the film on ektachrome transparency stock that was cross processed in colour negative chemicals , to reproduce '' the odd colour of the newspaper images of the gulf war . '' though the process produced a unique quality and look to the film , it was exceedingly unreliable to develop , and many film labs would not provide insurance for the transparency stock if it did not develop properly . russell feared that the scenes would need to be reshot until finally a lab was found that would develop the transparency stock in the negative chemicals . the opening was shot on conventional negative stock and bleach bypassed to give a deep black and high contrast look . some interior shots were also filmed on conventional negative stock and processed normally . russell also credited the realism of the firefights to the film 's cinematographer , newton thomas sigel , who had shot several documentaries on south american civil wars , saying '' he knew what it was like to be in that kind of world . '' all of the explosions in the movie were filmed in one shot , as opposed to a typical film where each would have been covered by multiple cameras . russell explained , '' to me that 's more real . the car 's blowing up on this guy , and we just park the camera . of course the producer says , 'we got ta run three cameras ! ' but if i cut three ways , then it just looks like an action picture . '' russell also had the foley department tone down the sounds of gunfire , saying he did n't want to '' bruce willis-ize '' the film . '' one frequently noted shot in the film is an image of a bullet piercing a number of internal organs , releasing bile into the abdominal cavity , used when gates is describing sepsis as the effect of a gunshot wound . this internal camera is again used when sfc barlow is shot in the torso and his chest begins to fill with air , crushing his lung . both of these scenes were inspired by russell asking an emergency room doctor friend '' what 's the weirdest wound you 've ever seen ? '' it also erupted a minor controversy , when russell began to joke around that the gunshots were fired into a real corpse ; a statement everyone vehemently denied later . . conflicts . the film 's production process was particularly difficult for russell , who was taking a variety of risks with what was a 42 million studio film . at the time it was made , warner bros . had not financed an auteur film in many years , and executives were hesitant to put such money in the hands of filmmakers who were used to working independently . the film 's political overtones also worried the studio , especially with conflict still occurring in the middle east . as a result , warner bros . gave russell a number of limitations . the shooting schedule was reduced to only 68 days instead of the 80 russell had initially asked for . the studio wanted the budget lowered to 35 million . executives were also asking for the removal of more violent scenes , such as the exploding cow and the shooting of an iraqi woman . russell was also forced to sign a legal document requiring that scenes containing paedophilia accusations against michael jackson be removed from the film . the shoot took place in arizona during october . the crew were unused to the improvisational , on-the-fly directing style that russell implemented . rather than preparing organized shot lists , russell preferred to use ideas as they came to him , often asking for longer hours . early on , some of the crew began to feel a dislike for these methods and russell along with them . clooney noted that '' there 's an element of david that was in way over his head . he was vulnerable and selfish , and it would manifest itself in a lot of yelling . '' when russell 's frustration led to outbursts , clooney took it upon himself to defend crew members and extras , leading to increased tensions . when an extra had an epileptic seizure on set , clooney ran to his aid while russell apparently remained indifferent . afterward , clooney criticized russell for ignoring the incident , though russell later stated that he was busy setting up a shot some yards away from the extra and was not aware that the extra had suffered a seizure . another on-set conflict between the two arose while shooting footage on a humvee with a camera mounted to it . clooney recalls russell yelling at the driver to drive faster . clooney then approached the director , telling him to '' knock it off '' . russell remembers the incident differently : '' the camera broke , we were losing the day and i was upset about that . so i jumped off the truck and i was like , 'fuck ! ' i was just kicking the dirt and everything like that . and then george had this big thing about defending the driver , whom i had n't really said anything to . '' during the shoot , clooney was exhausted as he was still shooting er in los angeles three days a week , while working on three kings the other four . regardless , clooney was determined to stay with the role and remained loyal to the script . he helped convince executives to support certain aspects of the film ( such as the exploding cow scene ) even after he was urged to drop out of production , as his contract called for his compensation with or without his decision to stay in the film . after a number of arguments , clooney wrote russell a letter that criticized russell 's behavior in a last attempt to make peace between the two , days before another fight broke out during the filming of the movie 's finale . in it , the three lead characters attempt to escort iraqi rebels across the border to iran . there were a number of actors and extras in the scene , as well as other elements such as helicopters flying overhead and landing in the center of the location . the fight began after an extra was having difficulty throwing ice cube 's character to the ground . after a number of takes , russell came to the extra and put him through the motions of the action . some individuals present on the set during the incident state that russell was simply showing the extra how to convincingly act in the scene . however , clooney and others thought that russell had violently thrown the extra to the ground . clooney recalls : '' we were trying to get a shot and then he went berserk . he went nuts on an extra . '' clooney approached russell and began criticizing him again , coming to the extra 's defense . the two began shouting at one another before commencing a physical fight . second assistant director paul bernard was so fed up that he put down his camera and walked off the set , effectively quitting . clooney concludes , '' will i work with david ever again ? absolutely not . never . do i think he 's tremendously talented and do i think he should be nominated for oscars ? yeah . '' russell offered a different view , saying , '' we 're both passionate guys who are the two biggest authorities on the set , '' and maintained that the two continue to be friends . ice cube felt the conflict helped the film , saying , '' it kind of kicked the set into a different gear where everybody was focused and we finished strong . i would n't mind if the director and the star got into an argument on all of my movies . '' though the fight was initially kept under wraps , both russell and clooney eventually gave official statements saying that the argument had blown over and neither harbored any ill will towards the other . however , clooney continued to describe the event in later interviews , as well as in the cover story of the october 2003 issue of vanity fair , in which he states : '' i would not stand for him humiliating and yelling and screaming at crew members , who were n't allowed to defend themselves . i do n't believe in it and it makes me crazy . so my job was then to humiliate the people who were doing the humiliating . '' executive producer and production manager gregory goodman later stated of clooney 's comments in the media , '' it does n't reflect well on clooney . it 's like some stupid sandbox quarrel . '' in early 2012 , clooney indicated that he and russell had mended their relationship , saying , '' we made a really , really great film , and we had a really rough time together , but it 's a case of both of us getting older . i really do appreciate the work he continues to do , and i think he appreciates what i 'm trying to do . '' . release . the film was released in the united states and canada on october 1 , 1999 on 2,942 screens . . critical reception . three kings received critical acclaim . on rotten tomatoes , the film holds a 94 % '' certified fresh '' rating , based on 128 reviews , with an average rating of 7.8/10 . the site 's critical consensus reads , '' three kings successfully blends elements of action , drama , and comedy into a thoughtful , exciting movie on the gulf war . '' on metacritic , the film holds a score of 82 out of 100 , based on 34 reviews , indicating '' universal acclaim '' . audiences surveyed by cinemascore gave the film a grade b on scale of a to f . peter bradshaw says , '' a strange flavour , but this is an enjoyable and intelligent action film . '' roger ebert of the chicago sun-times gave the film four stars out of four , and said that '' three kings is one of the most surprising and exciting movies i 've seen this year '' and that the film is a '' weird masterpiece , a screw-loose war picture that sends action and humor crashing head-on into each other and spinning off into political anger . '' jeff greenfield of cnn said , '' this is a keeper '' . david edelstein for the new york times said , '' it remains the most caustic anti-war movie of this generation . '' the director 's commentary of the film reveals that then-incumbent president bill clinton liked the film so much that he had it screened for his staff , friends , and advisors at the white house . in reel power : hollywood cinema and american supremacy matthew alford calls three kings '' an unusual ideological product on hollywood terms , which begins to break down the official history of the gulf war . but nevertheless . suggests that the problems of iraq can be solved , and only solved , by the application of us force . '' he observes that russell '' sheepishly indicated three kings ' ideological consistency with the 2003 iraq war '' when russell met george w . bush in 1999 and said he was making a film that would question his father 's legacy in iraq . alford quotes bush as responding to russell , '' then i guess i 'm going to have to finish the job , are n't i ? '' alford , reel power , p . 80-1 . box office . the film opened at number two at the united states box office for the weekend with a gross of 15,847,636 , behind double jeopardy second weekend gross of 17 million . exit polls suggested the film played to an older audience than anticipated . the film grossed 60,652,036 in the united states and canada and 47.1 million internationally , for a worldwide total of 107.8 million . . re-release . in 2004 , warner bros . , feeling the film had become relevant again due to the iraq war , decided to re-release it in theaters and on dvd . having no additional footage to add , russell instead shot soldiers pay , a short documentary about the iraq war , to accompany the film . taking its name from william faulkner 's soldiers ' pay about an airman 's return home in world war i 's aftermath , russell said the documentary examined '' both sides of the war , people who feel good about the war , who believe in the mission , people who feel bad . '' while making the documentary , russell spoke with both iraqis and u.s . troops . asked how the iraqis he had interviewed felt about the war , russell said : although russell had planned to release the film before november 2004 , hoping to '' perhaps make a difference before the election , '' warner bros . abandoned the project at the last minute , citing '' controversy surrounding the documentary , combined with a later-than-expected arrival of the bonus footage '' . russell disputed the time-crunch excuse , saying , '' i think if they really wanted to they could make it happen . '' eventually the documentary was purchased by the independent film channel , where it was aired in its entirety the night before the 2004 u.s . presidential election . . see also . 1999 in film heist film . references . external links .