Tenné

etymology . in the oxford english dictionary , tenné is described as '' orange-brown , as a stain used in blazoning '' , and as a mid-16th-century variant of old french tané . the origin of both tenné and tawny is the medieval latin word tannare , meaning '' to tan leather '' . as such , in french ( and most of continental ) heraldry , tenné is the light-brownish colour that leather is supposed to have once tanned . used primarily for depicting wood and skin in proper charges , it then slowly became its own tincture . hatchings . perhaps as a symptom of the theoretical nature of heraldic stains , the hatchings assigned to these have been inconsistent among sources . the hatching for tenné has been given variously as a combination of vertical lines ( as gules ) and dexter to sinister lines ( as vert ) , neubecker , p . 86 . or as a combination of horizontal lines ( as azure ) and sinister to dexter lines ( as purpure ) , fox-davies , p . 76 . ( and other combinations may be found in other sources ) though both these sources provide the same hatching of alternating vertical dots and dashes for '' orange '' . confer both previous citations ( neubecker , p . 86 and fox-davies , p . 76 ) . . in theory and in practice . while tenné is frequently mentioned in books about heraldry , it is not among the basic heraldic colours and its appearance in practice is quite rare . arthur charles fox-davies , in his complete guide to heraldry , asserted that both tenné and murrey were probably inventions of the theoretical ( though never shown in actual practice ) system of abatements , further commenting that he knew of only one instance of tenné to date ( as of 1909 ) , and that was in an estate livery rather than coat armory . the oxford guide to heraldry cites a late-14th century english treatise as stating that in addition to the two metals and five colours , a colour called tawny was '' borne only in the empire and france , '' the oxford guide also citing gerard leigh 's the accendance of armory ( 1562 ) as rejecting tenné or tawny as non-existent and sanguine or murrey as mistaken purpure . . in britain . despite its role in the system of theoretical abatement ( heraldry ) introduced in the 16th century , woodcock & robinson , p . 68 . tenné is quite rare in british armory , appearing only occasionally in liveries and never as a colour upon the escutcheon . the oxford guide to heraldry notes that the '' stains '' ( tenné , murrey and sanguine ) '' occur occasionally in the twentieth century but have never been spotted in a visitation record . '' woodcock & robinson , p . 53 . fox-davies named the estate livery of lord fitzhardinge , worn by the lord 's hunt servants , as the only known occurrence of '' orange-tawny '' in british armory . fox-davies , p . 73 . to this , woodward was able to add the standards of both the earl of derby , bearing the stanley crest upon a field of tawny and vert , and the earl of northumberland , bearing '' four horizontal bands , the upper being russet , the two central ones yellow , and the lowest tawny . '' the coat of arms of west yorkshire ( 1975–1986 ) was supported on the sinister side by a lion per fess tenne and vert , with a lion per fess gules and tenne in crest . according to the heraldry society of scotland , the team colours of the dundee united f.c . should be called '' tenny and argent '' . dundee united calls the colours tangerine and white , and the team is referred to as '' the tangerines . '' dundee united states the colour was borrowed from an american team called dallas tornado in the 1960s . . in continental europe . according to the oxford guide to heraldry , a late-14th century english treatise on heraldry stated that a colour called tawny was '' borne only in the empire and france . '' fox-davies suggested that orange , as it appears in german heraldry , may be a different colour than tenné , noting that a different hatching is associated with german orange than that of british tenné . fox-davies , p . 74 . german heraldic author ottfried neubecker also noted a distinction between orange and brown or tenné , showing the usual hatching for tenné but a distinctive hatching of alternating vertical dots and dashes for orange . nb : the same hatching neubecker gave for '' orange '' was repeated in fox-davies , p . 76 , as the hatching for german '' orange '' . orangé , tanné and tenné appear in the civic arms of several communes in the department of oise in france . specifically , the arms of lamorlaye have a field tinctured orangé ( in french ) , the arms of margny-lès-compiègne have a divided field which is partly tinctured orangé as well as a charge in chief which is also orangé , and the arms of la neuville-roy has a quarter tinctured tanné ( in french ) ; all of these are communes in the department of oise ; see them listed at armorial of the communes of oise-3 ( i-p ) . in french heraldry , tanné ( same as tenné ) is traditionally a light brown . it is to be a light brown color , bright enough to be distinguished from the darkest heraldic colour , sable ( black ) , as well as the darker brown color brunâtre , used for bear hide fur . it should also be a distinctive brown , and be clearly different than both flesh-color carnation and orangé , used per example as the field color for the arms of the french commune of lamorlaye . tenné takes its name from the colour of tanned leather , joubert , pierre , nouveau guide de l'héraldique ( 1984 ) , rennes , ouest-france . and occurs in the field of the arms of a few french communes , including maruéjols-lès-gardon . le grand robert de la langue française , ( 2001 ) . tanné colour also occurs in the dexter chief quarter of the arms of la neuville-roy , where it notably replaces azure as the field for a semy of fleurs-de-lys very reminiscent of the ancient arms of france . in english heraldry , all these colours are sometimes—yet mistakenly—confused as tenné . file : blason de la ville de maruéjols-lès-gardon ( 30 ) . svg arms of the french city of maruéjols-lès-gardon , bearing a field tenné file : blason la neuville roy.svg arms of the french commune of la neuville-roy , bearing a field tanné in the dexter chief quarter . file : blason lamorlaye.svg arms of lamorlaye , a city in french oise , bearing a field orangé . in australia . granted in 1978 , the coat of arms of the northern territory has a tenny field , with a design inspired by aboriginal paintings . northern territory flags & emblems , about australia , retrieved 3 october 2015 . in south africa . orange is a common colour in south african heraldry , because of the history of south africa as a dutch colony , and the fact that royal house of the netherlands is the house of orange . the dutch prince 's flag was an orange white and blue tricolour , and this was the basis of the flags of the orange free state ( 1857-1902 ) and the flag of south africa ( 1928-1994 ) . in the united states . tenné ( so blazoned ) is found in the arms and colours of some u.s . military units , particularly in the signal corps , where the colour is shown as a bright shade of orange , and the cavalry , where tenné is sometimes called '' dragoon yellow '' . the coat of arms of the 1st signal battalion , designed in 1932 by the u.s . army heraldic program office ( since 1960 called the institute of heraldry ) is per bend argent and tenné , since orange and white are the traditional colours of the signal corps . these colours are repeated in the arms of virtually every battalion in the signal corps . for a full listing of the arms of each unit in the u.s . army signal corps , see the institute of heraldry : categories > signal . the 1st cavalry regiment ( also known as the 1st regiment of dragoons ) was assigned a coat of arms by the heraldic program office in 1921 featuring a gold dragon on a field of tenné . the 1st cavalry was founded as the regiment of united states dragoons in 1833 , and at the time the dragoon units wore a cord of tenné ( which they called '' dragoon yellow '' ) and or ( gold ) . these are also the colours of the torse in the coat of arms of the unit . . in popular culture . the star trek star fleet technical manual describes the official tunic color of starfleet command section standard issue uniforms , such as those worn by james kirk and hikaru sulu , as '' tenne . '' these are the tunics depicted on the actual show as yellow-gold fabric . separate from this , officers of captain 's rank or higher may optionally wear tunics and dress uniforms greenish in hue ; the manual specifies this color as '' olive . '' . examples . file : herbszrafirunekbrunatny.svg tenné with hatching file : heráldica - leonado.svg continental ( left ) and english ( right ) tenné file : heráldica - anaranjado.svg orange with hatching . see also . tawny ( color ) tawny port . references .