Plasma display

general characteristics . plasma displays are bright ( 1,000 & nbsp ; lux or higher for the display module ) , have a wide color gamut , and can be produced in fairly large sizes—up to diagonally . they had a very low luminance '' dark-room '' black level compared with the lighter grey of the unilluminated parts of an lcd screen . ( as plasma panels are locally lit and do not require a back light , blacks are blacker on plasma and grayer on lcd 's . ) hdguru.com – choosing the hdtv that ’ s right for you led-backlit lcd televisions have been developed to reduce this distinction . the display panel itself is about thick , generally allowing the device 's total thickness ( including electronics ) to be less than . power consumption varies greatly with picture content , with bright scenes drawing significantly more power than darker ones – this is also true for crts as well as modern lcds where led backlight brightness is adjusted dynamically . the plasma that illuminates the screen can reach a temperature of at least 1200 & nbsp ; °c ( 2200 & nbsp ; °f ) . typical power consumption is 400 watts for a screen . most screens are set to '' vivid '' mode by default in the factory ( which maximizes the brightness and raises the contrast so the image on the screen looks good under the extremely bright lights that are common in big box stores ) , which draws at least twice the power ( around 500–700 watts ) of a '' home '' setting of less extreme brightness . plasmatelevisions.org – how to calibrate your plasma tv the lifetime of the latest generation of plasma displays is estimated at 100,000 hours ( 11 years ) of actual display time , or 27 years at 10 hours per day . this is the estimated time over which maximum picture brightness degrades to half the original value . plasmatvbuyingguide.com – how long do plasma tvs last ? meow plasma screens are made out of glass , which may result in glare on the screen from nearby light sources . plasma display panels can not be economically manufactured in screen sizes smaller than . although a few companies have been able to make plasma enhanced-definition televisions ( edtv ) this small , even fewer have made 32 inch plasma hdtvs . with the trend toward large-screen television technology , the 32 inch screen size is rapidly disappearing . though considered bulky and thick compared with their lcd counterparts , some sets such as panasonic 's z1 and samsung 's b860 series are as slim as thick making them comparable to lcds in this respect . competing display technologies include cathode ray tube ( crt ) , organic light-emitting diode ( oled ) , crt projectors , amlcd , digital light processing dlp , sed-tv , led display , field emission display ( fed ) , and quantum dot display ( qled ) . plasma display advantages and disadvantages . advantages . capable of producing deeper blacks than lcd allowing for a superior contrast ratio . hometheatermag.com – plasma vs . lcd as they use the same or similar phosphors as are used in crt displays , plasma 's color reproduction is very similar to that of crts . wider viewing angles than those of lcd ; images do not suffer from degradation at less than straight ahead angles like lcds . lcds using ips technology have the widest angles , but they do not equal the range of plasma primarily due to '' ips glow '' , a generally whitish haze that appears due to the nature of the ips pixel design . less visible motion blur , thanks in large part to very high refresh rates and a faster response time , contributing to superior performance when displaying content with significant amounts of rapid motion such as auto racing , hockey , baseball , etc . google books – principles of multimedia by ranjan parekh , ranjan google books – the electronics handbook by jerry c . whitaker superior uniformity . lcd panel backlights nearly always produce uneven brightness levels , although this is not always noticeable . high-end computer monitors have technologies to try to compensate for the uniformity problem . unaffected by clouding from the polishing process . some lcd panel types , like ips , require a polishing process that can introduce a haze usually referred to as '' clouding '' . in their heyday , they were less expensive for the buyer per square inch than lcd , particularly when considering equivalent performance . . disadvantages . earlier generation displays were more susceptible to screen burn-in and image retention . recent models have a pixel orbiter that moves the entire picture slower than is noticeable to the human eye , which reduces the effect of burn-in but does not prevent it . due to the bistable nature of the color and intensity generating method , some people will notice that plasma displays have a shimmering or flickering effect with a number of hues , intensities and dither patterns . earlier generation displays ( circa 2006 and prior ) had phosphors that lost luminosity over time , resulting in gradual decline of absolute image brightness . newer models have advertised lifespans exceeding 100,000 hours ( 11 years ) , far longer than older crts . uses more electrical power , on average , than an lcd tv using a led backlight . older ccfl backlights for lcd panels used quite a bit more power , and older plasma tvs used quite a bit more power than recent models . led lcd vs . plasma vs . lcd , 2013 does not work as well at high altitudes above 6,500 feet ( 2,000 meters ) due to pressure differential between the gases inside the screen and the air pressure at altitude . it may cause a buzzing noise . manufacturers rate their screens to indicate the altitude parameters . plasmatvbuyingguide.com - plasma tvs at altitude , 2012 for those who wish to listen to am radio , or are amateur radio operators ( hams ) or shortwave listeners ( swl ) , the radio frequency interference ( rfi ) from these devices can be irritating or disabling . plasma displays are generally heavier than lcd and may require more careful handling , such as being kept upright . native plasma television resolutions . fixed-pixel displays such as plasma tvs scale the video image of each incoming signal to the native resolution of the display panel . the most common native resolutions for plasma display panels are 853×480 ( edtv ) , 1,366×768 or 1920×1080 ( hdtv ) . as a result , picture quality varies depending on the performance of the video scaler and the upscaling and downscaling algorithms used by each display manufacturer . plasmatvbuyingguide.com – step 3 : is a 1080p resolution plasma tv worth the extra money ? afterdawn.com – native resolution . enhanced-definition plasma television . early plasma televisions were enhanced-definition ( ed ) with a native resolution of 840×480 ( discontinued ) or 853×480 , and down-scaled their incoming high-definition video signals to match their native display resolution . plasmatvbuyingguide.com – edtv plasma vs . hdtv plasma . ed resolutions . the following ed resolutions were common prior to the introduction of hd displays , but have long been phased out in favor of hd displays , as well as because the overall pixel count in ed displays is lower than the pixel count on sd pal displays ( 853×480 vs 720×576 , respectively ) . 840×480p 853×480p . high-definition plasma television . early high-definition ( hd ) plasma displays had a resolution of 1024x1024 and were alternate lighting of surfaces ( alis ) panels made by fujitsu/hitachi . cnet uk – alis ( alternate lighting of surfaces ) google books – newnes guide to television and video technology by k . f . ibrahim , eugene trundle these were interlaced displays , with non-square pixels . plasmatvbuyingguide.com – 1024 x 1024 resolution plasma display monitors vs.853 x 480 resolution plasma display monitors modern hdtv plasma televisions usually have a resolution of 1,024×768 found on many 42 & nbsp ; inch plasma screens , 1280×768 , 1,366×768 found on 50 & nbsp ; in , 60 & nbsp ; in , and 65 & nbsp ; in plasma screens , or 1080p found in plasma screen sizes from 42 & nbsp ; inch to 103 & nbsp ; inch . these displays are usually progressive displays , with non-square pixels , and will up-scale and de-interlace their incoming standard-definition signals to match their native display resolution . 1024×768 resolution requires that 720p content be downscaled in one direction and upscaled in the other . about.com – are all plasma televisions hdtvs ? practical home theater guide – plasma tv faqs . design . thumb a panel of a plasma display typically comprises millions of tiny compartments in between two panels of glass . these compartments , or '' bulbs '' or '' cells '' , hold a mixture of noble gases and a minuscule amount of another gas ( e.g . , mercury vapor ) . just as in the fluorescent lamps over an office desk , when a high voltage is applied across the cell , the gas in the cells forms a plasma . with flow of electricity ( electrons ) , some of the electrons strike mercury particles as the electrons move through the plasma , momentarily increasing the energy level of the atom until the excess energy is shed . mercury sheds the energy as ultraviolet ( uv ) photons . the uv photons then strike phosphor that is painted on the inside of the cell . when the uv photon strikes a phosphor molecule , it momentarily raises the energy level of an outer orbit electron in the phosphor molecule , moving the electron from a stable to an unstable state ; the electron then sheds the excess energy as a photon at a lower energy level than uv light ; the lower energy photons are mostly in the infrared range but about 40 % are in the visible light range . thus the input energy is converted to mostly infrared but also as visible light . the screen heats up to between during operation . depending on the phosphors used , different colors of visible light can be achieved . each pixel in a plasma display is made up of three cells comprising the primary colors of visible light . varying the voltage of the signals to the cells thus allows different perceived colors . the long electrodes are stripes of electrically conducting material that also lies between the glass plates in front of and behind the cells . the '' address electrodes '' sit behind the cells , along the rear glass plate , and can be opaque . the transparent display electrodes are mounted in front of the cell , along the front glass plate . as can be seen in the illustration , the electrodes are covered by an insulating protective layer . paid access . a magnesium oxide layer may be present to protect the dielectric layer and to emit secondary electrons . control circuitry charges the electrodes that cross paths at a cell , creating a voltage difference between front and back . some of the atoms in the gas of a cell then lose electrons and become ionized , which creates an electrically conducting plasma of atoms , free electrons , and ions . the collisions of the flowing electrons in the plasma with the inert gas atoms leads to light emission ; such light-emitting plasmas are known as glow discharges . in a monochrome plasma panel , the gas is mostly neon , and the color is the characteristic orange of a neon lamp ( or sign ) . once a glow discharge has been initiated in a cell , it can be maintained by applying a low-level voltage between all the horizontal and vertical electrodes–even after the ionizing voltage is removed . to erase a cell all voltage is removed from a pair of electrodes . this type of panel has inherent memory . a small amount of nitrogen is added to the neon to increase hysteresis . in color panels , the back of each cell is coated with a phosphor . the ultraviolet photons emitted by the plasma excite these phosphors , which give off visible light with colors determined by the phosphor materials . this aspect is comparable to fluorescent lamps and to the neon signs that use colored phosphors . every pixel is made up of three separate subpixel cells , each with different colored phosphors . one subpixel has a red light phosphor , one subpixel has a green light phosphor and one subpixel has a blue light phosphor . these colors blend together to create the overall color of the pixel , the same as a triad of a shadow mask crt or color lcd . plasma panels use pulse-width modulation ( pwm ) to control brightness : by varying the pulses of current flowing through the different cells thousands of times per second , the control system can increase or decrease the intensity of each subpixel color to create billions of different combinations of red , green and blue . in this way , the control system can produce most of the visible colors . plasma displays use the same phosphors as crts , which accounts for the extremely accurate color reproduction when viewing television or computer video images ( which use an rgb color system designed for crt displays ) . plasma displays are different from liquid crystal displays ( lcds ) , another lightweight flat-screen display using very different technology . lcds may use one or two large fluorescent lamps as a backlight source , but the different colors are controlled by lcd units , which in effect behave as gates that allow or block light through red , green , or blue filters on the front of the lcd panel . cnet networks – plasma vs . lcd : which is right for you ? afterdawn.com – plasma display gizmodo – giz explains : plasma tv basics to produce light , the cells need to be driven at a relatively high voltage ( ~300 volts ) and the pressure of the gases inside the cell needs to be low ( ~500 torr ) . . contrast ratio . contrast ratio is the difference between the brightest and darkest parts of an image , measured in discrete steps , at any given moment . generally , the higher the contrast ratio , the more realistic the image is ( though the '' realism '' of an image depends on many factors including color accuracy , luminance linearity , and spatial linearity ) . contrast ratios for plasma displays are often advertised as high as 5,000,000:1 . on the surface , this is a significant advantage of plasma over most other current display technologies , a notable exception being organic light-emitting diode . although there are no industry-wide guidelines for reporting contrast ratio , most manufacturers follow either the ansi standard or perform a full-on-full-off test . the ansi standard uses a checkered test pattern whereby the darkest blacks and the lightest whites are simultaneously measured , yielding the most accurate '' real-world '' ratings . in contrast , a full-on-full-off test measures the ratio using a pure black screen and a pure white screen , which gives higher values but does not represent a typical viewing scenario . some displays , using many different technologies , have some '' leakage '' of light , through either optical or electronic means , from lit pixels to adjacent pixels so that dark pixels that are near bright ones appear less dark than they do during a full-off display . manufacturers can further artificially improve the reported contrast ratio by increasing the contrast and brightness settings to achieve the highest test values . however , a contrast ratio generated by this method is misleading , as content would be essentially unwatchable at such settings . google books – digital signage broadcasting by lars-ingemar lundström google books – instrument engineers ' handbook : process control and optimization by béla g . lipták google books – computers , software engineering , and digital devices by richard c . dorf each cell on a plasma display must be precharged before it is lit , otherwise the cell would not respond quickly enough . precharging normally increases power consumption , so energy recovery mechanisms may be in place to avoid an increase in power consumption . this precharging means the cells can not achieve a true black , whereas an led backlit lcd panel can actually turn off parts of the backlight , in '' spots '' or '' patches '' ( this technique , however , does not prevent the large accumulated passive light of adjacent lamps , and the reflection media , from returning values from within the panel ) . some manufacturers have reduced the precharge and the associated background glow , to the point where black levels on modern plasmas are starting to become close to some high-end crts sony and mitsubishi produced ten years before the comparable plasma displays . it is important to note that plasma displays were developed for ten more years than crts ; it is almost certain that if crts had been developed for as long as plasma displays were , the contrast on crts would have been far better than contrast on the plasma displays . with an lcd , black pixels are generated by a light polarization method ; many panels are unable to completely block the underlying backlight . more recent lcd panels using led illumination can automatically reduce the backlighting on darker scenes , though this method can not be used in high-contrast scenes , leaving some light showing from black parts of an image with bright parts , such as ( at the extreme ) a solid black screen with one fine intense bright line . this is called a '' halo '' effect which has been minimized on newer led-backlit lcds with local dimming . edgelit models can not compete with this as the light is reflected via a light guide to distribute the light behind the panel . . screen burn-in . thumb image burn-in occurs on crts and plasma panels when the same picture is displayed for long periods . this causes the phosphors to overheat , losing some of their luminosity and producing a '' shadow '' image that is visible with the power off . burn-in is especially a problem on plasma panels because they run hotter than crts . early plasma televisions were plagued by burn-in , making it impossible to use video games or anything else that displayed static images . plasma displays also exhibit another image retention issue which is sometimes confused with screen burn-in damage . in this mode , when a group of pixels are run at high brightness ( when displaying white , for example ) for an extended period , a charge build-up in the pixel structure occurs and a ghost image can be seen . however , unlike burn-in , this charge build-up is transient and self-corrects after the image condition that caused the effect has been removed and a long enough period has passed ( with the display either off or on ) . plasma manufacturers have tried various ways of reducing burn-in such as using gray pillarboxes , pixel orbiters and image washing routines , but none to date have eliminated the problem and all plasma manufacturers continue to exclude burn-in from their warranties . plasmatvbuyingguide.com – plasma tv screen burn-in : is it still a problem ? . environmental impact . plasma screens use significantly more energy than crt and lcd screens . to reduce the energy consumption , new technologies are also being found . . history . early development . kálmán tihanyi , a hungarian engineer , described a proposed flat-panel plasma display system in a 1936 paper . the first practical plasma video display was co-invented in 1964 at the university of illinois at urbana–champaign by donald bitzer , h . gene slottow , and graduate student robert willson for the plato computer system . the original neon orange monochrome digivue display panels built by glass producer owens-illinois were very popular in the early 1970s because they were rugged and needed neither memory nor circuitry to refresh the images . brian dear , chapter 6 – gas and glass , the friendly orange glow , pantheon books , new york , 2017 ; pages 92-111 cover the development and first stages ac plasma panel commercialization . a long period of sales decline occurred in the late 1970s because semiconductor memory made crt displays cheaper than the 2500 usd plato plasma displays . brian dear , chapter 22 – the business opportunity , the friendly orange glow , pantheon books , new york , 2017 ; pages 413–417 cover cdc 's decision to use crts with cheap video-ram instead of plasma panels in 1975 . nonetheless , the plasma displays ' relatively large screen size and 1 & nbsp ; inch thickness made them suitable for high-profile placement in lobbies and stock exchanges . burroughs corporation , a maker of adding machines and computers , developed the panaplex display in the early 1970s . the panaplex display , generically referred to as a gas-discharge or gas-plasma display , uses the same technology as later plasma video displays , but began life as a seven-segment display for use in adding machines . they became popular for their bright orange luminous look and found nearly ubiquitous use throughout the late 1970s and into the 1990s in cash registers , calculators , pinball machines , aircraft avionics such as radios , navigation , and stormscopes ; test equipment such as frequency counters and multimeters ; and generally anything that previously used nixie tube or numitron displays with a high digit-count . these displays were eventually replaced by leds because of their low current-draw and module-flexibility , but are still found in some applications where their high brightness is desired , such as pinball machines and avionics . 1980s . in 1983 , ibm introduced a orange-on-black monochrome display ( model 3290 'information panel ' ) which was able to show up to four simultaneous ibm 3270 terminal sessions . by the end of the decade , orange monochrome plasma displays were used in a number of high-end a/c powered portable computers , such as the compaq portable 386 ( 1987 ) and the ibm p75 ( 1990 ) . plasma displays had a better contrast ratio , viewability angle , and less motion blur than the lcds that were available at the time , and were used until the introduction of active-matrix color lcd displays in 1992 . due to heavy competition from monochrome lcds used in laptops of the era and the high costs of plasma display technology , in 1987 ibm planned to shut down its factory in upstate new york , the largest plasma plant in the world , in favor of manufacturing mainframe computers , which would have left development to japanese companies . ogg , e . , '' getting a charge out of plasma tv '' , cnet news , june 18 , 2007 , retrieved 2008-11-24 . dr . larry f . weber , a university of illinois ece phd ( in plasma display research ) and staff scientist working at cerl ( home of the plato system ) co-founded a startup company plasmaco with stephen globus , as well as james kehoe , who was the ibm plant manager , and bought the plant from ibm for us 50,000 . weber stayed in urbana as cto until 1990 , then moved to upstate new york to work at plasmaco . 1990s . in 1992 , fujitsu introduced the world 's first 21-inch ( 53 & nbsp ; cm ) full-color display . it was based on technology created at the university of illinois at urbana–champaign and nhk science & technology research laboratories . in 1994 , weber demonstrated a color plasma display at an industry convention in san jose . panasonic corporation began a joint development project with plasmaco , which led in 1996 to the purchase of plasmaco , its color ac technology , and its american factory for us 26 million . in 1995 , fujitsu introduced the first plasma display panel ; weber , l . f . , '' history of the plasma display panel , '' ieee transactions on plasma science , vol . 34 , no . 2 , ( april , 2006 ) , pp.268-278 . it had 852×480 resolution and was progressively scanned . mendrala , jim , '' flat panel plasma display '' , north west tech notes , no . 4 , june 15 , 1997 , retrieved 2009-01-29 . two years later , philips introduced the first large commercially available flat-panel tv , using the fujitsu panels . it was available at four sears locations in the us for 14,999 , including in-home installation . pioneer also began selling plasma televisions that year , and other manufacturers followed . by the year 2000 prices had dropped to 10,000 . 2000s . in the year 2000 , the first 60-inch plasma display was developed by plasmaco . panasonic was also reported to have developed a process to make plasma displays using ordinary window glass instead of the much more expensive '' high strain point '' glass . high strain point glass is made similarly to conventional float glass , but it is more heat resistant , deforming at higher temperatures . high strain point glass is normally necessary because plasma displays have to be baked during manufacture to dry the rare-earth phosphors after they are applied to the display . however , high strain point glass may be less scratch resistant . g . , gaume , o . , & el khiati , n . ( 2003 ) . 23.4 : high strain point glass with improved chemical stability and mechanical properties for fpds . sid symposium digest of technical papers , 34 ( 1 ) , 905 . doi:10.1889/1.1832431 in late 2006 , analysts noted that lcds had overtaken plasmas , particularly in the 40-inch ( 100 & nbsp ; cm ) and above segment where plasma had previously gained market share . '' shift to large lcd tvs over plasma '' , msnbc , november 27 , 2006 , retrieved 2007-08-12 . another industry trend was the consolidation of plasma display manufacturers , with around 50 brands available but only five manufacturers . in the first quarter of 2008 , a comparison of worldwide tv sales broke down to 22.1 million for direct-view crt , 21.1 million for lcd , 2.8 million for plasma , and 0.1 million for rear projection . '' lcd televisions outsell plasma 8 to 1 worldwide '' , digital home , 21 may 2008 , retrieved 2008-06-13 . until the early 2000s , plasma displays were the most popular choice for hdtv flat panel display as they had many benefits over lcds . beyond plasma 's deeper blacks , increased contrast , faster response time , greater color spectrum , and wider viewing angle ; they were also much bigger than lcds , and it was believed that lcds were suited only to smaller sized televisions . however , improvements in vlsi fabrication narrowed the technological gap . the increased size , lower weight , falling prices , and often lower electrical power consumption of lcds made them competitive with plasma television sets . screen sizes have increased since the introduction of plasma displays . the largest plasma video display in the world at the 2008 consumer electronics show in las vegas , nevada , was a unit manufactured by matsushita electric industrial ( panasonic ) standing 6 & nbsp ; ft ( 180 & nbsp ; cm ) tall by 11 & nbsp ; ft ( 330 & nbsp ; cm ) wide . dugan , emily . , '' 6ft by 150 inches – and that 's just the tv '' , the independent , 8 january 2008 , retrieved 2009-01-29 . pcmag.com – panasonic 's 150-inch '' life screen '' plasma opens ces . 2010s . at the 2010 consumer electronics show in las vegas , panasonic introduced their 152 '' 2160p 3d plasma . in 2010 panasonic shipped 19.1 million plasma tv panels . in 2010 , the shipments of plasma tvs reached 18.2 million units globally . lcd tv market ten times larger than plasma tvs on units-shipped basis , 20 february 2011 , jonathan sutton , hdtvtest.co.uk , retrieved at september 12 , 2011 since that time , shipments of plasma tvs have declined substantially . this decline has been attributed to the competition from liquid crystal ( lcd ) televisions , whose prices have fallen more rapidly than those of the plasma tvs . in late 2013 , panasonic announced that they would stop producing plasma tvs from march 2014 onwards . in 2014 , lg and samsung discontinued plasma tv production as well , effectively killing the technology , probably because of lowering demand . notable display manufacturers . most have discontinued doing so , but at one time or another all of these companies have produced products containing plasma displays : beko ( known sometimes as grundig ) fujitsu ( only produced panels funai gradiente chunghwa picture tubes ( only produced panels ) formosa plastics ( only produced panels ) hitachi ( produced panels ) jvc lanix lg ( produced panels ) magnavox marantz nec ( only produced panels ) orion panasonic ( produced panels ) philips pioneer ( produced panels ) proscan protron samsung ( produced panels ) sanyo sony bravia ( produced panels ) toshiba ( produced panels ) vestel ( both under vestel name but also under various brands ) panasonic was the biggest plasma display manufacturer until 2013 , when it decided to discontinue plasma production . in the following months , samsung and lg also ceased production of plasma sets . panasonic , samsung and lg were the last plasma manufacturers for the u.s . retail market . see also . display examples large-screen television technology . references . external links . plasma display panels : the colorful history of an illinois technology ' ' by jamie hutchinson , electrical and computer engineering alumni news , winter 2002–2003 ( via archive.org ) nytimes.com – forget l.c.d . ; go for plasma , says maker of both according to panasonic corporation home theater geeks – 13 : plasma geek out ( audio podcast )