Carabao

etymology . the spanish word is derived from visayan ( likely waray ) . cognates include cebuano , javanese , malay , and indonesian dutch . the female is called ( in spanish ) a . the word 's resemblance to caribou is coincidental , and they do not share a common etymology - an example of a false cognate . carabaos are also known in tagalog as , which is derived from spanish . before the spanish era , carabaos were more widely known as nowang among the ilocanos of northern luzon , anowang and damulag among the ethnic groups of southern and central luzon ; . characteristics . carabaos have the low , wide , and heavy build of draught animals . they vary in colour from light grey to slate gray . the horns are sickle-shaped or curve backward toward the neck . chevrons are common . albinism are present in the proportion of about 3 % of the buffalo population . mature male carabaos weigh , and females . height at withers of the male ranges from , and of the female from . water buffaloes imported to the philippines from cambodia in the early 20th century are called '' cambodian carabaos '' . they have white or yellowish hair on a pinkish skin , but the eyes , hooves , and mouth are dark , and the skin may be speckled . they are slightly bigger and have larger horns . males weigh on average and measure at the withers . . husbandry . water buffalo are well adapted to a hot and humid climate . water availability is of high importance in hot climates since they need wallows , rivers , or splashing water to reduce the heat load and thermal stress . borghese , a . , mazzi , m . ( 2005 ) . '' buffalo population and strategies in the world '' . pp . 1–39 in borghese , a . ( ed . ) buffalo production and research . reu technical series 67 . inter-regional cooperative research network on buffalo , fao regional office for europe , rome . swamp buffaloes prefer to wallow in a mudhole that they make with the horns . their objective is to acquire a thick coating of mud . they thrive on many aquatic plants and in time of flood will graze submerged , raising their heads above the water and carrying quantities of edible plants . they eat reeds , the giant reed , bulrush , sedges , the eichhornia crassipes , and rushes . green fodders are used widely for intensive milk production and for fattening . many fodder crops are conserved as hay , chaffed , or pulped . trials in the philippines showed that the carabao , on poor-quality roughage , had a better feed conversion rate than cattle . the carabao cools itself by lying in a waterhole or mud during the heat of the day . mud , caked on to its body , also protects it from bothersome insects . the carabao feeds mainly in the cool of the mornings and evenings . its lifespan is 18 to 20 years . the female carabao can deliver one calf each year . in the philippines . the oldest evidence of water buffalo discovered in the philippines is multiple fragmentary skeletal remains recovered from the upper layers of the neolithic nagsabaran site , part of the lal-lo and gattaran shell middens ( ~2200 bce to 400 ce ) of northern luzon . most of the remains consisted of skull fragments , almost all of which have cut marks indicating they were butchered . the remains are associated with red slipped pottery , spindle whorls , stone adzes , and jade bracelets ; which have strong affinities to similar artifacts from neolithic austronesian archeological sites in taiwan . based on the radiocarbon date of the layer in which the oldest fragments were found , water buffalo were first introduced to the philippines by at least 500 bce . in the early 20th century , other breeds of water buffalo were imported from china ( the '' shanghai buffalo '' ) and cambodia for work in sugarcane plantations . these were generally larger and have bigger horns . murrah buffaloes were first introduced from india in 1917 . a few representatives of the niliravi breed have also been acquired . the word carabao is now used for the imported river-type buffalo as well as for the local swamp buffalo . carabaos are widely distributed in all the larger islands of the philippines . carabao hide was once used extensively to create a variety of products , including the armor of precolonial philippine warriors . in the late 1980s , the carabao puppet character kardong kalabaw became popular as a symbol of the philippine people 's hard work and sense of industry . file : various philippine animals and plants frame 1 , detail from carta hydrographica y chorographica de las yslas filipinas.jpg an illustration from the carta hydrographica y chorographica de las yslas filipinas ( 1734 ) shows carabaos as beasts of burden file : carabao cart.jpg carabao cart in the philippines ( c . 1899 ) image : skinscompared.jpg the hardened hide of a carabao ( left ) and a cow ( right ) , displayed in the crisologo museum , in vigan , ilocos sur , philippines file : glimpse of batad.jpg a carabao in the batad rice terraces file : jfalbinocarabaosanmateo203mapaladarayatfvf.jpg an albino carabao in 1993 , the philippine carabao center was established to conserve , propagate , and promote the carabao as a source of draught animal power , meat , milk , and hide to benefit the rural farmers through carabao genetic improvement , technology development and dissemination , and establishment of carabao-based enterprises , thus ensuring higher income and better nutrition . the national water buffalo gene pool in muñoz , nueva ecija , is a facility for continuous selection , testing , and propagation of superior breeds of dairy buffalo . philippine carabao center ( 2011 ) . annual report . department of agriculture . in 2003 , 3.2 & nbsp ; million carabao were in the philippines ; 99 % belonged to small farmers who have limited resources , low income , and little access to other economic opportunities . one of the many reasons for the failure of the attempted japanese pacification of the philippines during their 1941–1945 occupation was their indifference to the basics of the philippine economy . the carabaos provided the necessary labor that allowed philippine farmers to grow rice and other staples . japanese army patrols would not only confiscate the rice , but would also slaughter the carabaos for meat , thereby preventing the farmers from growing enough rice to feed the large population . before world war ii , an estimated three million carabaos inhabited the philippines . by the end of the war , an estimated nearly 70 % of them had been lost . schmidt , l . s . ( 1982 ) . american involvement in the filipino resistance on mindanao during the japanese occupation , 1942–1945 . m.s . thesis . u.s . army command and general staff college . the old method of farming is still the method of choice in northern samar . the soil of the rice paddy is first softened with rainwater or diverted watershed , then the farmer guides a group of carabaos in trampling the planting area until it is soggy enough to receive the rice seedlings . this time-consuming task produces lower yields and lower income when compared with the advancement in irrigated fields . philippine daily inquirer , 8-18-2007 . . carabao racing . carabao racing is a widely popular sport among farmers and carabao enthusiasts in the philippines . in central , southern luzon and south cotabato some fiestas are highlighted with carabaos racing up towards the finish line . training and conditioning of the race carabao to its full extent is a serious job . farmers and their trustworthy carabaos gather together to race in a dirt road . spectators fill up this unique spectacle , some betting on their best carabaos , others watch for the thrill . the carabaos , geared with their carts on their back , race together with their dear farmer to win prizes . the race is divided into two classes , one for amateur or first-time carabao racers and the other is for the veteran carabao racers . a race carabao can be bought for ₱35,000 to ₱60,000 , with the price increasing with the number of races that it wins . proven race winners can command a price as high as ₱200,000 . in guam . carabaos were introduced to guam by spanish missionaries in the 17th century from domestic stock in the philippines to be used as pack animal . a feral herd on the ordnance annex in central guam was classified as protected game , but the population has been declining since 1982 , most likely due to poaching . conry , p . j . ( 1988 ) . '' management of feral and exotic game species on guam '' . transactions of the western section of the wildlife society 24 : 26–30 . carabaos were used for farming and for pulling carts . they were fairly common in guam before the 20th century , with a population numbering in the thousands . today , they are rare in most parts of the island except in the us naval magazine near the village of santa rita , which is fenced on all sides . the carabao population of naval magazine has grown to several hundred , to the point that they have become a pest and caused environmental damage , and polluted the water supply in the fena reservoir . in 2003 , the navy began a program of extermination to control the carabao population of naval magazine , a move that was protested by many chamorro people . the carabao is considered a symbol of guam . in the early 1960s , carabao races were a popular sport in the island , especially during fiestas . today , carabaos are a part of the popular culture . they are often brought to carnivals or other festivities , and are used as a popular ride for children . carabao meat is sometimes eaten as a delicacy . . in malaysia . the carabao is the official animal of the state of negeri sembilan , malaysia .