Plains of Abraham

plains of abraham museum . the plains of abraham museum serves as the park 's information and reception centre . it features a multi-media exhibition about the siege of québec and the 1759 and 1760 battles of the plains of abraham . other displays feature the history of the site through archaeological artifacts found in the park . open year-round and located at 835 wilfrid-laurier avenue , the museum serves as the starting point for tours and includes a gift shop . name and features . referred to the heights of abraham , as did the diaries of british soldiers , who also employed the phrase plains of abraham . the park itself presently occupies an area approximately 2.4 & nbsp ; km ( 1.5 & nbsp ; mi ) long by 0.8 & nbsp ; km ( 0.5 & nbsp ; mi ) wide , 98 ha ( 242 acres ) that extends westward from the citadelle of quebec and the walls of quebec city along a plateau above the saint lawrence river , and forms a part of the battlefields park . an interpretive centre and walking trails have been built on the site , and monuments commemorate the battle of sainte-foy and james wolfe , the latter being an astronomic meridian marker raised in 1790 by the surveyor-general of canada , major holland , on the site where wolfe was said to have died . in 1913 , the national battlefields commission placed a column identical to one that had been built on the site in 1849 , and a replica cross of sacrifice was constructed on the plains to commemorate soldiers who were lost in world war i ; it continues to be the location of remembrance day ceremonies every year . . history . on september 13 , 1759 , the area was the scene of the battle of the plains of abraham , part of the french and indian war , which was itself part of the seven years ' war . on that date , british army under the command of general wolfe , climbed the steep cliff under the city in darkness , surprising and defeating the french , through a single deadly volley of musket fire , causing the battle to be over within 30 minutes . both wolfe and the french commander , the marquis de montcalm , died of their wounds , but the battle left control of quebec city to the british , eventually allowing them to take control of canada the following year . the plains thereafter remained nondescript fields , with only a monument to wolfe as a reminder of the events that took place . as quebec city grew , development of the plains took place unabated , and hundreds of acres were built over . only in 1901 did government intervention come , when the proposed subdivision of of the region was halted by the purchase of the land by the dominion crown . at the same time , however , another area of the plains was taken and , despite public protest , covered by a ross rifle factory , which included a water tank built upon an existing martello tower . a movement to preserve the site continued , nonetheless , and by 1904 , the literary and historical society of quebec was permitted by the federal government to put up plaques at various significant spots around the vicinity . the following year , a proposal for the establishment of an historic landmarks association was placed before the royal society of canada and governor general the earl grey initiated his plan to preserve the battlefields , having visited the site and stating that he '' would never rest until such sacred ground became the heirloom of all canada and the empire . '' image : prince of wales presenting title deeds to earl grey , quebec tercentenary - close up.jpg thumb left george v , presents the title deeds of the plains of abraham to governor general the earl grey at the tercentenary of quebec city in 1908 the mayor of quebec city , jean-georges garneau , in 1908 appointed a landmark commission under the chairmanship of chief justice of the quebec superior court françois langelier . amongst its recommendations for permanently recording the celebrations for the 300th anniversary of the founding of quebec city , the group called for a nationalization of the quebec battlefields and the construction of a museum of canadian history . the federal prime minister at the time , wilfrid laurier , suggested , however , that a preservation of the plains themselves would be a more fitting tribute , thus falling in line with the desires of the earl grey , who in january had travelled to quebec to see whether the site could be dedicated as a part of the tercentenary celebrations . by 17 march , the park was created , becoming the first national historic site in canada and was placed under the auspices of the newly and specifically formed national battlefields commission , a group that , following the lead of edward vii , began to collect historical data relating to the plains and the battles that took place on them . finally , on 24 july 1908 , the king 's eldest son , prince george , prince of wales ( later george v ) , dedicated the the battlefields park at the plains of abraham , then presenting the title deeds of the lands to the governor general . the events were popular with quebec residents , leading laurier to opine that quebecers were '' monarchical by religion , by habit , and by the remembrance of past history . '' the official memorial record of the anniversary was titled the king 's book of quebec ; with the assent of the king ( by then george v ) , the volume was published in 1911 . image : carnaval de québec - place de la famille - 2006-02.jpg thumb right a crowd at the place de la famille , a quebec winter carnival site on the plains of abraham the site has become an urban park within quebec city ; the national battlefields commission has compared its use to that of central park in new york city and hyde park in london . it has thus seen various events staged on it , most regularly during the fête nationale du québec , the quebec winter carnival , and the quebec city summer festival . recognition . on 10 september 1959 , canada post issued plains of abraham , 1759–1959 , designed by ephrum philip weiss with a picture engraved by yves baril and lettering engraved by donald j . mitchell . the 5¢ stamps are perforated 12 and were printed by canadian bank note company . canada post stamp the site is mentioned in the 1975 song '' acadian driftwood '' , by the band , as well as in the song '' the maker '' , by daniel lanois . gordon lightfoot mentions the site in '' nous vivons ensemble '' ( 1971 ) . geddy lee mentions the site in his song '' my favourite headache '' from his solo album of the same name ( 2000 ) . references . external links . plains of abraham - official site at national battlefields commission 1759 : from the warpath to the plains of abraham virtual museum clash of empires and the battle of the plains of abraham – the canadian war museum