Stormwater

stormwater pollution . image : natural & impervious cover diagrams epa.jpg thumb 400px relationship between impervious surfaces and surface runoff with less vegetation and more impervious surfaces ( parking lots , roads , buildings , compacted soil ) , developed areas allow less rain to infiltrate into the ground , and more runoff is generated than in the undeveloped condition . additionally , conveyances such as ditches and storm sewers quickly transport runoff away from commercial and residential areas into nearby water bodies . this greatly increases the volume of water in waterways and the discharge of those waterways , leading to erosion and flooding . because the water is flushed out of the watershed during the storm event , little infiltrates the soil , replenishes groundwater , or supplies stream baseflow in dry weather . schueler , thomas r . '' the importance of imperviousness . '' reprinted in the practice of watershed protection . 2000 . center for watershed protection , ellicott city , md . a first flush is the initial runoff of a rainstorm . during this phase , polluted water entering storm drains in areas with high proportions of impervious surfaces is typically more concentrated compared to the remainder of the storm . consequently , these high concentrations of urban runoff result in high levels of pollutants discharged from storm sewers to surface waters . alex maestre and robert pitt ; center for watershed protection ( 2005 ) . '' the national stormwater quality database , version 1.1 : a compilation and analysis of npdes stormwater monitoring information . '' report prepared for u.s . environmental protection agency ( epa ) , washington , dc . september 4 , 2005 . daily human activities result in deposition of pollutants on roads , lawns , roofs , farm fields , and other land surfaces . such pollutants include trash , sediment , nutrients , bacteria , pesticides , metals , and petroleum byproducts . when it rain or there is irrigation , water runs off and ultimately makes its way to a river , lake , or the ocean . while there is some attenuation of these pollutants before entering receiving waters , polluted runoff results in large enough quantities of pollutants to impair receiving waters . u.s . environmental protection agency , washington , dc . '' results of the nationwide urban runoff program : volume 1 – final report '' , water planning division . 1983 . . stormwater runoff as a source of pollution . in addition to the pollutants carried in surface runoff , urban runoff is being recognized as a cause of pollution in its own right . in natural catchments ( watersheds ) surface runoff entering waterways is a relatively rare event , occurring only a few times each year and generally after larger storm events . before development occurred most rainfall soaked into the ground and contributed to groundwater recharge or was recycled into the atmosphere by vegetation through evapotranspiration . modern drainage systems , which collect runoff from impervious surfaces ( e.g . , roofs and roads ) , ensure that water is efficiently conveyed to waterways through pipe networks , meaning that even small storm events result in increased waterway flows . in addition to delivering higher pollutants from the urban catchment , increased stormwater flow can lead to stream erosion , encourage weed invasion , and alter natural flow regimes . native species often rely on such flow regimes for spawning , juvenile development , and migration . stormwater runoff from roadways has been observed to contain many metals including zinc ( zn ) , cadmium ( cd ) , copper ( cu ) , nickel ( ni ) , lead ( pb ) , chromium ( cr ) , manganese ( mn ) , iron ( fe ) , vanadium ( v ) , cobalt ( co ) , and aluminum ( al ) ( sansalone and buchberger , 1997 ; westerlund and viklander , 2006 ) and other constituents in some areas , especially along the u.s . coast , polluted runoff from roads and highways may be the largest source of water pollution . for example , about 75 percent of the toxic chemicals getting to seattle , washington 's puget sound are carried by stormwater that runs off paved roads and driveways , rooftops , yards , and other developed land . washington state department of ecology . '' control of toxic chemicals in puget sound , phase 2 : development of simple numerical models '' , 2008 for class v stormwater injection wells '' underground injection control ( uic ) stormwater drainage wells '' the u.s . environmental protection agency reports “ the contaminants that have been observed above drinking water standards or health advisory limits in storm water drainage well injectate are aluminum , antimony , arsenic , beryllium , cadmium , chloride , chromium , color , copper , cyanide , iron , lead , manganese , mercury , nickel , nitrate , ph , selenium , tds , turbidity , zinc , benzene , benzo ( a ) pyrene , bis ( 2-ethylhexyl ) phtlalate , chlordane , dichloromethane , fecal coliforms , methyl-tertbutyl- ether , pentachlorophenol , tetrachloroethylene , and trichloroethylene . ” the u.s . geological survey ( usgs ) reports “ many of the contaminants normally associated with runoff from the nation 's highways have the potential for biological effects . highway-runoff contaminants of particular interest throughout the united states include deicers , nutrients , metals , industrial/urban-organic chemicals , sediment , and agricultural chemicals from industrial , commercial , residential , agricultural , and highway sources . ” in addition to the problem of chemical contaminants in stormwater , this usgs report also identifies problems of physical habitat disturbance that best management practices ( bmps ) do not eliminate , “ some of the most substantial biological changes caused by development are directly or indirectly related to altered hydrology . despite efforts to use bmps to attenuate the hydrologic effects of development , increased peak flows and more flashy runoff will cause physical modifications to the channel shape , bed substrate , and banks of receiving waters , with corresponding effects on aquatic habitat and biota . loss of forest canopy , increases in paved area , and shallow and ( or ) muddy detention areas also may cause thermal pollution problems , which can exacerbate chemical stressors on aquatic organisms in receiving waters . ” u.s . congress prohibits class v stormwater wells to be authorized by permit or by rule where they endanger drinking water sources . ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) . urban flooding . stormwater is a major cause of urban flooding . urban flooding is the inundation of land or property in a built-up environment caused by stormwater overwhelming the capacity of drainage , such as storm sewers . although triggered by single events such as flash flooding or snow melt , urban flooding is a condition , characterized by its repetitive , costly and systemic impacts on communities . in areas susceptible to urban flooding , backwater valves and other infrastructure may be installed to mitigate losses . where properties are built with basements , urban flooding is the primary cause of basement and sewer backups . although the number of casualties from urban flooding is usually limited , the economic , social and environmental consequences can be considerable : in addition to direct damage to property and infrastructure ( highways , utilities and services ) , chronically wet houses are linked to an increase in respiratory problems and other illnesses . indoor air quality ( iaq ) scientific findings resource bank ( iaq-sfrb ) , '' health risks or dampness or mold in houses '' sewer backups are often from the sanitary sewer system , which takes on some storm water as a result of infiltration/inflow . urban flooding has significant economic implications . in the u.s . , industry experts estimate that wet basements can lower property values by 10 to 25 percent and are cited among the top reasons for not purchasing a home . the prevalence and cost of urban flooding . chicago : center for neighborhood technology , 2013 . according to the federal emergency management agency almost 40 percent of small businesses never reopen their doors following a flooding disaster . in the uk , urban flooding is estimated to cost £270 million a year ( as of 2007 ) in england and wales ; 80,000 homes are at risk . parliamentary office of science and technology , london , uk . '' urban flooding . '' postnote 289 , july 2007 a study of cook county , illinois , identified 177,000 property damage insurance claims made across 96 percent of the county ’ s zip codes over a five-year period from 2007 to 2011 . this is the equivalent of one in six properties in the county making a claim . average payouts per claim were 3,733 across all types of claims , with total claims amounting to 660 million over the five years examined . the prevalence and cost of urban flooding . rep . chicago : center for neighborhood technology , 2013 an example of an urban flooding control project is the brays bayou greenway framework in houston , texas . brays bayou and its tributaries drain a watershed of approximately 88,000 acres south of downtown houston . the federally-funded improvement project created a short-term solution by improving the bayou 's drainage capacity , and identified a broad set of potential recreation and open space opportunities along the 35 miles of the bayou and tributaries . . stormwater creation of sinkhole collapses . an example of urban stormwater creating a sinkhole collapse is the february 25 , 2002 dishman lane collapse in bowling green , kentucky where a sinkhole suddenly dropped the road under four traveling vehicles . the nine-month repair of the dishman lane collapse cost a million dollars but there remains the potential for future problems . kambesis , p . , r . brucker , t . waltham , f . bell , and m . culshaw . '' collapse sinkhole at dishman lane , kentucky . '' sinkholes and subsidence : karst and cavernous rocks in engineering and construction . springer , berlin ( 2005 ) : 277-282 . in undisturbed areas with natural subsurface ( karst ) drainage , soil and rock fragments choke karst openings thereby being a self-limitation to the growth of openings . palmer , arthur n . '' groundwater processes in karst terranes . '' ground water geomorphology ( 1990 ) : 177-209 . the undisturbed karst drainage system becomes balanced with the climate so it can drain the water produced by most storms . however , problems occur when the landscape is altered by urban development . veni , george . living with karst . american geological institute , 2001 . in urban areas with natural subsurface ( karst ) drainage there are no surface streams for the increased stormwater from impervious surfaces such as roofs , parking lots , and streets to runoff into . instead , the stormwater enters the subsurface drainage system by moving down through the ground . when the subsurface water flow becomes great enough to transport soil and rock fragments , the karst openings grow rapidly . where karst openings are roofed by supportive ( competent ) limestone , there frequently is no surface warning that an opening has grown so large it will suddenly collapse catastrophically . therefore , land use planning for new development needs to avoid karst areas . ultimately taxpayers end up paying the costs for poor land use decisions . stormwater management . managing the quantity and quality of stormwater is termed , '' stormwater management . '' washington state department of ecology ( 2005 ) . olympia , wa . '' stormwater management manual for western washington . '' publication no . 05-10-029 . the term best management practice ( bmp ) or stormwater control measure ( scm ) is often used to refer to both structural or engineered control devices and systems ( e.g . retention ponds ) to treat or store polluted stormwater , as well as operational or procedural practices ( e.g . street sweeping ) . stormwater management includes both technical and institutional aspects . . technical aspects . control of flooding and erosion ; control of hazardous materials to prevent release of pollutants into the environment ( source control ) ; planning and construction of stormwater systems so contaminants are removed before they pollute surface waters or groundwater resources ; acquisition and protection of natural waterways or rehabilitation ; building nature-based solutions such as ponds , swales , constructed wetlands or green infrastructure solutions to work with existing or '' hard '' drainage structures , such as pipes and concrete channels ( constructed wetlands built for stormwater treatment can also serve as habitat for plants , amphibians and fish ) . institutional and policy aspects . development of funding approaches to stormwater programs potentially including stormwater fee and the creation of a stormwater utility ; development of long-term asset management programs to repair and replace aging infrastructure ; revision of current stormwater regulations to address comprehensive stormwater needs ; enhancement and enforcement of existing ordinances to make sure property owners consider the effects of stormwater before , during and after development of their land ; education of a community about how its actions affect water quality , and about what it can do to improve water quality . integrated water management . image:7sigma raingarden 66.jpg thumb rain garden designed to treat stormwater from adjacent parking lot integrated water management ( iwm ) of stormwater has the potential to address many of the issues affecting the health of waterways and water supply challenges facing the modern urban city . iwm is often associated with green infrastructure when considered in the design process . professionals in their respective fields , such as urban planners , architects , landscape architects , interior designers , and engineers , often consider integrated water management as a foundation of the design process . also known as low impact development ( lid ) in the united states , or water sensitive urban design ( wsud ) in australia , iwm has the potential to improve runoff quality , reduce the risk and impact of flooding and deliver an additional water resource to augment potable supply . the development of the modern city often results in increased demands for water supply due to population growth , while at the same time altered runoff predicted by climate change has the potential to increase the volume of stormwater that can contribute to drainage and flooding problems . iwm offers several techniques , including stormwater harvest ( to reduce the amount of water that can cause flooding ) , infiltration ( to restore the natural recharge of groundwater ) , biofiltration or bioretention ( e.g . , rain gardens ) , to store and treat runoff and release it at a controlled rate to reduce impact on streams and wetland treatments ( to store and control runoff rates and provide habitat in urban areas ) . there are many ways of achieving lid . the most popular is to incorporate land-based solutions to reduce stormwater runoff through the use of retention ponds , bioswales , infiltration trenches , sustainable pavements ( such as permeable paving ) , and others noted above . lid can also be achieved by utilizing engineered , manufactured products to achieve similar , or potentially better , results as land-based systems ( underground storage tanks , stormwater treatment systems , biofilters , etc . ) . the proper lid solution is one that balances the desired results ( controlling runoff and pollution ) with the associated costs ( loss of usable land for land-based systems versus capital cost of manufactured solution ) . green ( vegetated ) roofs are also another low cost solution . iwm as a movement can be regarded as being in its infancy and brings together elements of drainage science , ecology and a realization that traditional drainage solutions transfer problems further downstream to the detriment of the environment and water resources . regulations . united states . . federal requirements . in the united states , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) is charged with regulation stormwater pursuant to the clean water act ( cwa ) . united states . federal water pollution control amendments of 1972 ( '' clean water act '' ) . , october 18 , 1972 . the goal of the cwa is to restore all '' waters of the united states '' to their '' fishable '' and '' swimmable '' conditions . point source discharges , which originate mostly from municipal wastewater ( sewage ) and industrial wastewater discharges , have been regulated since enactment of the cwa in 1972 . pollutant loadings from these sources are tightly controlled through the issuance of national pollution discharge elimination system ( npdes ) permits . however , despite these controls , thousands of water bodies in the u.s . remain classified as '' impaired , '' meaning that they contain pollutants at levels higher than is considered safe by epa for the intended beneficial uses of the water . much of this impairment is due to polluted runoff , generally in urbanized watersheds ( in other us watersheds , agricultural pollution is a major source ) . to address the nationwide problem of stormwater pollution , congress broadened the cwa definition of '' point source '' in 1987 to include industrial stormwater discharges and municipal separate storm sewer systems ( '' ms4 '' ) . these facilities are required to obtain npdes permits . united states . water quality act of 1987 , , february 4 , 1987 . added cwa section 402 ( p ) , . in 2017 , about 855 large municipal systems ( serving populations of 100,000 or more ) , and 6,695 small systems are regulated by the permit system . . state and local requirements . epa has authorized 47 states to issue npdes permits . in addition to implementing the npdes requirements , many states and local governments have enacted their own stormwater management laws and ordinances , and some have published stormwater treatment design manuals . some of these state and local requirements have expanded coverage beyond the federal requirements . for example , the state of maryland requires erosion and sediment controls on construction sites of 5,000 sq ft ( 460 m 2 ) or more . state of maryland . code of maryland regulations ( comar ) . activities for which approved erosion and sediment control plans are required . sec . 26.17.01.05 . it is not uncommon for state agencies to revise their requirements and impose them upon counties and cities ; daily fines ranging as high as 25,000 can be imposed for failure to modify their local stormwater permitting for construction sites , for instance . nonpoint source pollution management . agricultural runoff ( except for concentrated animal feeding operations , or '' cafo '' ) is classified as nonpoint source pollution under the cwa . it is not included in the cwa definition of '' point source '' and therefore not subject to npdes permit requirements . the 1987 cwa amendments established a non-regulatory program at epa for nonpoint source pollution management consisting of research and demonstration projects . clean water act sec . 319 , . related programs are conducted by the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) in the u.s . department of agriculture . public education campaigns . education is a key component of stormwater management . a number of agencies and organizations have launched campaigns to teach the public about stormwater pollution , and how they can contribute to solving it . thousands of local governments in the u.s . have developed education programs as required by their npdes stormwater permits . one example of a local educational program is that of the west michigan environmental action council ( wmeac ) , which has coined the term hydrofilth to describe stormwater pollution , west michigan environmental action council ( wmeac ) , grand rapids , mi . '' stop hydrofilth . '' accessed 2013-08-26 . as part of its '' 15 to the river '' campaign . ( during a rain storm , it may take only 15 minutes for contaminated runoff in grand rapids , michigan to reach the grand river . ) wmeac . '' 15 to the river '' accessed 2013-08-26 . its outreach activities include a rain barrel distribution program and materials for homeowners on installing rain gardens . wmeac . '' rain gardens . beautiful solutions for water pollution . '' accessed 2013-08-26 . other public education campaigns highlight the importance of green infrastructure in slowing down and treating stormwater runoff . dupage county stormwater management launched the '' love blue . live green . '' outreach campaign on social media sites to educate the public on green infrastructure and other best management practices for stormwater runoff . dupage county stormwater management . '' education and outreach . '' accessed 2013-12-27 . articles , websites , pictures , videos and other media are disseminated to the public through this campaign . history . since humans began living in concentrated village or urban settings , stormwater runoff has been an issue . during the bronze age , housing took a more concentrated form , and impervious surfaces emerged as a factor in the design of early human settlements . some of the early incorporation of stormwater engineering is evidenced in ancient greece . a specific example of an early stormwater runoff system design is found in the archaeological recovery at minoan phaistos on crete . c . michael hogan , '' phaistos fieldnotes . '' the modern antiquarian ( 2007 ) . . see also . nationwide urban runoff program ( u.s . research program ) sanitary sewer overflow stochastic empirical loading and dilution model . references . external links . epa stormwater permit program stormwater model usgs stochastic empirical loading and dilution model ( seldm ) stormwater model usepa storm water management model ( swmm ) international stormwater best management practices ( bmp ) database stormwater youtube page