Curia

origins . the word curia is thought to derive from old latin coviria , meaning '' a gathering of men '' ( co- , '' together '' vir , '' man '' ) . webster 's third new international dictionary ( 1966 ) . in this sense , any assembly , public or private , could be called a curia . in addition to the roman curiae , voting assemblies known as curiae existed in other towns of latium , and similar institutions existed in other parts of italy . during the republic , local curiae were established in italian and provincial municipia and coloniae . in roman empire , local magistrates were often elected by municipal senates , which also came to be known as curiae . by extension , the word curia came to mean not just a gathering , but also the place where an assembly would gather , such as a meeting house . oxford classical dictionary , 2nd ed . ( 1970 ) . . roman curiae . in roman times , '' curia '' had two principal meanings . originally it applied to the wards of the comitia curiata . however , over time the name became applied to the senate house , which in its various incarnations housed meetings of the roman senate from the time of the kings until the beginning of the seventh century ad . comitia curiata . the most important curiae at rome were the 30 that together made up the comitia curiata . traditionally ascribed to the kings , each of the three tribes established by romulus , the ramnes , tities , and luceres , was divided into ten curiae . in theory , each gens ( family , clan ) belonged to a particular curia , although whether this was strictly observed throughout roman history is uncertain . harper 's dictionary of classical antiquities , second edition , harry thurston peck , editor ( 1897 ) each curia had a distinct name , said to have been derived from the names of some of the sabine women abducted by the romans in the time of romulus . however , some of the curiae evidently derived their names from particular districts or eponymous heroes . the curiae were probably established geographically , representing specific neighborhoods in rome , for which reason curia is sometimes translated as '' ward '' . only a few of the names of the 30 curiae have been preserved , including acculeia , calabra , faucia , foriensis , rapta , veliensis , tifata , and titia . marcus terentius varro , de lingua latina libri xxv . the assertion that the plebs were not members of the curiae , or that only the dependents ( clients ) of the patricians were admitted , and not entitled to vote , is expressly contradicted by dionysius dionysius of halicarnassus , romaike archaiologia iv . 12 , 20 . this argument is also refuted by mommsen . theodor mommsen , römische forschungen . each curia had its own sacra , in which its members , known as curiales , worshipped the gods of the state and other deities specific to the curia , with their own rites and ceremonies . sextus pompeius festus , epitome of marcus verrius flaccus , de verborum significatu . each curia had a meeting site and place of worship , named after the curia . originally , this may have been a simple altar , then a sacellum , and finally a meeting house . the curia was presided over by a curio ( plural , curiones ) , who was always at least 50 years old , and was elected for life . the curio undertook the religious affairs of the curia . he was assisted by another priest , known as the flamen curialis . when the 30 curiae gathered to make up the comitia curiata , they were presided over by a curio maximus , who until 209 bc was always a patrician . originally , the curio maximus was probably elected by the curiones , but in later times by the people themselves . each curia was attended by one lictor ; an assembly of the comitia curiata was attended by thirty lictors . cicero , de lege agraria contra rullum the comitia curiata voted to confirm the election of magistrates by passing a law called the lex curiata de imperio . it also witnessed the installation of priests , and adoptions , and the making of wills . the pontifex maximus may have presided over these ceremonies . the assembly probably possessed much greater authority before the establishment of the comitia centuriata , which gradually assumed many of the curiate assembly 's original functions . . senate house . since the roman kingdom , the meeting-house of the roman senate was known as the curia . the original meeting place was said to have been a temple built on the spot where the romans and sabines laid down their arms during the reign of romulus ( traditionally reigned 753–717 bc ) . the institution of the senate was always ascribed to romulus ; although the first senate was said to comprise 100 members , the earliest number which can be called certain is 300 , probably connected with the three tribes and 30 curiae also attributed to romulus . . curia hostilia . after the original temple was destroyed by fire , it was replaced by a new meeting house by tullus hostilius , the third king of rome ( traditionally reigned 673–642 bc ) . the curia hostilia stood on the north end of the comitium , where the comitia curiata and other roman assemblies met , and was oriented along the four cardinal points . after more than 500 years of service , the building was restored and enlarged by the dictator lucius cornelius sulla in 80 bc . sulla had doubled the senate 's membership from 300 to 600 , necessitating a larger building , which retained the original orientation of the curia hostilia , but extended further south into the comitium . in 52 bc , following the murder of publius clodius pulcher , his clientes set fire to the senate house , which was rebuilt by faustus cornelius sulla , son of the dictator . following this reconstruction , the building came to be called the curia cornelia . . curia julia . a generation after sulla enlarged the senate from 300 members to 600 , julius caesar increased its membership to 900 , necessitating the construction of a larger meeting house . the curia cornelia was demolished , and shortly before his death in 44 bc , caesar began the construction of a new building , which became known as the curia julia . this structure covered most of the comitium , and abandoned the original orientation of the previous curiae , pointing slightly northwest . the building featured a large central hall with a daïs for magistrates , and marble benches on one side . there was also a record office on one side . the building was completed by caesar 's grandnephew , augustus , the future emperor augustus , in 29 bc , although he reduced the senate itself to its former number of 600 . in ad 94 , the curia julia was rebuilt along caesar 's original plan by the emperor domitian , who also restored the former orientation of the curia hostilia . the building was damaged by fire during the reign of carinus in 283 , and again restored under his successor , diocletian . the roman senate is last mentioned in ad 600 . in 630 , pope honorius i transformed the senate house into the church of sant'adriano al foro , preserving the structure at its full height . in 1923 , the church and an adjacent convent were bought by the italian government . the building was further restored from 1935 to 1937 , removing various medieval additions , to reveal the original roman architecture . . curiae veteres . the curiae veteres was the earliest sanctuary of the thirty curiae . it is discussed by both varro and by tacitus , who mentions it as one point of the palatine pomerium of roma quadrata . tac . annales 12.24 it is likely that this shrine was located at the northeast corner of the palatine hill . its remains have likely been identified in excavations carried out by clementina panella . c . panella . '' curiae veteres . nuovi dati sulla frequentazione del santuario in età tardo-repubblicana . '' scienze dell'antichità . storia , archeologia , antropologia 25 fasc.1 , p . 41-71 ( 2019 ) as the republic continued , the curiae grew too large to meet conveniently at the curiae veteres , and a new meeting place , the curiae novae , was constructed . a few of the curiae continued to meet at the curiae veteres due to specific religious obligations . cil vi.975 a.f . ferrandes , 2013 . '' il ripristino delle curiae veteres . '' in scavare nel centro di roma . storia , uomini , paesaggi , edited by c . panella , 118-23 . rome . . municipal curiae . in the roman empire a town council was known as a curia , or sometimes an ordo , or boule . the existence of such a governing body was the mark of an independent city . municipal curiae were co-optive , and their members , the decurions , sat for life . their numbers varied greatly according to the size of the city . in the western empire , one hundred seems to have been a common number , but in the east five hundred was customary , on the model of the athenian boule . however , by the fourth century , curial duties had become onerous , and it was difficult to fill all the posts ; often candidates had to be nominated . the emperor constantine exempted christians from serving in the curiae , which led to many rich pagans claiming to be priests in order to escape these duties . a . h . m . jones , the later roman empire , p . 724 . . other curiae . the concept of the curia as a governing body , or the court where such a body met , carried on into medieval times , both as a secular institution , and in the church . medieval curiae . in medieval times , a king 's court was frequently known as the curia regis , consisting of the king 's chief magnates and councilors . in england , the curia regis gradually developed into parliament . in france , the curia regis or conseil du roi developed in the twelfth century , with the term gradually becoming applied to a judicial body , and falling out of use by the fourteenth century . roman catholic church . in the roman catholic church , the administrative body of the holy see is known as the roman curia . it is through this curia that the roman pontiff conducts the business of the church as a whole . . modern usage . thumb the court of justice of the european union uses '' curia '' ( in roman script ) in its official emblem . the term curia may refer to separate electoral colleges in a system of reserved political positions ( reserved seats ) , e.g . during the mandatory palestine at the third election ( 1931 ) of the asefat hanivharim there were three curiae , for the ashkenazi jews , the sephardi jews and for the yemeni jews . fannie fern andrews , the holy land under mandate , boston and new york , houghton mifflin company – the riverside press cambridge , 1931 , 2 vol . ( ch . xiv – building a jewish corporate life , vol . ii , 1–32 ) moshe burstein , self-government of the jews in palestine since 1900 , tel aviv , hapoel hatzair , 1934 esco foundation for palestine , inc . , palestine . a study of jewish , arab and british policies , new haven , yale university press , 1947 , 2 vol . ( the growth and organization of the jewish community , vol.ii , 404–414 ) jacob c . hurewitz , the struggle for palestine , new york , norton and company , 1950 ( ch . 3 – the political structure of the yishuv , 38–50 ) in the united states supreme court an interested third party to a case may file a brief as an amicus curiae . the federal palace of switzerland , the seat of the swiss confederation , bears the inscription curia confœderationis helveticæ . see also . constitution of the roman republic . references . further reading . bond , sarah e . 2014 . “ curial communiqué : memory , propaganda , and the roman senate house ” in aspects of ancient institutions and geography : studies in honor of richard j.a . talbert . impact of empire , 19 . edited by lee l . brice and daniëlle slootjes . leiden : brill , 84-102 . crofton-sleigh , lissa . 2018 . '' the curia in aeneid 7 . '' illinois classical studies 43.1 . gorski , gilbert j . and james e . packer . 2015 . the roman forum : a reconstruction and architectural guide . new york : cambridge university press . heinzelmann , michael . 2011 . '' the imperial building complex of s . maria antiqua in rome : an incomplete senate building of domitian ? '' anales de arqueología cordobesa , 21-22 : 57-80 . millar , fergus . 1989 . “ political power in mid-republican rome . curia or comitium ? . ” the journal of roman studies lxxix , 138-150 . santangeli valenzani , riccardo . 2006 . “ the seat and memory of power : caesar 's curia and forum . ” in julius caesar in western culture . edited by maria wyke . oxford : blackwell , 85-94 . external links .