Travel

etymology . the origin of the word '' travel '' is most likely lost to history . the term '' travel '' may originate from the old french word travail , which means 'work' . entymoligical dictionary ( definition ) . retrieved on 10 december 2011 according to the merriam webster dictionary , the first known use of the word travel was in the 14th century . it also states that the word comes from middle english travailen , travelen ( which means to torment , labor , strive , journey ) and earlier from old french travailler ( which means to work strenuously , toil ) . in english we still occasionally use the words '' travail '' , which means struggle . according to simon winchester in his book the best travelers ' tales ( 2004 ) , the words '' travel '' and '' travail '' both share an even more ancient root : a roman instrument of torture called the tripalium ( in latin it means '' three stakes '' , as in to impale ) . this link may reflect the extreme difficulty of travel in ancient times . travel in modern times may or may not be much easier depending upon the destination . travel to mount everest , the amazon rainforest , extreme tourism , and adventure travel are more difficult forms of travel . travel can also be more difficult depending on the method of travel , such as by bus , cruise ship , or even by bullock cart . buzard , j . ( 1993 ) the beaten track . european tourism literature , and the ways to 'culture ' 1800 - 1918 . oxford : oxford university press . purpose and motivation . reasons for traveling include recreation , '' the road to travel : purpose of travel . '' university of florida , college of liberal arts and sciences . ( compilation for history 3931/rel 3938 course . ) accessed july 2011 . tourism or vacationing , research travel , the gathering of information , visiting people , volunteer travel for charity , migration to begin life somewhere else , religious pilgrimages and mission trips , business travel , trade , commuting , and other reasons , such as to obtain health care or waging or refugee or for the enjoyment of traveling . travellers may use human-powered transport such as walking or cycling ; or vehicles , such as public transport , automobiles , trains and airplanes . motives for travel include : pleasure relaxation discovery and exploration intercultural communications taking personal time for building interpersonal relationships . history of travel . travel dates back to antiquity where wealthy greeks and romans would travel for leisure to their summer homes and villas in cities such as pompeii and baiae . while early travel tended to be slower , more dangerous , and more dominated by trade and migration , cultural and technological advances over many years have tended to mean that travel has become easier and more accessible . '' a brief visual history of travel '' . accessed may 2017 . mankind has come a long way in transportation since christopher columbus sailed to the new world from spain in 1492 , an expedition which took over 10 weeks to arrive at the final destination ; to the 21st century where aircraft allow travel from spain to the united states overnight . travel in the middle ages offered hardships and challenges , however , it was important to the economy and to society . the wholesaling depended ( for example ) on merchants dealing with/through caravans or sea-voyagers , end-user retailing often demanded the services of many itinerant peddlers wandering from village to hamlet , gyrovagues ( wandering monks ) and wandering friars brought theology and pastoral care to neglected areas , traveling minstrels practiced the never-ending tour , and armies ranged far and wide in various crusades and in sundry other wars . pilgrimages were common in both the european and islamic world and involved streams of travelers both locally ( canterbury tales-style ) and internationally . in the late 16th century it became fashionable for young european aristocrats and wealthy upper-class men to travel to significant european cities as part of their education in the arts and literature . this was known as the grand tour , it included cities such as london , paris , venice , florence , and rome . however , the french revolution brought with it the end of the grand tour . travel by water often provided more comfort and speed than land-travel , at least until the advent of a network of railways in the 19th century . travel for the purpose of tourism is reported to have started around this time when people began to travel for fun as travel was no longer a hard and challenging task . this was capitalized on by people like thomas cook selling tourism packages where trains and hotels were booked together . airships and airplanes took over much of the role of long-distance surface travel in the 20th century , notably after the second world war where there was a surplus of both aircraft and pilots . indeed , air travel has become so ubiquitous in the 21st century that one woman , alexis alford , visited all 196 countries before the age of 21 . . geographic types . travel may be local , regional , national ( domestic ) or international . in some countries , non-local internal travel may require an internal passport , while international travel typically requires a passport and visa . a trip may also be part of a round-trip , which is a particular type of travel whereby a person moves from one location to another and returns . . travel safety . authorities emphasize the importance of taking precautions to ensure travel safety . '' tips for traveling abroad . '' bureau of consular affairs , u.s . department of state . accessed july 2011 . when traveling abroad , the odds favor a safe and incident-free trip , however , travelers can be subject to difficulties , crime and violence . '' a safe trip abroad . '' bureau of consular affairs , u.s . department of state . accessed july 2011 . some safety considerations include being aware of one 's surroundings , avoiding being the target of a crime , leaving copies of one 's passport and itinerary information with trusted people , obtaining health insurance valid in the country being visited and registering with one 's national embassy when arriving in a foreign country . many countries do not recognize drivers ' licenses from other countries ; however most countries accept international driving permits . '' road safety overseas . '' bureau of consular affairs , u.s . department of state . accessed july 2011 . vehicle insurance policies issued in one 's own country are often invalid in foreign countries , and it is often a requirement to obtain temporary auto insurance valid in the country being visited . it is also advisable to become oriented with the driving rules and -regulations of destination countries . wearing a seat belt is highly advisable for safety reasons ; many countries have penalties for violating seatbelt laws . there are three main statistics which may be used to compare the safety of various forms of travel ( based on a detr survey in october 2000 ) : the risks of travel