Alabama Claims

british political involvement . the british prime minister lord palmerston and foreign secretary lord john russell failed to stop the alabama from putting to sea from the shipyards of john laird sons and company in birkenhead . the united states legation in london had explicitly opposed this , and the american minister to britain , charles francis adams , charged that the ship was bound for the confederacy , where it would be used against the united states . though both the prime minister and foreign secretary were thought to favor the confederacy at the time of alabama construction , british public opinion was divided on the issue , and mps such as richard cobden campaigned against it . the subsequent departure of the alabama proved to be publicly embarrassing , and palmerston and russell were later forced to admit that the ship should not have been allowed to depart . the government had requested advice from the lord chief justice of england and wales , sir alexander cockburn , who ruled that her release did not violate britain 's neutrality , because she was not outfitted with guns at the time that they left british ports . hansard . the foreign enlistment act- question , march 27 , 1863 . in the next year , britain detained two ironclad warships constructed in birkenhead and destined for the confederacy . as a result of the uproar over the alabama , palmerston instructed the british admiralty to tender an offer for the purchase of the ships . they had been bought by a go-between , monsieur bravay of paris ( who had ordered their construction as intermediary for confederate principals ) . the claims . in what was called the alabama claims , in 1869 the united states claimed direct and collateral damage against great britain . in the particular case of the alabama , the united states claimed that britain had violated neutrality by allowing five warships to be constructed , especially the alabama , knowing that it would eventually enter into naval service with the confederacy . other particulars included the following : in the summer of 1862 , the british-built steam warship oreto , later renamed the css florida , was delivered to nassau in the bahamas with the secret understanding that it would be later transferred to the confederate states navy . british royal navy admiral george willes watson ( 1827–1897 ) aided the transfer , and watson 's actions were reviewed by the tribunal . kenneth m . startup , '' 'this small act of courtesy : ' admiral sir george willes watson , trouble , trials , and turmoil in bahama waters , '' journal of the bahamas historical society , october 2009 , vol . 31 , pp . 57–62 . other warships included the ( built at alexander stephen and sons in glasgow ) , ( built at john laird and sons , like the alabama ) , and ( built at j & w dudgeon in london ) . on february 17 , 1883 , joseph henderson , john van deusen , william anderson , and james callahan petitioned the united states , via the alabama claims award , for compensation of their loss of the pilot boat william bell during the civil war . henderson and callahan had to testify to their ownership and status as sandy hook pilots during the court of commissioners of alabama claims . on june 5 , 1883 , they were compensated for their ownership ( henderson got 6,170.31 for his 5/16 shares ) in the william bell . . payment . senator charles sumner of massachusetts , the chairman of the u.s . senate foreign relations committee , originally wanted to ask for 2 billion in damages , or alternatively , the ceding of canada to the united states . when american secretary of state william h . seward negotiated the alaska purchase in 1867 , he intended it as the first step in a comprehensive plan to gain control of the entire northwest pacific coast . seward was a firm believer in '' manifest destiny '' , primarily for its commercial advantages to the united states . seward expected the west coast province of british columbia to seek annexation to the united states and thought britain might accept this in exchange for the alabama claims . soon other u.s . politicians endorsed annexation , with the goal of annexing british columbia , the central canadian red river colony ( later manitoba ) , and eastern nova scotia , in exchange for dropping the damage claims . the idea reached a peak in the spring and summer of 1870 , with american expansionists , canadian separatists , and british anti-imperialists seemingly combining forces . the plan was dropped for several reasons : london continued to stall , american commercial and financial groups pressed washington for a quick settlement of the dispute in cash , canada offered to have british columbia enter the canadian confederation on very generous terms , which bolstered nationalist sentiment in british columbia that already favored fealty to the british empire , congress became preoccupied with reconstruction , and most americans showed little interest in territorial expansion after the long years , expenses and losses of the civil war . doris w . dashew , '' the story of an illusion : the plan to trade alabama claims for canada , '' civil war history , december 1969 , vol . 15 issue 4 , pp . 332–348 david e . shi , '' seward 's attempt to annex british columbia , 1865–1869 , '' pacific historical review , may 1978 , vol . 47 issue 2 , pp . 217–238 . . treaty of washington . in 1871 , hamilton fish , president ulysses s . grant 's secretary of state , worked out an agreement with british representative sir john rose to create a commission in washington comprising six members from the british empire and six members from the united states . its assignment was to resolve the alabama claims , refinancing , and other international disputes between canada and the united states by treaty . smith , jean edward ( 2001 ) . grant . new york : simon & schuster paperbacks . pp . 510 , 511 . on march 8 , 1871 , the treaty of washington was signed at the state department and the u.s . senate ratified the treaty on may 24 , 1871 . smith ( 2001 ) , 512–514 . in accord with the treaty , an international arbitration tribunal met in geneva . the treaty included the settlement process for the alabama claims , settled disputed atlantic fisheries and the san juan boundary ( concerning the oregon boundary line ) . britain and the united states became perpetual allies after the treaty , with britain having expressed regret over the alabama damages . smith ( 2001 ) , 512–515 . . the tribunal . the tribunal was composed of representatives : britain : sir alexander cockburn united states : charles francis adams , with william maxwell evarts serving as counsel italy : federico sclopis switzerland : jakob stämpfli brazil : marcos antônio de araújo , 2nd baron of itajubá . negotiations had taken place in suitland , maryland , at the estate of businessman samuel taylor suit . the tribunal session was held in a reception room of the town hall in geneva , switzerland . this has been named . the final award of 15,500,000 formed part of the treaty of washington and was paid out by great britain in 1872 . this was balanced against damages of 1,929,819 paid by the united states to great britain for illegal union blockade practices and ceded fishing privileges . thomas a . bailey , a diplomatic history of the american people , ny ( 1958 ) , 6th ed . , pp . 388–389 . . legacy . this established the principle of international arbitration , and launched a movement to codify public international law with hopes for finding peaceful solutions to international disputes . the arbitration of the alabama claims was a precursor to the hague convention , the league of nations , the world court , and the united nations . cook ( 1975 ) the alabama claims inspired international jurist gustave moynier to pursue legal arrangements to enforce international treaties in the 1870s . the soviet union carefully studied the alabama claims when assessing whether it could claim damages in response to allied intervention in the russian civil war . according to vladimir nabokov , the core incident has a legacy in literary reference , being used as a plot device in anna karenina , by leo tolstoy . in one early passage , stiva oblonsky has a dream that may show his having read of the alabama claims through the kölnische zeitung . and in the jules verne novel around the world in eighty days inspector fix warns phileas fogg that the riot they encounter in san francisco may be connected to the claim . there is a passing reference to the alabama claims in the vicar of bullhampton by anthony trollope . trollope , anthony ( 1870 ) , the vicar of bullhampton , ch.47 . see also . prize ( law ) blockade runners of the american civil war the great rapprochement . references . bibliography . ( see external links ) , reprinted in the michigan historical reprint series , , reprinted in blegen , theodore c . '' a plan for the union of british north america and the united states , 1866 . '' mississippi valley historical review 4.4 ( 1918 ) : 470-483 online . , the standard scholarly history . further reading . '' the united states , '' the times , september 23 , 1873 , 8d . external links . geneva arbitration , 1872 ( in english and french ) cartoons from harper 's weekly : '' john bull 's neutrality '' , november 1 , 1862 '' king andy '' , november 3 , 1866 . note that the medallion worn by secretary of the navy gideon welles is engraved with the number '' 290 '' , the original dockyard number for the alabama . '' the apple of discord at the geneva convention '' , october 5 , 1872 '' columbia lays aside her laurels '' , november 9 , 1872 . note that the '' laurels '' laid aside are those won at the geneva arbitration . great britain and the american civil war op . cit . at project gutenberg la salle de l'alabama in the hotel de ville , geneva edwin h . abbott papers , w.s . hoole special collections library , university of alabama