John T. Scopes

early life . scopes was born in 1900 to thomas scopes and mary alva brown , who lived on a farm in paducah , kentucky . john was the fifth child and only son . the family moved to danville , illinois , when he was a teenager . in 1917 , he moved to salem , illinois , where he was a member of the class of 1919 at salem high school . he attended the university of illinois briefly before leaving for health reasons . he earned a degree at the university of kentucky in 1924 , with a major in law and a minor in geology . scopes moved to dayton where he became the rhea county high school 's football coach , and occasionally served as a substitute teacher . trial . scopes ' involvement in the so-called scopes trial came about after the american civil liberties union ( aclu ) announced that it would finance a test case challenging the constitutionality of the butler act if they could find a tennessee teacher who was willing to act as a defendant . a band of businessmen in dayton , tennessee , led by engineer and geologist george rappleyea , saw this as an opportunity to get publicity for their town , and they approached scopes . rappleyea pointed out that while the butler act prohibited the teaching of human evolution , the state required teachers to use the assigned textbook , hunter 's civic biology ( 1914 ) , which included a chapter on evolution . rappleyea argued that teachers were essentially required to break the law . when asked about the test case , scopes was initially reluctant to get involved . after some discussion he told the group gathered in robinson 's drugstore , '' if you can prove that i 've taught evolution and that i can qualify as a defendant , then i 'll be willing to stand trial . '' by the time the trial had begun , the defense team included clarence darrow , dudley field malone , john neal , arthur garfield hays and frank mcelwee . the prosecution team , led by tom stewart , included brothers herbert hicks and sue k . hicks , wallace haggard , father and son pairings ben and j . gordon mckenzie , and william jennings bryan and william jennings bryan jr . the elder bryan had spoken at scopes ' high school commencement , and remembered the defendant was laughing while he was giving the address to the graduating class six years earlier . the case ended on july 21 , 1925 , with a guilty verdict , and scopes was fined 100 ( roughly 1,460 in 2020 ) . the case was appealed to the tennessee supreme court . in a 3–1 decision written by chief justice grafton green , the butler act was held to be constitutional , but the court overturned scopes 's conviction because the judge had set the fine instead of the jury . see tenn . const . art . vi , s . 14 ; see also , scopes v . state , 154 tenn . 105 , 289 s.w . 363 ( 1926 ) the butler act remained in effect until may 18 , 1967 , when it was repealed by the tennessee legislature . scopes may have actually been innocent of the crime to which his name is inexorably linked . after the trial , he admitted to reporter william kinsey hutchinson , '' i did n't violate the law , '' explaining that he had skipped the evolution lesson , and that his lawyers had coached his students to go on the stand ; the dayton businessmen had assumed that he had violated the law . hutchinson did not file his story until after the scopes appeal was decided in 1927 . in 1955 , the trial was made into a play titled inherit the wind starring paul muni as a character based on clarence darrow , and ed begley as a character based on william jennings bryan . in 1960 , a film version of the play starred spencer tracy as the darrow character and fredric march as the bryan character . both the play and the film engage in literary license with the facts . for example , '' bertram cates '' ( the character representing scopes ) is shown being arrested in class , thrown in jail , burned in effigy by frenzied , mean-spirited , and ignorant townspeople , and taunted by a fire-snorting preacher . '' matthew harrison brady '' ( bryan ) , an almost comical fanatic , dramatically dies of a '' busted belly '' while attempting to deliver his summation in a chaotic courtroom . none of that actually happened in dayton , tennessee , during the trial . . life after the trial . the results of the scopes trial affected him professionally and personally . his public image was mocked in animation , cartoons and other media in the following years . scopes himself retreated from the public eye and focused his attention on his career . in september 1925 , he enrolled in the graduate school of university of chicago to finish his studies in geology . & nbsp ; evidence of harassment by the press was highlighted by frank thorne : “ you may be interested to know that mr . john t . scopes of anti-evolution trial fame expects to take up the study of geology as a graduate student of chicago this fall…please do what you can to protect him from the importunities of chicago reporters….he is a modest and unassuming young chap , and has been subjected to a great deal more limelight than he likes . ” frank thorne to donald glassman , september 14 , 1925 , science service record ( ru7091 ) , box 83 , folder i . a year later , the tennessee supreme court decision of 1926 prompted the press to pursue scopes again . during this time , he wrote to thorne , “ i am tired of fooling with them . ” j.t . scopes to frank thorne , no date on letter other than '' sunday '' but it was received in the science service office on february 8 , 1927 , science service records ( ru7091 ) , box 90 , folder 5 . scopes was referring to the local chapter house of the gamma alpha graduate scientific fraternity . see also john t . scopes to kirtley f . mather , january 24 , 1927 , denison university archives , 12p mi box 19 , k . b . bork biography of kirtley mather , '' scopes , john t./scopes trial . '' & nbsp ; it is evident that the media attention was affecting scopes emotionally . even worse , the depression affected his career . & nbsp ; after graduation , he was '' barred '' see , for example , frank thorne to winterton c . curtis , march 12 , 1931 , science service records ( ru7091 ) , box 123 , folder 4 ; and j . harlen bretz to frank thorne , december 7 , 1931 , science service records ( ru7091 ) , box 122 , folder 7 . from career opportunities in tennessee , requiring him and his wife to move into his childhood home in kentucky around 1930 . having failed in education , scopes attempted a political career the summer of 1932 as a kentucky congressman . '' scopes of evolution frame seeks congress seat , '' chicago daily tribune , august 13 , 1932 ; '' scopes names in house race , '' los angeles times , august 13 , 1932 ; '' 'monkey trial ' figure named for congress , '' new york times , august 13 , 1932 ; and '' kentucky official majority is 185,858 , '' washington post , november 29 , 1932 . he registered on the socialist ticket and suffered defeat . & nbsp ; in the end , scopes returned to the oil industry , serving as an oil expert for the united production corporation , later known as united gas corporation . there , he first worked out of beeville , texas , then in the company ’ s houston office until 1940 , and later in shreveport , louisiana , where he stayed until his death . united gas merged into what was pennzoil in 1968 . later in his life , the media surrounding scopes calmed down . & nbsp ; occasionally , he was dragged into the spotlight , such as to attend the 1960 inherit the wind premiere , accept the key to the city , and participate in the celebration of john t . scopes day . scopes and the story of his trial were featured in the first segment of the october 10 , 1960 , episode of the television game show to tell the truth . in june 1967 , scopes wrote center of the storm : memoirs of john t . scopes . the butler act was repealed that same year . personal life and death . scopes married mildred elizabeth scopes ( née walker ) ( 1905–1990 ) . together they had two sons : john thomas jr . and william clement '' bill '' . he died on october 21 , 1970 , of cancer in shreveport , louisiana , at the age of 70 . . see also . mildred seydell . references . sources . . further reading . books web . external links .