The Final Countdown (film)

plot . in 1980 , the aircraft carrier is departing naval station pearl harbor for naval exercises in the mid-pacific ocean . the ship takes on a civilian observer — warren lasky ( martin sheen ) a systems analyst for tideman industries working as an efficiency expert for the u.s . defense department — on the orders of his reclusive employer , mr . tideman , whose secretive major defense contractor company designed and built the nuclear-powered warship . once at sea , the nimitz encounters a mysterious electrically-charged storm-like vortex . while the ship passes through it , radar and other equipment become unresponsive and everyone aboard falls into agony . initially unsure of what has happened to them , and having lost radio contact with u.s . pacific fleet command at pearl harbor , captain yelland ( kirk douglas ) , commander of the aircraft carrier , fears that there may have been a nuclear strike on hawaii or the continental united states . he orders general quarters and launches an rf-8 crusader reconnaissance aircraft . the aircraft returns after photographing hawaii but the images appear to date from 1941 , showing an intact row of u.s . pacific fleet battleships moored on '' battleship row '' at pearl harbor , a sight which has not existed for four decades . when a surface contact is spotted on the radar , yelland launches the ready alert , with two grumman f-14 tomcat fighter jets from vf-84 , to intercept . the patrol witnesses a civilian wooden yacht , gatsby , being strafed and destroyed by two imperial japanese navy mitsubishi a6m zero fighters , killing three of the crew members . the f-14s are ordered to drive off the zeros without firing , but when the zeros inadvertently head towards the nimitz , yelland gives clearance to shoot them down . the nimitz rescues survivors from the yacht : prominent u.s . senator samuel chapman ( charles durning ) , his aide laurel scott ( katherine ross ) , her dog charlie , and one of the two downed zero pilots ( soon-tek oh ) . commander owens ( james farentino ) , an amateur historian , recognizes chapman as a politician who could have been franklin d . roosevelt 's running mate ( and his potential successor ) during his final re-election bid , had chapman not disappeared shortly before the attack on pearl harbor on december 7 , 1941 . when a grumman e-2 hawkeye scouting craft discovers the 1st air fleet task force further north in unpatrolled waters , poised to launch its attack on pearl harbor , the nimitz crew realize that they have been transported back in time to the day before the attack . yelland has to decide whether to destroy the japanese fleet and alter the course of history or to stand by and allow history to proceed as they know it . the american civilians and the zero pilot are kept isolated , but while being questioned , the japanese pilot obtains a rifle , kills two marine guards , and takes laurel , owens , and lasky hostage . he threatens to kill them unless he is given access to a radio to warn the japanese fleet about the nimitz . lasky tells commander owens to recite and describe the secret plans for the japanese attack , and the japanese pilot lowers his guard and is overcome and shot by marines . laurel and owens develop an attraction for each other . chapman is outraged that yelland knows of the impending japanese attack but has not told anyone else , and demands to be taken to pearl harbor to warn the naval authorities . yelland instead orders owens to fly the civilians and sufficient supplies via helicopter to an isolated hawaiian island , assuming they will eventually be rescued . when they arrive , chapman realizes he has been tricked and tries to force the pilot to fly to pearl harbor , but instead causes an explosion that destroys the craft and kills everyone on board , which strand laurel and owens on the island . the nimitz launches a massive strike force against the incoming japanese forces , but the time storm returns . after a futile attempt to outrun the storm , yelland recalls the strike force , and the ship and its aircraft safely return to 1980 , leaving the past relatively unchanged . upon the return of the nimitz to pearl harbor , the pacific fleet admirals board the ship to investigate the nimitzs bizarre disappearance . meanwhile , lasky leaves the ship with laurel 's dog , charlie , and encounters the mysterious mr . tideman face-to-face . tideman is revealed to be a much older owens , along with his wife , laurel . owens says to lasky that they have a lot to talk about . cast . production . peter douglas was the driving force behind the final countdown . kjolseth , pablo . '' home video reviews : the final countdown '' . turner classic movies . retrieved : september 7 , 2012 . with a limited budget and a promising script , he was able to attract interest from the u.s . navy . officials from the department of defense offered full cooperation after seeing a script , but insisted that for safety and operational readiness , the film schedule would be dependent on the '' on location '' naval consultant , william micklos . suid 2002 , pp . 421–423 . principal photography took place at naval air station key west , naval station norfolk , and off the florida keys , over two five-week periods in 1979 . scenes at pearl harbor consisted of mainly stock footage with most of the final countdown exteriors shot on the nimitz while at sea , and at drydock for interiors . during operations , an emergency landing took place with the production crew allowed to film the recovery of the aircraft on the nimitz ; the sequence appeared in the final film . crew members of the nimitz were used as extras , a few with speaking parts ; a total of 48 of the crew appear as '' actors '' in the final credits . '' the final countdown dvd ( end credits ) '' . blue underground , 2004 . the difficulties in filming a modern jet fighter were soon apparent when the first setup to record an f-14 takeoff at naval station norfolk , virginia , resulted in both camera and operator being pitched down a runway . gregory , david . '' the final countdown dvd ( overlaid commentary ) '' . blue underground , 2004 . dissension in the production crew led to major changes during location shooting , with a number of the crew being fired and replaced . taylor 's direction was considered workmanlike , as he had a reputation for bringing projects in on time and on budget , but suggestions from u.s . naval aviators were ultimately incorporated into the shooting schedules with the '' b '' crew placed in charge of all the aerial sequences that became the primary focus of the film . gregory , david . interview with lloyd kaufman ( documentary featurette that accompanies 'the final countdown ' dvd ) . blue underground , 2004 . in order to film the aerial sequences , panavision cameras were mounted on naval aircraft while camera-equipped aircraft and helicopters were leased from frank tallman , including a bell 206 helicopter , a learjet 35 , and a b-25 bomber converted into a camera platform . three mitsubishi a6m zero replicas , originally built for the film tora ! tora ! tora ! ( 1970 ) , were flown by pilots from the confederate air force , now called the commemorative air force . cooper , gregory . '' zero pilot journal '' . caf dispatch , 1979 . two of the replicas were featured in a dogfight with f-14 tomcats ; it was the first time such a dissimilar engagement had appeared in film , with the aircraft 's ' '' totally different speeds.environments and weaponry '' . gregory , david . '' starring the jolly rogers '' —interviews with the jolly rogers f-14 fighter squadron ( documentary featurette that accompanies 'the final countdown ' dvd ) . blue underground , 2004 . in one scene where an f-14 '' thumps '' a zero by flying under and streaking upward in front of the slower aircraft , the resultant '' jet blast '' of turbulent air was so intense that the yokes of both of the zeros in the scene were violently wrenched out of the pilots ' hands and caused both aircraft to momentarily tumble out of control . the lead pilot 's headset , along with his watch , were ripped off and out of the open canopy of his zero , resulting in a few anxious moments as the f-14 pilots were unable to establish contact . during a scene when a zero fires on an f-14 , in order to get on the '' six '' of the low and slow zero , the jet fighter did a low pull up that ended just above the ocean in a screaming recovery . during the climactic attack on pearl harbor , scenes reproduced in monochrome from tora ! tora ! tora ! featured aichi d3a dive bombers , mitsubishi a6m zero fighters and nakajima b5n torpedo bombers . muir , john kenneth . '' cult movie review : the final countdown ( 1980 ) '' . john kenneth muir 's reflections on film/tv , august 28 , 2008 . retrieved : may 18 , 2012 . . aircraft appearing in the production . douglas ea-3b skywarrior grumman f-14 tomcat grumman e-2 hawkeye grumman a-6 intruder lockheed s-3 viking ltv a-7 corsair ii mcdonnell douglas f-4 phantom ii ( briefly ) north american a-5 vigilante ( briefly ) north american t-6 texan modified to resemble mitsubishi a6m zero north american t-6 texan modified to resemble nakajima kate sikorsky sh-3 sea king vought f-8 crusader vultee bt-13 valiant modified to resemble aichi d3a . release . the final countdown was released to theaters in the united states on august 1 , 1980 . a novelization by martin caidin , based on the screenplay , was released in the same month . caidin 1980 , p . versa . . home video . the film was released on home video , on march & nbsp ; 30 , 2004 . it was later released by blue underground on a two-dvd set ( with both full-screen and widescreen formats ) and a special two-disc limited edition set with a hologram cover . each dvd edition was accompanied by special featurettes , including a '' behind-the-scenes '' documentary and a commentary track by the producer and other studio principals . the final countdown dvd . blue underground . on november & nbsp ; 4 , 2008 , a high-definition two-disc blu-ray set was released , but lacked some of the earlier background materials . the final countdown blu-ray . blue underground . retrieved : september 3 , 2012 . . reception . critical reception . the final countdown was promoted as a summer blockbuster and received mixed reviews from critics . vincent canby of the new york times considered it more of an interesting , behind-the-scenes tour of nimitz . '' we see planes landing and taking off with beautiful precision and , just to let us know that things do n't always run smoothly on nimitz , we also see one plane , which has lost its landing hook , landing safely anyway because of the ship 's emergency gear . '' canby , vincent . '' 'the final countdown ' ( 1980 ) - carrier nimitz stars in 'countdown ' '' . the new york times , august 1 , 1980 . roger ebert commented that '' logic does n't matter in a star wars ( -like ) movie '' . he went on to clarify : '' unfortunately , the movie makes such a mess of it that the biggest element of interest is the aircraft carrier itself . '' ebert , roger . '' the final countdown '' . chicago sun times , august 5 , 1980 . retrieved : may 7 , 2012 . later reviews concentrated on the intriguing aspect of the time travel story , again stressing that the military hardware was the real star . '' the final countdown ( 1980 , usa ) '' . black hole reviews , april 2 , 2009 . retrieved : may 7 , 2012 . carrazzoa , vince . '' the final countdown ( 1980 ) '' . dvdnet . retrieved : may 7 , 2012 . the u.s . navy sponsored the film premiere and exploited the film as a recruiting tool to the extent that the theatrical poster appeared in u.s . navy recruiting offices shortly after the film 's release . ebert and gene siskel selected the film as one of their '' dogs of the year '' in a 1980 episode of sneak previews . christopher john reviewed the final countdown in ares magazine 5 and commented that '' there is nothing wrong with what is on the screen in final countdown ; what is on the screen , however , is only half of the film . maybe someday , like close encounters of the third kind , someone will go back and put in the missing half-hour of this movie . '' . box office . the film grossed 6.1 million in its first 10 days of release from 630 theatres and earned a total of 16.6 & nbsp ; million in the united states and canada . . awards . nominee , best science fiction film of year—saturn award ( peter vincent douglas ) nominee , best actor—saturn award ( kirk douglas ) winner , goldene leinwand ( german box office award ) . see also . axis of time trilogy forever young – time travel genre through cryostasis ( clathrate hydrates ) g.i . samurai operation rainbow – a.k.a . the philadelphia experiment , which inspired the film of the latter name somewhere in time the philadelphia experiment – the reverse story ( world war ii-era navy personnel transported through time to the 1980s ) time after time zipang . notes . references . sources . caidin , martin . the final countdown . new york : bantam , 1980 . dolan , edward f . jr . hollywood goes to war . london : bison books , 1985 . frietas , gary a . war movies : the belle & blade guide to classic war videos . bandon , oregon : robert d . reed publishers , 2011 . kaufman , lloyd , trent haaga , and adam jahnke . make your own damn movie ! : secrets of a renegade director . los angeles : l.a . weekly books , 2003 . suid , lawrence h . guts & glory : the making of the american military image in film . lexington , kentucky : the university press of kentucky , 2002 . toland , john . infamy : pearl harbor and its aftermath . new york : berkley , 1991 . external links .