Hacker culture

definition . the term hacker was first coined in the fourteenth century , as a term for someone who did not have a lot of knowledge in something . the jargon file , an influential but not universally accepted compendium of hacker slang , defines hacker as '' a person who enjoys exploring the details of programmable systems and stretching their capabilities , as opposed to most users , who prefer to learn only the minimum necessary . '' the request for comments ( rfc ) 1392 , the internet users ' glossary , amplifies this meaning as '' a person who delights in having an intimate understanding of the internal workings of a system , computers and computer networks in particular . '' internet users ' glossary ( request for comments 1392 ) , january 1993 the media started using the word '' hacker '' heavily when google maps was released to the public in 2005 . people would mess with google 's code to add whatever they wanted to the map , which caught wind with the media and hackers began to have a negative connotation . . hacker vs . cracker . some common nicknames among this culture include '' crackers '' who are unskilled thieves who mainly rely on luck . others include '' phreak '' which refers to a type of skilled crackers and '' warez d00dz '' which is a kind of cracker that acquires reproductions of copyrighted software . furthermore , there are other hackers who are hired to test security , they are called '' pentesters '' or '' tiger teams '' . hackers from this subculture tend to emphatically differentiate themselves from what they pejoratively call '' crackers '' ; those who are generally referred to by media and members of the general public using the term '' hacker '' , and whose primary focusbe it to malign or for malevolent purposeslies in exploiting weaknesses in computer security . as documented in the jargon file , these hackers are disappointed by the mass media and general public 's usage of the word hacker to refer to security breakers , calling them '' crackers '' instead . this includes both '' good '' crackers ( '' white hat hackers '' ) who use their computer security related skills and knowledge to learn more about how systems and networks work and to help to discover and fix security holes , as well as those more '' evil '' crackers ( '' black hat hackers '' ) who use the same skills to author harmful software ( like viruses , trojans , etc . ) and illegally infiltrate secure systems with the intention of doing harm to the system . definition of '' cracker '' in the jargon file the programmer subculture of hackers , in contrast to the cracker community , generally sees computer security related activities as contrary to the ideals of the original and true meaning of the hacker term that instead related to playful cleverness . the dictionary still defines a hacker as someone who illegally obtains access to some form of digital information . but this culture would argue that there is a clear difference between hackers and crackers . history . the word '' hacker '' derives from the seventeenth-century word of a '' lusty laborer '' who harvested fields by dogged and rough swings of his hoe . although the idea of '' hacking '' has existed long before the term '' hacker '' with the most notable example of george ellsworth , it was not a word that the first programmers used to describe themselves . in fact , many of the first programmers were from engineering or physics backgrounds . there was a growing awareness of a style of programming different from the cut and dried methods employed at first , a successful software and hardware hacker artist is mark lottor ( mkl ) , who has created the 3-d light art projects entitled the cubatron , and the big round cubatron . this art is made using custom computer technology , with specially designed circuit boards and programming for microprocessor chips to manipulate the led lights . don hopkins is a software hacker artist well known for his artistic cellular automata . this art , created by a cellular automata computer program , generates objects which randomly bump into each other and in turn create more objects and designs , similar to a lava lamp , except that the parts change color and form through interaction . hopkins says : some hacker artists create art by writing computer code , and others , by developing hardware . some create with existing software tools such as adobe photoshop or gimp . the creative process of hacker artists can be more abstract than artists using non-technological media . for example , mathematicians have produced visually stunning graphic presentations of fractals , which hackers have further enhanced , often producing detailed and intricate graphics and animations from simple mathematical formulas . file : bubbles2.gif bubbles was created using watercolors , then scanned into a computer . colors were then manipulated using a software imaging tool file : sunrise-lile.gif sunrise was created using pen and ink , then scanned into a computer and colored with a software imaging tool file : hills7p.gif rolling golden hills of california was created using pencil , scanned , and then painted with a software imaging tool file : bransleys fern.png barnsley 's fern , a fractal fern computed using an iterated function system file : animated fractal mountain.gif a fractal that models the surface of a mountain . art . burning man festival computer art computer music digital art demoscene electronic art electronic art music electronica experiments in art and technology generative art internet art robotic art software art . hacker art mentions . '' vector in open space '' by gerfried stocker 1996 . switch journal jun 14 1998 . eye weekly '' tag – who 's it ? '' by ingrid hein , july 16 , 1998 . linux today '' playing the open source game '' by , jul 5 , 1999 . canterbury christ church university library resources by subject – art & design , 2001 . supercollider workshop / seminar joel ryan describes collaboration with hacker artists of silicon valley . 21 march 2002 anthony barker 's weblog on linux , technology and the economy '' why geeks love linux '' , sept 2003 . live art research gesture and response in field-based performance by sha xin wei & satinder gill , 2005 . hackers , who are they '' the hackers identity , october 2014 . see also . cowboy coding : software development without the use of strict software development methodologies demoscene history of free software maker culture unix philosophy . references . further reading . the jargon file has had a role in acculturating hackers since its origins in 1975 . these academic and literary works helped shape the academic hacker subculture : olson , parmy . ( 05-14-2013 ) . we are anonymous : inside the hacker world of lulzsec , anonymous , and the global cyber insurgency . coleman , gabriella . ( nov 4 , 2014 ) . hacker , hoaxer , whistleblower , spy : the many faces of anonymous . verso books . shantz , jeff ; tomblin , jordon ( 2014-11-28 ) . cyber disobedience : re : //presenting online anarchy . john hunt publishing . external links . a brief history of hackerdom hack , hackers , and hacking ( see appendix a ) gabriella coleman : the anthropology of hackers the atlantic , 2010 . gabriella coleman : hacker , hoaxer , whistleblower , spy : the many faces of anonymous at open library