Uxmal

toponymy . the present name seems to derive from oxmal , meaning '' three times built . '' this seems to refer to the site 's antiquity and the times it had to rebuild . the etymology is disputed ; another possibility is uchmal which means '' what is to come , the future . '' by tradition , this was supposed to be an '' invisible city , '' built in one night by the magic of the dwarf king . ancient history . while much work has been done at the popular tourist destination of uxmal to consolidate and restore buildings , little in the way of serious archeological excavation and research has been done . the city 's dates of occupation are unknown and the estimated population ( about 15,000 people ) is a rough guess . most of the city 's major construction took place while uxmal was the capital of a late classic maya state around 850-925 ad . after about 1000 ad , toltec invaders took over , and most building ceased by 1100 ad . maya chronicles say that uxmal was founded about 500 a.d . by hun uitzil chac tutul xiu . for generations uxmal was ruled over by the xiu family . it was the most powerful site in western yucatán , and for a while , in alliance with chichen itza , dominated all of the northern maya area . sometime after about 1200 , no new major construction seems to have been made at uxmal , possibly related to the fall of uxmal 's ally chichen itza and the shift of power in yucatán to mayapan . the xiu moved their capital to maní , and the population of uxmal declined . uxmal was dominant from 875 to 900 ce . the site appears to have been the capital of a regional state in the puuc region from 850-950 ce . the maya dynasty expanded their dominion over their neighbors . this prominence did not last long , as the population dispersed around 1000 ce . after the spanish conquest of yucatán ( in which the xiu allied with the spanish ) , early colonial documents suggest that uxmal was still an inhabited place of some importance into the 1550s . as the spanish did not build a town here , uxmal was soon after largely abandoned . the mayan story the dwarf-wizard of uxmal is set in uxmal . . description of the site . even before the restoration work , uxmal was in better condition than many other maya sites . much was built with well-cut stones set into a core of concrete not relying on plaster to hold the building together . the maya architecture here is considered matched only by that of palenque in elegance and beauty . the puuc style of maya architecture predominates . thanks to its good state of preservation , it is one of the few maya cities where the casual visitor can get a good idea of how the entire ceremonial center looked in ancient times . some of the more noteworthy buildings include : the governor 's palace , a long low building atop a huge platform , with the longest façades in pre-columbian mesoamerica . : with an approximate azimuth of 118° , the building is oriented to the main pyramid of cehtzuc , a small site located nearly 5 km to the southeast . observing from there , venus as evening star , when reaching its maximum northerly extremes , would have set behind the northern edge of the governor 's palace . since these events occur every eight years , always in late april or early may , heralding the onset of the rainy season , it is significant that the decoration of the building 's facade contains almost 400 venus glyphs placed in the masks of the rain god chac , and that there are eight bicephalic serpents above the main entrance ; additionally , numerals 8 in bar-and-dot notation appear on two chac masks at the northern corners of the palace . file : governor 's palace details , uxmal.jpg governor 's palace details file : governor 's palace rear view and details , uxmal.jpg governor 's palace rear view and details file : governor 's palace rear view , uxmal.jpg governor 's palace rear view file : governor 's palace side view , uxmal.jpg governor 's palace side view file : mexico-6366 - throne of the jaguar ( 4691171977 ) . jpg throne of the jaguar file : викиушмаль.jpg nunnery quadrangle and the pyramid of the magician file : traditional mayan symbols.jpg traditional mayan symbols file : maya images of people and animals.jpg maya images of people and animals file : snake and traditional mayan lattice.jpg snake and traditional mayan lattice file : sculptural image on the corner of the building.jpg sculptural image on the corner of the building the adivino ( a.k.a . the pyramid of the magician or the pyramid of the dwarf ) , is a stepped pyramid structure , unusual among maya structures in that its layers ' outlines are oval or elliptical in shape , instead of the more common rectilinear plan . it was a common practice in mesoamerica to build new temple pyramids atop older ones , but here a newer pyramid was built centered slightly to the east of the older pyramid , so that on the west side the temple atop the old pyramid is preserved , with the newer temple above it . the structure is featured in one of the best-known tales of yucatec maya folklore , '' el enano del uxmal '' ( the dwarf of uxmal ) , which is also the basis for the structure 's common name . multiple versions of this tale are recorded . it was popularised after one of these was recounted by john lloyd stephens in his influential 1841 book , incidents of travel in central america , chiapas , and yucatan . according to stephens ' version , the pyramid was magically built overnight during a series of challenges issued to a dwarf by the gobernador ( ruler or king ) of uxmal . the dwarf 's mother ( a bruja , or witch ) arranged the trial of strength and magic to compete against the king . stephens ( 1841 , vol . ii pp.423–425 ) the nunnery quadrangle was built from 900-1000 , and the name related with nuns was assigned in the 16th century because it resembled a convent . the quadrangle consists of four palaces placed on different levels that surround a courtyard . of the different buildings that make up this palatial complex , several vault tops have been recovered , they are painted and represent partial calendrical dates from 906 to 907 ad , which is consistent with the chan chahk ’ ahk nalajaw period of government . the formal entrance , the hierarchy of the structures through the different elevations , and the absence of domestic elements suggest that this space corresponds to a royal palace with administrative and non-residential functions , where the ruling group must have had meetings to collect the tribute , make decisions , and dictate sentences among other activities . these set of buildings are the finest of uxmal 's several fine quadrangles of long buildings . it has elaborately carved façades on both the inside and outside faces . a large ballcourt for playing the mesoamerican ballgame . its inscription says that it was dedicated in 901 by the ruler chan chak k'ak'nal ajaw , also known as lord chac ( before the decipherment of his corresponding name glyphs ) . the ball court 's condition is very deteriorated , and it ’ s made of two constructions of medium dimensions that make up the sides of the court with the rings by which the ball was to be introduced . the originally carved stone rings were removed to protect them from the elements and were replaced by reproductions . this game has always been related to mythical and cosmic aspects . the ball symbolized the movements of the stars in the sky and the players , in repeated occasions , symbolically staged the fight of the day against the night or the struggle of the deities of the underworld against the gods of heaven . a number of other temple-pyramids , quadrangles , and other monuments , some of significant size , and in varying states of preservation , are also at uxmal . these include north long building , house of the birds , house of the turtles , grand pyramid , house of the doves , and south temple . the majority of hieroglyphic inscriptions were on a series of stone stelae unusually grouped together on a single platform . the stelae depict the ancient rulers of the city . they show signs that they were deliberately broken and toppled in antiquity ; some were re-erected and repaired . a further suggestion of possible war or battle is found in the remains of a wall which encircled most of the central ceremonial center . a large raised stone pedestrian causeway links uxmal with the site of kabah , some 18 & nbsp ; km to the south-east . archaeological research at the small island site of uaymil , located to the west on the gulf coast , suggests that it may have served as a port for uxmal and provided the site access to the circum-peninsular trade network . modern history of the ruins . the site , located not far from mérida beside a road to campeche , has attracted many visitors since the time of mexico 's independence . the first detailed account of the ruins was published by jean frederic waldeck in 1838 . john lloyd stephens and frederick catherwood made two extended visits to uxmal in the early 1840s , with architect/draftsman catherwood reportedly making so many plans and drawings that they could be used to construct a duplicate of the ancient city ( unfortunately most of the drawings are lost ) . ) désiré charnay took a series of photographs of uxmal in 1860 . some three years later empress carlota of mexico visited uxmal ; in preparation for her visit local authorities had some statues and architectural elements depicting penis themes removed from the ancient façades . sylvanus g . morley made a map of the site in 1909 which included some previously overlooked buildings . the mexican government 's first project to protect some of the structures from risk of collapse or further decay came in 1927 . in 1930 frans blom led a tulane university expedition to the site . they made plaster casts of the façades of the '' nunnery quadrangle '' ; using these casts , a replica of the quadrangle was constructed and displayed at the 1933 world 's fair in chicago , illinois . the plaster replicas of the architecture were destroyed following the fair , but some of the plaster casts of uxmal 's monuments are still kept at tulane 's middle american research institute . in 1936 a mexican government repair and consolidation program was begun under josé erosa peniche . queen elizabeth ii of the united kingdom visited on 27 february 1975 for the inauguration of the site 's sound & light show . when the presentation reached the point where the sound system played the maya prayer to chaac ( the maya rain deity ) , a sudden torrential downpour occurred . gathered dignitaries included gaspar antonio xiu , a descendant of the xiu noble maya lineage . three hotels and a small museum have been built within walking distance of the ancient city . microbial degradation . microbial biofilms have been found degrading stone buildings at uxmal and kabah . phototrophs such as xenococcus are found more often on interior walls . stone degrading gloeocapsa and synechocystis were also present in large numbers . aureobasidium and fusarium fungi species are present at chichen itza and uxmal . cyanobacteria were prevalent in the interiors of rooms with low light levels . . see also . list of archaeoastronomical sites sorted by country list of mesoamerican pyramids . notes . references . . external links . architecture , restoration , and imaging of the maya cities of uxmal , kabah , sayil , and labna , documentation project by prof . charles rhyne , reed college