Matthew Bible

translation . matthew 's bible was the combined work of three individuals , working from numerous sources in at least five different languages . the entire new testament ( first published in 1526 , later revised , 1534 and 1535 ) , the pentateuch , jonah and in david daniell 's view , tyndale , william ( tr . ) ; martin , priscilla ( ed . ) ( 2002 ) william tyndale 's new testament ( edition of 1534 ) ; with an introduction by priscilla martin . hertfordshire ; p . xxi , line 37 and see the wikipedia article for david daniell the book of joshua , judges , ruth , books of samuel , books of kings , and books of chronicles , were the work of william tyndale . tyndale worked directly from the hebrew and greek , occasionally consulting the vulgate and erasmus ’ s latin version , and he used luther 's bible for the prefaces , marginal notes and the biblical text . scientifically proven , see : tyndale , william ( tr . ) ; martin , priscilla ( ed . ) ( 2002 ) ; p . xvi scientifically proven , see also : daniell , david ( 1994 ) william tyndale : a biography . new haven & london : yale university press , p . 114 , line 33 scientifically proven , see also : vogel , gudrun ( 2009 ) '' tyndale , william '' in : brockhaus enzyklopädie . mannheim/leipzig : brockhaus verlag scientifically proven , see also : zwahr . a . ( 2004 ) tyndale , william '' in : meyers konversations-lexikon . mannheim : bibliographisches institut the use of the pseudonym '' thomas matthew '' resulted possibly from the need to conceal from henry viii the participation of tyndale in the translation . a theory exists that indicates the name thomas matthew , which in greek means '' a twin to the original gift from god '' , may have been chosen to indicate that the largest contributing author was indeed william tyndale and that his writings were preserved . the remaining books of the old testament and the apocrypha were the work of myles coverdale . coverdale translated primarily from german and latin sources . probably luther bible and the vulgate ( see : tyndale , william ( tr . ) ; martin , priscilla ( ed . ) ( 2002 ) ; p . xxi , line 18 ) ; for more see : coverdale bible historians often tend to treat coverdale and tyndale like competitors in a race to complete the monumental and arduous task of translating the biblical text . one is often credited to the exclusion of the other . in reality they knew each other and occasionally worked together . contemporary historian john foxe states that they were in hamburg translating the pentateuch together as early as 1529 . foxe , john . the acts and monuments of john foxe the prayer of manasseh was the work of john rogers . rogers translated from a french bible printed two years earlier ( in 1535 ) . rogers compiled the completed work and added the preface , some marginal notes , a calendar and an almanac . of the three translators , two were burned at the stake . tyndale was burned on 6 october 1536 in vilvoorde , belgium . most probably , at the instigation of agents of henry viii and his anglican church john rogers was '' tested by fire '' on 4 february 1555 at smithfield , england ; the first to meet this fate under mary i of england . myles coverdale was employed by cromwell to work on the great bible of 1539 , the first officially authorized english translation of the bible . time and extensive scholastic scrutiny have judged tyndale the most gifted of the three translators . dr . westcott ( in his history of the english bible ) states that '' the history of our english bible begins with the work of tyndale and not with that of wycliffe . '' the quality of his translations has also stood the test of time , coming relatively intact even into modern versions of the bible . a . s . herbert , bible cataloguer , says of the matthew bible , '' this version , which welds together the best work of tyndale and coverdale , is generally considered to be the real primary version of our english bible '' , upon which later editions were based , including the geneva bible and king james version . professor david daniell recounts that , '' new testament scholars jon nielson perhaps also written : john nielson and royal skousen observed that previous estimates of tyndale 's contribution to the kjv 'have run from a high of up to 90 % ( westcott ) to a low of 18 % ( butterworth ) ' . by a statistically accurate and appropriate method of sampling , based on eighteen portions of the bible , they concluded that for the new testament tyndale 's contribution is about 83 % of the text , and in the old testament 76 % . daniell , david ( 2003 ) the bible in english : history and influence . new haven and london : yale university press , p . 448 thus the matthew bible , though largely unrecognized , significantly shaped and influenced english bible versions in the centuries that followed its first appearance . printing . john strype wrote in 1694 that the 1537 matthew bible was printed by richard grafton , in hamburg . later editions were printed in london ; the last of four appeared in 1551 . two editions of the matthew bible were published in 1549 . one was a reprint of the 1537 first edition , and was printed by thomas raynalde and william hyll ( herbert 75 ) . the other was printed by john daye and william seres , and made extensive changes to the notes of the original matthew bible , included copious commentaries on the book of revelation based on the book image of two churches by contemporary john bale . van meteren 's son , emanuel , stated in an affidavit dated 28 may 1609 that his father was '' a furtherer of reformed religion , and he that caused the first bible at his costes to be englisshed by mr myles coverdal in antwerp , the w ’ h his father , with mr edward whytchurch , printed both in paris and london . '' coverdale was employed as a translator by jacobus van meteren . rogers began assisting the work around 1535 , and married j . van meteren 's niece adriana in the same year that the matthew bible was first published ( 1537 ) . rogers was living in london again at the time of the second printing of the matthew bible in 1549 . literature . ; bible editions 1 . the matthew 's bible . 1537 edition facsimile . peabody , massachusetts , hendrickson publishers , 2009 , 2 . the tyndale bible , thomas matthew , 1549 facsimile . greydon press , usa , 2003 , . sold as a facsimile of matthew 's version , it is in fact becke 's 1549 edition of the matthew bible but contains preliminary pages from raynalde and hyll 's 1549 version , and even a copy of the title page from the 1549 great bible . 3 . new matthew bible : world 's first project working with the matthew bible scriptures to publish the matthew bible in modern spelling with language and grammar minimally updated - '' new matthew bible project '' , with a target publication date of 2020 . 4 . the matthew bible : modern spelling edition . '' the matthew bible : modern spelling edition '' this bible uses modern font and spelling ( without changing the original wording ) . it includes modern verse divisions . it is available in 2021 . . notes . references ( general ) .