Moss

geological history . the fossil record of moss is sparse , due to their soft-walled and fragile nature . unambiguous moss fossils have been recovered from as early as the permian of antarctica and russia , and a case is put forwards for carboniferous mosses . it has further been claimed that tube-like fossils from the silurian are the macerated remains of moss calyptræ . mosses also appear to evolve 2–3 times slower than ferns , gymnosperms and angiosperms . recent research shows that ancient moss could explain why the ordovician ice ages occurred . when the ancestors of today 's moss started to spread on land 470 & nbsp ; million years ago , they absorbed co 2 from the atmosphere and extracted minerals by secreting organic acids that dissolved the rocks they were growing on . these chemically altered rocks in turn reacted with the atmospheric co 2 and formed new carbonate rocks in the ocean through the weathering of calcium and magnesium ions from silicate rocks . the weathered rocks also released a lot of phosphorus and iron which ended up in the oceans , where it caused massive algal blooms , resulting in organic carbon burial , extracting more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere . small organisms feeding on the nutrients created large areas without oxygen , which caused a mass extinction of marine species , while the levels of co 2 dropped all over the world , allowing the formation of ice caps on the poles . . ecology . habitat . file : mossopolis.jpg dense moss colonies in a cool coastal forest file : mossforest.jpg a cool high altitude/latitude moss forest ; the forest floor is covered in moss , beneath conifers file : route 1 , between vik and kirkjubæjarklaustur - panoramio ( 7 ) . jpg moss colonizes a basalt flow , in iceland file : moss ( iceland ) 03.jpg moss growing along seeps and springs in newly deposited basaltic rock , iceland . file : steinerne rinne bei obererasbach im altmühltal.jpg moss growing along the stream from a karst spring ; travetine deposits from the stream water and the moss overgrows it , forming this ridge , with the stream on top . file : winter moss.jpg moss with sporophytes on brick file : mech plonnik mlode sporofity.jpg young sporophytes of the common moss tortula muralis ( wall screw-moss ) file : taiwan 2009 jinguashi historic gold mine moss covered retaining wall frd 8940.jpg retaining wall covered in moss file : michiganmosspatch.jpg a small clump of moss beneath a conifer ( a shady , usually dry place ) file : mossonconcretewall.jpg moss on a concrete wall since moss gametophytes are autotrophic they require enough sunlight to perform photosynthesis . shade tolerance varies by species , just as it does with higher plants . in most areas , mosses grow chiefly in moist , shaded areas , such as wooded areas and at the edges of streams , but they can grow anywhere in cool , humid , cloudy climates , and some species are adapted to sunny , seasonally dry areas like alpine rocks or stabilized sand dunes . choice of substrate varies by species as well . moss species can be classed as growing on : rocks , exposed mineral soil , disturbed soils , acid soil , calcareous soil , cliff seeps and waterfall spray areas , streamsides , shaded humusy soil , downed logs , burnt stumps , tree trunk bases , upper tree trunks , and tree branches or in bogs . moss species growing on or under trees are often specific about the species of trees they grow on , such as preferring conifers over broadleaf trees , oaks over alders , or vice versa . while mosses often grow on trees as epiphytes , they are never parasitic on the tree . mosses are also found in cracks between paving stones in damp city streets , and on roofs . some species adapted to disturbed , sunny areas are well adapted to urban conditions and are commonly found in cities . examples would be rhytidiadelphus squarrosus , a garden weed in vancouver and seattle areas ; bryum argenteum , the cosmopolitan sidewalk moss , and ceratodon purpureus , red roof moss , another cosmopolitan species . a few species are wholly aquatic , such as fontinalis antipyretica , common water moss ; and others such as sphagnum inhabit bogs , marshes and very slow-moving waterways . such aquatic or semi-aquatic mosses can greatly exceed the normal range of lengths seen in terrestrial mosses . individual plants or more long are common in sphagnum species for example . wherever they occur , mosses require liquid water for at least part of the year to complete fertilisation . many mosses can survive desiccation , sometimes for months , returning to life within a few hours of rehydration . it is generally believed that in the northern hemisphere , the north side of trees and rocks will generally have more luxuriant moss growth on average than other sides . the reason is assumed to be because sunlight on the south side causes a dry environment . the reverse would be true in the southern hemisphere . however , naturalists feel that mosses grow on the damper side of trees and rocks . in some cases , such as sunny climates in temperate northern latitudes , this will be the shaded north side of the tree or rock . on steep slopes , it may be the uphill side . for mosses that grow on tree branches , this is generally the upper side of the branch on horizontally growing sections or near the crotch . in cool , humid , cloudy climates , all sides of tree trunks and rocks may be equally moist enough for moss growth . each species of moss requires certain amounts of moisture and sunlight and thus will grow on certain sections of the same tree or rock . some mosses grow underwater , or completely waterlogged . many prefer well-drained locations . there are mosses that preferentially grow on rocks and tree trunks of various chemistries . . relationship with cyanobacteria . in taiga , some species of moss play an important role in providing nitrogen for the ecosystem due to their relationship with nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria . cyanobacteria colonize moss and receive shelter in return for providing fixed nitrogen . moss releases the fixed nitrogen , along with other nutrients , into the soil '' upon disturbances like drying-rewetting and fire events , '' making it available throughout the ecosystem . . cultivation . moss is often considered a weed in grass lawns , but is deliberately encouraged to grow under aesthetic principles exemplified by japanese gardening . in old temple gardens , moss can carpet a forest scene . moss is thought to add a sense of calm , age , and stillness to a garden scene . moss is also used in bonsai to cover the soil and enhance the impression of age . rules of cultivation are not widely established . moss collections are quite often begun using samples transplanted from the wild in a water-retaining bag . however , specific species of moss can be extremely difficult to maintain away from their natural sites with their unique requirements of combinations of light , humidity , substrate chemistry , shelter from wind , etc . growing moss from spores is even less controlled . moss spores fall in a constant rain on exposed surfaces ; those surfaces which are hospitable to a certain species of moss will typically be colonised by that moss within a few years of exposure to wind and rain . materials which are porous and moisture retentive , such as brick , wood , and certain coarse concrete mixtures , are hospitable to moss . surfaces can also be prepared with acidic substances , including buttermilk , yogurt , urine , and gently puréed mixtures of moss samples , water and ericaceous compost . in the cool , humid , cloudy pacific northwest , moss is sometimes allowed to grow naturally as a moss lawn , one that needs little or no mowing , fertilizing or watering . in this case , grass is considered to be the weed . landscapers in the seattle area sometimes collect boulders and downed logs growing mosses for installation in gardens and landscapes . woodland gardens in many parts of the world can include a carpet of natural mosses . the bloedel reserve on bainbridge island , washington state , is famous for its moss garden . the moss garden was created by removing shrubby underbrush and herbaceous groundcovers , thinning trees , and allowing mosses to fill in naturally . . green roofs and walls . mosses are sometimes used in green roofs . advantages of mosses over higher plants in green roofs include reduced weight loads , increased water absorption , no fertilizer requirements , and high drought tolerance . since mosses do not have true roots , they require less planting medium than higher plants with extensive root systems . with proper species selection for the local climate , mosses in green roofs require no irrigation once established and are low maintenance . mosses are also used on green walls . mossery . a passing fad for moss-collecting in the late 19th century led to the establishment of mosseries in many british and american gardens . the mossery is typically constructed out of slatted wood , with a flat roof , open to the north side ( maintaining shade ) . samples of moss were installed in the cracks between wood slats . the whole mossery would then be regularly moistened to maintain growth . aquascaping . aquascaping uses many aquatic mosses . they do best at low nutrient , light , and heat levels , and propagate fairly readily . they help maintain a water chemistry suitable for aquarium fish . they grow more slowly than many aquarium plants , and are fairly hardy . . inhibiting moss growth . moss can be a troublesome weed in containerized nursery operations and greenhouses . vigorous moss growth can inhibit seedling emergence and penetration of water and fertilizer to the plant roots . moss growth can be inhibited by a number of methods : decreasing availability of water through drainage . increasing direct sunlight . increasing number and resources available for competitive plants like grasses . increasing the soil ph with the application of lime . heavy traffic or manually disturbing the moss bed with a rake application of chemicals such as ferrous sulfate ( e.g . , in lawns ) or bleach ( e.g . , on solid surfaces ) . in containerized nursery operations , coarse mineral materials such as sand , gravel , and rock chips are used as a fast-draining top dressing in plant containers to discourage moss growth . the application of products containing ferrous sulfate or ferrous ammonium sulfate will kill moss ; these ingredients are typically in commercial moss control products and fertilizers . sulfur and iron are essential nutrients for some competing plants like grasses . killing moss will not prevent regrowth unless conditions favorable to their growth are changed . . uses . traditional . preindustrial societies made use of the mosses growing in their areas . laplanders , north american tribes , and other circumpolar people used mosses for bedding . mosses have also been used as insulation both for dwellings and in clothing . traditionally , dried moss was used in some nordic countries and russia as an insulator between logs in log cabins , and tribes of the northeastern united states and southeastern canada used moss to fill chinks in wooden longhouses . circumpolar and alpine peoples have used mosses for insulation in boots and mittens . ötzi the iceman had moss-packed boots . the capacity of dried mosses to absorb fluids has made their use practical in both medical and culinary uses . north american tribal people used mosses for diapers , wound dressing , and menstrual fluid absorption . tribes of the pacific northwest in the united states and canada used mosses to clean salmon prior to drying it , and packed wet moss into pit ovens for steaming camas bulbs . food storage baskets and boiling baskets were also packed with mosses . . commercial . there is a substantial market in mosses gathered from the wild . the uses for intact moss are principally in the flower trade and for home decoration . decaying moss in the genus sphagnum is also the major component of peat , which is '' mined '' for use as a fuel , as a horticulture soil additive , and in smoking malt in the production of scotch whisky . sphagnum moss , generally the species s . cristatum and s . subnitens , is harvested while still growing and is dried out to be used in nurseries and horticulture as a plant growing medium . some sphagnum mosses can absorb up to 20 times their own weight in water . the plant underworld , sphagnum and water , australian botanic garden in world war i , sphagnum mosses were used as first-aid dressings on soldiers ' wounds , as these mosses said to absorb liquids three times faster than cotton , retain liquids better , better distribute liquids uniformly throughout themselves , and are cooler , softer , and be less irritating . it is also claimed to have antibacterial properties . native americans were one of the peoples to use sphagnum for diapers and napkins , which is still done in canada . in rural uk , fontinalis antipyretica was traditionally used to extinguish fires as it could be found in substantial quantities in slow-moving rivers and the moss retained large volumes of water which helped extinguish the flames . this historical use is reflected in its specific latin/greek name , the approximate meaning of which is '' against fire '' . in finland , peat mosses have been used to make bread during famines . engman , max ; d . g . kirby ( 1989 ) . finland : people , nation , state . c . hurst & co . p . 45 . in mexico , moss is used as a christmas decoration . physcomitrella patens is increasingly used in biotechnology . prominent examples are the identification of moss genes with implications for crop improvement or human health ralf reski and wolfgang frank ( 2005 ) : moss ( physcomitrella patens ) functional genomics – gene discovery and tool development with implications for crop plants and human health . briefings in functional genomics and proteomics 4 , 48-57 . and the safe production of complex biopharmaceuticals in the moss bioreactor , developed by ralf reski and his co-workers . london installed several structures called '' city trees '' : moss-filled walls , each of which is claimed to have '' the air-cleaning capability of 275 regular trees '' by consuming nitrogen oxides and other types of air pollution and producing oxygen . . see also . embryophyte lichen . references . external links . information , diagrams and photos moss grower 's handbook- 2.39mb , pdf file the british bryological society picture gallery of mosses world of mosses - watercolour paintings of moss by robert muma