Risk aversion

example . a person is given the choice between two scenarios : one with a guaranteed payoff , and one with a risky payoff with same average value . in the former scenario , the person receives 50 . in the uncertain scenario , a coin is flipped to decide whether the person receives 100 or nothing . the expected payoff for both scenarios is 50 , meaning that an individual who was insensitive to risk would not care whether they took the guaranteed payment or the gamble . however , individuals may have different risk attitudes . a person is said to be : risk averse ( or risk avoiding ) - if they would accept a certain payment ( certainty equivalent ) of less than 50 ( for example , 40 ) , rather than taking the gamble and possibly receiving nothing . risk neutral – if they are indifferent between the bet and a certain 50 payment . risk loving ( or risk seeking ) – if they would accept the bet even when the guaranteed payment is more than 50 ( for example , 60 ) . the average payoff of the gamble , known as its expected value , is 50 . the smallest dollar amount that an individual would be indifferent to spending on a gamble or guarantee is called the certainty equivalent , which is also used as a measure of risk aversion . an individual that is risk averse has a certainty equivalent that is smaller than the prediction of uncertain gains . the risk premium is the difference between the expected value and the certainty equivalent . for risk-averse individuals , risk premium is positive , for risk-neutral persons it is zero , and for risk-loving individuals their risk premium is negative . utility of money . in expected utility theory , an agent has a utility function u ( c ) where c represents the value that he might receive in money or goods ( in the above example c could be 0 or 40 or 100 ) . the utility function u ( c ) is defined only up to positive affine transformation – in other words , a constant could be added to the value of u ( c ) for all c , and/or u ( c ) could be multiplied by a positive constant factor , without affecting the conclusions . an agent possesses risk aversion if and only if the utility function is concave . for instance u ( 0 ) could be 0 , u ( 100 ) might be 10 , u ( 40 ) might be 5 , and for comparison u ( 50 ) might be 6 . the expected utility of the above bet ( with a 50 % chance of receiving 100 and a 50 % chance of receiving 0 ) is : e ( u ) ( u ( 0 ) +u ( 100 ) ) /2 , and if the person has the utility function with u ( 0 ) 0 , u ( 40 ) 5 , and u ( 100 ) 10 then the expected utility of the bet equals 5 , which is the same as the known utility of the amount 40 . hence the certainty equivalent is 40 . the risk premium is ( 50 minus 40 ) 10 , or in proportional terms : ( \ 50-\ 40 ) /\ 40 or 25 % ( where 50 is the expected value of the risky bet : ( \tfrac . limitations of expected utility treatment of risk aversion . using expected utility theory 's approach to risk aversion to analyze small stakes decisions has come under criticism . matthew rabin has showed that a risk-averse , expected-utility-maximizing individual who , from any initial wealth level . turns down gambles where she loses 100 or gains 110 , each with 50 % probability . will turn down 50–50 bets of losing 1,000 or gaining any sum of money . rabin criticizes this implication of expected utility theory on grounds of implausibility—individuals who are risk averse for small gambles due to diminishing marginal utility would exhibit extreme forms of risk aversion in risky decisions under larger stakes . one solution to the problem observed by rabin is that proposed by prospect theory and cumulative prospect theory , where outcomes are considered relative to a reference point ( usually the status quo ) , rather than considering only the final wealth . another limitation is the reflection effect , which demonstrates the reversing of risk aversion . this effect was first presented by kahneman and tversky as a part of the prospect theory , in the behavioral economics domain . the reflection effect is an identified pattern of opposite preferences between negative as opposed to positive prospects : people tend to avoid risk when the gamble is between gains , and to seek risks when the gamble is between losses . for example , most people prefer a certain gain of 3,000 to an 80 % chance of a gain of 4,000 . when posed the same problem , but for losses , most people prefer an 80 % chance of a loss of 4,000 to a certain loss of 3,000 . the reflection effect ( as well as the certainty effect ) is inconsistent with the expected utility hypothesis . it is assumed that the psychological principle which stands behind this kind of behavior is the overweighting of certainty . options which are perceived as certain are over-weighted relative to uncertain options . this pattern is an indication of risk-seeking behavior in negative prospects and eliminates other explanations for the certainty effect such as aversion for uncertainty or variability . the initial findings regarding the reflection effect faced criticism regarding its validity , as it was claimed that there are insufficient evidence to support the effect on the individual level . subsequently , an extensive investigation revealed its possible limitations , suggesting that the effect is most prevalent when either small or large amounts and extreme probabilities are involved . . in the brain . attitudes towards risk have attracted the interest of the field of neuroeconomics and behavioral economics . a 2009 study by christopoulos et al . suggested that the activity of a specific brain area ( right inferior frontal gyrus ) correlates with risk aversion , with more risk averse participants ( i.e . those having higher risk premia ) also having higher responses to safer options . this result coincides with other studies , that show that neuromodulation of the same area results in participants making more or less risk averse choices , depending on whether the modulation increases or decreases the activity of the target area . public understanding and risk in social activities . in the real world , many government agencies , e.g . health and safety executive , are fundamentally risk-averse in their mandate . this often means that they demand ( with the power of legal enforcement ) that risks be minimized , even at the cost of losing the utility of the risky activity . it is important to consider the opportunity cost when mitigating a risk ; the cost of not taking the risky action . writing laws focused on the risk without the balance of the utility may misrepresent society 's goals . the public understanding of risk , which influences political decisions , is an area which has recently been recognised as deserving focus . in 2007 cambridge university initiated the winton professorship of the public understanding of risk , a role described as outreach rather than traditional academic research by the holder , david spiegelhalter . . children . children 's services such as schools and playgrounds have become the focus of much risk-averse planning , meaning that children are often prevented from benefiting from activities that they would otherwise have had . many playgrounds have been fitted with impact-absorbing matting surfaces . however , these are only designed to save children from death in the case of direct falls on their heads and do not achieve their main goals . they are expensive , meaning that less resources are available to benefit users in other ways ( such as building a playground closer to the child 's home , reducing the risk of a road traffic accident on the way to it ) , and—some argue—children may attempt more dangerous acts , with confidence in the artificial surface . shiela sage , an early years school advisor , observes '' children who are only ever kept in very safe places , are not the ones who are able to solve problems for themselves . children need to have a certain amount of risk taking . so they 'll know how to get out of situations . '' . game shows and investments . one experimental study with student-subject playing the game of the tv show deal or no deal finds that people are more risk averse in the limelight than in the anonymity of a typical behavioral laboratory . in the laboratory treatments , subjects made decisions in a standard , computerized laboratory setting as typically employed in behavioral experiments . in the limelight treatments , subjects made their choices in a simulated game show environment , which included a live audience , a game show host , and video cameras . in line with this , studies on investor behavior find that investors trade more and more speculatively after switching from phone-based to online trading and that investors tend to keep their core investments with traditional brokers and use a small fraction of their wealth to speculate online . . see also . ambiguity aversion equity premium puzzle investor profile loss aversion marginal utility neuroeconomics optimism bias problem gambling , a contrary behavior prudence in economics risk premium st . petersburg paradox statistical risk uncertainty avoidance , which is different , as uncertainty is not the same as risk utility . references . external links . arrow-pratt measure on about.com : economics the benefit of utilities : a plausible explanation for small risky parts in the portfolio