Camper Van Beethoven

history . formative and early years ( 1983–1985 ) . camper van beethoven was preceded by several related garage bands based in redlands , including sitting duck and the estonian gauchos ( featuring future cracker guitarist johnny hickman ) . these bands included future camper van beethoven members bassist and vocalist david lowery , guitarist and multi-instrumentalist chris molla , and often drummer bill mcdonald as well . the estonian gauchos and a late incarnation of sitting duck also included another future camper van beethoven member , bassist victor krummenacher , whose joining allowed lowery to switch to rhythm guitar . sitting ducks played a mixture of punk and acid rock , along with what lowery described as '' fake russian-sounding music '' . at the same time , lowery , molla and krummenacher were studying in santa cruz at the university of california , santa cruz , and were musically active there as well . the former two played in the santa cruz-based box o ' laffs , which also included future camper van beethoven members richie west , anthony guess , and chris pedersen at various times . while on summer break in 1983 , lowery and molla returned to redlands and formed a new band , camper van beethoven and the border patrol . the group featured lowery , molla , krummenacher and mcdonald , along with several other musicians at various points , including guitarist david mcdaniel , harmonica player mike zorn and violinist daniel blume . although this initial incarnation of the band only existed for three months , during this time they wrote much of the material which would feature on their debut album , including '' take the skinheads bowling '' . the band 's name was coined by mcdaniel : according to lowery '' mcdaniel was into this stuff that would sound like it made sense , but really it didn ’ t . he ’ d watch a lot of tv , accept all this mass-media stuff and spit it out all chopped up . i got the whole absurdism influence from him '' . when lowery , molla and krummenacher returned to college in santa cruz , lowery and molla resumed playing with box o ' laffs . after meeting violinist , keyboardist and guitarist jonathan segel , they decided to re-form camper van beethoven and the border patrol in santa cruz , with drummer richie west replacing mcdonald . . first three albums ( 1985–1987 ) . in 1985 , the band reduced its name to camper van beethoven , replaced west with anthony guess , and recorded their debut album , telephone free landslide victory . the record featured their first successful single , '' take the skinheads bowling '' , the lesser hit '' the day that lassie went to the moon '' , and an experimental country-influenced cover version of black flag 's '' wasted '' . the album featured songs with humorous lyrics , often simultaneously celebrating and mocking 1980s counterculture , and instrumental tracks featuring ska-beats and eastern european , mexican or spaghetti-western influenced guitar or violin lines . shortly after this record was released , lead guitarist greg lisher joined the group . the band recorded a set of songs with an expanded version of the lineup that recorded the debut , with lisher playing lead on some songs . guess departed shortly thereafter , leaving lowery and molla briefly to take turns swapping drumming duties . this incarnation recorded a second set of songs , with molla handling the drums . at the end of the sessions , in 1986 , long-term drummer chris pedersen was added . the band 's second album , ii & iii , was culled from both recording sessions . segel played mandolin and sitar in addition to violin , and molla played pedal steel guitar on some tracks . the album featured a noticeably expanded sound , with influences of country music and americana mixed in with faux indian or arabic music and psychedelia . released later that year , their self-titled third album featured guest membership from experimental banjo and guitar player eugene chadbourne on their cover of pink floyd 's '' interstellar overdrive '' and several other tracks . on the album , the elements of psychedelia on the previous album came to the fore . the album also featured some satirical political commentary on songs like '' good guys and bad guys '' and '' joe stalin 's cadillac , '' the former which enjoyed some underground college radio play . krummenacher , lisher , pedersen and molla also formed the side project monks of doom , although molla was quickly replaced by guitarist david immerglück . molla left camper van beethoven after touring for the third album , reducing the band to a five-piece with lowery , krummenacher , segel , lisher , and pedersen — the longest-standing lineup in their initial career . released in november 1987 , the ep vampire can mating oven preceded a major label bidding war . the ep featured a more streamlined and accessible sound , with lisher 's lead guitar taking a major role for the first time . virgin records years ( 1987–1990 ) . in 1987 the band signed to virgin records . they released their fourth album our beloved revolutionary sweetheart . the album featured a more streamlined , song-oriented approach , cutting back on the psychedelia and reducing the number of instrumentals , but keeping much of their eclectic approach . this was followed by extensive touring and preparations for recording their next album . due to internal tensions , segel left the band during rehearsals for their fifth full-length record . written mostly as a four-piece , the resultant lp , key lime pie , featured the violin playing of don lax before the replacement of violinist morgan fichter ( of the bay area band harm farm ) was found . fichter played violin on two tracks . the album featured a noticeably darker lyrical outlook as compared to the band 's previous records . musically , it featured less of the world-music influences of the previous albums , replaced with more elements of americana , along with a lusher , a more orchestrated version of psychedelia than their previous records had featured . they scored a minor hit with a cover of the status quo song '' pictures of matchstick men '' , their highest-charting single . david immerglück ( of the ophelias and the monks of doom ) joined in 1990 for touring behind the record , playing some of the departed molla and segel 's instrumental parts on steel guitar , guitar and mandolin . they broke up in april 1990 after a show in örebro , sweden . . inactive period ( 1990–1999 ) . camper vantiquities , a compilation album packaging the vampire can mating oven ep with outtakes , demos , and rarities , was released in 1993 . after disbanding , lowery and hickman formed cracker with bassist davey faragher . krummenacher , lisher , immerglück and pedersen intensified their activities in monks of doom , which remained active until 1993 . these members also collaborated with chadbourne under the name camper van chadbourne . immerglück later collaborated with counting crows , officially joining the group in 1999 . krummenacher began a solo career , recording several solo albums with guests such as dave alvin . pedersen moved to australia in 1998 . segel played with dieselhed and sparklehorse , and fronted his own bands hieronymus firebrain and jack & jill , later playing under his own name . he later became involved in experimental and electronic music , including collaborations with fred frith and joelle leandre , and chaos butterfly , an electro-acoustic duo with dina emerson . segel and krummenacher also ran their own record label , magnetic motorworks . reunion ; tusk ( 1999–2004 ) . in 1999 , lowery , segel , and krummenacher regrouped in the studio to assemble the experimental rarity set camper van beethoven is dead . long live camper van beethoven , which also contained newly recorded material . segel and krummenacher , along with greg lisher , also joined cracker for a tour , playing a set of camper songs for a section of the set , backed by drummer frank funaro and other cracker members . in 2002 , the group played its first proper live shows in twelve years . with lowery , segel , krummenacher and lisher forming the core of the reunited lineup , two new york dates also featured immerglück and two members of cracker , drummer frank funaro and keyboardist kenny margolis . three california dates omitted these latter three musicians and saw pedersen return to the kit . also in 2002 , they released the double-cd tusk , a re-recording of the entire fleetwood mac tusk ( album ) . although initially announced as a rediscovery of a series of 1987 demos , the album was recorded in 2001 by lowery , segel , krummenacher and lisher as an experiment to see if the members could now work together . extensive touring , mostly with margolis and funaro , followed . the group next released cigarettes & carrot juice : the santa cruz years , a five-disc box set compiling their first three ( pre-virgin ) albums , camper vantiquities , and a live recording from 1990 they called greatest hits played faster . the latter recording featured live versions of several unreleased songs . shortly thereafter , the band released '' director 's cut '' versions of the first three records and camper vantiquities , which included remastering , re-sequencing and additional demo and b-side tracks . new roman times ; live and compilation releases ( 2004–2012 ) . in 2004 , the band released new roman times , their first studio album of original material in 15 years . a concept album , the record detailed the rise and fall of an idealistic texan whose disenchantment following a stint with the american military redirected him towards organized terrorism . it featured the band 's familiar eclectic sound , but also added a heavier , prog-metal sound on a few tracks . the lineup on the album included lowery , krummenacher , segel , lisher , pedersen and immergluck . the album also featured contributions by other camper van beethoven associates , including molla and hickman . following the album 's release , pedersen and immergluck did not participate in the touring lineup , and funaro started to handle all of the drumming in live shows . a limited-edition live concert disc was also released , in the mouth of the crocodile – live in seattle . segments of a 2004 performance were released the following year as discotheque cvb : live in chicago . the band continued to frequently tour with cracker ( whom krummenacher joined for a time ) , and in 2005 the two groups started an annual three-night '' campout '' at pappy and harriet 's pioneertown palace in pioneertown , california . the campout has seen appearances by built to spill , neko case , magnolia electric company , and john doe , as well as sets from the individual members of the band . a compilation of greatest hits , popular songs of great enduring strength and beauty , was released by cooking vinyl records in june 2008 . as band relations with virgin records were poor , they were not granted access to any material from the two virgin lps for this compilation . thus , the band re-recorded five songs from these albums to include on the collection . these were the first and so far only camper van beethoven studio tracks to include funaro . in 2011 , the band began playing a series of shows that featured the key lime pie record in its entirety , often joined by immergluck . in the same year , they also revealed plans for a new album . . la costa perdida and el camino real ( 2013–present ) . la costa perdida , the followup to new roman times , was released on january 22 , 2013 , preceded by the single '' northern california girls '' . the music was inspired in part by holland-era beach boys . most of the drumming on the album was by studio drummer and former cracker member michael urbano , although chris pederson played on some tracks as well . much of the album featured a gentler , more folky sound than their previous albums . lowery revealed in interviews that there were seven songs recorded during the sessions for la costa perdida that were not released , which would be included on a follow-up album to be finished in 2013 . in august 2013 , the band revealed on its facebook page that it was tracking songs for the album , with urbano on drums again . the band stated that the album would be a southern california-themed sequel to the northern california theme of la costa perdida . on march 2 , 2014 , the band announced a title for the new album el camino real which was released on june 3 , 2014 in the united states and on june 23 , 2014 in the uk . in contrast to the previous album , it featured some of the band 's most abrasive and intense music , mixing elements of prog-rock and punk with the band 's trademark eclecticism . for subsequent tour dates , the band initially alternated pedersen and urbano on drums , due to health problems that have prevented frank funaro from playing . since 2015 , chris pedersen has been flying in from australia to participate in the band 's infrequent tours , resulting in a reunion of their best-known late 80 's lineup . david immerglück also continues to join the band 's lineup for occasional shows . band members . ; current members david lowery – lead vocals , rhythm guitar , keyboards , bass , drums ( 1983–1990 , 1999–present ) victor krummenacher – bass , baritone guitar , vocals , occasional lead vocals ( 1983–1990 , 1999–present ) jonathan segel – violin , guitar , keyboards , sitar , mandolin , vocals , occasional lead vocals ( 1984–1989 , 1999–present ) greg lisher – lead guitar , backup vocals ( 1985–1990 , 1999–present ) chris pedersen – drums , backup vocals ( 1986–1990 , 2004 , 2015–present ; 2002–2014 part-time ) part-time members : david immerglück – guitar , lap steel guitar , mandolin , bass , backup vocals ( 1990 ; 2004 , 2000-2003/2005–present part-time ) michael urbano – drums ( 2011–present in studio , occasional live dates ) ; former members chris molla – guitar , pedal steel , keyboards , drums , vocals ( 1983–1986 ; 2002–2004 part-time ) david mcdaniel – guitar ( 1983–1984 ) bill mcdonald – drums ( 1983–1984 ) mike zorn – harmonica ( 1983–1984 ) daniel blume – violin ( 1983–1984 ) richie west – drums ( 1984 ) kevtone – drums ( 1985 ) eugene chadbourne – guitar , banjo ( 1986 , studio sessions only ) don lax – violin ( 1989 , studio sessions only ) morgan fichter – violin , vocals ( 1989–1990 ) frank funaro – drums , backup vocals ( 2000–2004 as guest , 2004–2013 as member , mostly for live dates ) kenny margolis – keyboards , accordion ( 2000–2006 as guest ) . discography . ; studio albums telephone free landslide victory ( 1985 ) ii & iii ( 1986 ) camper van beethoven ( 1986 ) our beloved revolutionary sweetheart ( 1988 ) key lime pie ( 1989 ) tusk ( 2002 ) new roman times ( 2004 ) la costa perdida ( 2013 ) el camino real ( 2014 ) ; eps and singles take the skinheads bowling ( 1986 ) - single vampire can mating oven ( 1987 ) - ep '' turquoise jewelry '' ( 1988 ) '' life is grand '' ( 1988 ) '' pictures of matchstick men '' ( 1990 ) '' the history of utah '' ( live ) ( 2004 ) – split single with calexico ; live albums in the mouth of the crocodile – live in seattle ( 2004 ) – live album discotheque cvb : live in chicago ( 2005 ) – live ep ; compilations camper vantiquities ( 1993 ) – rarities compilation camper van beethoven is dead . long live camper van beethoven ( 2000 ) – rarities compilation cigarettes & carrot juice : the santa cruz years ( 2002 ) – boxed set popular songs of great enduring strength and beauty ( 2008 ) – greatest hits compilation ; various artist compilations look at all the love we found ( 2005 ) – sublime tribute album the sandinista ! project ( 2007 ) - the clash tribute album sharknado 3 : oh hell no ! ( 2015 ) film soundtrack . references . external links . official web page audio recordings at the live music archive interview with crawdaddy !