Governmental positions on the Iraq War prior to the 2003 invasion of Iraq

background . image : bush auth jbc.jpg thumb 400px right president george bush , surrounded by leaders of the house and senate , announces the joint resolution to authorize the use of united states armed forces against iraq , october 2 , 2002 . in 2002 , the united states began to campaign for the overthrow of iraq 's president , saddam hussein . the united states , under the administration of george w . bush , argued that saddam hussein was a threat to global peace , a vicious tyrant , and a sponsor of international terrorism . opinion on the war was greatly divided between nations . some countries felt that the united states failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that hussein had an active weapons program . others felt that iraq was an insignificant and militarily weak country that was not worth fighting over . some saw the war as an act of imperialism , and charged that the united states just wanted iraq 's oil . on the other side , supporting countries argued that saddam hussein was one of the 20th century 's worst despots , and that free countries should be obliged to remove brutal dictators from power . others felt that saddam 's ties to terror groups were well-established , and his weapons programs very real . although the u.s . has yet to find the location of the wmds , they did find records of bank transactions from some of saddam 's accounts that paid various suicide bombers ' families 25,000 in exchange for their sons ' martyrdom . supporters also argue that the chemical and biological weapons that were believed to be in saddam 's control were shipped to syria before the engagement and that the current existence of bio and chemical weapons labs in iraq are an indication of saddam 's continued desire to produce wmds . furthermore , supporters point out that although the u.s . does have oil interests in the middle east , so do the islamic terror cells who want to gain control of the oil in an effort to pressure the western world . additionally , they argue that the u.n . rejected the invasion of iraq because of their involvement in the '' unscam '' , ( established in 1995 ) , in which u.n . and iraqi officials skimmed money to allegedly bribe u.n . officials . peter van walsum , the former chairman of the iraq sanctions committee from 1999 to 2000 , speculated in a recent book that iraq deliberately divided the u.n . security council by awarding contracts to france , russia , and china but not the united kingdom or united states . coincidentally it was france and russia who were leading the opposition to the invasion of iraq . he also claimed that sanctions were not effective and that the lack of iraqi cooperation was designed to exacerbate the suffering of his own people . other allegations included a 400,000 contribution from shaker al-kaffaji , and iraqi-american businessman to produce a film by ex-un inspector scott ritter discrediting the weapons searches . scott ritter points out in his october 19 , 2005 interview with seymour hersh that the us policy to remove saddam hussein from power started with president george h . w . bush in august 1990 . ritter concludes from public remarks by president george h . w . bush and united states james baker that the economic sanctions would only be lifted when saddam hussein was removed from power . the justification for sanctions was disarmament . the cia offered the opinion that containing saddam hussein for six months would result in the collapse of his regime . this policy resulted in the us military invasion and occupation of iraq . latin america . mexico , venezuela , brazil , argentina and chile condemned the war . major demonstrations were reported from la paz , bolivia ; lima , peru ; bogotá , colombia ; buenos aires , argentina ; são paulo and rio de janeiro , brazil ; and santiago , chile . pierre charles , the late prime minister of the caribbean island nation of dominica also condemned the war . after costa rica 's constitutional court ruled that the war broke international law and that the country 's support for the war contradicted its constitution , the government declared its withdrawal of support , which was merely moral anyway as costa rica has no army . honduras , nicaragua , and the dominican republic retreated their troops . africa . the african union , with all of its 52 members , condemned the war . guinea , cameroon and angola had seats on the security council , and amid talks of american financial donations would have likely voted in approval of a un war resolution against iraq . major protests were reported from cairo and alexandria , egypt ; rabat , morocco ; mombasa , kenya ; mogadishu , somalia ; nouakchott , mauritania ; tripoli , libya ; windhoek , namibia ; johannesburg and cape town , south africa . arab league . the arab league unanimously condemned the war , with the exception of kuwait . saudi foreign minister prince saud publicly claimed that the u.s . military would not be authorized to use saudi arabia 's soil in any way to attack iraq . however , this was later revealed to have been a front , as saudi arabia , kuwait , and some other arab states did , in fact , provide support to american troops , but they did not wish to risk offending saddam pre-war by making those statements publicly . ( after ten years of u.s . presence in saudi arabia , cited among reasons by saudi-born osama bin laden for his september 11 , 2001 al-qaeda attacks on america , most of u.s . forces were withdrawn from saudi arabia in 2003 . ( for the duration of the war , the saudi public remained strongly against the us action , even regardless of a un mandate . before the war , the government repeatedly attempted to find a diplomatic solution , generally agreeing with the us position on saddam 's menace , even going so far as to urge saddam to go into voluntary exile—a suggestion that angered him a great deal . anti-war demonstrations took place in damascus , syria ; baghdad , iraq ; sana ' a , yemen ; muscat , oman ; amman , ma'an , and irbid , jordan ; widhat , beirut and sidon , lebanon ; bethlehem , nablus , tulkarm , jenin , ramallah and gaza , palestinian cities in the west bank and gaza strip ; tel aviv , israel , and in the nation of bahrain . as is the case in egypt , demonstrations are not common in many of these less-than-democratic countries and some regimes saw themselves in danger because of riots . asia . . saudi arabia . pre-war , saudi arabia 's public position had been one of neutrality in the conflict ; worldwide media reported that , despite numerous american attempts , saudi arabia would not offer the american military any use of its land as a staging ground for the invasion of iraq . in an interview , prince saud alfaysal , saudi arabia 's foreign minister when asked whether saudi arabia would allow more us troops to be placed on saudi soil , the foreign minister replied , '' under the present circumstances with no proof that there is a threat imminent from iraq , i do not think saudi arabia will join in '' . interview with saud al-faysal , iraq watch , 11 august 2002 this was later explained to have been a public front , as saudi arabia , as well as kuwait , was actually one of the most important allies in terms of offering coalition soldiers its land , including military bases . it was also eventually learned that a high-ranking saudi prince had been at the white house on the day that the iraq war began , and bush administration officials told the prince to alert his government that the initial phase of the war had begun , hours before missiles first landed in baghdad . officially , saudi arabia wished to see saddam hussein and the ba'ath regime go , but feared the aftermath . rick fawn and raymond hinnebusch the iraq causes and consequences war ( usa , colorado : lynne rienner publishers:2006 ) as the us invasion of iraq became inevitable , the question of whether saudi arabia wanted the baath regime replaced by a pro-western government '' pumping oil in greater quantities than saudi arabia '' posed a dilemma for the saudi government . simon henderson , weekly standard , 13 may 2002 . furthermore , saudi arabia worried about the possibility of an iraqi shia pro-iranian government installed at its doorstep , following the demise of saddam 's sunni regime . saudi arabia 's response to the war had to be handled carefully so that the us-saudi strategic alliance did not suffer , while at the same time maintaining the semblance of arab solidarity against us aggression to appease its own indigenous population . rick fawn and raymond hinnebusch the iraq causes and consequences war ( usa , colorado : lynne rienner publishers : 2006 , p . 155 ) in october 2002 saudi arabia declared that his country would allow us use of saudi military facilities to attack iraq , provided there was un approval for it ; but on 4 november 2002 , faysal told cnn that it would not . moreover , in the same month , during a televised address on saudi television , crown prince abdullah insisted that '' our armed forces will not , under no circumstances , step one foot into iraqi territory '' . however , the contradiction and ambiguity of the saudi position reflected the regime 's desperation both to appease washington and not be seen providing a territorial base for the us attack . it also reflected a lack of consensus among senior members of the royal family . syria . syria opposed the war and refused to submit to washington 's demand for co-operation . rick fawn and raymond hinnebusch the iraq causes and consequences war usa , colorado : lynne rienner publishers:2006 , p . 129 it acted in concert with russia , france , and germany in the security council , even voting in support of resolution 1441 , mandating the renewal of united nations weapons inspections in iraq . syria 's un ambassador , makhail wehbe , said he believed that the evidence presented by the united states to the security council on iraq 's weapons had been fabricated . oxford business group , online briefing , 2 october 2003 , syrian commentators explained that none of iraq 's neighbors felt it was a threat , and that weapons of mass destruction were a mere pretext for a war motivated by the interests of israel and the us companies that hoped to profit from post-war reconstruction contracts . steven s . and eli c . '' the syrian government and media on the war in iraq , '' middle east research institute , inquiry and analysis series no . 134 , 12 april 2003 , . jordan . king abdullah ii of jordan advised washington against the iraq war but later gave the invading coalition covert and tacit support , in defiance of the overwhelming opinion of his own public . rick fawn and raymond hinnebusch the iraq causes and consequences war ( usa , colorado : lynne rienner publishers:2006 , p . 143 ) the jordanian government publicly opposed the war against iraq . the king stressed to the united states and european union that a diplomatic solution , in accordance with un security council ( unsc ) resolutions 1284 ( 1999 ) and 1409 ( 2002 ) , was the only appropriate model for resolving the conflict between iraq and the un . rick fawn and raymond hinnebusch the iraq causes and consequences war ( usa , colorado : lynne rienner publishers:2006 , p . 144 ) in august 2002 he told the washington post that an attempt to invade iraq would be a '' tremendous mistake '' and that it could '' throw the whole area into turmoil '' . g . kessler and p . slevin , '' abdullah : foreign oppose attack ; jordanian king to urge bush to focus on peace in mideast , not invasion of iraq , '' washington post , 1 august 2002 . people 's republic of china . the people 's republic of china pressed for continued u.n . weapons inspections in iraq after two arms inspectors told the security council they had found no evidence of weapons of mass destruction . beijing insisted on staking out a “ principled ” and independent position on u.s . intervention in iraq . although it stated its wish that the situation be resolved peacefully , china did not threaten to exercise its security council veto and had abstained in many previous decisions on iraq . during the iraq war of 2003 , china vehemently demanded iraq to comply with the un security council resolution 1441 but opposed the use of force to secure iraqi compliance . however , when the war broke out , china 's middle east policy reflected the traditional policy of seeking to maximize its economic interests without becoming entangled in political controversies . pakistan . major anti-war demonstrations took place in the cities of peshawar , islamabad , karachi , lahore , and quetta . general pervez musharraf faced already fierce opposition from his mostly muslim population for his support of the u.s . campaign in afghanistan . pakistan also had a seat on the un security council during the pre-war period , though would not have likely voted in favour of the resolution at the time bush had planned to present it , in an attempt to quell civilian dissent . other asian states . bangladesh , malaysia and indonesia , all largest muslim countries of world and vietnam condemned the war . bangladesh urged to solve the problem through discussion rather than war . huge anti-war demonstrations took place in dhaka , bangladesh ; kathmandu , nepal ; colombo , sri lanka ; kelantan ; jakarta and java , indonesia ; surabaya ; and bangkok , thailand . new zealand . the new zealand government disagreed with its neighbour , australia , and did not support the war in principle . however , new zealand did send a group of non-combatant engineers to help rebuild iraq . there were major anti-war demonstrations in the new zealand cities christchurch , wellington and auckland . neutral , unclear . ireland . the republic of ireland is an officially neutral country , with a strong tradition of supporting un institutions , peacekeeping and international law . nevertheless , the use of shannon airport was allowed for transatlantic stopovers by the us army . under domestic pressure , the taoiseach bertie ahern repeatedly glossed over the particulars of the situation , while emphasising the need for a un mandate . despite large-scale protests , including many at shannon airport itself , opinion polls showed that many people broadly supported official policy on the use of the airport . while a large majority of the public did oppose the war , there was a fifty & ndash ; fifty split on the use of shannon . keeping us investment in ireland safe was the principal reason for allowing us stopovers . ultimately anti-war allies were appeased by the government 's not condoning the war while the situation with shannon kept irish-u.s . relations cordial . republic of china ( taiwan ) . despite public protests in front of the american institute in taiwan , leaders of the republic of china ( commonly known as taiwan ) seemed supportive of the war effort ; however taiwan did not appear in the official list of members of the coalition of the willing . this was because despite the government 's offer of military and monetary support , taiwan eventually pulled back from the coalition in response to vocal opposition by opposition leaders and the public at large . . solomon islands . as croatia and slovenia , the solomon islands were claimed to be members of the coalition but wished '' to disassociate itself from the report '' . the solomon islands do not have a globally or regionally deployable military . iran . iran 's official view of us policy in iraq since 2002 has been characterized by considerable ambivalence . on the one hand , lingering mistrust of saddam hussein ( as a result of 1980-1988 war with iraq ) both created and reinforced an attitude that accepted the us containment of iraq as being in iran 's interests . on the other hand , the us since 1993 had proclaimed the containment of iran to be of equal importance to that of iraq , and therefore , iranian leaders felt encircled by the arrival of thousands of us troops in iraq together with those in afghanistan since the end of 2001 . indeed , bush 's 2002 inclusion of iran in his '' axis of evil '' meant a us military presence in iraq could constitute an existential threat for the government of the islamic republic . as circumstances in iraq evolved from early 2003 to mid-2005 , iranian policy makers faced the challenge of crafting strategies to take advantage of new opportunities while simultaneously remaining out of the crosshairs of a triumphal and hostile united states . rick fawn and raymond hinnebusch the iraq causes and consequences war ( usa , colorado : lynne rienner publishers:2006 , p . 173 ) . see also . views on the 2003 invasion of iraq at the center of the storm , a 2007 memoir co-written by former director of the central intelligence agency george tenet with bill harlow , former cia director of public affairs iraq disarmament timeline 1990–2003 , 1997-2000 , 2001-2003 iraq disarmament crisis 2003 invasion of iraq public opinion in the united states on the invasion of iraq opposition to the iraq war protests against the iraq war united nations security council and the iraq war international community peace movement . references . external links . state department officials about the '' coalition of the willing '' ( march 2003 ) blix attacks 'shaky ' intelligence on weapons cook 's resignation speech more inspections enjoy broad u.n . support turkey : arab states urging iraq to cooperate , caution u.s . against unilateral move arab leagues against iraq war translations of chirac 's interventions around the possible french veto