Software synthesizer

types . softsynths can cover a range of synthesis methods , including subtractive synthesis ( including analog modeling , a subtype ) , fm synthesis ( including the similar phase distortion synthesis ) , physical modelling synthesis , additive synthesis ( including the related resynthesis ) , and sample-based synthesis . many popular hardware synthesizers are no longer manufactured but have been emulated in software . the emulation can even extend to having graphics that model the exact placements of the original hardware controls . some simulators can even import the original sound patches with accuracy that is nearly indistinguishable from the original synthesizer . popular synthesizers such as the minimoog , yamaha dx7 , korg m1 , prophet-5 , oberheim ob-x , roland jupiter 8 , arp 2600 and dozens of other classics have been recreated in software . some softsynths are heavily sample-based , and frequently have more capability than hardware units , since computers have fewer restrictions on memory than dedicated hardware synthesizers . some of these sample-based synthesizers come with sample libraries many gigabytes in size . some are specifically designed to mimic real-world instruments such as pianos . many sample libraries are available in a common format like wav , . sf or . sf2 , and can be used with almost any sampler-based softsynth . the major downside of using softsynths can often be more latency ( delay between playing the note and hearing the corresponding sound ) . decreasing latency requires increasing the demand on the computer 's processor . when the soft synthesizer is running as a plug-in for a host sequencer , both the soft synth and the sequencer are competing for processor time . multi-processor computers can handle this better than single-processor computers . as the processor becomes overloaded , sonic artifacts such as '' clicks '' and '' pops '' can be heard during performance or playback . when the processor becomes completely overloaded , the host sequencer or computer can lock up or crash . increasing buffer size helps , but also increases latency . however modern professional audio interfaces can frequently operate with extremely low latency , so in recent years this has become much less of a problem than in the early days of computer music . it is also possible to generate sound files offline , meaning sound generation does not have to be in real time , or live . for example , the input could be a midi file and the output could be a wav file or an mp3 file . playing a wav or mp3 file simply means playing a precalculated waveform . the advantage of offline synthesis is that the software can spend as much time as it needs to generate the resulting sounds , potentially increasing sound quality . it could take 30 seconds of computing time to generate 1 second of real-time sound , for example . the disadvantage is that changes to the music specifications can not be heard immediately . often a composer or virtual conductor will want a '' draft mode '' for initial score editing and then use the '' production mode '' to generate high-quality sound as one gets closer to the final version . the draft mode allows for quicker turn-around , perhaps in real time , but will not have the full quality of the production mode . the draft render is roughly analogous to a wire-frame or '' big polygon '' animation when creating 3d animation or cgi . both are based on the trade-off between quality and turn-around time for reviewing drafts and changes . software instrument . image : cubase 6 feature - software instruments and software effects.svg thumb top : software instruments bottom : software effect processors on cubase 6 a software instrument can be a synthesized version of a real instrument ( like the sounds of a violin or drums ) , or a unique instrument , generated by computer software . software instruments have been made popular by the convergence of synthesizers and computers , as well as sequencing software like garageband , logic pro ( geared toward professionals ) , the open source project audacity , and ableton live which is geared towards live performances . also of note is software like csound and nyquist , which can be used to program software instruments . a software instrument is akin to a soundfont . plugin compatibility . stand-alone softsynths run as a program on the computer so additional software is not required . plugin softsynths require a host application such as a digital audio workstation , which records the music that is played . common plugin technologies include vst , au , and ladspa . comparison to digital hardware synthesizers . software synthesizers can have more advanced algorithms than digital hardware synthesizers due to the much greater processing speed ( as well as support for floating point processing and greater than 24-bit word size ) of the x86-64 cpus that modern music production personal computers have over the digital signal processors found in common hardware synthesizers . the advantage to dedicated hardware is that it can be more stable , and also that it often has a user interface that is physical ( knobs and sliders ) and therefore easier to manipulate during performances . many softsynths use mathematical algorithms that directly emulate the electronic components and circuitry of the original hardware synthesizer . this produces an exceptionally authentic sound , even capturing flaws in the original hardware , such as oscillator drift caused by thermal sensitivity of the components . typical software synthesizers . discodsp discovery sonic academy ana & ana2 spectrasonics omnisphere 2 u-he diva xfer records serum uvi falcon lennar digital sylenth1 massive , reaktor 6 and fm8 by native instruments waldorf largo synapse dune 3 software synth developers such as arturia offer virtual editions of analog synths like the minimoog , the arp 2600 , as well as the yamaha cs-80 . gforce produces a minimoog with sounds designed by rick wakeman and version of the arp odyssey . linux synthesizers . zynaddsubfx is an open-source software synthesizer for linux , macos and windows . it can generate polyphonic , multitimbral , microtonal sounds in realtime . it is a free program , licensed under version 2 of the gnu general public license . there are many other open-source software synthesizers available for free for unix-based operating systems , including amsynth , hexter , tal noizemaker , xsynth , wsynth , whysynth , add64 , obxd , mx44 , phasex , alsa modular synth , bristol and others still . microsoft gs wavetable sw synth . the microsoft gs wavetable sw synth ( based on sample-based synthesis ) included in instances of directx as an integral part of directmusic is a version of the roland virtual sound canvas with gs sound set licensed by microsoft from roland corporation in 1996 . the file , gm.dls , containing the samples is in dls format . mobile synthesizer . the integrated processors included in mobile phones have become so fast , that synthesizer applications ( apps ) can play with the same capabilities as the classic analog or digital synths . they can have several oscillators with pulse-width modulated waveforms , frequency- and amplitude- modulation , adsr envelope forming , and a number of digital sound processing effects like filter , exciter , delay , chorus and reverb . one example is the windows phone synthesizer . recently , there have been many virtual synthesizers released for apples ios devices ( ipad , iphone , and ipod touch ) . many of these are from independent developers . hardware manufacturers have also released apps for the ipad and iphone including moog music , korg , roland corporation , akai and tascam . apple logic studio comes with a variety of software synths including fm , bass , analog , ensemble as well as electric piano and hammond b-3 emulation . list of some of the earlier softsynths for pc . wingroove ( windows 3.1x , 1995 ) audio simulation audiosim ( dos , 1996 ) axs ( analogue xpansion system ) ( windows 95/98 , 1998 ) orangator ( windows 95/98 , 1997 ) simsynth ( windows 95/98 , 1995 ) synoptic probe ( windows 95/98 , 1999 ) microsoft gs wavetable sw synth ( featured in windows 98 and later versions of windows ) . see also . : category : software synthesizers : category : music software plugin architectures digital audio editor modular synthesizer music sequencer digital audio workstation sound module synthesizer synthfont timidity++ video game music list of music software . references . external links . vintage softsynths demo list on youtube audiosim demo on youtube axs demo on youtube orangator demo on youtube software synthesizers for the linux platform