Un Chien Andalou

synopsis . the film opens with a title card reading '' once upon a time '' . a middle-aged man ( luis buñuel ) sharpens his razor at his balcony door and tests the razor on his thumb . he then opens the door , and idly fingers the razor while gazing at the moon , about to be engulfed by a thin cloud , from his balcony . there is a cut to a close-up of a young woman ( simone mareuil ) being held by the man . she calmly stares straight ahead as he brings the razor near her eye . another cut occurs to the moon being overcome by the cloud , then a cut to a close up of a hand slitting the eye of an animal with the razor ( which happens so quickly the viewer may believe it was the woman 's eye ) , and the vitreous body spills out from it . the subsequent title card reads '' eight years later '' . a slim young man ( pierre batcheff ) bicycles down a calm urban street wearing what appears to be a nun 's habit and a striped box with a strap around his neck . a cut occurs to the young woman from the first scene , who has been reading in a sparsely furnished upstairs apartment . she hears the young man approaching on his bicycle and casts aside the book she was reading ( revealing a reproduction of vermeer 's the lacemaker ) . she goes to the window and sees the young man lying on the curb , his bicycle on the ground . she emerges from the building and attempts to revive the young man . later , the young woman assembles pieces of the young man 's clothing on a bed in the upstairs room , and concentrates upon the clothing . the young man appears near the door . the young man and the young woman stare at his hand , which has a hole in the palm from which ants emerge . a slow transition occurs focusing on the armpit hair of the young woman as she lies on the beach and a sea urchin at a sandy location . there is a cut to an androgynous young woman , with bobbed hair and dressed in rather masculine attire , in the street below the apartment . she pokes at a severed human hand with her cane while surrounded by a large crowd held back by policemen . the crowd clears when the policeman places the hand in the box previously carried by the young man and gives it to the young woman . the androgynous young woman contemplates something happily while standing in the middle of the now busy street clutching the box . she is then run over by a car and a few bystanders gather around her . the young man and the young woman watch these events unfold from the apartment window . the young man seems to take sadistic pleasure in the androgynous young woman 's danger and subsequent death , and as he gestures at the shocked young woman in the room with him , he leers at her and grasps her breasts . the young woman resists him at first , but then allows him to touch her as he imagines her nude from the front and the rear . the young woman pushes him away as he drifts off and she attempts to escape by running to the other side of the room . the young man corners her as she reaches for a racquet in self-defense , but he suddenly picks up two ropes and drags two grand pianos containing dead and rotting donkeys , stone tablets containing the ten commandments , two pumpkins , and two rather bewildered priests ( played by jaime miravilles and salvador dalí ) who are attached by the ropes . as he is unable to pursue , the young woman escapes the room . the young man chases after her , but she traps his hand , which is infested with ants , in the door . she finds the young man in the next room , dressed in his nun 's garb in the bed . the subsequent title card reads '' around three in the morning '' . the young man is roused from his rest by the sound of a door-buzzer ringing ( represented visually by a martini shaker being shaken by a set of arms through two holes in a wall ) . the young woman goes to answer the door and does not return . another young man , whom we see only from behind , dressed in lighter clothing , arrives in the apartment , gesturing angrily at him . the second young man forces the first one to throw away his nun 's clothing and then makes him stand with his face to the wall , as if in disgrace . the subsequent title card reads '' sixteen years ago '' . we see the second young man 's face for the first time ( and discover that he is also played by pierre batcheff ) as he admires the art supplies and books on the table near the wall and forces the first young man to hold two of the books as he stares at the wall . the first young man eventually shoots the second young man when the books abruptly turn into revolvers . the second young man , now in a meadow , dies while swiping at the back of a nude female figure which suddenly disappears into thin air . a group of men come and carry his corpse away . the young woman returns to the apartment and sees a death's-head moth . the first young man sneers at her as she retreats and wipes his mouth off his face with his hand . the young woman very nervously applies some lipstick in response . subsequently , the first young man makes the young woman 's armpit hair attach itself to where his mouth would be on his face through gestures . the young woman looks at the first young man with disgust , and leaves the apartment sticking her tongue out at him . as she exits her apartment , the street is replaced by a coastal beach , where the young woman meets a third man with whom she walks arm in arm . he shows her the time on his watch and they walk near the rocks , where they find the remnants of the first young man 's nun 's clothing and the box . they seem to walk away clutching each other happily and make romantic gestures in a long tracking shot . however , the film abruptly cuts to the final shot with a title card reading '' in spring '' , showing the couple buried in beach sand up to their elbows , motionless and perhaps dead . cast . simone mareuil as young girl ( as simonne mareuil ) pierre batcheff as young man and second young man ( as pierre batchef ) luis buñuel as man in prologue ( uncredited ) salvador dalí as seminarist and as man on beach ( uncredited ) robert hommet as third young man ( uncredited ) kieran agterberg as seminarist ( uncredited ) fano messan as androgynous young woman ( uncredited ) jaime miravilles as fat seminarist ( uncredited ) . production . development . the screenplay of the film “ andalusian dog ” is based on two dreams of its creators luis buñuel and salvador dali . the idea for the film began when buñuel was working as an assistant director for jean epstein in france . buñuel told dalí at a restaurant one day about a dream in which a cloud sliced the moon in half '' like a razor blade slicing through an eye '' . dalí responded that he had dreamed about a hand crawling with ants . excitedly , buñuel declared : '' there 's the film , let 's go and make it . '' they were fascinated by what the psyche could create , and decided to write a script based on the concept of suppressed human emotions . the title of the film is a hidden reminiscence from the spanish saying : '' the andalusian dog howls-someone has died ! ” the screenplay was written in a few days . according to buñuel , they adhered to a simple rule : “ do not dwell on what required purely rational , psychological or cultural explanations . open the way to the irrational . it was accepted only that which struck us , regardless of the meaning . we did not have a single argument . a week of impeccable understanding . one , say , said : '' a man drags double bass . '' “ no , ” the other objected . and the objection was immediately accepted as completely justified . but when the proposal of one liked the other , it seemed to us magnificent , indisputable and immediately introduced into the script . ” in deliberate contrast to the approach taken by jean epstein and his peers , which was to never leave anything in their work to chance , with every aesthetic decision having a rational explanation and fitting clearly into the whole , buñuel made clear throughout his writings that , between dalí and himself , the only rule for the writing of the script was : '' no idea or image that might lend itself to a rational explanation of any kind would be accepted . '' he also stated : '' nothing , in the film , symbolizes anything . the only method of investigation of the symbols would be , perhaps , psychoanalysis . '' in his 1939 autobiography buñuel said : '' in the film the aesthetics of surrealism are combined to some of freud 's discoveries . the film was totally in keeping with the basic principle of the school , which defined surrealism as 'psychic automatism ' , unconscious , capable of returning to the mind its true functions , beyond any form of control by reason , morality or aesthetics . '' . filming . the film was financed by buñuel 's mother , and shot in le havre and paris at the billancourt studios over a period of 10 days in march 1928 . it is a black and white , 35 mm , silent film , with a running time of 17 minutes , although some sources state 24 minutes , and a physical length of 430 meters . for many years ( and still ) , published and unpublished reports have circulated that buñuel had used a dead goat 's eye , bendiner , kenneth ( 2004 ) , food in painting : from the renaissance to the present , london : reaktion books ; p . 230 , no . 9 . roger ebert , '' un chien andalou '' review , chicago sun-times , 16 april 2000 , p . 22 . or that of a dead sheep , thomson , david ( 2008 ) , '' have you seen . ? '' a personal introduction to 1,000 films ; new york : knopf , p . 162 . or of a dead donkey , allan havis ( 2008 ) , cult films : taboo and transgression , university press of america , inc . , pg 11 . or other animal , in the notorious eyeball-slicing scene . however , in an interview in 1975 or '76 , buñuel claimed that he had used a dead calf 's eye . turrent , t . and j . de la colina ( 1993 ) , conversations avec luis buñuel , paris , p . 32 . through the use of intense lighting , and bleaching of the calf 's skin , buñuel attempted to make the furred face of the animal appear as human skin . during the bicycle scene , the woman who is sitting on a chair , reading , throws the book aside when she notices the man who has fallen . the image it shows when it lies open is a reproduction of a painting by vermeer , whom dalí greatly admired and often referred to in his own paintings . in buñuel 's original script , the final shot was to feature the corpses of the man and woman '' consumed by swarms of flies '' . however , this special effect was modified due to budget limitations , with the film ending with a still shot of the man and woman , who had been walking in the previous beach scene , half-buried in the sand and apparently dead . the movie contains several thematic references to federico garcía lorca and other writers of that time . for example , the rotting donkeys are a reference to the popular children 's novel platero y yo by juan ramón jiménez , which buñuel and dalí hated . – excerpt from letter written by buñuel and dalí to jiménez , 1928 . anthropologist jean rouch has reported that after filming was complete , buñuel and dalí had run out of money , forcing buñuel to edit the film personally in his kitchen without the aid of a moviola or any other technical equipment . . reception . the first screening of un chien andalou took place at studio des ursulines , with an audience of tout-paris . notable attendees of the première included pablo picasso , le corbusier , jean cocteau , christian bérard and georges auric , in addition to the entirety of andré breton 's surrealist group . the audience 's positive reception of the film amazed buñuel , who was relieved that no violence ensued . dalí , on the contrary , was reportedly disappointed , feeling the audience 's reaction made the evening '' less exciting '' . buñuel since claimed that prior to the show , he had put stones in his pockets '' to throw at the audience in case of disaster '' , although others had no recollection of this . it was buñuel 's intention to shock and insult the intellectual bourgeoisie of his youth , later saying : '' historically , this film represents a violent reaction against what at that time was called 'avantgarde cine , ' which was directed exclusively to the artistic sensibility and to the reason of the spectator . '' against his hopes and expectations , the film was a huge success amongst the french bourgeoisie , leading buñuel to exclaim in exasperation , '' what can i do about the people who adore all that is new , even when it goes against their deepest convictions , or about the insincere , corrupt press , and the inane herd that saw beauty or poetry in something which was basically no more than a desperate impassioned call for murder ? '' after its '' triumphant premiere '' , un chien andalou was bought by the owner of '' studio-28 '' . during its eight-month run , forty or fifty informers came to the police with a demand to ban such an indecent and cruel film . this was the beginning of years of insults and threats that haunted buñuel until his old age . a likely apocryphal account claimed that two miscarriages occurred while watching the film . despite the criticism , however , the film was never banned . through their accomplishment with un chien andalou , dalí and buñuel became the first filmmakers to be officially welcomed into the ranks of the surrealists by the movement 's leader andré breton , an event recalled by film historian georges sadoul : '' breton had convoked the creators to our usual venue the café radio & nbsp ; . one summer 's evening . dalí had the large eyes , grace , and timidity of a gazelle . to us , buñuel , big and athletic , his black eyes protruding a little , seemed exactly like he always is in un chien andalou , meticulously honing the razor that will slice the open eye in two . '' . sequel . among the most enthusiastic viewers of the film were the wealthy couple viscount charles and marie-laure de noailles , who commissioned dalí and buñuel to create a sequel , of around the same length , with sound , to be called la bête andalouse , in order to affirm its connection with un chien . dalí stated that the theme of the new film was to parallel that of the first : '' to present the straight and pure 'conduct ' of someone who continues to pursue love despite wretched humanitarian ideals , patriotism and the other poor mechanisms of reality . '' this new film ultimately was released in 1930 under the title l'age d'or . the sequel was not a success with parisian high society . first shown in november 1930 , it was received extremely coldly . the next day , charles de noaille learned that he had been expelled from the jockey club de paris . the noaille family quickly withdrew the film after it was banned by the prefecture of police of paris . soundtrack . during the original 1929 screening in paris , buñuel selected music which he played live on a phonograph . modern prints of the film feature a soundtrack consisting of excerpts from richard wagner 's '' liebestod '' from his opera tristan und isolde and a recording of two argentinian tangos , '' tango argentino '' and '' recuerdos '' by the vicente alvarez & carlos otero et son orchestre . they were first added to a print of the film in 1960 under buñuel 's supervision . buñuel , 1968 . influence . film scholar ken dancyger has argued that un chien andalou might be the genesis of the filmmaking style present in the modern music video . roger ebert had called it the inspiration for low budget independent films . premiere ranked the opening scene as 10th out of '' the 25 most shocking moments in movie history '' . the lyrics of the pixies ' song '' debaser '' are based on un chien andalou . the eraserheads named a song from their fifth album , sticker happy , after the film . rock music fans around the world watched the film in its entirety during david bowie 's isolar – 1976 tour . the film was shown before each show in lieu of an opening musical act . see also . list of films with a 100 % rating on rotten tomatoes , a film review aggregator website . references . further reading . . external links . un perro andaluz . the film , online at rtve . un chien andalou analyzed by michael koller un chien andalou , from shatter , rupture , break one of the art institute of chicago 's digital scholarly catalogues