1928 in literature

events . january the soviet magazine oktyabr begins publishing mikhail sholokhov 's novel and quiet flows the don ( « тихий дон » , tikhiy don ) in instalments . ford madox ford publishes last post in the u.k . , as the last in his world war i tetralogy parade 's end , which has been appearing since 1924 . january 16 – the english novelist and poet thomas hardy 's ashes are interred in the poets ' corner of westminster abbey , london . pallbearers include stanley baldwin , j . m . barrie , john galsworthy , edmund gosse , a . e . housman , rudyard kipling , ramsay macdonald and george bernard shaw . meanwhile hardy 's heart is interred where he wished to be buried , in the grave of his first wife , emma , in the churchyard of his parish of birth , stinsford ( '' mellstock '' ) in dorset . later in the year , his widow florence publishes the first part of a biography , the early life of thomas hardy , 1840–1891 ( macmillan ) , in fact largely dictated by hardy . february – weird tales magazine publishes h . p . lovecraft 's story '' the call of cthulhu '' in the united states . march 31 – stockholm public library , designed by gunnar asplund , opens . april 19 – publication of the oxford english dictionary is completed . spring – george orwell moves from london to paris ; his first articles as a professional writer appear later in the year . june – the literary magazine contemporáneos is first published in mexico by jaime torres bodet , giving a name to the group los contemporáneos . june 27 – the english writer evelyn waugh marries evelyn gardner , daughter of lady winifred burghclere , in st paul 's church , portman square , london , with only harold acton , alec waugh ( the author 's brother ) and pansy pakenham present . they move into a flat in canonbury square , islington . in september the author 's first completed novel , decline and fall , is published by chapman & hall , of which his father , arthur waugh , is managing director . it is illustrated by the author . it reaches a third impression by the end of the year . the marriage lasts until the following september . july – d . h . lawrence 's lady chatterley 's lover is published in florence . it will not be published unexpurgated in britain until 1960 . august 27 – taibhdhearc na gaillimhe in galway is founded as the national irish language theater , opening with micheál mac liammóir 's version of dhiarmada agus ghráinne . august 31 – the threepenny opera ( die dreigroschenoper ) , adapted by bertolt brecht , elisabeth hauptmann and composer kurt weill ( with set designer caspar neher ) from the beggar 's opera , is launched at the theater am schiffbauerdamm in berlin , with harald paulsen and lotte lenya in the principal rôles . september s . s . van dine publishes '' twenty rules for writing detective stories '' in the american magazine . leslie charteris publishes meet the tiger in the u.k . , the first adventure of simon templar ( '' the saint '' ) . charteris will write dozens of novels and stories with the character in 1928–1963 ; successor writers will continue until 1983 . september 21 – the gorseth kernow is set up at boscawen-un in cornwall by henry jenner ( gwas myghal ) and others . october w . h . auden goes to berlin and is soon joined by christopher isherwood . luk phu chai ( a real man ) , perhaps the first major original thai novel , is published by siburapha ( kulap saipradit ) . october 14 – the gate theatre in dublin is founded by english actors and lovers micheál mac liammóir and hilton edwards , initially using the abbey theatre 's peacock studio to stage works by european and american dramatists . november–december – erich maria remarque 's antiwar novel all quiet on the western front ( im westen nichts neues ) appears in the german newspaper vossische zeitung . hans herbert grimm 's schlump is also published ( anonymously ) by kurt wolff in berlin this year . november 1 – mustafa kemal atatürk , president of turkey , introduces the roman-based 29-letter turkish alphabet to replace the ottoman script as official writing system for the turkish language . november 6 – xu zhimo writes his poem 再別康橋 ( zài bié kāngqiáo , '' on leaving cambridge once more '' ) . november 9–16 – radclyffe hall 's novel the well of loneliness , published on july 27 by jonathan cape in london with an appreciation by havelock ellis , is tried and convicted at bow street magistrates ' court on the grounds of obscenity under the hicklin test , for its theme of lesbian love , after a campaign against it by james douglas in the sunday express . the presiding magistrate , sir chartres biron , holds that the book contains '' not one word which suggested that anyone with the horrible tendencies described was in the least degree blameworthy . all the characters in the book were presented as attractive people and put forward with admiration . '' other lesbian literature published in england this year evades prosecution : elizabeth bowen 's novel the hotel , virginia woolf 's fictional orlando : a biography , and compton mackenzie 's satirical extraordinary women . djuna barnes ' novel ladies almanack , published in paris , also alludes to the controversy . december 9 – r . c . sherriff 's drama journey 's end , set on the western front ( world war i ) , is premièred by the incorporated stage society at the apollo theatre in london , with laurence olivier in a principal rôle . december 19 – italo svevo ( aron schmitz ) , returning from an alpine resort to trieste , suffers a car accident . he dies next day leaving his novel il vegliardo ( the old man ) unfinished in mid-word . uncertain dates bibhutibhushan bandyopadhyay 's novel pather panchali first appears as a serial in a calcutta periodical . the clerihew , a comic pseudo-biographical verse form associated with edmund clerihew bentley , is first mentioned in print . in the week-end book – oxford english dictionary . it is claimed that one in four of all secular books printed and sold in england are written by edgar wallace . . new books . fiction . mário de andrade – munacaima giovanni battista angioletti – il giorno del giudizio leslie barringer – joris of the rock charles william beebe – beneath tropic seas henry bellamann – crescendo andré breton – nadja mary butts – armed with madness morley callaghan – strange fugitive ferreira de castro – emigrantes ( emigrants ) agatha christie – the mystery of the blue train colette – break of day ( la naissance du jour ) clemence dane – enter sir john frank parker day – rockbound franklin w . dixon – hunting for hidden gold w . e . b . du bois – dark princess ephesian ( c . e . bechhofer roberts ) – this side idolatry rudolph fisher – the walls of jericho esther forbes – a mirror for witches ford madox ford – last post e . m . forster – the eternal moment and other stories august gailit – toomas nipernaadi reşat nuri güntekin – yeşil gece radclyffe hall – the well of loneliness thea von harbou – the rocket to the moon georgette heyer – the masqueraders aldous huxley – point counter point ilf and petrov – the twelve chairs ( « двенадцать стульев » , dvenadtsat stulyev ) mikheil javakhishvili – givi shaduri ( გივი შადური ) joseph kessel – belle de jour kwee tek hoay – drama dari krakatau ( serialization ) selma lagerlöf – anna svärd nella larsen – quicksand d . h . lawrence – lady chatterley 's lover claude mckay – home to harlem wyndham lewis - the childermass : section i compton mackenzie – extremes meet w . somerset maugham – ashenden : or the british agent abdul muis – salah asuhan dhan gopal mukerji – gay neck , the story of a pigeon vladimir nabokov ( as v . sirin ) – king , queen , knave ( « король , дама , валет » , korol ' , dama , valet ) baroness orczy – skin o ' my tooth anthony powell – the barnard letters premchand – nirmala jenaro prieto – the partner erich maria remarque – all quiet on the western front e . arnot robertson – cullum siegfried sassoon – memoirs of a fox-hunting man ( anonymous in 1st impression ) dorothy l . sayers lord peter views the body the unpleasantness at the bellona club arthur schnitzler – therese nan shepherd – the quarry wood păstorel teodoreanu – hronicul măscăriciului vălătuc s . s . van dine the greene murder case the bishop murder case edgar wallace again sanders again the three just men the double elegant edward ( short stories ) the flying squad the gunner the orator ( short stories ) the thief in the night ( short stories ) the twister mika waltari – suuri illusioni evelyn waugh – decline and fall h . g . wells – mr . blettsworthy on rampole island franz werfel – class reunion ( der abituriententag ) virginia woolf – orlando : a biography s . fowler wright deluge the island of captain sparrow francis brett young the key of life my brother jonathan . children and young people . joyce lankester brisley – milly-molly-mandy stories edgar rice burroughs – tarzan , lord of the jungle wanda gág – millions of cats a . a . milne – the house at pooh corner felix salten – bambi , a life in the woods ( bambi . eine lebensgeschichte aus dem walde , 1923 ) ruth plumly thompson – the giant horse of oz . drama . jacinto benavente – pepa doncel charles bennett blackmail the last hour bertolt brecht – the threepenny opera joe corrie – in time o ' strife eduardo de filippo – filosoficamente nikolai erdman – the suicide ( « самоубийца » , written ) marieluise fleißer – pioneers in ingolstadt ( pioniere in ingolstadt ) garrett fort – jarnegan agha hashar kashmiri – sita banbas ( published ) kwee tek hoay ( 郭德懷 ) – korbannja yi yong toen ( victims of yi yong toen , published serially ) patrick hastings – the moving finger daniil kharms – elizabeth bam ( « елизавета бам » ) miroslav krleža – the glembays ( gospoda glembajevi ) john howard lawson – the international alexander lernet-holenia , as clemens neydisser , and stefan zweig – gelegenheit macht liebe ( opportunity creates love ) or quiproquo federico garcía lorca – the love of don perlimplín and belisa in the garden ( amor de don perlimplín con belisa en su jardín , written ) walter c . hackett – other men 's wives w . somerset maugham – the sacred flame ivor novello – the truth game eugene o'neill – strange interlude ( first staging ) eugen ortner – meier helmbrecht ouyang yuqian ( 欧阳予倩 ) – pan jinlian ( 潘金蓮 ) r . c . sherriff – journey 's end ben travers – plunder sophie treadwell – machinal john van druten – the return of the soldier louis verneuil – monsieur lamberthier roger vitrac – victor , or power to the children ( victor , ou les enfants au pouvoir ) edgar wallace the lad the man who changed his name the squeaker carl zuckmayer – katharina knie . poetry . stephen vincent benét – john brown 's body robert frost – west-running brook robinson jeffers – cawdor ( poem ) federico garcía lorca – gypsy ballads siegfried sassoon – the heart 's journey . non-fiction . max aitken – politicians and the war clive bell – civilization : an essay edmund blunden – undertones of war ( autobiography ) hall caine – recollections of rossetti ( second expanded version ) julius evola – imperialismo pagano ( pagan imperialism ) sidney bradshaw fay – origins of the world war dion fortune – esoteric orders and their work harold lloyd – an american comedy ( autobiography ) dora marsden – the definition of the godhead margaret mead – coming of age in samoa paul morand – black magic tomas o'crohan – allagar na h-inise ( island cross-talk ) edgar wallace – the trial of patrick herbert mahon h . g . wells – the open conspiracy stefan zweig – drei dichter ihres lebens . casanova – stendhal – tolstoi ( adepts in self-portraiture : casanova , stendhal , tolstoy ) . births . january 1 – iain crichton smith , scottish writer ( died 1998 ) january 7 – william peter blatty , american novelist and screenwriter ( died 2017 ) january 8 – sander vanocur , american journalist january 10 – philip levine , american poet ( died 2015 ) january 16 – william kennedy , american writer and journalist january 17 – roman frister , polish writer ( died 2015 ) january 21 – jános kornai ( as jános kornfelder ) , hungarian economist january 24 – desmond morris , english anthropologist and writer february 5 – andrew greeley , irish-american priest and novelist ( died 2013 ) february 9 – roger mudd , american journalist february 13 – refik erduran , turkish playwright , columnist and writer ( died 2017 ) february 25 – richard g . stern , american novelist and educator ( died 2013 ) february 29 – jean adamson , english children 's author and illustrator march 4 – alan sillitoe , english novelist ( died 2010 ) march 12 – edward albee , american dramatist ( died 2016 ) march 13 – jane grigson , english cookery writer ( died 1990 ) march 22 – e . d . hirsch , american academic literary critic and educator march 30 – tom sharpe , english satirical author ( died 2013 ) april 4 – maya angelou , american poet ( died 2014 ) april 7 – alan j . pakula , american screenwriter ( died 1998 ) april 11 – lionel abrahams , south african novelist , poet and essayist ( died 2004 ) april 17 – cynthia ozick , american author april 24 – martin seymour-smith , english poet , biographer and critic ( died 1998 ) may 4 – thomas kinsella , irish poet may 24 – william trevor , irish fiction writer and playwright ( died 2016 ) june 10 – maurice sendak , american children 's author and illustrator ( died 2012 ) june 28 – stan barstow , english novelist ( died 2011 ) july 16 anita brookner , english novelist ( died 2016 ) robert sheckley , american writer ( died 2005 ) july 19 – samuel john hazo , american author july 24 – griselda gambaro , argentine writer july 26 – bernice rubens , welsh novelist ( died 2004 ) august 7 – anthony lejeune , english writer , editor and broadcaster ( died 2018 ) august 12 – beni virtzberg , israeli forester , holocaust survivor and writer ( died 1968 ) september 6 – robert m . pirsig , american philosopher and author september 11 – william x . kienzle , american priest and author ( died 2000 ) september 20 – donald hall , american poet and poet laureate september 30 – elie wiesel , american jewish author and 1986 nobel peace prize winner ( died 2016 ) october 3 – alvin toffler , american futurist writer ( died 2016 ) october 7 – sohrab sepehri , persian poet and painter ( died 1980 ) october 10 – sheila f . walsh , english novelist ( died 2009 ) october 17 – rosemary tonks , english poet , prose writer and children 's writer ( died 2014 ) november 2 steve ditko , american cartoonist ( died 2018 ) paul johnson , english historian and journalist november 9 – anne sexton , american poet ( died 1974 ) november 12 – marjorie w . sharmat , american children 's writer november 11 – carlos fuentes , mexican writer ( died 2012 ) november 20 – dolf verroen , dutch writer of children 's literature november 28 – bano qudsia , punjab-born pakistani fiction writer ( died 2017 ) december 3 karin bang , norwegian novelist and poet ( died 2017 ) barbara probst solomon , american author , essayist and journalist ( died 2019 ) december 16 – philip k . dick , american science fiction author ( died 1982 ) december 31 – veijo meri , finnish writer ( died 2015 ) . deaths . january 8 – juan b . justo , argentine journalist ( born 1865 ) january 11 – thomas hardy , english novelist and poet ( born 1840 ) january 19 – hans hinrich wendt , german theologian ( born 1853 ) january 28 – vicente blasco ibáñez , spanish novelist , journalist and politician ( born 1867 ) february 19 – mildred aldrich , american journalist ( born 1853 ) february 29 – adolphe appia , swiss writer and scenery and lighting designer ( born 1862 ) march 4 – paul sabatier , french religious writer ( born 1858 ) march 18 – paul van ostaijen , flemish poet ( born 1896 ) march 24 didrik hegermann grønvold , norwegian novelist ( born 1855 ) charlotte mew , english poet ( born 1869 ; suicide ) april 10 – stanley j . weyman , english novelist ( born 1855 ) april 19 – ladislav klíma , czech novelist and philosopher ( born 1878 ) may 5 – barry pain , english writer ( born 1864 ) may 16 – edmund gosse , english poet and critic ( born 1849 ) may 22 – francisco lópez merino , argentine poet ( suicide , born 1904 ) may 25 – george ranetti , romanian humorist and playwright ( born 1875 ) july 1 – avery hopwood , american playwright ( heart attack , born 1882 ) july 8 – crystal eastman , american journalist ( born 1881 ) august – isaac markens , american journalist ( born 1846 ) '' isaac markens . ; author of several books on lincoln succumbs at 82 in newark '' , the new york times , august 1928 . august 16 – antonín sova , czech poet ( born 1864 ) august 24 – oskar jerschke , german dramatist ( born 1861 ) october 24 – henry festing jones , english biographer , editor and lawyer ( born 1851 ) '' jones , henry festing '' . retrieved 1 january 2018 . ] december 16 – elinor wylie , american poet and novelist ( stroke , born 1885 ) december 19 – italo svevo , italian writer ( born 1861 ) december 23 – ludwig rosenthal , german antiquarian bookseller ( born 1840 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : siegfried sassoon , memoirs of a fox-hunting man james tait black memorial prize for biography : john buchan , montrose newbery medal for children 's literature : dhan gopal mukerji , gayneck , the story of a pigeon nobel prize for literature : sigrid undset prix goncourt : maurice constantin-weyer , un homme se penche sur son passé pulitzer prize for drama : eugene o'neill , strange interlude pulitzer prize for poetry : edwin arlington robinson , tristram pulitzer prize for the novel : thornton wilder , the bridge of san luis rey . references .