Terrorism Act 2000

definition of terrorism . terrorism is defined , in the first section of the act , as follows : section 1 . – : ( 1 ) in this act '' terrorism '' means the use or threat of action where- : : ( a ) the action falls within subsection ( 2 ) , : : ( b ) the use or threat is designed to influence the government or an international governmental organisation words in square brackets inserted by terrorism act 2006 . or to intimidate the public or a section of the public , and : : ( c ) the use or threat is made for the purpose of advancing a political , religious , racial word in square brackets inserted by counter-terrorism act 2008 . or ideological cause . : ( 2 ) action falls within this subsection if it- : : ( a ) involves serious violence against a person , : : ( b ) involves serious damage to property , : : ( c ) endangers a person 's life , other than that of the person committing the action , : : ( d ) creates a serious risk to the health or safety of the public or a section of the public , or : : ( e ) is designed seriously to interfere with or seriously to disrupt an electronic system . : ( 3 ) the use or threat of action falling within subsection ( 2 ) which involves the use of firearms or explosives is terrorism whether or not subsection ( 1 ) ( b ) is satisfied . sections ( 2 ) ( b ) and ( e ) have been criticised as falling well outside the scope of what is generally understood to be the definition of terrorism , i.e . acts that require life-threatening violence . prior to this , terrorism was defined in an act as a footnote , such as reinsurance ( acts of terrorism ) act 1993 ( c . 18 ) section 2 ( 2 ) : '' acts of terrorism '' means acts of persons acting on behalf of , or in connection with , any organisation which carries out activities directed towards the overthrowing or influencing , by force or violence , of her majesty 's government in the united kingdom or any other government de jure or de facto . and prevention of terrorism ( temporary provisions ) act 1989 ( c . 4 ) section 20 ( 1 ) : in this act '' terrorism '' means the use of violence for political ends , and includes any use of violence for the purpose of putting the public or any section of the public in fear . in the northern ireland ( emergency provisions ) act 1996 , the criminal offences referred to as terrorism are provided as an exhaustive list of over 70 items . this move to establish a sound definition of terrorism in the law made it possible to build an entirely new set of police and investigatory powers into incidents of this kind , beyond what they could do for ordinary violent offences . the inclusion in its definition of the phrase or threat mirrors the common law , as it was codified with respect to written words , in 27 geo ii c.15 ( 1754 ) and again in 4 geo iv c.54 ( 1823 ) . sir william oldnall russell : '' russell on crime '' vol 2 , ch.3 , p.576-7 ( 2nd ed , 1828 ) . proscribed groups . as in previous terrorism acts , such as the prevention of terrorism ( temporary provisions ) act 1989 , the home secretary had the power to maintain a list of '' proscribed groups '' that they believe are '' concerned in terrorism '' . the act of being a member of , or supporting such a group , or wearing an item of clothing such as '' to arouse reasonable suspicion that he is a member or supporter of a proscribed organisation '' is sufficient to be prosecuted for a terrorist offence . under the act aliases of organizations can be added . for example , al muhajiroun , islam4uk , call to submission , islamic path , london school of sharia and muslims against crusades were added in january 2010 and november 2011 as alternative names for al ghurabaa and the saved sect ( also deemed to be the same organization ) and in june 2014 need4khilafah , the shariah project and the islamic dawah association were added to this list . an alias does not have to be added to the list for prosecution to be possible , provided it can be demonstrated that for all intents and purposes the organization is a proscribed one , and that the person involved has committed a proscribed act . list of proscribed international terrorist groups . the following 75 organisations appear in schedule 2 of the act , to which they have been added periodically since march 2001 by statutory instruments , and are listed under the above heading in the home office document 'proscribed terrorist organisations : over 1000 anti-war protesters , were stopped and required to empty their pockets , on their way to raf fairford ( used by american b-52 bombers during the iraq conflict ) . during the 2005 g8 protests in auchterarder , scotland , a cricketer on his way to a match was stopped at king 's cross station in london under section 44 powers and questioned over his possession of a cricket bat . in october 2008 police stopped a 15-year-old schoolboy in south london who was taking photographs of wimbledon railway station for his school geography project . he was questioned under suspicion of being a terrorist . his parents raised concerns that his personal data could be held on a crimint for up to six years . in january 2009 , member of parliament andrew pelling was questioned after photographing roadworks near a railway station in april 2009 a man in enfield was questioned under section 44 for photographing a police car that he considered was being driven inappropriately along a public footpath . the police claimed ( incorrectly ) that the act made it illegal to take photographs of police officers and vehicles . trainspotters have frequently been subjected to stop and search . between 2000 and 2009 , police used powers under the act to stop 62,584 people at railway stations . in november 2009 , bbc photographer jeff overs was searched and questioned by police outside the tate modern art gallery for photographing the sunset over st paul 's cathedral , under suspicion of preparing for a terrorist act . overs lodged a formal complaint with the metropolitan police . in december 2009 , renowned architectural photographer grant smith was searched by a group of city of london police officers under section 44 because he was taking photographs of christ church greyfriars ; although he was working on public ground , the church 's proximity to the bank of america city of london branch caused a bank security guard to call the police . in june 2010 metropolitan police officers attempted to prevent a 15-year-old boy from photographing an armed forces day parade in romford , east london , citing '' antisocial behaviour '' and the terrorism act . a police misconduct hearing held in december 2011 found that the police had no legal power to prevent the teenager from taking pictures and that the police inspector involved in the incident had used abusive language in calling the boy '' silly '' , '' gay '' and '' stupid '' . the boy was awarded compensation and given an apology . in october 2011 a man was challenged by security staff in the braehead shopping centre in glasgow after taking photographs of his own four-year-old daughter eating an ice cream in the centre . he was held by strathclyde police under the terrorism act and eventually released without charge . . schedule 7 . paul golding was arrested after visiting russia in october 2019 . paul golding refused to provide pin codes to his phone and laptop at heathrow airport and so he was arrested at the airport and convicted in february 2020 with a discharge ( sentence ) for 9 months and ordered to pay £21 in victim surcharge and £750 in costs the guardian , 20 may 2020 . retrieved 21 may 2020 . police abuse of powers - civil liberties eroding ! - tommy robinson on banned.video/infowars 20 may 2020 . amendments . section 6 of the counter-terrorism and security act 2015 made amendments to the act . see also . terrorism acts ( since 2000 ) human rights in the united kingdom walter wolfgang – subject of an oft-quoted abuse of section 44 of the terrorism act . samina malik – first woman convicted under the terrorism act . rizwaan sabir – postgraduate student arrested and detained for 6 days under section 41 of the terrorism act proscribed organisations appeal commission photography and the law – issues arising around the taking of photographs censorship in the united kingdom list of designated terrorist organisations us state department list of foreign terrorist organizations . references . external links . explanatory notes to the terrorism act 2000 , from the office of public sector information . home office independent reviews of the act lord carlile 's review of the act in 2005 review of definition of “ terrorism ” in british law published terrorism act 2000 schedule 7 port and border controls