William of Malmesbury

biography . though the education william received at malmesbury abbey included a smattering of logic and physics , moral philosophy and history were the subjects to which he devoted the most attention . the earliest fact which he records of his career is that he assisted abbot godfrey ( 1081–1105 ) in collecting a library for the use of the community , and the evidence shows that malmesbury had first-hand knowledge of at least four hundred works by two hundred-odd authors . thomson 1987:197–207 . during the course of his studies , he amassed a collection of medieval histories , which inspired in him the idea for a popular account of english history modelled on the historia ecclesiastica gentis anglorum ( ecclesiastical history of the english people ) of bede . william 's obvious respect for bede is apparent even within the preface of his gesta regum anglorum , where he professes his admiration for the man . in fulfilment of this idea , william completed in 1125 hollister 2001:4 , his gesta regum anglorum ( '' deeds of the english kings '' ) , consciously patterned on bede , which spanned from ad 449 to 1120 . he later edited and expanded it up to the year 1127 , releasing a revision dedicated to robert , earl of gloucester . this '' second edition '' of the gesta regum , '' disclosing in his second thoughts the mellowing of age '' , hollister 2001:4 . is now considered one of the great histories of england . william wrote of william the conqueror in historia anglorum : william 's first edition of the book was followed by the gesta pontificum anglorum ( deeds of the english bishops ) in 1125 . for this vivid descriptive history of abbeys and bishoprics , dwelling upon the lives of the english prelates saints , notably the learned wonder-working aldhelm , william travelled widely in england . he stayed at glastonbury abbey for a time , composing on the antiquity of the glastonbury church for his friend , the abbot henry of blois who was also the bishop of winchester . ( among the first works to mention ss & nbsp ; fagan and deruvian , its present form is notably marred by anachronistic forgeries and additions . ) at a point before the onset of anarchy in 1139 , william made the beneficial acquaintance of roger of salisbury , who possessed malmesbury castle . such a beneficial local connection , combined with the positive reception of william 's gesta regum , led to an offer of the position of abbot of malmesbury in 1140 , which william declined , preferring his duties as a librarian and scholar . his one public appearance was made at the council of winchester in 1141 , in which the clergy declared for the empress maud . beginning about 1140 , william continued his chronicles with the historia novella , or '' modern history '' , a three-book chronicle that ran from 1128 to 1142 , including important accounts of the anarchy of king stephen 's reign . this work breaks off with an unfulfilled promise that it would be continued : presumably william died before he could redeem his pledge . william also wrote a history of his abbey and several saints ' lives . significance . william is considered by many , including john milton , to be one of the best english historians of his time , and remains known for strong documentation and his clear , engaging writing style . a strong latin stylist , he shows literary and historiographical instincts which are , for his time , remarkably sound . he is an authority of considerable value from 1066 onwards ; many telling anecdotes and shrewd judgments on persons and events can be gleaned from his pages . some scholars criticise him for his atypical annalistic form , calling his chronology less than satisfactory and his arrangement of material careless . much of william 's work on wulfstan , bishop of worcester , is thought to derive from a first-hand account from coleman , a contemporary of wulfstan . william merely translated the document from old english into latin . william 's works are still considered invaluable and , despite these shortcomings , he remains one of the most celebrated english chroniclers of the twelfth century . works . ( willielmi monachi malmesburiensis ) : de gestis regum anglorum , libri v ; historiae novellae , libri ii ; de gestis pontificum anglorum , libri iiii . , in rerum anglicarum scriptores post bedam praecipui , ex vetustissimis codicibus manuscriptis nunc primum in lucem editi ( g . bishop , r nuberie & r . barker typographij regii , london 1596 ) . digitized ed . migne , patrologia latina vol . 179 . william of malmesbury : gesta pontificum anglorum ( deeds of the english bishops ) , vol . i , edited and translated by m . winterbottom and r.m . thomson , oxford university press , 2007 . william of malmesbury : gesta pontificum anglorum ( deeds of the english bishops ) , vol . ii : general introduction and commentary , by r . m . thomson , oxford university press , 2007 . william of malmesbury : gesta regum anglorum ( deeds of the kings of the english ) , vol . i , edited and translated by r . a . b . mynors , r . m . thomson and m . winterbottom , oxford university press , 1998 . william of malmesbury : gesta regum anglorum ( deeds of the kings of the english ) , vol . ii : general introduction and commentary , by m . winterbottom and r . m . thomson , oxford university press , 2002 , william of malmesbury : historia novella ( the contemporary history ) , edited by edmund king , translated by k . r . potter , oxford university press , 1999 . william of malmesbury , chronicle of the kings of england , translated by rev . john sharpe , edited by j . a . giles , london : george bell and sons , 1904 . william of malmesbury : the deeds of the bishops of england gesta pontificum anglorum , translated by david preest , boydell press , 2002 . de antiquitate glastoniensis ecclesiae ( 63–1126 ad ) ( the ancient church of glastonbury ) . translation : . unprinted extant works . among these are : miracles of the virgin liber super explanationem lamentationum yeremiae prophetae an abridgment of amalarius ' de divinis officiis de dictis et factis memorabilibus philosophorum an epitome of the historia of haymo of fleury and some other works , historical and legal lives of the english saints the manuscripts of these works are to be found partly in the british museum , partly in the bodleian library . lost works . a vita sancti patricii and miracle sancti benigni are mentioned in the prologue to the book on glastonbury a metrical life of st ælfgyfu is quoted in the gesta pontificum chronica tribus libellis are mentioned in the prologue to the historia novella , and a fragment of them is apparently preserved in the british museum lansdowne manuscripts 436 . john leland gave extracts from an itineraries johannis abbatis , describing the journey of abbot of malmesbury john to rome in 1140 ( leland , collectanea , iii . 272 ) . notes . references . . further reading . rodney m . thomson , william of malmesbury , boydell & brewer , 2003 . kirsten a . fenton , gender , nation and conquest in the works of william of malmesbury ( woodbridge , boydell , 2008 ) ( gender in the middle ages ) . discovering william of malmesbury , edited by rodney thomson , emily dolmans , and emily a . winkler ( woodbridge : boydell & brewer , 2017 ) . external links . lewis e 247 gesta regum anglorum ( deeds of the english kings ) ; historia regum britanniae ( history of the kings of britain ) at openn latin chroniclers from the eleventh to the thirteenth centuries : william of malmesbury from the cambridge history of english and american literature , volume i , 1907–21 . full text of '' william of malmesbury 's chronicle of the kings of england . from the earliest period to the reign of king stephen '' battle of hastings , 1066 , excerpts . account of the battle of lincoln in 1141 , excerpts . historia novella , excerpts .