Rupert Giles

biography . character history . rupert edmund giles ( most frequently called giles ) was born circa 1955 in england . his family has worked within the watchers ' council for at least three generations ; both his father and grandmother , edna giles ( née fairweather ) , were also watchers . as a child , giles dreamed of being either '' a fighter pilot or possibly a grocer '' , but he soon learned that being a watcher is a calling , much as being a slayer is , and rupert 's father explained his destiny to him when he was ten years old ( revealed in '' never kill a boy on the first date '' ) . although the scooby gang later joked that he wore tweed diapers as a child , giles was in fact a rebellious youth , rejecting his responsibility as a watcher and dropping out of oxford university , where he was studying history , when he was twenty-one . during this time , giles claimed to be a founding member of pink floyd in order to impress girls ( although since pink floyd was founded in 1965 , when giles would have been around ten years old , it was not a particularly credible claim ) , and may have delved into criminal activity ( he remarks that hot-wiring a car is '' like riding a bloody bicycle '' , and band candy giles has no qualms about breaking into a clothing store and attacking a police officer ) . he is a talented singer and guitar player ( as head is in real life ) which the gang discovered , to their astonishment , when they saw him singing '' behind blue eyes '' by the who in '' where the wild things are '' . spike also saw him singing '' free bird '' by lynyrd skynyrd in '' the yoko factor '' . he began to explore dark magic and befriended a group of young people who delved into the dark arts for fun or money : ethan rayne , philip henry , dierdre page , thomas sutcliff , and randall . giles gained the nickname '' ripper '' during this time . together , the group summoned a demon called eyghon , who would possess and eventually destroy randall . following randall 's death , ethan and the others failed to exorcise eyghon , and giles accepted his destiny of becoming a watcher . before becoming a fully-fledged watcher , he also worked as '' the curator of a british museum , maybe the british museum '' as willow says ( '' welcome to the hellmouth '' ) , although , given the context , she may well have been repeating a rumor that was going around the school . sunnydale . at the behest of the watchers ' council , giles travels to sunnydale , california , and works as the librarian at the local high school . there he meets the current slayer , buffy summers , whom he begins training . the library , a sort of command center for buffy 's demon-hunting gang , sits right above the hellmouth . as the watcher , librarian , and general authority figure , giles often delivers exposition . he is a father figure to buffy and her friends xander harris and willow rosenberg , together forming the '' core four '' of the scooby gang . giles is often portrayed as something of a '' straight man '' and his '' stuffy '' oxford sensibility serves as counterpoint to the stereotypical southern californian characters and setting . he makes a '' weird cluck-cluck sound with his tongue '' when he is angry but is '' too english to say anything '' ( '' faith , hope & trick '' ) . he admits to being technophobic , a fact which often brings him into conflict with technopagan and computer science teacher , jenny calendar . however , after jenny aids him in casting the demon moloch out of the internet , the pair reach an understanding and begin a romantic relationship . despite his apparent fear with modern technology , giles is quite adept with computers , which is required in his occupation as a librarian ( season three episode '' gingerbread '' ) . in season two , giles ' dark side is revealed and his relationship with jenny deepens . in '' the dark age '' , ethan rayne comes to sunnydale to flee the demon eyghon . giles ashamedly admits to buffy that he was responsible for summoning the demon in his youth , and is horrified when jenny becomes possessed by eyghon . although eyghon is defeated , jenny takes time to cope with her ordeal , remaining distant from giles in the meantime . when new slayer kendra young arrives in sunnydale , giles shares with her an appreciation for obscure texts , resulting in buffy nicknaming her the '' she-giles . '' giles feels betrayed when jenny reveals she is actually a member of the kalderash gypsy clan , sent to keep an eye on buffy 's relationship with the vampire angel . when angel loses his soul he reverts to his evil , sadistic alter ego angelus . angelus murders jenny , leaving her corpse for giles to find in a romantic setting in his apartment ( '' passion '' ) , giles seeks revenge by burning down angelus ' base . angelus later kidnaps and tortures him , and drusilla hypnotizes him into thinking she is jenny so he will reveal how to awake acathla . buffy is forced to kill angel to save the world , despite willow 's restoring his soul , and subsequently leaves sunnydale . in season three , giles 's paternal feelings for buffy strengthen significantly . he spends the summer desperately following up every clue as to buffy 's whereabouts , and is overjoyed when she finally returns months later . giles briefly serves as watcher for kendra 's replacement slayer , faith lehane . the scoobies are given another disturbing glimpse in giles ' past when , along with every other adult in sunnydale , he reverts to being a teenager by enchanted band candy supplied by ethan rayne . he indulges in theft and vandalism , and makes out with and has sex with buffy 's mother , joyce summers . when buffy keeps angel 's return from hell a secret from the other scoobies , giles feels betrayed by her love for the man who tortured him and murdered jenny , but later agrees to help angel in '' amends '' . as buffy 's cruciamentum approaches ( a brutal tradition of the watchers ' council in which a depowered slayer is forced to battle a particularly dangerous vampire using only her wits ) , giles struggles to cope with the guilt of betraying buffy 's trust . despite describing the test as '' an archaic exercise in cruelty '' , he secretly injects buffy with muscle relaxants and adrenaline suppressors , which weaken her significantly , before finally coming clean when the vampire she is meant to fight escapes . buffy is disgusted , but is later moved when giles interferes to save her life and is subsequently dismissed for having a father 's love for her . giles is fired , and replaced with wesley wyndam-pryce , but continues to act as buffy 's unofficial watcher , proving especially helpful when wesley turns out to be an incompetent coward . when buffy briefly finds herself endowed with telepathic powers , she 'hears ' her mother remembering that giles was '' like a stevedore '' during sex . in a battle with the demonic mayor of sunnydale , giles presses the trigger which destroys the mayor and sunnydale high , putting himself out of a job . in season four , giles must cope with unemployment and a growing awareness that buffy no longer needs him . he continues a sexual relationship with his old friend olivia . lacking a sense of purpose , he spends most of his time lounging around his apartment , watching passions with spike . he gets depressed , especially when the scoobies fail to keep him in the loop regarding buffy 's new boyfriend riley finn and his membership in the initiative . in the episode '' something blue '' , giles becomes blind as a result of a faulty spell cast by willow rosenberg . when ethan rayne casts a spell on giles which turns him into a fyarl demon ( '' a new man '' ) , he must enlist spike 's help to escape the initiative and buffy , which believes him to be a demon who murdered giles . buffy , about to kill him , at the last moment recognizes his eyes and '' annoyed '' expression , and ethan is taken into custody by the initiative . in order to defeat the cyber-demonoid adam , buffy , willow , xander and giles cast a spell to combine their strength . giles provides the '' mind , '' and buffy is able to defeat adam . at the beginning of season five , giles no longer sees his place in sunnydale and decides to go back to england , telling no one except willow , whom he needs to organize the research documents for the scoobies . he quickly abandons this decision when buffy asks him to be her watcher again , confessing that she needs him , both emotionally and in order to discover more about what being a slayer means . when the owner of the magic box is killed by vampires , giles is convinced by the shop 's high profit margins to buy it , hiring anya as his overly enthusiastic assistant . buffy learns that her sister , dawn summers , is actually the key : mystical energy disguised in human form to conceal it from the hell-god glory . buffy initially confides only in giles about dawn 's true nature , and he decides to contact the watchers ' council for more information about glory . in '' checkpoint '' , quentin travers tries to coerce buffy to obey the council 's demands , by threatening to have giles deported . buffy stands up to the council , pointing out that without her there 's no need for a council , and tells them to give her all information concerning glory and to reinstate giles as her official watcher . travers reluctantly agrees , and leaves . as the scoobies labor to find a way to defeat glory , giles brings up the difficult idea of killing dawn to end glory 's plans to take over the world . buffy vows to protect dawn at all costs . glory shares her body with an innocent human named ben , and can be killed if ben dies . in the final battle against glory , buffy abandons the fight when glory turns back into a wounded ben , so that she can save dawn . giles is less merciful . explaining that buffy is a hero and therefore different from the rest of humanity , he suffocates ben with his bare hands ( '' the gift '' ) . season six sees giles reluctantly stepping back to allow buffy to gain independence . one hundred and forty-seven days after her death , giles decides to return to england . on the very day he leaves , willow , xander , anya and tara resurrect buffy , and he comes back as soon as he hears of this . despite being overjoyed to have buffy back , he is furious at willow for invoking such dark magic , and angrily dismisses her as '' a rank , arrogant amateur . '' while the other scoobies believe buffy was in hell , giles is not convinced , and his suspicions prove true when a demon 's musical spell causes buffy to reveal to them all that she was indeed in heaven . as buffy begins to rely excessively on giles for financial and emotional support , he decides his presence is preventing her assuming responsibility for her life . he leaves again for his native england , moving to a place near bath , where he works with a powerful local coven . a few months later , tara is killed by a stray bullet as warren mears attacks buffy . willow , still recovering from an addiction to magic , suffers a relapse , kills warren and attempts to kill his former partners in crime , before resolving to end humanity 's pain ( and her own ) by destroying the world . hearing of a dark power rising in sunnydale , giles teleports back there , wielding great magical power borrowed from the devon coven . as dark willow boasts of her indestructibility , giles knocks her to the floor with a blast of magic energy , saying '' i 'd like to test that theory '' ( '' two to go '' ) . after being filled in on everything that has happened to the scoobies in his absence , giles apologizes to buffy , insisting that he never should have left them , but buffy assures him that he did the right thing . knowing that willow is too strong to defeat , he tricks her into draining him of his white magics , which brings him near death . it also allows xander to reason with willow as the good magic brings out her natural love and compassion , eating away at the evil within her . giles returns to england with willow for her rehabilitation . a few months later , he brings potential slayers to sunnydale to protect them from the first evil and its bringers . giles had removed a few volumes from the headquarters of the watchers ' council , which is soon afterward destroyed by caleb , an agent of the first . an injured watcher named robson witnessed giles about to be decapitated by a bringer before blacking out . when the scoobies hear about this , they worry that giles may have been killed and the first is merely impersonating him . they are relieved when anya , dawn , xander and andrew tackle him to the ground , proving he is corporeal and therefore not the first . giles later loses buffy 's trust somewhat when he takes part in a scheme with robin wood to kill spike ( '' lies my parents told me '' ) . buffy tells him , '' i think you 've taught me everything i need to know . '' giles believes that buffy kept spike around for personal reasons rather than tactical ones ; this is confirmed when she talks to spike the night before the final battle under the hellmouth . in the series finale , giles participates in the battle of the hellmouth , and survives . shortly after buffy ended its seven-year televised run , there was talk of a giles-based spin-off series for the bbc entitled ripper . at comicon in 2007 , joss whedon stated that ripper was still planned and in the pipeline , but as of 2012 , nothing has come of the project . in season five of angel , angel contacts giles via phone twice . it is established that , after the events of '' chosen '' , giles travels to europe with buffy to train new slayers . he also takes andrew wells under his wing , training him to be a watcher . in '' damage '' , andrew claims to be '' faster , stronger and 82 % more manly '' as a result of giles ' mentoring . later in '' a hole in the world '' , after fred dies , angel phones giles , desperate to get in contact with willow , who can not be located . after angel confirms that he still works for wolfram & hart , giles coldly hangs up on him . originally , giles was to appear in '' a hole in the world '' as the one whom angel and spike approached in an attempt to save fred , because whedon needed a character who would be instantly believed ( by the characters and by the audience ) when he said there was no way to save fred . as it was too expensive for anthony stewart head to fly out to los angeles to guest-star , whedon created drogyn the battlebrand , who was mystically compelled to tell the truth . literature . as a main character from the beginning of the series , giles has appeared in most of the spin-off books published based on the series . he plays a particularly key role in the lost slayer series , where a chain of events lead to buffy ( from a point early in the fourth season ) being projected into the body of her twenty-four-year-old self in a timeline where giles was turned into a vampire by the followers of an aztec bat god , forcing buffy to face a foe who knows her every technique before she manages to find a way to return to the past and prevent giles being captured and turned . in the canonical comic book continuation of the series , buffy the vampire slayer season eight , the scooby gang has expanded into a global organization , training approximately five hundred slayers spread over ten squads . giles is head of the slayer operations in england , parallel with andrew 's operations in italy and buffy and xander 's in scotland , and he keeps in close contact with xander and andrew , discussing issues . in the season eight arc , '' no future for you '' , he comes to faith to request her assistance assassinating another slayer , who will bring about the apocalypse if left unchecked . after they are both forced to make the difficult decisions to kill the rogue slayer gigi and her mentor roden , they decide to work together in the future as equal partners , keeping slayers from turning down the dark path that both faith and gigi walked . as a result of their covert operation , buffy and giles are no longer on speaking terms . in the story '' safe , '' giles and faith hear of a '' slayer sanctuary '' in a town called hanselstadt from a young slayer named courtney . there , giles encounters duncan fillworthe , a former watcher , who claims vampires do not dare to enter the town because they know the town contains an army of slayers . later , as giles argues that a stalemate is not a solution to the vampire problem , duncan reveals that in fact the town is feeding the slayers who come seeking sanctuary to an ancient demon . the fear of the demon is what really keeps the vampires from entering . giles goes to warn faith as duncan states this is the fate that slayers deserve for rejecting the watchers council , especially buffy , reminding giles that buffy 's relationship with angel resulted in jenny calendar 's death . giles finds faith already in combat with the demon , which feeds on beings who feel regret and fear . while trying to free courtney from the demon , duncan intercepts giles . during their skirmish , the demon devours duncan and giles saves courtney while faith kills the demon . the stalemate ended , giles and faith rally the reluctant townspeople against the coming vampires , telling them if they want to live , they 'll have to fight . buffy the vampire slayer season 8 - 24 '' safe '' after harmony kendall 's reality show establishes a new pro-vampire , anti-slayer world order , faith and giles are in hiding in the führerbunker in the '' retreat '' storyline . once their underground hideout is compromised by demons , they retreat to scotland to reunite with buffy . giles and buffy are driven to reconcile by twilight 's attacks . the entire group are later transported to oz in tibet to learn how to suppress magic to stop twilight tracking them . in the penultimate issue of season eight , angel is possessed by a powerful mystical entity known as twilight , and while under its influence , murders giles , after giles deliberately put himself in harm 's way to provoke buffy to action . angel does so by snapping giles ' neck , homaging angelus ' murder of jenny calendar . confirms that the resemblance between the two deaths was intentional . while angelus killed jenny in vampiric face—a result of joss not wanting the audience to truly hate angel 's face—giles is murdered while angel 's face is in human form . afterwards , it is revealed that giles has left to faith his entire estate in his will ( with the exception of the 'vampyr ' book from the first episode of the series , which he leaves to buffy ) , and faith assures buffy this does n't mean giles cared about her less but rather felt faith needed it more . in a 2011 interview , whedon stated that his decision to kill off giles could not be discussed in detail '' because ripples from that event '' will also be a large part of both buffy season nine and angel and faith . however , he was able to explain other motivations ; he felt that from a writing perspective , giles did not work in the comic book medium where he had flourished on the television show . his primary roles - provider of narrative exposition , and paternal figure - did n't work well in the comic book format . whedon killed off giles where he did so that it might have a greater effect on the coming season , '' because he wanted to make all this matter '' . in the follow-up comic series angel & faith , angel makes it his personal mission to bring giles back to life . over the course of several arcs giles ' life before sunnydale is shown in flashbacks as angel and faith gather pieces of giles ' soul from demons or magical objects that were significant in giles ' life . these parts of his soul are absorbed into angel 's body using the mystical tooth of ammuk . they are joined by rupert 's great-aunts lavinia and sophronia fairweather , two depowered witches who used magic to remain young , and an old friend of giles named alasdair coames who is a depowered magical archmage and collector of magical artifacts . in the '' death and consequences '' arc angel and faith discover giles is not buried in his grave . it has been possessed by the demon eyghon who had survived '' the dark age ( buffy episode ) '' . because giles had sold his soul to eyghon in his youth , he did not move on even though he died a natural death , and the core of his soul went to eyghon , while smaller parts broke off and attached themselves to the things angel & faith had found . thus , it is possible for giles to be resurrected from a natural death in a world with no current source of magic . angel recruits spike to help him kill eyghon and a group of british slayers reluctantly agree to work with them to save their friends who are still alive from eyghon 's control . the presence of three beings inside angel 's body ( himself , angelus and giles ) prevent eyghon from controlling angel , and giles speaks through him as angel kills eyghon and therefore has all of giles ' soul . it is later transferred out of angel to a mystical vessel . using a mystical item to restore giles ' corpse to full health and coames ' collection of artifacts to provide magic for a resurrection spell , angel , faith , coames and the fairweathers try to bring him back to life . the group is shocked when giles comes back to life with all his memories intact , but in the body of a 12-year-old boy due to his aunts thinking of him as a child during the ritual . giles is grateful to be free of eyghon but furious at the age of his body and they have been trying to bring him back and not stopping a plot by villains whistler ( buffyverse ) , pearl and nash to mutate humans into a magical species at the cost of a few billion lives . before confronting them , giles says to faith she has grown into a fine woman and they may have wanted him back , but none of the group needs him like they used to . the villains plan to unleash their plague by releasing an orb of pure magic into the upper atmosphere . giles is able to use ambient magic to attack nash with a fireball causing him to drop the orb but it also mutates a nearby crowd . nash is killed causing pearl to flee . whistler sees the error of his ways and sacrifices his life to destroy the orb . in the aftermath of the battle , giles wants faith to keep his money . he decides to return to america because he was at his best with buffy , not noticing he has hurt faith 's feelings . he parts on good terms with angel who is staying in london 's new magic town suburb . while resenting the challenges of his youthful body compared to his adult mind , giles adapts to his new situation , particularly with the discovery that his command of magic is more potent in his youthful body ; his aunts speculate that he is tapping into the full potential that he repressed to focus on his studies as a watcher . powers and abilities . giles has extensive knowledge of demonology and slayer combat ( including at least a theoretical knowledge of jujutsu and aikido , but excelling at the art of fencing ) , mainly due to his training as a watcher . his youthful interest in witchcraft and sorcery has endured into his adult life ; though his natural aptitude for it is only moderate ( much less than that of willow ) , he does have a high amount of magical knowledge . giles is proficient in several languages , including latin , ancient greek , sumerian ( '' primeval '' ) , japanese ( '' checkpoint '' ) , and possibly gaelic ( '' fear , itself '' ) , but weak in german ( '' gingerbread '' ) , mandarin and cantonese ( '' first date '' ) . while he has no prominent supernatural powers of his own , his extensive experience with dealing with vampires , demons , and other creatures makes him capable of handling them effectively . giles has moderate skill in hand to hand combat , as well as various melee weapons . while his demeanor is typically mild and polite , giles is not above using raw violence to solve a problem , such as physically threatening principal snyder into readmitting buffy to school after her expulsion ( '' dead man 's party '' ) , pummeling angelus senseless with a flaming baseball bat and arson his hideout upon discovering that he had killed jenny calendar ( '' passion '' ) , manhandling spike while ordering him to get over his feelings for buffy ( '' i was made to love you '' ) , forcing glory 's minion slook to talk by inflicting a painful-sounding injury offscreen ( '' tough love '' ) , severely beating up ethan rayne for information ( '' halloween '' ) , and suffocating a critically injured ben with his bare hands to keep glory from awakening in his body . ( '' the gift '' ) . typically , however , giles ' calm demeanor and professionalism offer him a detached state of authority even in the face of fearsome monsters , as demonstrated during his confrontation with a violent demon in '' the long way home '' . he is also shown to be able to quickly hotwire a car in the episode '' dead man 's party '' . in the season six finale , giles was temporarily endowed with powers of the devon coven in an attempt to stop willow . during this time , he demonstrated powers such as teleportation , telekinesis , and energy projection . he lost all of these powers when willow drained him and left him on the brink of death , but he recovered immediately after xander calmed her down from her rampage . his moderate proficiency in magic combined with his natural acumen and intelligence still make him quite formidable ; in season eights '' no future for you '' , he kills the warlock roden , who could fly and conjure easily , through using a spell inventively . after being resurrected in the form of an adolescent , giles displays much more magical aptitude , which is briefly lost when willow temporarily ages him back into an adult form . sophronia and lavinia theorised that if giles had been tutored in magic by them rather than being trained as a watcher at the wishes of his father and grandmother , he would have become an extremely powerful magician , and could achieve this potential in his new life . despite his vast intelligence , giles is not what one would call technology-savvy and is , by his own admission , somewhat technophobia . however , being a librarian , his occupation requires the use of up-to-date technology and skills to further a library service 's goals to serve its patrons efficiently , and in one episode ( '' gingerbread '' ) , shows that giles is proficient with computers at least on a basic level . reception . head 's portrayal of giles was largely well received by television critics . an article for the wrap summarized , '' for more than five seasons , the british actor added depth and charm to joss whedon 's groundbreaking 1997-2003 series as mild-mannered librarian rupert giles . '' head was nominated in for the 2001 saturn award for best supporting actor , but lost out to co-star james marsters . . references . external links .