1951 in literature

events . january 12 – janie moore , c . s . lewis ' so-called adoptive mother , dies . march – the american writer flannery o'connor leaves hospital after being diagnosed with lupus at the age of 25 . march 12 – hank ketcham 's u.s . dennis the menace appears for the first time in 16 united states newspapers . march 17 – the homonymous u.k . dennis the menace comic strip first appears in the children 's comic the beano . spring – arthur c . clarke 's short story '' the sentinel '' , which will form a basis for the film 2001 : a space odyssey ( 1968 ) and a subsequent novel , is published as '' sentinel of eternity '' in the only issue ever produced of the american science fiction and fantasy pulp magazine 10 story fantasy . may – joe orton enters the royal academy of dramatic art in london , where he meets his lover and ultimate murderer kenneth halliwell . june 18 – frank hardy is acquitted of criminal libel in australia over his self-published , 1950 roman à clef on corruption in melbourne life , power without glory . july 16 – j . d . salinger 's coming-of-age story the catcher in the rye is published by little , brown and company in new york city . september 6 – william s . burroughs shoots and kills his common-law wife joan vollmer , apparently by accident , in mexico city . december 16 – noël coward leaves his home , white cliffs , on the south coast of england , having sold it to ian fleming . unknown dates e . e . cummings and rachel carson are awarded guggenheim fellowships . it is cummings ' second . janet frame 's first book , the lagoon and other stories , is published by the caxton press ( new zealand ) ( dated 1952 ) while the author is a patient in seacliff lunatic asylum , seacliff , new zealand , scheduled for a lobotomy . it is awarded the hubert church memorial award , at the time one of new zealand 's most prestigious literary prizes . this results in the cancellation of frame 's operation . béla hamvas completes his epic novel karnevál . he is banned from publication in hungary at the time , so that it will appear only in 1985 , 17 years after his death . the first novel in anthony powell 's set of twelve , a dance to the music of time , is published by heinemann in the u.k . the custom of performing medieval mystery plays is revived at york and chester , england . the théâtre national de la colline in paris is founded . . new books . fiction . sholem asch – moses isaac asimov foundation the stars like dust nigel balchin – a way through the wood samuel beckett – molloy ray bradbury the illustrated man '' the last night of the world '' ( short story ) gill hunt – galactic storm taylor caldwell – the balance wheel morley callaghan – the loved and the lost truman capote – the grass harp l . sprague de camp rogue queen the undesired princess john dickson carr – the devil in velvet camilo josé cela – the hive ( la colmena ) james hadley chase – but a short time to live agatha christie the under dog and other stories they came to baghdad arthur c . clarke – prelude to space beverly cleary – ellen tebbits julio cortázar – bestiario robertson davies – tempest-tost august derleth – the memoirs of solar pons heimito von doderer – die strudlhofstiege , oder melzer und die tiefe der jahre ( the strudelhof steps ) owen dodson – boy at the window daphne du maurier – my cousin rachel friedrich dürrenmatt – suspicion howard fast – spartacus per anders fogelström – sommaren med monika julien gracq – le rivage des syrtes ( the opposing shore ) graham greene – the end of the affair henri rené guieu – le pionnier de l'atome john hawkes – the beetle leg robert a . heinlein – the puppet masters elizabeth jane howard and robert aickman – we are for the dark : six ghost stories laurence hyde – southern cross ( wordless novel ) james jones – from here to eternity a . m . klein – the second scroll wolfgang koeppen – tauben im gras ( pigeons on the grass ) kalki krishnamurthy poiman karadu ponniyin selvan ( பொன்னியின் செல்வன் , the son of ponni ; publication begins ) louis l'amour – the rustlers of the west fork john masters – nightrunners of bengal françois mauriac – le sagouin ( the marmoset ) james a . michener – return to paradise nancy mitford – the blessing nicholas monsarrat – the cruel sea alberto moravia – the conformist ( il conformista ) robert pinget – entre fantoine et agapa anthony powell – a question of upbringing sax rohmer – sumuru j . d . salinger – the catcher in the rye ernst von salomon – the questionnaire ( der fragebogen ) ooka shohei ( 大岡 昇平 ) – fires on the plain ( 野火 , nobi ) vern schneider – the teahouse of the august moon margit söderholm – meeting in vienna cardinal spellman – the foundling howard spring – the houses in between john steinbeck – the log from the sea of cortez rex stout curtains for three murder by the book william styron – lie down in darkness elizabeth taylor – a game of hide and seek phoebe atwood taylor – diplomatic corpse josephine tey – the daughter of time anne de tourville – jabadao herman wouk – the caine mutiny john wyndham – the day of the triffids frank yerby – a woman called fancy marguerite yourcenar – memoirs of hadrian ( mémoires d'hadrien ) juan eduardo zúñiga – inútiles totales ( totally useless ) . children and young people . m . e . atkinson – castaway camp ( first in the fricka series of five books ) viola bayley – the dark lantern margaret biggs – the blakes come to melling anne de vries – into the darkness ( de duisternis in , first in the journey through the night – reis door de nacht – series of four books ) eleanor estes – ginger pye rumer godden – the mousewife cynthia harnett – the wool-pack c . s . lewis – prince caspian elinor lyon – we dare n't go a'hunting gianni rodari – l romanzo di cipollino ( the adventures of the little onion ) . drama . ian hay – the white sheep of the family kenneth horne – and this was odd eugène ionesco – the lesson ( la leçon ) maryat lee – dope ! a . a . milne – before the flood lawrence riley – kin hubbard jean-paul sartre – the devil and the good lord ( le diable et le bon dieu ) john van druten – i am a camera john whiting a penny for a song saint 's day ( first performance ) tennessee williams – the rose tattoo . poetry . clark ashton smith – the dark chateau frank o'hara – a city winter and other poems iona and peter opie – the oxford dictionary of nursery rhymes . non-fiction . nelson algren – chicago : city on the make ( essay ) lou andreas-salomé ( died 1937 ) – lebensrückblick ( looking back ) hannah arendt – the origins of totalitarianism albert camus – the rebel ( l'homme révolté ) rachel carson – the sea around us nirad c . chaudhuri – the autobiography of an unknown indian wolfgang clemen – the development of shakespeare 's imagery thomas b . costain – the magnificent century ( second book in the plantagenet or pageant of england series ) daphne du maurier ( ed . ) – the young george du maurier : a selection of his letters 1860–67 jacquetta hawkes a land a guide to the prehistoric and roman monuments in england and wales eric hoffer – the true believer : thoughts on the nature of mass movements karl huber ( executed 1943 ) – leibniz dumas malone – jefferson and his time c . wright mills – white collar : the american middle classes vladimir nabokov – speak , memory j . a . schumpeter – imperialism and social classes . births . january 1 – ashfaq hussain , urdu poet january 13 – nigel cox , new zealand novelist january 22 – steve j . spears , australian actor , singer , and playwright ( died 2007 ) february 13 – katja lange-müller , german novelist february 17 – jagadish mohanty , indian novelist ( died 2013 ) march 4 – theresa hak kyung cha , south korean-born novelist and artist ( died 1982 ) march 12 – susan musgrave , canadian poet and children 's writer april 5 – guy vanderhaeghe , canadian author april 19 – pierre lemaitre , french suspense novelist may 3 – tatyana tolstaya , russian novelist , essayist and tv presenter may 9 christopher dewdney , canadian poet joy harjo , native american poet may 15 – david almond , english writer for children and young adults may 20 – christie blatchford , canadian newspaper columnist , journalist , writer and broadcaster ( died 2020 ) may 21 – al franken , american comedian , actor , writer and politician june 15 – amir barghashi , iranian-born swedish actor and dramatist june 22 – rosario murillo , nicaraguan poet and political activist june 29 – don rosa , american writer and artist of disney comics august 20 – greg bear , american science fiction writer august 24 – orson scott card , american science fiction writer september 20 – javier marías , spanish novelist september 29 – andrés caicedo , colombian novelist and cinema critic ( suicide 1977 ) october 3 – bernard cooper , american writer october 11 – louise rennison , english author and comedian ( died 2016 ) october 12 – peter flannery , english dramatist october 17 – clark parent , haitian novelist , musician and politician december 6 – tomson highway , canadian and cree playwright , novelist and children 's author december 8 – bill bryson , american travel writer december 22 – charles de lint , canadian fantasy author and celtic folk musician unknown dates mohammed achaari , moroccan writer carol birch , english novelist . deaths . january 7 – rené guénon , french philosophical writer ( born 1886 ) january 10 – sinclair lewis , american novelist ( born 1885 ) january 29 – james bridie , scottish dramatist ( born 1888 ) february 13 – lloyd c . douglas , american author ( born 1877 ) february 16 – henri-rené lenormand , french dramatist ( born 1882 ) february 19 – andré gide , french author ( born 1869 ) february 28 – vsevolod vishnevsky , russian dramatist and screenwriter ( born 1900 ) march 25 – oscar micheaux , african american author , film director and producer ( born 1884 ) april 3 – henrik visnapuu , estonian poet and dramatist ( born 1890 ) april 9 – sadegh hedayat , iranian-born novelist ( born 1903 ; suicide ) april 29 – ludwig wittgenstein , austrian philosopher ( born 1889 ) june 10 – håkon evjenth , norwegian children 's writer ( born 1894 ) june 11 – w . c . sellar , scottish humorist ( born 1898 ) august 14 – william randolph hearst , american newspaper tycoon ( born 1863 ) august 18 – richard malden , english editor , classical and biblical scholar , and ghost story writer ( born 1879 ) august 31 – abraham cahan , american jewish journalist and novelist ( born 1860 ) september 2 – antoine bibesco , romanian dramatist ( born 1878 ) september 7 – f . g . loring , english writer and naval officer ( born 1869 ) september 28 – petre p . negulescu , romanian philosopher ( born 1870 ) november 27 – timrava ( božena slančíková ) , slovak novelist , short story writer and playwright ( born 1867 ) december 4 – pedro salinas , spanish poet ( born 1891 ) december 10 – algernon blackwood , english novelist and journalist ( born 1869 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : cynthia harnett , the wool-pack frost medal : wallace stevens james tait black memorial prize for fiction : chapman mortimer , father goose james tait black memorial prize for biography : noel annan , leslie stephen newbery medal : elizabeth yates , amos fortune , free man nobel prize in literature : pär lagerkvist premio nadal : luis romero , la noria pulitzer prize for drama : no award given pulitzer prize for fiction : conrad richter , the town pulitzer prize for poetry : carl sandburg , complete poems . references .