William Wilde

early life and career . william wilde was born at kilkeevin , near castlerea , in county roscommon , the youngest of the three sons and two daughters of a prominent local medical practitioner , thomas wills wilde , and his wife , amelia flynne ( d . c.1844 ) , mcgeachie , james ( 2004 ) 'wilde , sir william robert wills ( 1815–1876 ) ' in oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press . and received his initial education at the elphin diocesan school in elphin , county roscommon . in 1832 , wilde was bound as an apprentice to abraham colles , the pre-eminent irish surgeon of the day , at dr steevens ' hospital in dublin . he was also taught by the surgeons james cusack and sir philip crampton and the physician sir henry marsh . wilde also studied at the private and highly respected school of anatomy , medicine , and surgery in park street ( later lincoln place ) , dublin . in 1837 , he earned his medical degree from the royal college of surgeons in ireland . in the same year , wilde embarked on an eight-month-cruise to the holy land with a recovering patient , visiting various cities and islands throughout the mediterranean . porpoises were flung on board the ship , crusader , and wilde dissected them . taking notes , he eventually composed a two-volume book on the nursing habits of the creatures . belford , barbara ( 2000 ) oscar wilde : a certain genius , random house , inc . among the places he visited on this tour was egypt . in a tomb he found the mummified remains of a dwarf and salvaged the torso to bring back to ireland . he also collected embalmed ibises . once back in ireland , wilde published an article in the dublin university magazine suggesting that one of the '' cleopatra 's needles '' be transported to england ( eventually in 1878 one of the needles was transported to london , and in 1880 the other one was brought to new york 's central park ) . in 1873 he was awarded the cunningham gold medal by the royal irish academy . . recognition . he ran his own hospital , st mark 's ophthalmic hospital for diseases of the eye and ear , in dublin and was appointed to serve as oculist-in-ordinary to queen victoria . at one point , wilde performed surgery on the father of another famous irish dramatist , george bernard shaw . wilde had a very successful medical practice and was assisted in it by his natural son , henry wilson , who had been trained in dublin , vienna , heidelberg , berlin , and paris . wilson 's presence enabled wilde to travel and he visited scandinavia , where he received an honorary degree from uppsala , and was welcomed in stockholm by anders retzius , among others . charles xv of sweden conferred on him the nordstjärneorden ( order of the polar star ) . in 1853 , he was appointed surgeon occulist in ordinary to the queen in ireland , the first position of its kind , probably created for him . the dublin university magazine , volume 85 ( 1875 ) he was awarded a knighthood in a ceremony at dublin castle on 28 january 1864 the irish times , 29 january 1864 . more for his involvement with the irish census than for his medical contributions , although he had been appointed medical commissioner to the irish census in 1841 . in 1845 , he became editor of the dublin journal of medical science , to which he contributed many articles . marriage and children . wilde married the poet jane wilde in 1851 , who wrote and published under the name of speranza . the couple had two sons : willie and oscar , and a daughter , isola francesca , who died in childhood . in addition to his children with his wife , sir william wilde was the father of three children born out of wedlock before his marriage : henry wilson , born in 1838 , and emily and mary wilde , born in 1847 and 1849 , respectively , of different parentage to henry . sir william acknowledged paternity of his illegitimate children and provided for their education , but they were reared by his relatives rather than with his wife and legitimate children . ellmann , richard ( 1988 ) oscar wilde , vintage books , new york , emily and mary both died in 1871 following a halloween party at which their dresses accidentally caught fire . zapata , mariana . '' the strange secret behind the tragic deaths of oscar wilde ’ s half-sisters '' , atlas obscura ( 21 october 2016 ) . from 1855 to his death in 1876 , william wilde lived at no . 1 merrion square , now the headquarters of american college dublin . the building is named oscar wilde house after william wilde 's son , who also lived at the address from 1855 until 1878 . later life . wilde 's reputation suffered when mary travers , a long-term patient of his and the daughter of a colleague , claimed that he had seduced her two years earlier . fryer , jonathan ( 2005 ) wilde . haus publishing . she wrote a pamphlet crudely parodying wilde and lady wilde as dr and mrs quilp , and portraying dr quilp as the rapist of a female patient anaesthetised under chloroform . she distributed the pamphlets outside the building where wilde was about to give a public lecture . lady wilde complained to mary 's father , robert travers , which resulted in mary bringing a libel case against her . mary travers won her case but was awarded a mere farthing in damages by the jury . legal costs of £2,000 were awarded against lady wilde . the case was the talk of all dublin , and wilde 's refusal to enter the witness box during the trial was widely held against him as ungentlemanly behaviour . from this time onwards , wilde began to withdraw from dublin to the west of ireland , where he had started in 1864 to build what became moytura , his house overlooking lough corrib in connemara . he died aged 61 in 1876 , de vere white , terence ( 1967 ) the parents of oscar wilde . london : hodder & stoughton and is buried in mount jerome cemetery in dublin . publications . the narrative of a voyage to madeira , teneriffe , and along the shores of the mediterranean , 1840 . the beauties of the boyne and the blackwater , 1849 . practical observations on aural surgery and the nature and treatment of diseases of the ear , 1853 . lough corrib , its shores and islands , first published in 1867 . the closing years of the life of dean swift . the epidemics of ireland . the early races of mankind in ireland , irish builder , 1874 . books about . victorian doctor : the life of sir william wilde , t.g . wilson ( methuen , london , 1942 . ) . references . external links . online text of lough corrib wilde in the journal of the american academy of pediatrics portrait of sir wiliam r . wilde in the dublin magazine , vol 85 ( 1875 )