Industrial archaeology

ia topics and sites . industrial archaeology covers a wide range of topics , from early ironworks and water-powered mills to large modern factories , as well as ancillary sites and structures such as worker housing , warehouses and infrastructure . ia topics generally fall into one of four categories : extractive ( also known as '' basic materials '' , which includes mining , quarrying , petroleum , lumbering , etc . ) , manufacturing ( mills and factories , including their power systems and machinery ) , public utilities ( water , sewer , electric , gas , etc . ) , and transport ( canals , railways , roads , aviation , bridges , tunnels , etc . ) . additionally , the topic of power generation ( water , wind , steam , electric , etc . ) , while applicable to each of the four major ia categories , is sometimes considered its own category . see also : list of industrial archaeology topics the work of industrial archaeologists has led to greater public awareness of industrial heritage , including the creation of industry museums and the inclusion of sites on national and international historic cultural registers in many parts of the world . notable examples include the ironbridge gorge museums , engelsberg ironworks and lowell national historical park , among many others . see also : list of notable industrial heritage sites . history of industrial archaeology . early developments . one of the earliest forerunners of the mid-20th-century ia-movement was the sheffield trades technical societies , established in 1918 at the university of sheffield to preserve elements of that city 's industrial history . in 1920 , the newcomen society was founded in great britain to foster the study of the history of engineering and technology , including many relics of the industrial revolution , such as steam engines , canals , iron bridges , machinery , and other historical artifacts . the newcomen society also established the journal of industrial archaeology in 1964 , first national ia-publication in the uk . another early development was the formation of the cornish engines preservation committee ( cepc ) in 1935 , to rescue the levant mine and beam engine in cornwall . during the early 20th century , the historic preservation movement in the united states was still in its infancy . most of the historic sites that received any attention were related to presidents and political figures , or the early colonial period . however , in 1925 , one of the first industrial museums in the united states opened at old slater mill , in pawtucket , rhode island , at the site of the first successful textile mill in the country , built in 1793 . the museum was founded by a group of business leaders with ties to the new england textile industry , during a period of decline due to southern competition . the old slater mill association had the foresight to restore the old mill to its early 19th-century appearance , and fill it with a representative collection of textile machinery . in 1966 , old slater mill was declared a national historic landmark . in the early 1970s , paul e . rivard , then the director of the old slater mill museum was one of the key figures in the founding of the society for industrial archeology . another notable example of an early industrial archaeology site ( one that predates the widespread ia-movement ) , is the saugus iron works national historic site in saugus , massachusetts . it is the site of the first integrated iron works in north america , and was reconstructed in the 1950s after extensive archaeological excavations that began in the late 1940s by roland w . robbins . . beginnings of the ia movement . the term “ industrial archaeology ” was popularised in great britain in 1955 by michael rix of birmingham university , who wrote an article in the amateur historian , about the need for greater study and preservation of 18th and 19th century industrial sites and relics of the british industrial revolution . world industrial archaeology , kenneth hudson in 1959 , council for british archaeology ( cba ) established an industrial archaeology research committee . the cba soon developed a standardized record card for industrial monuments , which it distributed to volunteer groups around the uk . in 1965 , the national record of industrial monuments ( nrim ) was created as a central archive for the record cards that had been collected by angus buchanan at the university of bath . industrial archaeology : a handbook , palmer , nevell & sissons , 2012 by the late 1960s , a number of local industrial archaeology groups had been formed in the uk , including the gloucestershire society for industrial archaeology in 1963 , the bristol industrial archaeological society in 1967 , and the greater london industrial archaeology society in 1968 , among others . the primary mission of these local ia groups during this period was recording the remaining relics of industrial history , especially those deemed to be most at risk from urban redevelopment schemes . depending on the condition of the site or artifact , recording typically consists of compiling a brief summary of the site 's history through available records , including old maps or photographs , followed by detailed onsite measurements , drawings and photographs of the existing conditions of the site . generally , a report is prepared and copies are filed in a public archive for the benefit of future generations . most recording trips are intended to obtain a general overview of existing conditions , and are not meant to be an exhaustive study . one of the first areas to be the subject of a systematic study of industrial archaeology was the ironbridge gorge in shropshire , united kingdom . this landscape developed from the 17th century as one of the first industrial landscapes in the world , and by the 18th century had a range of extractive industries as well as extensive iron making , ceramic manufacturing , and a series of early railways . the ironbridge gorge museum trust was established in 1967 , and the significance of the ironbridge gorge was recognized in 1986 with its designation as a unesco world heritage site . in 1963 , british journalist kenneth hudson published the first ia text , titled industrial archaeology : an introduction . four years later in april 1967 , hudson spoke at a seminar at the smithsonian institution in washington , d.c . , at what is considered the birth of the ia-movement in the united states . the seminar , which was attended by an audience of historic preservationists , museum professionals and others , focused on what was being done to promote the study of industrial archaeology in great britain and in europe , and what needed to be done in the united states . by this time , a number of select historic industrial sites had been recorded by the historic american buildings survey ( habs ) , which until then had mainly concentrated its efforts on architecturally significant sites . in 1967 , the notable new england textile mills survey ( netms ) was performed under the habs umbrella , led by robert m . vogel , curator of the division of mechanical and civil at the smithsonian museum of history and technology . the netms was the first large-scale , industrial recording project by habs . vogel , robert m . , historical archaeology , the new england textile mill survey , vol . 1 , 1967 , page 34 . it was followed by the new england textile mill survey ii in 1968 . sande , ted , technology and culture , the national park service and the history of technology : the new england textile mill survey , vol . 14 , no . 3 , july 1973 the full reports from the 1967 and 1968 textile mill surveys are now available for public viewing on the library of congress website , including the amoskeag millyard in manchester , new hampshire , which was drastically altered soon after the survey was completed . the success of the 1967 and 1968 mill surveys led to the formation of the historic american engineering record ( haer ) in 1969 , in conjunction with the american society of civil engineers . since then , thousands of industrial / engineering sites and structures throughout the united states have been recorded by haer , and are on record at the library of congress for public benefit . 1970s-1980s . by the early 1970s , industrial archaeology was , for the most part , being practiced in a few select countries by amateurs and professionals with different backgrounds and objectives . while much had been accomplished during the preceding decade , the '' new '' field of industrial archaeology was still struggling to gain acceptance as a true scholarly pursuit . in october 1971 , a group of representatives from various museums , universities , and government organizations in the united states and canada met in washington , d.c . to establish a means to improve the exchange of ideas and information . the result was the first national-level , ia-related academic society in the world ; the society for industrial archeology ( sia ) . it was decided that the name of the society would take on the us-government 's spelling of '' archeology '' , instead of '' archaeology '' . the first sia newsletter was published in january 1972 , with robert m . vogel as editor . in april of that same year the new group held its first annual conference in new york city . in 1975 , the sia introduced its academic journal , ia , the journal of the society for industrial archeology , with emory kemp as editor . in 1973 , the association for industrial archaeology ( aia ) was founded in great britain . it brought together the numerous local ia-groups that had been formed throughout the country . the aia publishes a newsletter , industrial archaeology news , along with its academic journal , industrial archaeology review , introduced in 1976 . many aia members have been active in promoting the mission of ia throughout europe and the rest of the world . with the rapid decline of many established industries in north america and europe during the 1970s , industrial archaeologists began to take on a new role of recording and preserving recently closed sites , as opposed to antique relics from earlier periods . among the notable projects during this decade was the successful transformation of sloss furnaces in birmingham , alabama after it shut down in 1971 into an open air industrial museum . sloss furnaces was declared a nhl in 1981 . the museum opened in 1983 and offers a variety of educational and civic programs . in 1982 , i.a.recordings was founded by a small group of volunteers in the uk , to record past and present industries on film and video , as a resource for future generations . during the 1980s , the scope of the field of industrial archaeology in great britain shifted away from what was taken place in north america , where the theories of social archaeology that were developed in the historical archaeology field began to be applied to the study of industrial sites . british industrial archaeologists meanwhile mainly focused on the recording of the technical aspects of sites and artifacts . one key development during this period was the shift toward thematic studies of monuments by type , including three initial textile mill surveys in greater manchester , yorkshire and eastern cheshire led by keith falconer . . since 1990 . since 1990 , there has been an ever-increasing awareness of the importance of industrial heritage , confirmed most prominently by the addition of numerous industrial sites to the unesco world heritage list . many preserved industrial sites have become a vital part of heritage tourism , including the european route of industrial heritage ( erih ) , established in 1999 . based on the success of the route der industriekultur in ruhr , germany , the erih has expanded to consist of sixteen routes in seven countries , with plans for new routes in additional countries . the number of industrial sites that have been preserved and adaptive reuse such as apartments , public spaces or museums instead of being demolished is also a testament to the efforts of industrial archaeologists . industrial archaeology has gradually gained acceptance in the academic arena . in the uk , where the field developed largely from the efforts of volunteer researchers , the emergence of developer-funded projects in the past two decades has led to an increased presence of professional practitioners , with the application of theoretical archaeology methods such as landscape archaeology to the industrial setting . however , while many university archaeology departments now include the industrial period in their degree courses , industrial archaeology remains a fairly limited field of study , with few dedicated industrial archaeology programs , such as those offered at michigan technological university and the ironbridge institute . university courses widespread appreciation of the importance of industrial heritage by the general public is still lacking in many areas , as the subject often maintains the perception of being '' not old enough '' to truly be considered archaeology . additionally , there are often negative associations with neglected or abandoned industrial sites , including the social , economic and environmental consequences ( '' brownfield '' sites ) . as with other history-based fields , one of the continuing challenges of industrial archaeologists throughout the world is the competition for ever-decreasing public funding for their research , educational and preservation projects . the sheer number of historic industrial sites and limited funding often means that many are still being lost to neglect , fire and demolition . in 2003 , the nizhny tagil charter was adopted by ticcih at its xii congress in nizhny tagil , russia . it is the international standard for the study , documentation , conservation and interpretation of the industrial heritage . ia organizations . there are national industrial archaeology societies in many countries . they bring together people interested in researching , recording , preserving and presenting industrial heritage . industrial architecture , mineral extraction , heritage-based tourism , power technology , adaptive reuse , and transport history are just some of the themes that are investigated by society members . most groups publish periodic newsletters and host a variety of conferences , seminars and tours of ia-sites and still-active industries ( known as process tours ) . ia organizations may also be involved in advising on historic conservation matters , or advising government units on revision or demolition of significant sites or buildings .