USS Biloxi

service history . preparation for war , september 1943 & ndash ; january 1944 . the light cruiser fitted out at norfolk until 17 september when she began sea trial training in chesapeake bay . this included aircraft launch and recovery drills , structural test gun firing , day spotting practice and anti-aircraft drills . the crew also conducted an unplanned but successful man overboard drill when s2c scott was knocked overboard by a training gun mount . on 29 september , biloxi and the destroyer departed for trinidad . while en route , one of biloxis four curtiss so3c seamew floatplanes crashed during a landing attempt off the port beam . both the pilot and passenger , ensign h . jolly and acmm j . phagan , were rescued and the wreck was destroyed by gunfire as a hazard to navigation . after arriving at trinidad on 3 october , biloxi conducted two weeks of battle drills and other exercises . these included radar calibration tests , night and day battle practice , fueling at sea exercises , and fighter ( cap ) director drills . departing trinidad on the 18th , the light cruiser entered the norfolk navy yard on 26 october for post-shakedown overhaul . following these repairs , and a short trip north to rockland , maine , for gyro and compass standardization trials , biloxi sailed south for the canal zone on 20 november . passing through the panama canal on 24 november , biloxi arrived in san francisco on 4 december . there , the crew loaded provisions and , in the words of the war diary , exchanged four so3c 's and spare parts for two vought os2u kingfishers and no spare parts , before getting underway for hawaii on the 7th . she arrived at oahu on 11 december and conducted her first fire support exercise at kahoolawe island in company with the heavy cruiser between 15 and 19 december . the light cruiser sailed back to san francisco the next day , arriving on the 24th . after moving to san pedro for blower repairs , she reported for duty with the fifth fleet . on 1 january 1944 , biloxi joined the battleship , the cruisers and , and two destroyers , for shore bombardment and amphibious landing exercises at san clemente island . return to san pedro , she refueled and provisioned in preparation for '' operation flintlock '' . . marshall islands , january & ndash ; february 1944 . biloxi put to sea on 13 january and , after joining task group ( tg ) 53.5 in hawaii , sailed for the marshall islands . in company with louisville , mobile , , and six destroyers , the light cruiser approached wotje early in the morning on 30 january . after launching her kingfisher spotter aircraft , she carried out a neutralizing bombardment of the japanese air base on wotje from dawn until noon . enemy shore batteries fired back intermittently , one of which straddled biloxi . a later ricochet hit the superstructure above the signal bridge but fortunately did not explode . over the next two days , the light cruiser participated in several more shore bombardment missions against roi-namur in support of amphibious landings made by the northern attack force . she then screened three escort carriers for five days before entering majuro lagoon on the 7th to refuel . on 12 january , biloxi joined tg 58.1 , built around the carriers , , and , and sailed west for a carrier raid against the japanese base at truk lagoon in the central pacific . intended to cover the landings on eniwetok and to distract the japanese from allied operations in new guinea , '' operation hailstone '' began on 16 february when the carriers struck enemy airfields on truk . after a second strike during the morning of the 17th , the task group retired east to refuel . following the departure of enterprise later that day , the remaining warships were shifted into tg 58.2 and steamed northwest for a strike against saipan . . marianas , february & ndash ; june 1944 . on 19 february , a japanese reconnaissance aircraft closed the task group and was shot down by anti-aircraft fire . during this action , a salvo of anti-aircraft shells landed 500 yards off biloxis starboard bow . although the task group hoped they had avoided enemy detection , it was clear by the evening of the 21st that the japanese were tracking them . starting at 23:00 that evening , and continuing until 10:00 the following morning , the task group was attacked by three waves of mitsubishi g4m '' betty '' land-attack bombers . a total of nineteen bombers attacked at night and another five closed the task group in the morning . none penetrated the surface ship screen and eleven were shot down by anti-aircraft fire . following air strikes against saipan , the task group returned to majuro on the 26th . biloxi rearmed and replenished and got underway on 7 march in company with enterprise , belleau wood , two other light cruisers and eight destroyers . heading south , the task group crossed the equator , at which time neptune ceremonies were held and biloxi made loyal shellbacks out of some 1,139 polywogs , and arrived at espiritu santo on the 11th . there , the warships loaded supplies and provisions before proceeding to emirau in the bismarck archipelago . the light cruiser then covered landing on emirau on the 20th and again on the 25th . returning north the next day , the task group was joined by , a fourth light cruiser , and nine more destroyers before conducting a raid against japanese forces in the caroline islands . on 30 march , biloxi covered the carriers during strikes on palau . one '' betty '' was shot down as it tried to close the formation that morning . later that night , gun crews spotted a single aichi d3a '' val '' carrier bomber flying overhead and fired several 5 & nbsp ; inch batteries in a vain attempt to shoot it down . after observing the destruction of three japanese patrol craft by two destroyers off woleai the next day , the light cruiser steamed back to majuro , arriving there on 6 april . following a week of upkeep , biloxi sortied on 13 april with tg 58.1 for the hollandia operation . on 21 april , she covered the carriers as they launched strikes against enemy aircraft and installations at sawar , wakde , and sarmi in new guinea . at 14:56 that afternoon , the light cruiser launched two kingfishers to rescue the crew of a ditched grumman tbf avenger . neither floatplane found the aircraft crew , however , and one of the floatplanes later ran out of fuel . lt . ( jg ) h . jolly landed the aircraft on the water and the crew was rescued by . that evening , biloxi , two other light cruisers and five destroyers closed wakde and sawar . fire was opened at 01:15 on the 22nd against aircraft on wakde and ceased at 02:25 after firing at the airfield and supply dumps on sawar . rejoining the carriers later that morning , biloxi helped screen them until returning to manus on 28 april . the task group headed north and struck the japanese base at truk on 29 april . biloxi covered the carriers during these strikes and those launched against ponape in the caroline islands the next day . she also observed battleships bombarding ponape on 1 may . the warships steamed to the marshalls , arriving in kwajalein atoll on the 4th . the light cruiser then loaded fuel , ammunition and supplies in preparation for '' operation forager '' , the planned liberation of the mariana islands . tasked with eliminating japanese air power in the marianas , the 15 fleet carriers of task force 58 planned to attack airfields on saipan , tinian , and guam . they also prepared for a major fleet battle if the japanese carriers attempted to interfere with the american transports . biloxi joined tg 58.2 , which was built around the carriers , , , and and covered the carriers during air strikes against saipan and tinian on the 12th . several enemy raids were driven off by aircraft or shot down by anti-aircraft fire , including one japanese aircraft shot down '' in brilliant flames '' by the destroyer . the light cruiser screened the carriers during the landing operations on saipan beginning on the 15th . the next day , the task group heard reports that a large japanese force was closing the marianas from the philippines . after rendezvous with the other three carrier groups about noon on 18 june , the warships took up a patrol station some west of saipan . from that position , on the southern flank of the carrier forces , biloxi participated in the battle of the philippine sea . . battle of the philippine sea , 19–20 june 1944 . although american search aircraft could not find the approaching enemy carriers , the presence of reconnaissance aircraft near the american carriers indicated the japanese had found them . late in the morning of 19 june , the first of 14 enemy raids registered on radar and began closing the task force . most of these raids were destroyed or broken up by american fighters , severely disrupting the ensuing japanese attacks , but several raids did get through . around noon , six yokosuka d4y '' judy '' dive bombers evaded the american fighters and closed tg 58.2 . biloxi , along with several other escorts , fired on the two attacking bunker hill and both were shot down . at least four more judys pounced on the task group later that afternoon but all were shot down by anti-aircraft fire without inflicting any damage . these were but a small portion of the 300 or so japanese aircraft lost in the battle dubbed the '' great marianas turkey shoot . '' the next day , the american task force discovered the japanese carrier force had retired west during the night . late in the day , a sighting report at 16:13 led to a last-ditch 206-aircraft strike . these aircraft caught the retreating japanese at dusk and sank the light carrier and damaged another . the american aircraft then flew east for a difficult night landing . many were later ditched owing to darkness or lack of fuel and biloxi joined other warships in recovering crews from the water . after a futile stern chase of the japanese on the 21st , the american warships gave up the pursuit and retired , arriving at eniwetok on 27 june . . marianas , june & ndash ; july 1944 . the light cruiser stayed in the marshalls only briefly , sailing west with tg 58.1 to the bonin islands on 30 june . she screened the carriers , and while they launched fighter sweeps and other strikes against iwo jima on 3 july . biloxi then joined a bombardment group of four light cruisers and seven destroyers and closed iwo jima the following day . just as firing began at 14:45 , three japanese fighters took off from iwo jima and closed the american kingfisher spotter aircraft . although biloxis kingfisher safely retreated under the protection of friendly anti-aircraft fire , santa fe 's spotter aircraft was heavily damaged by enemy fire and forced to make an emergency landing . the crew was later rescued by . after the warships drove off the attacking japanese fighters , the bombardment resumed and the observation aircraft reported target areas well covered , with many fires burning when the bombardment group retired . after refueling at sea , the light cruiser spent the next two weeks screening the carriers during air strikes against guam and rota in the marianas . on 24 july , the task group sailed south for strikes against palau , yap , and ulithi . japanese air operations during both these operations were limited and no enemy aircraft closed the task group . on the morning of 27 july , biloxi catapulted two kingfishers to rescue a pilot sighted in the water just off the southwest tip of yap island . one kingfisher , flown by lt ( jg ) . r . dana , spotted the pilot at 09:05 and was able to land just outside the reef line surrounding the island . a japanese anti-aircraft gun began firing at the kingfisher , but was soon silenced by four circling american fighters . the downed flier managed to paddle his raft through the breaking swells and across the reef where he collapsed from exhaustion . lt ( jg ) . dana taxied between the raft and the reef and managed to pull the pilot in with a line . he took off at 09:40 and successfully returned to the task group later that morning . . volcano and ryukyu islands , july & ndash ; october 1944 . following one more air strike on 28 july , heavy rain squalls and poor weather canceled further strikes and the task group turned for the mariana islands . after a quick replenishment stop at saipan on 2 august , the task group steamed west for a strike against the bonin and volcano islands . during a fighter sweep on 4 august , friendly aircraft reported a small enemy task group in the area . late that afternoon , biloxi , three other cruisers and seven destroyers closed the bonins for an anti-shipping sweep . after the destroyers and destroyed a small sampan , the cruisers picked up a japanese convoy on radar north of muko jima . owing to the danger of enemy torpedo attack , the cruisers kept their distance and fired at long range . their accurate gunfire quickly damaged and eventually sank escort destroyer and collier ryuko maru . at 04:00 the following morning , while preparing for a bombardment mission against ani and chichi jima , a japanese '' betty '' closed from the stern and passed over the light cruiser . shortly thereafter a heavy underwater explosion , probably a torpedo , detonated in biloxis wake . the blast severely shook the warship but did no damage . the bombardment mission was carried out as planned later that morning and the cruisers rejoined the carriers that afternoon . the task group then sailed east and arrived at eniwetok on 9 august . after biloxi refueled alongside the oiler , she moved to a berth in the lagoon to take on stores and provisions . the crew also received three weeks of r & r ( military ) . assigned to tg 38.4 , the light cruiser got underway on 28 august in company with the carriers , and , the cruiser , and 12 destroyers . steaming west , the task group closed the bonins to neutralize japanese installations there in advance of upcoming operations against palau and the philippines . after franklin and enterprise launched a fighter sweep on the 31st , the cruisers closed and bombarded chichi jima . during that evolution , the warships were approached by a japanese '' betty '' but they drove the bomber off with anti-aircraft fire . the next day , the warships closed iwo jima and fired at targets ashore . during this operation , biloxis crew saw friendly aircraft strafing an enemy patrol craft . the destroyer then closed the target and sank it with gunfire . at 15:00 that afternoon , a damaged army b-24d liberator four-engined bomber appeared over the task group and eleven crew members bailed out . ten were rescued in the water and , despite extensive searches , the warships did not find the eleventh man . the task group then sailed east and moored at saipan anchorage on 4 september . the warships continued a fast pace of operations by sailing south to yap the next day . biloxi conducted an especially good bombardment mission during the morning of 7 september , starting numerous fires in a vehicle depot and an oil storage building . the light cruiser then took up a position to cover the carriers and screened them during air strikes against palau between 10 and 15 september . during this time , biloxi also launched kingfishers to fly close in anti-submarine patrol . following the amphibious landings on palau on the 15th , the light cruiser headed to the admiralty islands for upkeep . while en route , biloxi crossed the equator on 20 september . according to the war diarist , '' king neptune , davy jones , and all the royal court were received aboard and dispensed justice with their customary ruthless and bloodthirsty manner . among the initiates was the xo , commander e.f . mcdaniel , who until today had evaded his majesty during 21 years of naval service . he was punished accordingly . '' the warship arrived at manus the next day . after taking on supplies and ammunition , biloxi sailed to kossol passage on 24 september and joined tg 38.1 . once joined there by the other fast carriers of task force 38 , the force proceeded west to okinawa on 8 october . arriving off the ryukyu islands two days later , biloxi screened the carriers as they struck airfields and other installations ashore . that morning , two kingfishers catapulted off the light cruiser to search for a downed pilot from franklin . one aircraft landed and recovered the pilot but , owing to rough seas , the os2u capsized during takeoff . rather than risk the second floatplane—her last working aircraft—biloxi allowed the two pilots to be rescued by the submarine . the carriers then shifted to formosa on 12 october for two days of heavy attacks against japanese airfields . just before sunset on the 13th , seven '' betty '' bombers appeared out of a rain squall and rapidly closed the carriers . biloxis forward 6-inch turrets as well as her 5-inch and 40-mm batteries took five of these aircraft under fire as they passed down her port side . one aircraft broke into flames and , after biloxi checked fire to avoid hitting two nearby destroyers , all five were shot down by other warships in the formation . . philippines , october 1944 & ndash ; january 1945 . between 14 and 19 october , the light cruiser covered the carriers as they struck airfields on luzon in preparation for the leyte landings on 20th . numerous small enemy raids plagued the task group but they inflicted no damage . on the 19th , biloxis remaining os2u , accompanied by a seaplane from new orleans , successfully picked up the crew of a crashed dive bomber and returned them to franklin . after covering leyte strikes between 20 and 22 october , biloxi detached and joined tg 38.2 built around , bunker hill , cabot , and . upon word that three groups of japanese warships were closing the philippines , this force concentrated east of samar . on 24 october , during the second day of the battle of leyte gulf , aircraft from intrepid and cabot took part in attacks that sank the south of luzon . other air attacks damage two other battleships . that night , the task group steamed north off cape engano to hunt for fleeing enemy carriers , five of which are disposed of by air strikes the following day . later that evening the american warships turned south in an attempt to catch a second group of retiring japanese warships . just after midnight on the 26th , biloxi and four other cruisers and destroyers picked up a surface contact near san bernardino strait . the three cruisers quickly opened fire , destroying the in a blinding explosion shortly thereafter . nowaki had aboard her all of the survivors from the tone-class heavy cruiser chikuma , which had been sunk at the end of the battle off samar . as a result , a total of approximately 1,400 officers and men went down with her in this one action on 28 october , tg 38.2 returned to launching air strikes against luzon airfields and japanese shipping in manila bay . poor weather hampered aircraft recovery on the 29th , and the evening was spent rescuing ditched airmen . following a withdrawal to refuel and receive replacement aircraft , the task group carried out two more rounds of luzon strikes in the first weeks of november . these attacks pounded japanese shipping and port facilities at manila and central luzon , sinking half a dozen light warships and over a dozen cargo ships and auxiliaries . on the 15th , biloxi departed the philippines and steamed east to ulithi . arriving there two days later , she received much needed repairs and replenishment . biloxi also recovered pilot lt . ( jg ) dana , who related an exciting cruise in sterlet during which time the submarine sank at least two enemy cargo ships . while at ulithi on 20 november , biloxis crew experienced the japanese kaiten attack on the anchorage . all five midget submarines were lost in the attack , though not before the japanese torpedoes damaged and eventually sank the tanker . on 22 november , biloxi joined tg 38.3 for another set of air strikes against luzon . while carrier aircraft attacked enemy coastal shipping on the 25th , the light cruiser helped the task group fight off japanese kamikazes . numerous raids breached friendly fighter defenses that day and five american carriers were damaged , forcing the task group to retire from the area . the carriers returned to the philippines on 13 december and , in addition to air strikes in support of the mindoro landings , they also launched special night raids against japanese airfields . these attacks prevented enemy kamikaze dive bombers ( called '' green hornets '' ) from launching the coordinated attacks that had plagued the american task groups in late november . on 18 december , biloxis task force typhoon cobra ( 1944 ) northeast of samar and suffered heavy damage . in addition to the loss of three destroyers , many other warships were damaged and biloxi herself lost an os2u washed overboard . after spending the next few days searching for survivors , the light cruiser steamed to ulithi on the 24th and remained there for the next week . biloxi put to sea with tg 38.3 on 30 december , intending to strike formosa , nansei shoto , and northern luzon . the task group , built around the carriers , and launched the first strike against formosa on 3 january 1945 . the weather quickly worsened , however , and many of the planned attacks were canceled . the carriers steamed back south and , when the weather cleared on the 6th , blanketed luzon with aircraft in support of bombardment and amphibious invasion of lingayen gulf . these attacks did not achieve a lot of success , as enemy aircraft were carefully hidden and camouflaged , and the task group shifted strikes to airfields on formosa , in the ryukyus , and the penghu . during the evening of 9 january , the task group passed through bashi channel of luzon strait and began a high speed run south . two days later , carrier aviators struck targets between cam rahn bay and cape varella , hitting many ground installations and virtually annihilating a coastal convoy north of qui nhơn . nine japanese ships were sunk in that attack , and another 13 were damaged . after retired to refuel , a task made more difficult owing to typhoon passing through area , the carriers shifted north to attack hainan and hong kong . the following day , s1c daniel a . little was swept overboard by a wave and drowned . this was the first loss of life suffered by biloxis crew . after refueling , the task group passed through balintang channel and conducted strikes against airfields on formosa on 21 january . around midday , japanese kamikazes began attacking in increasing numbers and , in successive waves , two aircraft crashed into the carrier ticonderoga and another damaged the destroyer . that evening , biloxi detached to escort the two damaged warships to ulithi , arriving there on the 26th . . iwo jima , february & ndash ; march 1945 . on 10 february , biloxi joined tg 58.4 and sailed for operations against iwo jima . following carrier-launched fighter sweeps against japanese airfields in the tokyo area , the task group closed iwo jima to support battle of iwo jima . during the morning of 19 february , biloxi provided naval gunfire support for the troops ashore . she then shifted to harassing fire that evening . this pattern of operations continued until the 21st when 5 & nbsp ; inch mount 6 fired into the barrels of gun mount 5 , slightly injuring several sailors and destroying the latter mount . despite the damage , biloxi then rejoined tg 58.4 and returned to the tokyo area to attack aircraft factories and airfields starting on the 25th . increasingly heavy weather limited and then canceled strikes that afternoon and the force retired south . after hitting ground installations , airfields and shipping at okinawa , the task group split up and biloxi steamed to ulithi , arriving there on 1 march . she replenished , loaded ammunition and repaired mount 5 . . okinawa , march & ndash ; april 1945 . biloxi joined task force 54 ( tf 54 ) for the battle of okinawa . on 21 march , she sailed with a fire support group for operations in the ryukyus . assigned to tg 54.1 , she helped cover mine clearing sweeps , underwater demolition team ( udt ) operations , and the amphibious landings on kerama retto on the 26th . moving to okinawa later that morning , she launched seaplanes for spotting and reconnaissance missions and fired on targets west of zanpa misaki point . since the japanese air arm had been decimated by this point in the war , the lack of trained and experienced pilots led their most extensive deployment of kamikaze . just after dawn , a wave of kamikazes broke through friendly fighter cover and closed to attack the task group . although two '' vals '' were quickly shot down , a third crashed into the battleship and a fourth , taken under fire and burning , crashed into biloxi amidships . the light cruiser 's luck continued when the aircraft 's bomb did not explode and she suffered only minor damage to a storeroom . biloxi spent the next three weeks conducting shore bombardment missions , including closing to within 3,000 yards of the beach and using 40 & nbsp ; mm guns to support udt operations . starting on 1 april , she fired on enemy targets north of the battle of okinawa and then continued these bombardment missions in support of advancing troops ashore . during these weeks , the task group was repeatedly attacked by kamikazes , one of whom just missed biloxi on 3 april . in addition to fending off these aerial attacks , the light cruiser also fired on enemy suicide boat concentrations . . return to the united states , april & ndash ; july 1945 . biloxi departed okinawa on 20 april and steamed east to ulithi , where she arrived on the 24th . after receiving battle repairs alongside , the light cruiser continued east , arriving at san francisco via pearl harbor on 11 may . moving into the bethlehem shipbuilding corporation yard the warship received three weeks of long overdue repairs and machinery maintenance . following completion of this work on 6 july , biloxi conducted two weeks of post overhaul checks and refresher training out of san diego and san clemente . these evolutions were disrupted on 14 july when a water feed line ruptured in the aft fire room , flashed into steam and burned eight men , none seriously . . the end of the war , july & ndash ; august 1945 . returning west on 19 july , biloxi practiced shore bombardment exercises in hawaii before departing pearl harbor on 2 august . while en route to ulithi , the warship conducted a long range shore bombardment of wake on 8 august , primarily to train her gunners for upcoming operations against japan . after a stop at ulithi on 12 august , she refueled and headed for leyte , arriving in san pedro bay on 14th . while anchored there , the crew heard the surrender of japan announcement at 08:15 the following morning . . post-war , august & ndash ; november 1945 . departing the philippines for okinawa on 20 august , the light cruiser arrived there three days later and spent the next three weeks awaiting orders . putting to sea on 16 september , biloxi proceeded to nagasaki , japan , to evacuate pows . arriving there on the 18th , her crew saw the damage caused by the atomic bomb and took on 11 u.s . , 17 british , one australian , one canadian , and 187 dutch '' recovered allied military personnel . '' these men were delivered to okinawa on 21 september . steaming back to japan , the warship made stops at nagasaki , wakayama , and hiro wan as the occupation of japan consolidated their positions ashore . during october , some officers from ships ' company took part in inspections of surviving japanese shipping at kure . underway on 9 november , biloxi picked up passengers at okinawa on the 11th , before sailing to pearl harbor and then san francisco , arriving at the latter port on 27 november . . in reserve , decommissioning and sale , 1946 & ndash ; 1962 . the warship moved to port angeles , washington , on 15 january 1946 and reported for inactivation . on 18 may 1946 she was placed in commission in reserve at the puget sound naval shipyard , and on 29 october 1946 went out of commission in reserve . her name stricken from the navy list on 1 december 1961 , and she was sold for scrap to puget sound towing & barge co . on 29 march 1962 . . awards . biloxi received nine battle stars for her service in the pacific during world war ii . . memorials . the cruiser 's superstructure was set aside and erected in the guice park near the biloxi small craft harbor , on lameuse street where it still stands today . the ship 's bell is housed in the lobby of the biloxi maritime and seafood museum . references . . external links . uss biloxi at the naval history & heritage command compilation of world war ii press releases about the biloxi before and after katrina : photographs of the uss biloxi superstructure at the small craft harbor