Calf roping

origin . image : cattle branding ( grabill 1888 ) . jpg thumb calf roping as a rodeo event had its origin in ranch work . the event derives from the duties of actual working cowboys , which often required catching and restraining calves for branding or medical treatment . cowboy took pride in the speed with which they could rope and tie calves which soon turned their work into informal contests . . modern event . the calves are lined up in a row and moved through narrow runways leading to a chute with spring-loaded doors . when a calf enters the chute , a door is closed behind it and a lightweight rope , attached to a trip lever , is fastened around the calf 's neck . the lever holds a taut cord or '' barrier '' that runs across a large pen or '' box '' at one side of the calf chute , where the horse and rider wait . the barrier is used to ensure that the calf gets a head start . when the roper is ready , he or she calls for the calf , and the chute operator pulls a lever opening the chute doors and releasing the calf . the calf runs out in a straight line . when the calf reaches the end of the rope , that trips the lever , the rope falls off the calf , and the barrier for the horse is released , starting the clock and allowing horse and rider to chase the calf . thumb timing is critical . from a standstill , a rider will put his horse into a gallop from the box shortly after the calf leaves the chute , so that the horse saves valuable seconds by being at near-full speed the moment the barrier releases . however , if the rider mistimes his cue to the horse and the horse breaks the barrier before it releases , a 10-second penalty will be added to his time . this is sometimes referred to as a '' cowboy speeding ticket . '' the rider must lasso the calf from horseback by throwing a loop of the lariat around the calf 's neck . once the rope is around the calf 's neck , the roper signals the horse to stop quickly while he dismounts and runs to the calf . the calf must be stopped by the rope but can not be thrown to the ground by the rope . if the calf falls , the roper loses seconds because he must allow the calf to get back on its feet . when the roper reaches the calf , he picks it up and flips it onto its side . once the calf is on the ground , the roper ties three of the calf 's legs together with a short rope known as a tie-down rope or '' piggin ' string '' . a half hitch knot is used , sometimes referred to colloquially as '' two wraps and a hooey '' or a '' wrap and a slap '' . the piggin ' string is often carried between the roper 's teeth until he uses it . the horse is trained to assist the roper by slowly backing away from the calf to maintain a steady tension on the rope . image : calf roping szmurlo.jpg thumb calf roping event at the calgary stampede when the tie is complete , the roper throws his hands in the air to signal '' time '' and stop the clock . the roper then returns to his horse , mounts , and moves the horse forward to relax the tension on the rope . the timer waits for six seconds , during which the calf must stay tied before an official time is recorded . top professional calf ropers will rope and tie a calf in 7 seconds . the world record is just over 6 seconds . organizations and regulations . the event is recognized by most rodeo organizations , including the professional rodeo cowboys association ( prca ) and the international professional rodeo association . in the united states , there are two organizations that promote calf roping alone : the united states calf ropers association ( uscra ) and ultimate calf roping ( ucr ) . other timed rodeo events that use cattle include breakaway roping , where the rider ropes but does not throw the calf ; steer wrestling ; and team roping , which uses adult cattle . in prca events , the calf must weigh between 220 and 280 pounds . calves must be strong and healthy ; sick or injured livestock can not be used . according to the prca , '' most calves do not compete more than a few dozen times in their lives because of weight and usage restrictions and the fact that calves grow so rapidly . '' . animal welfare issues . there are concerns over the welfare of the calves used in professional rodeo , and the industry itself polices events closely , penalizing competitors who '' jerk down '' a calf with the rope or flip it over backwards . dr . eddie taylor stated that in 16 years as an attending veterinarian at prca rodeos in arizona , '' i personally have not seen a serious neck injury to a tie-down roping calf . '' statistically , the rate of injury to the animals is relatively low . in 1994 , a survey of 28 sanctioned rodeos was conducted by on-site independent veterinarians . reviewing 33,991 animal runs , the injury rate was documented at 0.047 % , or less than five-hundredths of one percent . a study of rodeo animals in australia found a similar injury rate . basic injuries occurred at a rate of 0.072 percent , or one in 1405 , with injuries requiring veterinary attention at 0.036 percent , or one injury in every 2810 times the animal was used , and transport , yarding and competition were all included in the study . a later prca survey of 60,971 animal performances at 198 rodeo performances and 73 sections of '' slack '' indicated 27 animals were injured , again approximately five-hundredths of 1 percent0.0004 . animal welfare proponents claim , however , that examples of injuries caused by calf roping include paralysis from spinal cord injuries , severed tracheas , as well as broken backs , necks , and legs . tie-down calf roping is not permitted in the state of rhode island or in the city of baltimore . tie-down calf roping is also not allowed in some localities in australia , brazil and canada and banned nationally in the united kingdom , germany and the netherlands . the aspca notes that practice sessions are often the occasion of more severe abuses than competitions . a 2016 study indicated that the process of calf roping , including being herded in the arena and into the roping chutes , was stressful on the animals as evidenced by eye movement when roped and increases in blood cortisol , epinephrine and nor-epinephrine . novice calves just herded into the chutes and across the arena also demonstrated stress responses . experienced slightly higher stress than experienced ones . however , cortisol responses did not continue for long . the researchers hypothesized that professionals at the highest level were less stressful on the animals than inexperienced ropers . . see also . rodeo . references . external links . professional rodeo cowboys association international professional rodeo association ultimate calf roping national little britches rodeo association national high school rodeo association