Metamathematics

history . metamathematical metatheorems about mathematics itself were originally differentiated from ordinary mathematical theorems in the 19th century to focus on what was then called the foundational crisis of mathematics . richard 's paradox ( richard 1905 ) concerning certain 'definitions ' of real numbers in the english language is an example of the sort of contradictions that can easily occur if one fails to distinguish between mathematics and metamathematics . something similar can be said around the well-known russell 's paradox ( does the set of all those sets that do not contain themselves contain itself ? ) . metamathematics was intimately connected to mathematical logic , so that the early histories of the two fields , during the late 19th and early 20th centuries , largely overlap . more recently , mathematical logic has often included the study of new pure mathematics , such as set theory , category theory , recursion theory and pure model theory , which is not directly related to metamathematics . serious metamathematical reflection began with the work of gottlob frege , especially his begriffsschrift , published in 1879 . david hilbert was the first to invoke the term '' metamathematics '' with regularity ( see hilbert 's program ) , in the early 20th century . in his hands , it meant something akin to contemporary proof theory , in which finitary methods are used to study various axiomatized mathematical theorems ( kleene 1952 , p . & nbsp ; 55 ) . other prominent figures in the field include bertrand russell , thoralf skolem , emil post , alonzo church , stephen kleene , willard quine , paul benacerraf , hilary putnam , gregory chaitin , alfred tarski and kurt gödel . today , metalogic and metamathematics broadly overlap , and both have been substantially subsumed by mathematical logic in academia . milestones . the discovery of hyperbolic geometry . the discovery of hyperbolic geometry had important philosophy consequences for metamathematics . before its discovery there was just one geometry and mathematics ; the idea that another geometry existed was considered improbable . when gauss discovered hyperbolic geometry , it is said that he did not publish anything about it out of fear of the '' uproar of the boeotians '' , which would ruin his status as princeps mathematicorum ( latin , '' the prince of mathematicians '' ) . the '' uproar of the boeotians '' came and went , and gave an impetus to metamathematics and great improvements in mathematical rigour , analytical philosophy and logic . begriffsschrift . begriffsschrift ( german for , roughly , '' concept-script '' ) is a book on logic by gottlob frege , published in 1879 , and the formal system set out in that book . begriffsschrift is usually translated as concept writing or concept notation ; the full title of the book identifies it as '' a formula language , modeled on that of arithmetic , of pure thought . '' frege 's motivation for developing his formal approach to logic resembled leibniz 's motivation for his calculus ratiocinator ( despite that , in his foreword frege clearly denies that he reached this aim , and also that his main aim would be constructing an ideal language like leibniz 's , what frege declares to be quite hard and idealistic , however , not impossible task ) . frege went on to employ his logical calculus in his research on the foundations of mathematics , carried out over the next quarter century . principia mathematica . principia mathematica , or '' pm '' as it is often abbreviated , was an attempt to describe a set of axioms and inference rules in symbolic logic from which all mathematical truths could in principle be proven . as such , this ambitious project is of great importance in the history of mathematics and philosophy , being one of the foremost products of the belief that such an undertaking may be achievable . however , in 1931 , gödel 's incompleteness theorem proved definitively that pm , and in fact any other attempt , could never achieve this lofty goal ; that is , for any set of axioms and inference rules proposed to encapsulate mathematics , there would in fact be some truths of mathematics which could not be deduced from them . one of the main inspirations and motivations for pm was the earlier work of gottlob frege on logic , which russell discovered allowed for the construction of paradoxical sets . pm sought to avoid this problem by ruling out the unrestricted creation of arbitrary sets . this was achieved by replacing the notion of a general set with notion of a hierarchy of sets of different 'types ' , a set of a certain type only allowed to contain sets of strictly lower types . contemporary mathematics , however , avoids paradoxes such as russell 's in less unwieldy ways , such as the system of zermelo–fraenkel set theory . gödel 's incompleteness theorem . gödel 's incompleteness theorems are two theorems of mathematical logic that establish inherent limitations of all but the most trivial axiomatic systems capable of doing arithmetic . the theorems , proven by kurt gödel in 1931 , are important both in mathematical logic and in the philosophy of mathematics . the two results are widely , but not universally , interpreted as showing that hilbert 's program to find a complete and consistent set of axioms for all mathematics is impossible , giving a negative answer to hilbert 's second problem . the first incompleteness theorem states that no consistent system of axioms whose theorems can be listed by an '' effective procedure '' ( e.g . , a computer program , but it could be any sort of algorithm ) is capable of proving all truths about the relations of the natural numbers ( arithmetic ) . for any such system , there will always be statements about the natural numbers that are true , but that are unprovable within the system . the second incompleteness theorem , an extension of the first , shows that such a system can not demonstrate its own consistency . tarski 's definition of model-theoretic satisfaction . the t-schema or truth schema ( not to be confused with 'convention t ' ) is used to give an recursive definition of truth which lies at the heart of any realisation of alfred tarski 's semantic theory of truth . some authors refer to it as the '' equivalence schema '' , a synonym introduced by michael dummett . the t-schema is often expressed in natural language , but it can be formalized in predicate logic or modal logic ; such a formalisation is called a t-theory . t-theories form the basis of much fundamental work in philosophical logic , where they are applied in several important controversies in analytic philosophy . as expressed in semi-natural language ( where 's ' is the name of the sentence abbreviated to s ) : 's ' is true if and only if s example : 'snow is white ' is true if and only if snow is white . the impossibility of the entscheidungsproblem . the ( german for 'decision problem ' ) is a challenge posed by david hilbert in 1928 . hilbert and ackermann the asks for an algorithm that takes as input a statement of a first-order logic ( possibly with a finite number of axioms beyond the usual axioms of first-order logic ) and answers '' yes '' or '' no '' according to whether the statement is universally valid , i.e . , valid in every structure satisfying the axioms . by gödel 's completeness theorem , a statement is universally valid if and only if it can be deduced from the axioms , so the can also be viewed as asking for an algorithm to decide whether a given statement is provable from the axioms using the rules of logic . in 1936 , alonzo church and alan turing published independent papers church 's paper was presented to the american mathematical society on 19 april 1935 and published on 15 april 1936 . turing , who had made substantial progress in writing up his own results , was disappointed to learn of church 's proof upon its publication ( see correspondence between max newman and church in alonzo church papers . turing quickly completed his paper and rushed it to publication ; it was received by the proceedings of the london mathematical society on 28 may 1936 , read on 12 november 1936 , and published in series 2 , volume 42 ( 1936-7 ) ; it appeared in two sections : in part 3 ( pages 230-240 ) , issued on nov 30 , 1936 and in part 4 ( pages 241-265 ) , issued on dec 23 , 1936 ; turing added corrections in volume 43 ( 1937 ) pp . 544–546 . see the footnote at the end of soare:1996 . showing that a general solution to the entscheidungsproblem is impossible , assuming that the intuitive notation of '' effectively calculable '' is captured by the functions computable by a turing machine ( or equivalently , by those expressible in the lambda calculus ) . this assumption is now known as the church–turing thesis .