CiteSeerX

history . citeseer and citeseer.ist . citeseer was created by researchers lee giles , kurt bollacker and steve lawrence in 1997 while they were at the nec research institute ( now nec labs ) , princeton , new jersey , usa . citeseer 's goal was to actively crawl and harvest academic and scientific documents on the web and use autonomous citation indexing to permit querying by citation or by document , ranking them by citation impact . at one point , it was called researchindex . citeseer became public in 1998 and had many new features unavailable in academic search engines at that time . these included : autonomous citation indexing automatically created a citation index that can be used for literature search and evaluation . citation statistics and related documents were computed for all articles cited in the database , not just the indexed articles . reference linking allowing browsing of the database using citation links . citation context showed the context of citations to a given paper , allowing a researcher to quickly and easily see what other researchers have to say about an article of interest . related documents were shown using citation and word based measures and an active and continuously updated bibliography is shown for each document . citeseer was granted a united states patent & nbsp ; 6289342 , titled '' autonomous citation indexing and literature browsing using citation context '' , on september 11 , 2001 . the patent was filed on may 20 , 1998 , and has priority to january 5 , 1998 . a continuation patent ( us patent & nbsp ; 6738780 ) was filed on may 16 , 2001 and granted on may 18 , 2004 . after nec , in 2004 it was hosted as citeseer.ist on the world wide web at the college of information sciences and technology , the pennsylvania state university , and had over 700,000 documents . for enhanced access , performance and research , similar versions of citeseer were supported at universities such as the massachusetts institute of technology , university of zürich and the national university of singapore . however , these versions of citeseer proved difficult to maintain and are no longer available . because citeseer only indexes freely available papers on the web and does not have access to publisher metadata , it returns fewer citation counts than sites , such as google scholar , that have publisher metadata . citeseer had not been comprehensively updated since 2005 due to limitations in its architecture design . it had a representative sampling of research documents in computer and information science but was limited in coverage because it was limited to papers that are publicly available , usually at an author 's homepage , or those submitted by an author . to overcome some of these limitations , a modular and open source architecture for citeseer was designed – citeseer x . citeseer x . citeseer x replaced citeseer and all queries to citeseer were redirected . citeseer x is a public search engine and digital library and repository for scientific and academic papers primarily with a focus on computer and information science . however , recently citeseer x has been expanding into other scholarly domains such as economics , physics and others . released in 2008 , it was loosely based on the previous citeseer search engine and digital library and is built with a new open source infrastructure , seersuite , and new algorithms and their implementations . it was developed by researchers dr . isaac councill and dr . c . lee giles at the college of information sciences and technology , pennsylvania state university . it continues to support the goals outlined by citeseer to actively crawl and harvest academic and scientific documents on the public web and to use a citation inquiry by citations and ranking of documents by the impact of citations . currently , lee giles , prasenjit mitra , susan gauch , min-yen kan , pradeep teregowda , juan pablo fernández ramírez , pucktada treeratpituk , jian wu , douglas jordan , steve carman , jack carroll , jim jansen , and shuyi zheng are or have been actively involved in its development . recently , a table search feature was introduced . it has been funded by the national science foundation , nasa , and microsoft research . citeseer x continues to be rated as one of the world 's top repositories and was rated number 1 in july 2010 . it currently has over 6 million documents with nearly 6 million unique authors and 120 million citations . citeseer x also shares its software , data , databases and metadata with other researchers , currently by amazon s3 and by rsync . its new modular open source architecture and software ( available previously on sourceforge but now on github ) is built on apache solr and other apache and open source tools which allows it to be a testbed for new algorithms in document harvesting , ranking , indexing , and information extraction . citeseer x caches some pdf files that it has scanned . as such , each page include a dmca link which can be used to report copyright violations . for example , . current features . automated information extraction . citeseer x uses automated information extraction tools , usually built on machine learning methods such parscit , to extract scholarly document metadata such as title , authors , abstract , citations , etc . as such , there are sometime errors in authors and titles . other academic search engines have similar errors . focused crawling . citeseer x crawls publicly available scholarly documents primarily from author webpages and other open resources , and does not have access to publisher metadata . as such citation counts in citeseer x are usually less than those in google scholar and microsoft academic search who have access to publisher metadata . usage . citeseer x has nearly 1 million users worldwide based on unique ip addresses and has millions of hits daily . annual downloads of document pdfs was nearly 200 million for 2015 . data . citeseer x data is regularly shared under a creative commons license with researchers worldwide and has been and is used in many experiments and competitions . thanks to its oai-pmh endpoint , citeseerx is an open archive and its content is indexed like an institutional repository in academic search engines , for instance base and unpaywall consumers . other seersuite-based search engines . the citeseer model had been extended to cover academic documents in business with smealsearch and in e-business with ebizsearch . however , these were not maintained by their sponsors . an older version of both of these could be once found at bizseer.ist but is no longer in service . other seer-like search and repository systems have been built for chemistry , chemxseer and for archaeology , archseer . another had been built for robots.txt file search , botseer . all of these are built on the open source tool seersuite , which uses the open source indexer lucene .