Thuringian Forest

natural regions . northwest thuringian forest . the northwest thuringian forest comprises an area of about 70 & nbsp ; km² reaching heights up to , hardly exceeding those of the adjacent buntsandstein forelands to the southwest , but exhibiting a much more pronounced relief . it stretches until moosbach stream , a tributary or erbstrom river , in the north east , and to bundesstraße 19 in the east and south , which follows the upper reaches of elte river between the villages of wilhelmsthal and etterwinden . the predominant rock species is eisenacher rotliegend , namely conglomerates and sandstones . the area is known for the so-called drachenschlucht , a narrow gorge near eisenach , and the wartburg castle . the northern part of the area is drained by several streams into the hörsel , the southern part into the elte . hence , the ridge of the northwestern thuringian forest only forms the watershed between hörsel and the middle course of the werra . notable summits include : großer drachenstein ( 470 m ) wartberg ( about 390 m , north of the main ridge ) , site of wartburg castle the much larger natural region of central thuringian forest with an area of about 850 & nbsp ; km² , whose ridge rises mostly above , is subdivided into several parts described below in their sequence from the north-west to the south-east . ruhla thuringian forest . this part , situated around the town of ruhla north of the rennsteig , is geologically formed by the basement rocks of the ruhlaer kristallin , consisting of granites , gneiss , and schist . there is no pronounced ridge , summits on both sides of the watershed reach heights of or more . its northeastern parts drain towards the hörsel , the southwestern parts towards the middle course of the werra . the area is limited towards the south-east by state road 1027 between schwarzhausen and bad liebenstein . notable summits include : birkenheide ( 717 m , immediately south of rennsteig ) glöckner ( 702 m ) windsberg ( 671 m ) , foothill of birkenheide and site of altenstein castle ringberg ( 639 m ) with alexanderturm ( observation tower ) . brotterode thuringian forest . reaching until tambach-dietharz , the part of thuringian forest around the town of brotterode is geologically more heterogeneous than the region around ruhla . state road 1026 between friedrichroda and floh-seligenthal which follows the valleys of the rivers schilfwasser and schmalkalde and passes through kleinschmalkalden and state road 1028 between georgenthal and floh-seligenthal which follows the valleys of the rivers apfelstädt and flohbach divide the area into segments . in this area the mountain ridge becomes more pronounced . the summit of großer inselsberg of volcanic origin causes a marked shift of the ridge towards the north . south of georgenthal , the mountain range becomes the watershed between elbe and weser . notable summits include : großer inselsberg ( 916.5 m ) between brotterode and tabarz , popular tourist destination großer weißenberg ( 747 m ) , location of a tripoint between the former countries of saxe-meiningen , saxe-coburg and gotha , and kurhessen and of today 's districts gotha , schmalkalden-meiningen , and wartburgkreis . gerberstein ( 728 m ) with an outlook platform . tambach-oberhof thuringian forest . the b 247 from luisenthal via oberhof and zella-mehlis to suhl , which follows the ohra to the north , a section along the lichtenau to the south and finally the lower reaches of the mühlwasser , together with the slightly more than 10 & nbsp ; km long l 1028 road that runs parallel to it to the northwest separates this natural sub-division of the thuringian forest from the rest . apart from the south , this region is traversed by very few public roads and is only populated in the south – in the villages of schnellbach and struth-helmershof in the municipality of floh-seligenthal , the rotterode , unterschönau and oberschönau suburbs of steinbach-hallenberg and the town of zella-mehlis . the elbe-weser watershed , accompanied by the rennsteig , reaches heights of around 900 & nbsp ; m at several places southwest to west of oberhof , but does not really form any individual mountains and has very much the character of a mountain crest . by contrast , the großer hermannsberg and ruppberg ( see below ) that rise to the southwest of the ridge are better known and popular tourist destinations . to the northeast , where the terrain gradually flattens out , are two of the 3 largest reservoirs in the thuringian forest ( see below ) . the best known rock formation in the mountain range , the falkenstein , is also found in this area . image : ruppberg gipfel bank.jpg thumb view from the ruppberg near zella-mehlis notable summits include : schützenberg ( 904 & nbsp ; m , main crest southwest of oberhof ) greifenberg ( 901 & nbsp ; m , main crest west of oberhof ) gebrannter stein ( 897 & nbsp ; m , south of the rennsteig , north of zella-mehlis ) with remarkable cliffs großer hermannsberg ( 867 & nbsp ; m , southwest flank ) - local mountain for steinbach-hallenberg , with observation tower ruppberg ( 866 & nbsp ; m , southwest flank ) - local mountain ( northwest ) for zella-mehlis , with observation tower . rivers and lakes . the northeastern flank of the mountains is drained by right tributaries of the apfelstädt , especially the schmalwasser , and left tributaries of the ohra , notably the kernwasser , via the ( apfelstädt , ) gera and unstrut into the saale . the apfelstädt is impounded by the tambach-dietharz dam into a small lake and the schmalwasser and ohra by the schmalwasser and ohra dams into larger reservoirs . the south is drained by the asbach which flows via the stille into the schmalkalde and by rivers and streams belonging to the fan-like system of tributaries of hasel ( werra ) , in particular the schwarza , the schwarza is called the haselbach in its upper reaches and the schönau in its middle course häselbach , the häselbach is , especially in its source region , also called the dürre hasel lichtenau and a stream from albrechts , feeding into the werra . gehlberg thuringian forest . image : stuetzerbach-081.jpg thumb view at a part of stützerbach this region between federal roads b 4 between ilmenau and stützerbach , following the rivers ilm , lengwitz , and nahe , and b 247 between luisenthal and suhl contains the three highest summits as well as the fifth highest summit of the whole range . the only settlements wholly within this region are gehlberg north of rennsteig and vesser south of it . parts of schmiedefeld and goldlauter-heidersbach ( part of suhl ) also extend into this part of the forest . the highest summits crowning the mountain ridge are of volcanic origin . the terrain dips rapidly down to heights below 800 m towards the north-east , while heights remain above this altitude south-west of rennsteig for some distance in the horseshoe-shaped adlersberg massif . motorway a 71 and the neudietendorf–ritschenhausen railway pass under the brandleite massif between gehlberg and oberhof in rennsteig road tunnel and brandleite tunnel . the area is drained towards the north by the river lütsche which feeds the lütsche reservoir and by wilde gera and zahme gera towards gera river and unstrut , and by freibach stream , a tributary of ilm river , and towards the south by lauter , a tributary of hasel , and mainly by erle , feeding the erle reservoir , breitenbach , vesser , and nahe into schleuse . notable summits include : großer beerberg ( 984 & nbsp ; m , main crest 3,4 & nbsp ; km east of zella-mehlis , highest elevation in the thuringian forest ) schneekopf ( 978 m ) , transmitter site and observation tower großer finsterberg ( 944 m ) , with observation tower großer eisenberg ( 907 m ) , whose name bears witness to ore mining activities in the past adlersberg massive ( up to 892 m ) with ringberghaus hotel on ringberg ( 746 m ) , a northwestern foothill . frauenwald-neustadt thuringian forest . the region around frauenwald and neustadt forms the most south-eastern part of the thuringian forest proper . it is limited by state road b 4 in the northwest , and by a line along the rivers talwasser ( with ilmsenbach ) , neubrunn , and schleuse . the adjacent thuringian slate mountains form a geographically and geologically separate natural region , although they are often popularly referred to as a continuation of the former range . populated places wholly within the region are frauenwald , allzunah , neustadt am rennsteig , and oehrenstock . parts of stützerbach also reach into this area . roads follow the rennsteig , the mountain crests , or the valleys of the rivers . the main ridge of the mountain range exceeds altitudes of 800 m in several places . the highest and best known summit is kickelhahn ( 861 metres above sea level ) southwest of ilmenau . as seen from there , all secondary crests towards the northeast and the southwest clearly originate from the main one and show even and gentle slopes , not counting the steep descent into the foreland . the southwestern crests reach altitudes of about 800 m . the dividing valleys are often narrow gorges . the zone drains : northeast by the fan of the ilm 's tributaries , towards the saale southwest by the nahe , trenkbach , schleuse , gabel , tanne , and tributaries of the neubrunn towards the werra . the schleuse , gabel and tanne feed the schönbrunn reservoir . notable summits include : kickelhahn ( 861 m ) with observation tower , '' backyard mountain '' of ilmenau großer dreiherrnstein ( 838 m ) , 500 m from the tripoint of the former countries schwarzburg-arnstadt , saxe-eisenach , and henneberg großer hundskopf ( 824 m ) with a transmitter site on its foothill kalter staudenkopf ( 768 m ) . tourism and sights . due to its geographical characteristics and the favourable climate , the thuringian forest is an important year-round tourist destination . winter sports play an important role , facilities of international significance are concentrated around oberhof . famous sights include wartburg castle outside eisenach where martin luther lived in exile , the selenite cave ( marienglashöhle , a former mine ) near friedrichroda , the firearms museum in suhl , and the historic town centres of eisenach and ilmenau . the rennsteig trail is the most popular long-distance hiking trail in germany . it is part of : the mountainous path from eisenach to budapest the e3 european long distance path the thüringen-rhein-wanderweg ( partly ) the pilgrims ' way or via porta . the latter links the abbeys of volkenroda and waldsassen . see also . thuringian forest nature park . notes and references . ; notes ; references . external links . thueringer-wald.de thueringer-landschaften.de , a web page with many pictures of thuringian landscapes