1945 in literature

events . january – in paris , journalist and poet robert brasillach is tried and found guilty of '' intelligence with the ( german ) enemy '' during world war ii , sparking a major dispute in french society over collaboration and clemency . c . january 1 – jean-paul sartre refuses the legion of honour . january 27 – primo levi is among those liberated from the auschwitz concentration camp complex . february – aleksandr solzhenitsyn is sentenced to eight years in a labour camp for criticizing joseph stalin . february 13–15 – the bombing of dresden in world war ii is seen by the german jewish diarist victor klemperer , the novelist kurt vonnegut as an american prisoner of war , and miles tripp as a british bomb aimer . it will feature in józef mackiewicz 's novel sprawa pulkownika miasojedowa ( colonel miasoyedov 's case , 1962 ) , bohumil hrabal 's ostře sledované vlaky ( closely observed trains , 1965 ) and vonnegut 's slaughterhouse-five , or the children 's crusade : a duty-dance with death ( 1969 ) . march 4 – poet pablo neruda is elected a senate of chile and officially joins the communist party of chile four months later . march 8 – federico garcía lorca 's play the house of bernarda alba , completed just before his assassination in 1936 , is first performed , in buenos aires . march 31 – tennessee williams ' semi-autobiographical '' memory play '' the glass menagerie ( 1944 , adapted from a short story ) opens on broadway at the playhouse theatre ( new york city ) , starring laurette taylor and winning the new york drama critics ' circle award . about end march – jack kerouac and william s . burroughs complete their mystery novel and the hippos were boiled in their tanks , a fictionalization of manslaughter committed in 1944 by their friend lucien carr , but it will not appear fully until 2008 . may – the estonian poet heiti talvik is deported to siberia and never heard of again . may 2 the expatriate american poet ezra pound is arrested by the italian resistance movement and taken to its headquarters in chiavari , but soon released as of no interest . hugh kenner . on may 5 , he turns himself in to the united states army . he is held in a military detention camp outside pisa , spending 25 days in an open cage before being given a tent . there he appears to suffer a nervous breakdown . while in the camp he drafts the pisan cantos . french novelist colette is the first woman admitted to the académie goncourt . may 8 – the occupying powers in allied-occupied germany and austria impose publishing curbs as part of denazification . june – australia 's best-known literary hoax takes place when modernist magazine angry penguins publishes poems by a fictitious ern malley . the poets james mcauley and harold stewart have created the verses from lines of other published work and then submitted them as purportedly by a recently deceased poet . the hoax is on max harris , the 22-year-old avant garde poet , critic and founder of the magazine . harris and his circle agree that an unknown modernist poet of great merit has come to light in suburban australia . the autumn 1944 edition with the poems comes out in mid-1945 due to wartime printing delays . an australian newspaper reveals the hoax within weeks . mcauley and stewart love early modernist poets , but despise later modernism , especially the well-funded angry penguins and harris 's precocious success . c . july – theatre workshop is formed in the north of england by joan littlewood , ewan maccoll and other former members of theatre union as a touring company . august 17 – the allegory dystopian novella animal farm by george orwell , a satire on stalinism , is first published by fredric warburg in london . september 11 – the citizens theatre opens in glasgow under this name . september – j . b . priestley 's drama an inspector calls is premièred in russian translation in leningrad . october 29 – vladimir nabokov 's 1940 application for u.s . citizenship is granted . november 1 – the u.s . magazine ebony appears . november 21 – andré malraux is named minister of information by the new french president , charles de gaulle . november 26 – the u.k . film brief encounter , adapted from noël coward 's short play still life , is released . november – astrid lindgren 's children 's book pippi långstrump , with illustrations by ingrid vang nyman , is published in sweden by rabén & sjögren , having won a competition run by the publisher for children 's books in august . it introduces an anarchic child heroine . an english translation appears as pippi longstocking . december – nag hammadi library , a collection of gnostic texts , is discovered in upper egypt . . new books . fiction . ivo andrić the bridge on the drina ( na drini ćuprija ) travnička hronika ( travnik chronicle , bosnian chronicle , bosnian story , the days of the consuls ) gospođica ( the young lady , the woman from sarajevo ) nigel balchin – mine own executioner banine – caucasian days ( jours caucasiens ) frans g . bengtsson – the long ships ( röde orm ) , part 2 adolfo bioy casares – a plan for escape ( plan de evasión ) robert bloch – the opener of the way ( anthology ) arna bontemps – anyplace but here hermann broch – the death of virgil ( der tod des vergil ) gwendolyn brooks – a street in bronzeville taylor caldwell – the wide house john dickson carr ( as carter dickson ) – the curse of the bronze lamp winifred carter – princess fitz vera caspary – bedelia agatha christie – sparkling cyanide thomas b . costain – the black rose gertrude crampton – tootle sergiu dan – unde începe noaptea simone de beauvoir – the blood of others ( le sang des autres ) august derleth in re : sherlock holmes something near c . s . forester – the commodore ( also commodore hornblower ) varian fry – surrender on demand julien gracq – a dark stranger winston graham – the forgotten story henry green – loving chester himes – if he hollers let him go – six candles for indonesia tove jansson – the moomins and the great flood ( småtrollen och den stora översvämningen , first in the moomin series of 14 books ) ruth krauss – the carrot seed margery lawrence – number seven , queer street robert lawson – rabbit hill j . sheridan le fanu ( d . 1873 ) – green tea and other ghost stories c . s . lewis – that hideous strength h . p . lovecraft and august derleth – the lurker at the threshold compton mackenzie – the north wind of love , book 2 ( last of the four winds of love hexalogy ) hugh maclennan – two solitudes nancy mitford – the pursuit of love r . k . narayan – the english teacher george orwell – animal farm gabrielle roy – bonheur d'occasion ( the tin flute ) jean-paul sartre – l'âge de raison ( the age of reason ) elizabeth smart – by grand central station i sat down and wept john steinbeck – cannery row noel streatfeild – saplings james thurber – the thurber carnival ( anthology ) tarjei vesaas – the house in the dark elio vittorini – uomini e no ( men and not men ) mika waltari – the egyptian ( sinuhe egyptiläinen ) evangeline walton – witch house evelyn waugh – brideshead revisited charles williams – all hallows ' eve cornell woolrich – night has a thousand eyes . children and young people . rev . w . awdry – three railway engines ( first in 42 railway series books by awdry and his son christopher awdry ) selina chönz and alois carigiet – uorsin ( schellen-ursli . ein engadiner bilderbuch , translated as a bell for ursli ) marguerite henry – justin morgan had a horse tove jannson – the moomins and the great flood ( småtrollen och den stora översvämningen ) jim kjelgaard – big red ruth krauss – the carrot seed robert lawson – rabbit hill lois lenski – strawberry girl astrid lindgren – pippi longstocking ( pippi långstrump , first in the pippi longstocking series of three full-length and six picture books ) e . b . white – stuart little . drama . jacinto benavente – la infanzona mary chase – harvey eduardo de filippo – napoli milionaria ( '' the millions of naples '' ) norman ginsbury – the first gentleman jean giraudoux ( posthumously ) – the madwoman of chaillot ( la folle de chaillot ) curt goetz – the house in montevideo ( das haus in montevideo ) walter greenwood – the cure for love arthur laurents – home of the brave john perry – a man about the house j . b . priestley – an inspector calls vernon sylvaine – madame louise . poetry . idris davies – tonypandy and other poems . non-fiction . r . g . collingwood – the idea of nature françoise frenkel – rien où poser sa tête ( no place to lay one 's head ) carlo emilio gadda – eros e priapo jacquetta hawkes – early britain aldous huxley – the perennial philosophy arthur koestler – the yogi and the commissar carlo levi – christ stopped at eboli ( cristo si è fermato a eboli ) c . s . lewis – the great divorce ( serialization concludes and book publication ) betty macdonald – the egg and i karl popper – the open society and its enemies bertrand russell – history of western philosophy ( russell ) ernesto sabato – one and the universe ( uno y el universo ) arthur schlesinger , jr . – the age of jackson henry dewolf smyth – smyth report ( a general account of the development of methods of using atomic energy for military purposes ) richard wright – black boy . births . january 3 – david starkey , english historian january 20 – robert olen butler , american novelist and short story writer january 30 – michael dorris , american writer ( died 1997 ) february 12 – david small , american author and illustrator february 23 – robert gray , australian poet and critic february 25 – shiva naipaul , trinidad-born novelist ( died 1985 ) march 19 – jim turner , american literary editor ( died 1999 ) april 2 – anne waldman , american poet april 16 – sebastian barker , english poet and journalist ( died 2014 ) april 27 – august wilson , american playwright ( died 2005 ) april 30 – annie dillard , american poet and prose writer june 11 – robert munsch , american-canadian author and academic june 21 – adam zagajewski , polish poet , novelist and essayist july 5 – michael blake , american novelist and screenwriter ( died 2015 ) july 9 – dean koontz , american novelist july 12 – remy sylado ( yapi panda abdiel tambayong ) , indonesian writer july 21 – wendy cope , english poet july 30 – patrick modiano , french novelist , nobel laureate september 1 – mustafa balel , turkish author and translator october 15 – john murrell , american-born dramatist november 5 – richard holmes , english literary biographer november 24 – nuruddin farah , somali novelist december 17 – jacqueline wilson , english children 's writer december 21 – raymond e . feist , american fantasy writer unknown dates esther croft , french canadian novelist and short-story writer rabai al-madhoun , palestinian writer mari strachan , welsh novelist mohamed zafzaf , moroccan novelist ( died 2001 ) . deaths . january 13 – margaret deland , american novelist ( born 1857 ) january 15 – ursula bethell , english-born new zealand poet ( born 1874 ) january 22 – else lasker-schüler , german-born jewish poet ( born 1869 ) january 27 – antal szerb , hungarian writer ( in concentration camp , born 1901 ) february 6 – robert brasillach , french writer ( executed , born 1909 ) february 23 – aleksey nikolayevich tolstoy , russian writer ( born 1883 ) c . march 12 – anne frank , german-born dutch child diarist ( probable typhus in concentration camp , born 1929 ) march 20 – lord alfred douglas , english poet ( born 1870 ) march 31 – maurice donnay , french dramatist ( born 1859 ) april – josef čapek , czech artist and writer ( in concentration camp , born 1887 ) april 9 – dietrich bonhoeffer , german theologian ( hanged in concentration camp , born 1906 ) may 15 – charles williams , english author ( born 1886 ) may 29 – mihail sebastian , romanian jewish playwright , essayist , and novelist ( road accident , born 1907 ) june 5 – ilie bărbulescu , romanian linguist and journalist ( born 1873 ) june 8 – robert desnos , french poet ( in concentration camp , born 1900 ) july 13 – alla nazimova , crimean-born american scriptwriter and actress ( born 1879 ) july 25 – charles gilman norris , american novelist ( born 1881 ) august 18 – e . r . eddison , english fantasy writer ( born 1882 ) august 20 – alexander roda roda , austro-croatian-born novelist ( born 1872 ) august 26 – franz werfel , bohemian-born writer ( born 1890 ) september 9 – zinaida gippius , émigré russian writer ( born 1869 ) september 21 – ioan c . filitti , romanian historian , political theorist and essayist ( born 1879 ) september 22 – thomas burke , english novelist and story writer ( born 1886 ) october 8 – felix salten , austrian-born children 's writer ( born 1869 ) november 21 – robert benchley , american humorist ( born 1889 ) december 4 – arthur morrison , english writer ( born 1863 ) december 28 – theodore dreiser , american author ( born 1871 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : l . a . g . strong , travellers james tait black memorial prize for biography : d . s . maccoll , philip wilson steer newbery medal for children 's literature : robert lawson , rabbit hill nobel prize for literature : gabriela mistral premio nadal : josé félix tapia , la luna ha entrado en casa prix goncourt : jean-louis bory , mon village à l'heure allemande pulitzer prize for drama : mary chase , harvey pulitzer prize for poetry : karl shapiro , v-letter and other poems pulitzer prize for the novel : john hersey , a bell for adano . references .