1934 in literature

events . january 7 – the first flash gordon comic strip is created and illustrated by alex raymond and published in the united states . january 25 – james joyce 's novel ulysses , after a december acquittal ( upheld on appeal in february ) in united states v . one book called ulysses , is first published in an authorized edition in the anglophone world by random house of new york city . it has 12,000 advance sales . january – b . traven 's novel the death ship ( 1926 ) first appears in english . february – stefan zweig flees austria and settles in london . february 6 – the february 6 riots in france , partly provoked by a performance of shakespeare 's coriolanus by the comédie-française , will become the focus of a cult in the works of far-right authors , notably death on credit by louis-ferdinand céline ( 1936 ) and gilles by pierre drieu la rochelle ( 1939 ) . also in 1934 , drieu announces his conversion to fascism , with the essay socialisme fasciste . march 16 and october 5 – p . g . wodehouse 's thank you , jeeves and right ho , jeeves , the first full-length novels to feature jeeves , are published . april – f . scott fitzgerald 's fourth and final completed novel , tender is the night , appears in book form in new york , after serialization since january in the monthly scribner 's magazine . april 3 – the english literary biographer thomas wright ( of olney ) first publishes , in the daily express , some facts about charles dickens ' relations with the actress ellen ternan . april 6 – rudyard kipling and w . b . yeats are awarded the gothenburg prize for poetry . may 1 – the first officially designated thingplatz for the performance of thingspiele is dedicated in the brandberge in halle ( nazi germany ) . june a medieval manuscript of le morte d'arthur used by caxton is identified in the fellows ' library of winchester college ( england ) by the bibliophile walter fraser oakeshott . the english poet laurie lee walks out one midsummer morning from his gloucestershire home , bound for spain . two notable gentleman detectives of the golden age of detective fiction , set in england , appear for the first time in print , later to have whole series written about them . the first to feature inspector roderick alleyn of scotland yard is a man lay dead by ngaio marsh , at this time resident in her native new zealand , published in london . the first sir henry merrivale locked room mystery , the plague court murders , appears from john dickson carr , at this time resident in the uk and writing as '' carter dickson '' , in new york around early june . it is followed in december by the white priory murders . july 17 – the circular manchester central library , england , opens . august – boris pasternak and korney chukovsky are among those at the first congress of the union of soviet writers . september – henry miller 's novel tropic of cancer is published in paris by the obelisk press . the united states customs service prohibits imports of it . october 22 – a new cambridge university library , designed by giles gilbert scott , opens in england . october 24 – the first of rex stout 's nero wolfe detective novels , fer-de-lance , is published in new york , and abridged in the november the american magazine as '' point of death . '' november 20 – lillian hellman 's first successful play , the children 's hour , dealing with a theme of accusations of lesbianism , opens at the maxine elliott theatre on broadway in new york , where it will run for two years . december 25 – the romanian novelist panait istrati , a former communist , begins his collaboration with the quasi-fascist cruciada românismului with a polemic against antisemitism . the weekly newspaper , edited by mihai stelescu and alexandru talex , later hosts pieces by constantin virgil gheorghiu . unknown date the first three volumes of mikhail sholokhov 's novel and quiet flows the don first appear in english under this title . new books . fiction . m . ageyev – cocain romance ( roman s kokainom ) edwin balmer and philip wylie – after worlds collide sharadindu bandyopadhyay – pother kanta samuel beckett – more pricks than kicks james branch cabell – smirt james m . cain – the postman always rings twice morley callaghan – such is my beloved victor canning – mr . finchley discovers his england john dickson carr the blind barber the eight of swords the bowstring murders ( as carr dickson/carter dickson ) the plague court murders ( as carter dickson ) the white priory murders ( as carter dickson ) devil kinsmere ( as roger fairbairn ) gabriel chevallier – clochemerle agatha christie murder on the orient express ( book publication ) why did n't they ask evans ? ( full book publication ) the listerdale mystery ( short stories ) parker pyne investigates ( short stories ) unfinished portrait ( as mary westmacott ) colette – duo freeman wills crofts – the 12.30 from croydon henry de montherlant – les célibataires ( the bachelors ) isak dinesen – seven gothic tales pierre drieu la rochelle – the comedy of charleroi ( la comédie de charleroi , linked short stories ) max ernst – une semaine de bonté ( a week of kindness , graphic novel ) f . scott fitzgerald – tender is the night carlo emilio gadda – il castello di udine jeanne galzy – jeunes filles en serre chaude ( young girls in a greenhouse ) jean giono – the song of the world robert graves – i , claudius graham greene – it 's a battlefield harold heslop the crime of peter ropner goaf ( english version ) robert hichens – the power to kill james hilton – goodbye , mr . chips richard hull – the murder of my aunt zora neale hurston – jonah 's gourd vine : a novel f . tennyson jesse – a pin to see the peepshow d . gwenallt jones – plasau ' r brenin john knittel – via mala halldór laxness – independent people ( sjálfstætt fólk ) — part i , icelandic pioneers ( landnámsmaður íslands ) alexander lernet-holenia – the standard marie belloc lowndes another man 's wife the chianti flask compton mackenzie – the darkening green henry miller – tropic of cancer leopold myers – rajah amar vladimir nabokov – despair carolina nabuco – a sucessora john o'hara – appointment in samarra e . phillips oppenheim – the strange boarders of palace crescent george orwell – burmese days john cowper powys autobiography weymouth sands ellery queen – the chinese orange mystery henry roth – call it sleep rafael sabatini – venetian masque dorothy l . sayers – the nine tailors bruno schulz – the street of crocodiles ( short stories , sklepy cynamonowe – cinnamon shops – in december 1933 , dated 1934 ) mihail sebastian – de două mii de ani ( for two thousand years ) j . slauerhoff – het leven op aarde ( life on earth ) howard spring – shabby tiger irving stone – lust for life rex stout – fer-de-lance ruth suckow – the folks phoebe atwood taylor the mystery of the cape cod tavern sandbar sinister 'torquemada ' – cain 's jawbone thomas f . tweed – blind mouths s . s . van dine the casino murder case the dragon murder case simon vestdijk – terug tot ina damman ( return to ina damman , first published of the anton wachter cycle ) evelyn waugh – a handful of dust nathanael west – a cool million dennis wheatley – the devil rides out dorothy whipple – they knew mr . knight p . g . wodehouse thank you , jeeves right ho , jeeves s . fowler wright david prelude in prague : the war of 1938 who else but she ? ( as sydney fowler ) v . m . yeates – winged victory francis brett young – this little world marguerite yourcenar – a coin in nine hands ( denier du rêve ) . children and young people . edgar rice burroughs – tarzan and the lion man elena fortún – celia en el mundo ( celia in the world ) hergé – cigars of the pharaoh ( les cigares du pharaon ) capt . w . e . johns – biggles of the camel squadron lorna lewis – the little french poodle constantin s . nicolăescu-plopșor – paramiseà romanè ( anthology ) arthur ransome – coot club hilda van stockum – a day on skates william woodthorpe tarn – the treasure of the isle of mist p . l . travers – mary poppins ( first in mary poppins series of eight books ) geoffrey trease – bows against the barons . drama . tawfiq al-hakim – shahrazad ( scheherazade ) james bridie – mary read winifred carter – the queen who kept her head jean cocteau – the infernal machine federico garcía lorca – yerma ian hay – admirals all lillian hellman – the children 's hour frederick j . jackson – the bishop misbehaves pär lagerkvist – bödeln ( the hangman ; dramatization ) eberhard wolfgang möller – rothschild siegt bei waterloo ayn rand – night of january 16th ( first performed as woman on trial ) lawrence riley – personal appearance dodie smith – touch wood john van druten – flowers of the forest paul vulpius ( ladislas fodor and hans adler ) – youth at the helm . poetry . constantin s . nicolăescu-plopșor – ghileà romanè ( anthology ) dylan thomas – 18 poems . non-fiction . ruth benedict – patterns of culture maud bodkin – archetypal patterns of poetry : psychological studies of imagination martí de riquer i morera l'humanisme català ( 1388–1494 ) humanisme i decadència en les lletres catalanes pierre drieu la rochelle – socialisme fasciste ( fascist socialism ) daphne du maurier – gerald : a portrait julius evola – il mistero del graal e la tradizione ghibellina dell'impero ( the mystery of the grail ) emma goldman – living my life aldous huxley – beyond the mexique bay nicolae iorga byzance après byzance histoire de la vie byzantine orizonturile mele . o viață de om așa cum a fost hugh kingsmill – the sentimental journey : a life of charles dickens cornelia meigs – invincible louisa a . a . milne – peace with honour karl popper – the logic of scientific discovery j . b . priestley – english journey amber reeves – the nationalisation of banking antal szerb – a magyar irodalom története ( history of hungarian literature ) h . g . wells – an experiment in autobiography . births . january 4 – hellmuth karasek , german journalist , literary critic , and novelist ( died 2015 ) january 8 – alexandra ripley , american novelist ( died 2004 ) january 12 – alan sharp , scottish-american screenwriter and author ( died 2013 ) february 10 fleur adcock , new zealand-born poet gordon lish , american writer , editor and teacher february 18 – audre lorde , american poet , writer and feminist ( died 1992 ) february 27 – n . scott momaday , native american novelist march 28 – jean louvet , belgian dramatist april 24 – jayakanthan , tamil writer , jnanpith awardee ( died 2015 ) may 10 – richard peck , american novelist ( died 2015 ) may 12 – elechi amadi , nigerian novelist ( died 2016 ) may 27 – harlan ellison , american science fiction writer june 11 – lady annabel goldsmith , english memoirist and socialite july 11 – helen cresswell , english children 's writer and scriptwriter ( died 2005 ) july 13 – wole soyinka , nigerian writer , playwright and nobel laureate july 20 – uwe johnson , german writer ( died 1984 ) july 21 – jonathan miller , english satirist and non-fiction author ( died 2019 ) august 5 – wendell berry , american poet , novelist and activist ( died 2019 ) august 6 piers anthony , english-born science fiction and fantasy writer diane di prima , american poet of the beat generation and artist ( died 2020 ) august 16 – diana wynne jones , english children 's fantasy novelist ( died 2011 ) september 11 – leon rooke , canadian novelist september 17 – binoy majumdar , indian hungryalist poet ( died 2006 ) september 21 – leonard cohen , canadian-born poet , singer-songwriter and novelist ( died 2016 ) september 23 – per olov enquist , swedish novelist ( died 2020 ) october 1 – shakeb jalali , pakistani poet in urdu ( suicide 1966 ) october 17 – alan garner , english children 's novelist october 24 – adrian mitchell , english poet , playwright and children 's author ( died 2008 ) november 9 – ronald harwood ( ronald horwitz ) , south african-born english dramatist and screenwriter ( died 2020 ) november 12 – john mcgahern , irish novelist ( died 2006 ) november 15 – irén pavlics , slovene author in hungary november 19 – joanne kyger , american poet november 21 – beryl bainbridge , english novelist ( died 2010 ) december 28 – alasdair gray , scottish novelist and artist ( died 2019 ) unknown dates muhammad al-maghut , syrian ismaili poet ( died 2006 ) yaakov shabtai , israeli novelist , playwright and translator ( died 1981 ) . deaths . january 1 – jakob wassermann , german-jewish novelist ( born 1873 ) january 6 – dorothy edwards , welsh novelist ( suicide , born 1903 ) january 8 – andrei bely ( boris nikolaevich bugaev ) , russian novelist , poet and critic ( born 1880 ) january 11 – helen zimmern , german-born english writer and translator ( born 1846 ) january 15 – hermann bahr , austrian dramatist and critic ( born 1863 ) february 8 – ferenc móra , hungarian novelist and journalist ( born 1879 ) march 10 – thomas anstey guthrie ( f . anstey ) , english comic novelist and journalist ( born 1856 ) april 9 – safvet-beg bašagić , bosnian poet ( born 1870 ) april 12 – robert clyde packer , australian journalist and newspaper magnate ( heart failure , born 1879 ) may 1 – paul zarifopol , romanian critic ( born 1874 ) june 14 – john gray , english poet ( born 1866 ) june 21 – thorne smith , american humorist and fantasy author ( heart attack , born 1892 ) june 26 – naito torajiro ( 内藤 虎次郎 ) , japanese historian ( born 1866 ) june 30 – night of the long knives fritz gerlich , german journalist ( murdered , born 1883 ) karl-günther heimsoth , austrian doctor and gay publicist ( shot , born 1899 ) willi schmid , german music critic ( murdered , born 1893 ) july 4 – hayim nahman bialik , hebrew-language poet ( born 1873 ) july 21 – julian hawthorne , american journalist and novelist ( born 1846 ) july 23 – karl joel , german philosopher ( born 1864 ) july 29 – frane bulić , croatian historian ( born 1846 ) august 13 – mary hunter austin , american travel writer ( born 1868 ) september 9 – roger fry , english art critic ( born 1866 ) september 21 – gheorghe bogdan-duică , romanian literary critic ( born 1866 ) november 23 – arthur wing pinero , english dramatist ( born 1855 ) december 15 – gustave lanson , french historian and literary critic ( born 1857 ) december 26 – wallace thurman , african american novelist ( tb , born 1902 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : robert graves , i , claudius and claudius the god james tait black memorial prize for biography : j . e . neale , queen elizabeth king 's gold medal for poetry instituted this year with first winner , laurence whistler newbery medal for children 's literature : cornelia meigs , invincible louisa nobel prize for literature : luigi pirandello . prix goncourt : roger vercel , capitaine conan pulitzer prize for drama : sidney kingsley , men in white pulitzer prize for poetry : robert hillyer , collected verse pulitzer prize for the novel : caroline miller , lamb in his bosom . references .