Steer wrestling

origins . image : cowboy morgan evans.jpg thumb 220px left '' cowboy morgan evans '' , 1927 world champion bulldogger historically , steer wrestling was not a part of ranch life . the event originated in the 1890s , and is claimed to have been started by an individual named bill pickett , a wild west show performer said to have caught a runaway steer by wrestling it to the ground . there are several versions of the story , some claiming that he developed the idea after he observed how cattle dogs worked with unruly animals . . modern event . thumb the event features a steer and two mounted cowboys , along with a number of supporting characters . the steers are moved through narrow pathways leading to a chute with spring-loaded doors . a barrier rope is fastened around the steer 's neck which is used to ensure that the steer gets a head start . the rope length is determined by arena length . on one side of the chute is the '' hazer '' , whose job is to ride parallel with the steer once it begins running and ensure it runs in a straight line , on the other side of the chute the '' steer wrestler '' or '' bulldogger '' waits behind a taut rope fastened with an easily broken string which is fastened to the rope on the steer . when the steer wrestler is ready he '' calls '' for the steer by nodding his head and the chute man trips a lever opening the doors . the suddenly freed steer breaks out running , shadowed by the hazer . when the steer reaches the end of his rope , it pops off and simultaneously releases the barrier for the steer wrestler . the steer wrestler attempts to catch up to the running steer , lean over the side of the horse which is running flat out and grab the horns of the running steer . the steer wrestler then is pulled off his horse by the slowing steer and plants his heels into the dirt further slowing the steer and himself . he then takes one hand off the horns , reaches down and grabs the nose of the steer pulling the steer off balance and ultimately '' throwing '' the steer to the ground . once all four legs are off the ground , an official waves a flag marking the official end and a time is taken . the steer is released and trots off . technique . thumb the preferred method of wrestling the steer to the ground is to lean from the galloping horse which is running beside the steer , transferring the weight of the upper body to the neck of the steer , with one hand on the near horn of the steer and the far horn grasped in the crook of the other elbow . one then lets the horse carry his feet by the steer until his feet naturally fall out of the stirrups . the steer wrestler then slides with his feet turned slightly to the left , twisting the head of the steer toward one by pushing down with the near hand and pulling up and in with the far elbow . finally the steer wrestler lets go of the near horn , and puts the steer 's nose in the crook of his left elbow , and throws his weight backwards causing the steer to become unbalanced and fall to the ground . rules . rules of steer wrestling include : the bulldogger 's horse must not break the rope barrier in front of it at the beginning of a run , but must wait for the animal escaping from the adjacent chute to release the rope . breaking the rope barrier early adds a 10-second penalty to the bulldogger 's time . if the steer stumbles or falls before the bulldogger brings it down , he must either wait for it to rise or help it up before wrestling it to the ground . if the bulldogger completely misses the steer on his way down , he will receive a '' no time '' . typical professional times will be in the range of 3.0 to 10 seconds from the gates opening to the waving of the flag . the steers used today are generally corriente cattle or longhorns , which weigh between 450–650 pounds , and the human steer wrestlers typically weigh 180–300 pounds . while steer wrestlers have a lower injury rate than bull riding or bronc riders , their injury rate is higher than that of the speed events . mullen , frank x . jr . '' rodeo injuries : mess with the bull , you get the horns '' reno gazette-journal 21 june 2005 . animal welfare concerns . like all other rodeo events , steer wrestling is under fire by animal rights advocates . modern rodeos in the united states are closely regulated and have responded to accusations of animal cruelty by instituting a number of rules to guide how rodeo animals are to be managed . in 1994 , a survey of 28 sanctioned rodeos was conducted by on-site independent veterinarians . reviewing 33,991 animal runs , the injury rate was documented at 16 animals or 0.047 percent , less than five-hundredths of one percent or one in 2000 animals . a study of rodeo animals in australia found a similar injury rate . basic injuries occurred at a rate of 0.072 percent , or one in 1405 , with injuries requiring veterinary attention at 0.036 percent , or one injury in every 2810 times the animal was used , and transport , yarding and competition were all included in the study . a later prca survey of 60,971 animal performances at 198 rodeo performances and 73 sections of '' slack '' indicated 27 animals were injured , again approximately five-hundredths of 1 percent0.0004 . however , accusations of cruelty in the usa persist . the prca acknowledges that they only sanction about 30 percent of all rodeos , while another 50 percent are sanctioned by other organizations and 20 percent are completely unsanctioned . several animal rights organizations keep records of accidents and incidents of possible animal abuse . they cite various specific incidents of injury to support their statements , renate robey , '' horse euthanized after show accident '' , denver post 16 january 1999 . and also point to examples of long-term breakdown , steve lipsher , '' veterinarian calls rodeos brutal to stock '' , denver post 20 january 1991 . as well as reporting on injuries and deaths suffered by animals in non-rodeo events staged on the periphery of professional rodeo such as chuckwagon races and '' suicide runs '' . in terms of actual statistics on animal injury rate , there appear to be no more recent independent studies on animal injury in rodeo than the 1994 study . however , groups such as people for the ethical treatment of animals ( peta ) periodically incidents of animal injury . according to the aspca , practice sessions are often the scene of more severe abuses than competitions . . see also . 101 ranch wild west show chute dogging national cowboy & western heritage museum bill pickett rodeo wild west show . references . . external links . prorodeo online steer wrestling national little britches rodeo association