Lynn Johnston

early life . born lynn ridgway in collingwood , ontario , she was raised in north vancouver , british columbia . she attended the vancouver school of art ( now emily carr university of art and design ) with hopes of making a living as an artist . after working briefly in animation , most notably as an uncredited cel colorist on the abbott and costello cartoon show , she married in 1969 and moved back to ontario , where she worked as a medical artist at mcmaster university for five years . johnston 's illustrations are in storage in mcmaster 's medical archive . they include depictions of routine hospital happenings , such as a father smoking in the waiting room . while expecting her first child , she drew single-panel cartoons for the ceiling of her obstetrician murray enkin 's office . those drawings were published in her first book , david , we 're pregnant ! which was published in 1973 under her then name of lynn franks ( and subsequently republished under the name of lynn johnston ) and became a best seller . after her divorce , she did freelance commercial and medical art in a studio converted from a greenhouse . hi mom ! hi dad ! , a sequel to david , was published in 1975 . shortly thereafter , she met and married dental student rod johnston . johnston 's for better or for worse retrospectives . . for better or for worse . in 1978 , the johnstons and their two children relocated to lynn lake , manitoba . she was asked by universal press syndicate if she was interested in doing a comic strip . she sent twenty copies of a strip called the johnstons , based on her family '' since we were the only people i knew i could draw over and over again with some consistency . '' much to her surprise , the syndicate approved of the initial strips and offered her a twenty-year contract . after a six-month '' work-up '' period , the strip first appeared in newspapers throughout canada under the title for better or for worse . the strip has been carried by about 2000 newspapers in canada , the u.s . and 20 other countries . many story lines draw from her family 's real-life experiences . her main characters are named after the middle names of her husband and children , with the exception of the mother , as lynn johnston has no middle name . instead , she elected to name the protagonist elly , in honor of a friend of hers who died at a young age . her brother-in-law ralph johnston inspired the controversial story about lawrence 's coming out . deanna was based on aaron 's high school sweetheart , who died in a car accident years after their relationship ended . johnston 's niece stephanie is developmentally handicapped and her experience is shared in recent story lines on the integration of developmentally handicapped students in april 's class . elizabeth 's teaching career was based on daughter kate 's decision not to pursue a career in education , but provided johnston with a chance to imagine how that might have turned out . suddenly silver , 25 years of for better or for worse , pg . 2 the characters in for better of for worse have aged in '' real time '' . on august 31 , 2008 , johnston herself appeared in the sunday strip , which was supposed to be the end of the cartoon , and announced that she would take the story back nearly 30 years to soon after its beginning , with half of the material to be new and the other half repeats . the '' new '' material was actually reworked versions of older strips with retouched artwork and new dialogue that was sometimes only tweaked to use modern expressions or product names in place of older ones . on seldom occasion an entire strip or a panel has been redone , such as michael or elizabeth spanked being turned into a '' time out '' . one spanking strip that remained was a story arc where michael was spanked by john for hitting another child , and it percolating into a discussion with elly that she disagreed that spanking was the proper remedy ( although she agreed with john that michael 's violent attitude had to be nipped in the bud ) . other strips , such as elly getting annoyed and then hurling something at the back of john 's head ( such as a coffee cup ) were also censored . as the strip was a family strip , issues of throwing a hard object behind someone 's back raised issues of spousal abuse . personal life . since the 1990s , johnston has been notably forthcoming in her discussion of the abuse inflicted on her by her mother '' i haven ’ t told many people this because my parents were still alive and i didn ’ t want to reveal it . it ’ s hard to describe . on the one hand , she beat the living crap out of me . on the other hand , though , she was bright and witty and well read . neither of my parents ever stopped encouraging my brother and me from pursuing our creativity . '' – hogan 's alley interview published in september 1994 and her first husband , '' i went for these guys who treated me like shit , and i married one of them ! the guys who treated me badly were the funny guys , and i always went for the guys with the sense of humor . my husband would say things to me like my mother did , '' you ’ re fat and ugly . '' and he treated me like garbage . his girlfriends would call him at home , and when i would pick up the phone , they would giggle at me . i married a guy who treated me very badly , but i was happy . i was miserable , so i was happy . '' – hogan 's alley interview published in september 1994 and being unprepared to be a mother to her son aaron '' i didn ’ t know how to raise a child . and i wasn ’ t close to my parents , and because i was too proud to go to my parents for help , i mistreated that little baby . i was exactly like my mother in that sense . '' – hogan 's alley interview published in september 1994 —topics that have also been reflected in the strip . a column by jan wong of the globe and mail , reprinted in lunch with jan wong , jan wong , lunch with jan wong bantam , 2001 , trade paperback , notably portrayed johnston as somewhat difficult and irascible . johnston resided in the northern ontario town of corbeil for many years during for better or for worses run . her daughter katie also lived in corbeil and worked at the for better or for worse studio , while her son aaron works in the television industry in vancouver , bc . in september 2007 , lynn and rod johnston announced their separation and intention to divorce . kansas city star , sept 6 , 2007 and editor & publisher , sept 7 , 2007 johnston had talked about either ending for better or for worse or handing it off to another cartoonist , but changed her mind as a result of her split from her husband of over 30 years . lynn johnston says it 's time to move on , peterborough examiner , september 19 , 2008 in september 2008 , for better or for worse transitioned into a unique mix of straight re-runs and strips that featured original 1980s artwork ( sometimes slightly retouched ) but new dialogue by johnston to reflect societal and technological changes . in september 2015 , johnston and her daughter moved back to north vancouver . johnston had a close friendship with charles m . schulz , creator of peanuts . she wrote the introduction to one of the volumes of fantagraphics books ' series the complete peanuts . on 13 march 2014 , library and archives canada announced that it had acquired material to add to its johnston collection , including 3282 drawings , 296 watercolours , 244 photographs , about 3.5 & nbsp ; m of textual items , and a few other objects . . awards and honours . image : lynn johnston star on walk of fame adj.jpg thumb right johnston 's star on canada 's walk of fame 1985 – reuben award , the first woman and first canadian to win 1987 – gemini award , best cartoon series 1990 – honorary degree , doctor of letters , lakehead university , thunder bay , ontario 1991 – national cartoonist society newspaper comic strip award 1992 – made a member of the order of canada , the country 's highest civilian honour 1993 – honorary degree , doctor of laws , mcmaster university , hamilton , ontario 1994 – finalist for the pulitzer prize for a story on lawrence 's coming out 1999 – honorary degree , doctor of laws , university of western ontario , london , ontario 2000 – honorary degree , doctor of letters , nipissing university , north bay , ontario 2000 – honorary degree , doctor of letters , emily carr institute of art and design , vancouver 2001 – comic of the year , editor and publisher 2002 – queen elizabeth ii golden jubilee medal 2003 – a star on canada 's walk of fame in toronto 2004 – debwewin citation from the anishinaabe nation for excellence in aboriginal-issues journalism 2007 – made a member of the order of manitoba 2008 – inducted into the canadian cartoonist hall of fame 2008 – inducted into the national cartoon museum hall of fame 2012 – queen elizabeth ii diamond jubilee medal . selected bibliography . david we 're pregnant , 1973 hi mom ! hi dad ! , 1975 do they ever grow up ? leaving home ( with andie parton ) see for better or for worse for compilations of the comic strip . references . external links . official website of for better or for worse official website of fborfw character ned tanner 1994 hogan 's alley interview , conducted by tom heintjes ncs awards the ohio state university billy ireland cartoon library & museum : lynn johnston collection guide