A30 road

route . london to honiton . the a30 begins at henlys roundabout , where the route stems from the a4 near hounslow . it runs south of the southern perimeter road , heathrow airport and north of ashford and staines-upon-thames , before reaching the m25 motorway orbital motorway . this first section is entirely dual carriageway . taken with the a4 , its natural continuation which nearby becomes non-dualled towards the m25 , the section constitutes one of five routes into the southern half of london which reach inner london with at least a dual-carriageway , the others being the a3 ( m ) , the m3 , the m20 and a2 , however approximately one mile before reaching inner london it is combined with the london variants of the m3 and m4 approaches . after running astride the m25 to cross the thames on a bridge designed by lutyens , the runnymede bridge , the a30 runs parallel to but distant from the m3 until southwest of basingstoke , bypassing egham and passing through heathland and sunningdale , bagshot , and camberley where the route almost mirrors the devil 's highway , a stone ( stane ) street to calleva atrebatum ( silchester roman town ) , believed to be older still , then passes close to hook town centre and in the surrounding country the soil is arable . after the 1930s basingstoke bypass , the m3 changes direction ( between north waltham and popham , at the popham interchange ) the a303 takes over for the a30 losing continuity . from sutton scotney village the a30 runs parallel to the latter road geodesic datum to north-east of honiton , devon passing through towns stockbridge ( where it meets its first substantive river since the thames , the test ) and its trout fishing centres , shaftesbury , sherborne , yeovil , crewkerne and chard . between stockbridge and shaftesbury it enters the cathedral city of salisbury . between the m25 and honiton , the a30 is mostly single carriageway , carrying local traffic with short stretches of dual carriageway from camberley to basingstoke , which has a dualled inner ring road , two between stockbridge and salisbury ( an alike ring road shared with the a36 ) , and between sherborne and yeovil . exeter to penzance . this section is a trunk road as far as penzance . it is mostly dual carriageway , but there are some short sections of single carriageway . to pass exeter , through traffic can join the m5 motorway for three miles . west of exeter , the a30 is dual carriageway through devon and into cornwall , bypassing whiddon down , okehampton and launceston . the dual carriageway continues through cornwall to carland cross , after which there is a single carriageway stretch to chiverton cross . highways england are currently progressing plans to dual this section of carriageway . a preferred route announcement was made july 2017 and a development consent order was made in february 2020 by secretary of state for transport . construction is due to start in 2020 , with the road open to traffic by the end of 2023 . from chiverton cross , the dual carriageway bypasses redruth and camborne . the a30 returns to single carriageway west of camborne , and a mid-1980s bypass takes the road around hayle . between hayle and penzance , the a30 returns to the original route and it passes through several villages . approaching penzance , the a30 briefly becomes a dual carriageway once again . once west of penzance , the a30 becomes a more rural road running through or past several villages , before terminating at land 's end . history . 17th – 18th centuries . the bulk of the a30 follows the historic london – land 's end coaching road . the road appeared on john ogilby 's map of britain in 1675 , and was covered by ogilby 's later strip-maps showing '' the road from london to the land 's end in cornwall '' . the coaching route started at hyde park corner , closer to the centre of london than the modern a30 , closely mirroring the modern route as far as exeter , except for three sections from knightsbridge to bedfont , basingstoke to salisbury via andover and exeter to penzance via ashburton , plymouth and following the cornish south coast via st austell . ogilby described it as '' the post-office making this one of their principal roads '' and thought the section through surrey and hampshire was '' in general a very good road with suitable entertainment '' . the road was known to attract significant postal and coach traffic along its length by 1686 . the route is described as the '' great road to land 's end '' in the magna britannia , published in the early 19th century . as the coaching road to land 's end was a major route , it was a popular place for highwayman . william davies , also known as the golden farmer , robbed several coaches travelling across bagshot heath . he was hanged in 1689 at a gallows at the local gibbet hill between bagshot and camberley . the jolly farmer pub was built near the site of the gallows ( gibbet ) , a junction . . 19th century . at the turn of the 19th century , william hanning created the '' new direct road '' , a fast coaching route between london and exeter . the road deviated from ogilby 's route running via amesbury and ilminster , rejoining the older road at honiton . it became popular with postal services such as the subscription . in 1831 , a race was held between london and exeter via the new direct road , which resulted in a dead heat . were covered in 13 hours , compared to a typical early 18th century time of four days . in response to the competition of routes , a new turnpike road was built west of chard , avoiding the historic route to honiton via stockland , with several steep hills . this road met the new direct road near upottery . historically , the route between london and land 's end was also called the '' great south-west road '' . in the 21st century , the name only refers to a small section of the road near heathrow . . 20th century . the a30 was one of the first roads to be classified by the ministry of transport for funding in 1921 . it followed ogilby 's route up to exeter , then the basic route of the modern a30 through okehampton , launceston and bodmin to the greenmarket in penzance , where it ended . it was extended to land 's end in 1925 . the great south west road section of the a30 around heathrow had been planned as the western end of the great west road project , one of the first bypasses built for motor traffic . construction began in 1914 but was quickly halted because of world war i . it resumed construction in 1919 . the full route from chiswick to ashford was opened by george v on 30 may 1925 . following the construction of a bypass around basingstoke , the route of the a30 was changed on 1 april 1933 to run by sutton scotney and stockbridge , rejoining the original route at lopcombe corner east of salisbury . an alternative route , the a303 was created out of existing roads at the same time between micheldever station and the blackdown hills , that followed the basic course of hanning 's new direct road . the a30 remained the principal route between london and exeter , until the a303 became a trunk road in 1958 , receiving central government funding and relegating the parallel a30 to a local road . by the mid-20th century , large sections of the a30 were struggling to cope with the increasing demands of road traffic . in the mid-1960s , numerous councils complained that the secretary of state for transport , barbara castle , decided that improvements to the a38 from exeter to plymouth were of higher priority for funding than any work on the a30 . cornwall county council complained that the a30 through the county was narrow and twisted , and known as the '' stage coach trail '' . following world war ii , the ministry of transport planned a large-scale upgrade of the a30 across south-west england , with the eventual intention that most of the route would be at least dual-carriageway . the m3 motorway was planned as a replacement for the a30 between london and popham . following a public enquiry in 1966 , the line was fixed the following year . the work was completed as far as bagshot in 1971 , then to sunbury-on-thames in 1974 . in 1971 , the secretary of state for the environment , peter walker announced many upgrades of the a30 across devon and cornwall , identifying the section from okehampton to bodmin as a key area of improvement . the honiton dual-carriageway bypass opened in early december 1966 at a cost of £984,000 . the hayle bypass was first proposed in the late 1970s . it was controversial , and dora russell protested against its construction . it was completed in 1985 . , who preferred a route to the north of the town through agricultural land . the section between honiton and exeter in east devon was upgraded in 1999 to dual carriageway , giving quicker access to exeter international airport . this road was built under the dbfo ( dbfo ) scheme by the private consortium connect a30 , who receive a shadow toll from the government for each vehicle travelling along the road . archaeological investigations during the work found a roman cavalry garrison and later settlement at pomeroy wood . there were several protests by environmentalism during construction and the particular nature of the dbfo scheme , with a long-lasting occupation of sites on the planned route , focused around fairmile . swampy received press attention for his part in this protest . along with other controversial road plans , including the m3 completion over twyford down and the newbury bypass , the action led to a slowdown in road construction throughout britain . . 21st century . during 2006 one of the main bottlenecks on the road was removed when the merrymeet roundabout between okehampton and exeter near whiddon down was replaced with a grade-separated junction and dual carriageway . since the bodmin to indian queens project was completed in late 2007 , the new dual carriageway runs to the north of goss moor . the previous road has been converted to a cycle lane . in december 2012 it was announced that from temple to higher carblake would be upgraded to a dual carriageway . building started in early 2015 , and was completed in summer 2017 . this work made the a30 continuous dual carriageway between the m5 at exeter and carland cross in cornwall . on 17 january 2008 , british airways flight 38 crash-landed near the great south west road southeast of heathrow airport . in 2014 , the a30 was identified as one of several key routes in the government 's road investment strategy , turning it into a strategic corridor for southwest england . this includes further dual carriageway improvements east of honiton towards the blackdown hills and between chiverton cross and carland cross . . future proposals . . carland cross to chiverton cross . dualling of the stretch between carland cross and chiverton cross would establish a continuous dual carriageway from exeter right through to camborne . although this was shelved in 2006 as it was not considered a regional priority , it was included within the government 's road investment strategy in 2014 . the preferred route was announced in july 2017 , and on 6 february 2020 , the secretary of state for transport approved highways england 's application for a development consent order for the scheme to be constructed . work began in march 2020 with anticipated completion in 2023 for an estimated cost of £330 million , with a total of £20 million being provided by the european regional development fund . the scheme is included as a case study in the department for transport 's document road investment strategy 2 : 2020–2025 . the current route of the road passes near a world heritage site , a registered park and gardens and a number of sssi . the proposed scheme includes a 20-metre-wide 'green bridge ' over the new road to promote connectivity and biodiversity . . cultural references . john betjeman referred to the a30 in his poem '' meditation on the a30 '' . arthur boyt , focus of bbc documentary the man who eats badgers , described the a30 near bodmin moor as a good road for finding roadkill . in monty python 's flying circus , episode 34 : the cycling tour , mr pither laments '' as i lay down to the sound of the russian gentlemen practising their shooting , i realised i was in a bit of a pickle . my heart sank as i realised i should never see the okehampton by-pass again . '' , just before his impending execution in russia . . references . notes . . citations .