Mehmet Fuat Köprülü

biography . childhood and education . fuat köprülü was born in the city of istanbul in 1890 as köprülüzade mehmed fuad . his paternal grandfather , ahmet ziya bey , was the former ambassador to bucharest , and ahmet ziya bey was son of the former head of the imperial chancery of state ( divan-i humayun beylikcisi ) , köprülüzade arif bey . köprülüzade arif bey descended from the köprülüs of the 17th century , an exceptional dynasty of grand vizier whose reforms and conquests delayed the collapse of the ottoman empire . fuat köprülü was named after the first grand vizier of the köprülü era , köprülü mehmed pasha . fuat köprülü received his formal education at ayasofya rusdiyesi and mercan idadisi , both formed by ottoman authorities to modernize and reform the ottoman education system . in 1905 , while a student at mercan idadisi and only 15 years old , the magazine musavver terakki published three poems by fuat köprülü . by the time he entered the istanbul university school of law at the age of 17 , fuat köprülü already had an excellent command of french , persian and arabic . his first book , hayat-i fikriyye ( the intellectual life ) , was published when he was 19 years old . after three years of study , fuat köprülü abandoned the school of law because of the poor quality of instruction , saying that diploma was not worth the loss of time it would entail . the making of a nationalist intellectual . from 1910 to 1913 , fuat köprülü taught ottoman language and literature at various high schools in istanbul , including the prestigious galatasaray high school . fuat köprülü initially opposed the literary movement known as new language , which sought to simplify the turkish language , and wrote articles for the servet-i funun magazine using a literary style comprehensible only to the most learned of ottoman intellectuals . fuat köprülü changed his writing style and politics during the balkan wars . on february 6 , 1913 , the day after the bulgarian army attacked the ottoman lines in the outskirts of istanbul , turk yurdu magazine , a bastion of simplified turkish prose and turkish nationalism , published the first of many popular and patriotic essays by the 23-year-old fuat köprülü : “ umit ve azim ” ( hope and determination ) , “ hicret matemleri ” ( mourning migration ) , “ turk ’ un duasi ” ( a turk 's prayer ) , and “ turkluk , islamlik , osmanlilik ” ( turkishness , islamness , ottomanness ) . toward the end of 1913 , fuat köprülü published his seminal and widely lauded academic article , “ turk edebiyati tarihinde usul ” ( the method in turkish literary history ) , in bilgi mecmuasi . he argued that historians should not only research kings , viziers , commanders and scholars , but ordinary people as well . fuat köprülü believed that in addition to public and official records , historians should also study art , archeology , literature , language , folklore and oral traditions . his plea for historians to study social history was so unique and ahead of its time that the annales school in france , famous for embracing a similar approach in the journal annales d ’ histoire economique et sociale , did not emerge until 1929 , a full 16 years after the publication of '' turk edebiyati tarihinde usul '' . one month after the publication of the article , fuat köprülü was appointed professor of the history of turkish literature at istanbul university . he was only 23 years old . fuat köprülü continued his scholarly research and academic publications through the years , eventually culminating in his magnum opus , turk edebiyatinda ilk mutasavviflar ( first mystics in turkish literature ) , in 1918 , a book that focused on two turkish sufism and folk poets , ahmad yasawi and yunus emre . his turk edebiyati tarihi ( history of turkish literature ) , published in 1920 , was another seminal book that traced the history of turkish literature through millennia . in 1923 , at the age of 33 , fuat köprülü was appointed dean of the faculty of literature at istanbul university . in a short book entitled turkiye tarihi ( the history of turkey ) published that same year , he reviewed the history of the turks from ancient central asia to the modern ottoman empire , continuing the approach he pioneered in his study of turkish literature . relationship with mustafa kemal atatürk . fuat köprülü was appointed undersecretary to the minister of education at the request of president atatürk and remained in this post for eight months . in addition , fuat köprülü was appointed the director of the turcology institute , established on the orders of president atatürk , and began publishing turkiyat mecmuasi ( the turcology journal ) . international recognition . fuat köprülü won numerous international accolades for his scholarship as well . the soviet academy of sciences granted him a corresponding membership in 1925 . the heidelberg university honored him with an honorary degree in 1927 . the university of athens and the sorbonne university ( sorbonne ) granted him honorary doctorates in 1937 and 1939 , respectively . in fact , most european oriental societies made him a corresponding or honorary member , as did the american oriental society in 1947 . in 1933 , fuat köprülü became a professor ordinarius , a title denoting a professor of the highest rank in turkey . in 1935 , he delivered a series of influential lectures at the university of paris ( sorbonne ) on the origins of the ottoman empire . fuat köprülü argued that ethnic turks formed the ottoman empire using seljuk and ilhanid administrative traditions , and he discredited the prevailing view among western scholars that the ottoman empire was formed by a race of predominantly albanians , eastern romans and also slavic converts to islam . later political life . in 1935 , at the request of president atatürk , fuat köprülü joined the single party regime in the turkish parliament as a kars deputy , and was elected again in 1939 and 1943 . in 1945 , as calls to establish a multiparty democracy increased after world war ii , fuat köprülü joined the opposition and was dismissed from the ruling party along with adnan menderes and refik koraltan . in 1946 , menderes , koraltan and köprülü , together with celâl bayar , formed the democratic party . fuat köprülü became the minister of foreign affairs when the democratic party came to power in the 1950 elections , and he served in this post until 1955 . in 1953 , an agreement was reached between yugoslav president tito and fuat köprülü that promoted the emigration of albanians from yugoslavia to anatolia . concerning cyprus , he had a tolerant view of the dispute and supported the line of the turkish government , that the status quo of a british government on the island was favorable . fuat köprülü also briefly served as deputy prime minister in 1955 . on september 6 , 1957 , fuat köprülü resigned from the democratic party after disagreeing with the authoritarian tendencies displayed by the party leadership ; pelt , mogens ( 2014 ) , p.107 same year he joined liberty party . following the coup d'état in 1960 he was tried at the yassiada trials but found not guilty . . death . fuat köprülü died on june 28 , 1966 . works . a prolific scholar and public intellectual , fuat köprülü wrote over 1500 poems , essays , articles and books . a mehmet fuat koprulu scholarship programme was recently established to provide funds for turkish students to undertake phd study at the university of cambridge . his works include the following : yeni osmanlı tarih-i edebiyatı ( 1916 ) türk edebiyatında i̇lk mutasavvıflar ( 1918 ) nasrettin hoca ( 1918 ) türk edebiyatı tarihi ( 1920 ) türkiye tarihi ( 1923 ) bugünkü edebiyat ( 1924 ) azeri edebiyatına ait tetkikler ( 1926 ) milli edebiyat cereyanının i̇lk mübeşşirleri ve divan-ı türk-i basit ( 1928 ) türk saz şairleri antolojisi ( 1930–1940 , üç cilt ) türk dili ve edebiyatı hakkında araştırmalar ( 1934 ) anadolu ’ da türk dili ve edebiyatı ’ nın tekamülüne bir bakış ( 1934 ) osmanlı devleti ’ nin kuruluşu ( 1959 ) edebiyat araştırmaları külliyatı ( 1966 ) i̇slam ve türk hukuk tarihi araştırmaları ve vakıf müessesesi ( 1983 ) . translations . the origins of the ottoman empire , trans . gary leiser . suny press , 1992 . the seljuks of anatolia : their history and culture according to local muslim sources , trans . gary leiser . university of utah press , 1992 . islam in anatolia after the turkish invasion ( prologomena ) , trans . by gary leiser . university of utah press , 1993 . early mystics in turkish literature , trans . by gary leiser and robert dankoff . routledge , 2006 . references . biyografi.info - biography of mehmet fuat köprülü who is who - biography of mehmet fuat köprülü . external links .