2003 in literature

events . february 12 – an invitation from the first lady of the united states , laura bush , for some poets to attend a conference at the white house is postponed when one of them , sam hamill , organizes a '' poets against the war '' group for poetry readings across the united states on the same date . february 15 – anti-war protests occur in london . they are later used as the setting for ian mcewan 's 2005 novel saturday . march – the university of mosul library is damaged and looted during the iraq war , but many volumes are removed for protection by staff . april 14 – the iraq national library and archive is burned down during the battle of baghdad . april – nicholas hytner succeeds sir trevor nunn as artistic director of london 's royal national theatre . november 7 – unesco places among the masterpieces of the oral and intangible heritage of humanity wayang kulit , a shadow puppet theatre and best known of the indonesian wayang . indonesian wayang inscribed in 2003 on the representative list of the intangible cultural heritage of humanity . . new books . fiction . peter ackroyd – the clerkenwell tales chimamanda ngozi adichie – purple hibiscus mitch albom – the five people you meet in heaven monica ali – brick lane martin amis – yellow dog margaret atwood – oryx and crake paul auster – oracle night max barry – jennifer government greg bear – darwin 's children frédéric beigbeder – windows on the world hilari bell – fall of a kingdom thomas berger – best friends giles blunt – the delicate storm frank brennan – tampering with asylum dan brown – the da vinci code angus peter campbell – an oidhche mus do sheol sinn lars saabye christensen – maskeblomstfamilien paulo coelho – eleven minutes j . m . coetzee – elizabeth costello deborah joy corey – the skating pond bernard cornwell sharpe 's havoc sharpe 's christmas heretic douglas coupland – hey nostradamus ! robert crais – the last detective julie e . czerneda – space , inc . jeffery deaver – twisted don delillo – cosmopolis cory doctorow a place so foreign and eight more down and out in the magic kingdom gerard donovan – schopenhauer 's telescope fernanda eberstadt – the furies rodrigo fresán – jardines de kensington cornelia funke – inkheart anna gavalda – i wish someone were waiting for me somewhere ( translation ) william gibson – pattern recognition newt gingrich and william r . forstchen – gettysburg : a novel of the civil war jean-christophe grangé – l'empire des loups john grisham – the king of torts margaret peterson haddix – among the barons mark haddon – the curious incident of the dog in the night-time pete hamill – forever joanne harris – holy fools victor heck – the asylum vol 2 – the violent ward vol 3 – the quiet ward jennifer haigh – mrs . kimble zoë heller – notes on a scandal khaled hosseini – the kite runner michel houellebecq – lanzarote alan judd – the kaiser 's last kiss n . m . kelby – theater of the stars : a novel of physics and memory thomas keneally – the tyrant 's novel greg keyes – the final prophecy stephen king – wolves of the calla dean r . koontz – the face jhumpa lahiri – the namesake dennis lehane – shutter island jonathan lethem – the fortress of solitude james luceno – the unifying force steve martini – the arraignment magnus mills – the scheme for full employment paul murray – an evening of long goodbyes julie myerson – something might happen andrew neiderman – the baby squad audrey niffenegger – the time traveler 's wife garth nix – mister monday chuck palahniuk – diary christopher paolini – eragon carolyn parkhurst – the dogs of babel per petterson – out stealing horses ( ut og stjæle hester ) dbc pierre – vernon god little terry pratchett monstrous regiment the wee free men jean raspail – les royaumes de borée matthew reilly – scarecrow nina revoyr – southland tom robbins – villa incognito j . jill robinson – residual desire nick sagan – idlewild matthew sharpe – the sleeping father michael slade – bed of nails wilbur smith – blue horizon olen steinhauer – the bridge of sighs neal stephenson – quicksilver ( vol . i of the baroque cycle ) matthew stover – shatterpoint anthony swofford – jarhead miguel sousa tavares – equador adam thirlwell – politics akira toriyama ( 鳥山 明 ) – toccio the angel ( tenshi no tocchio ) sergio troncoso – the nature of truth andrew vachss – the getaway man mario vargas llosa – the way to paradise ( el paraíso en la otra esquina ) jo walton – tooth and claw irvine welsh – porno tobias wolff – old school roger zelazny – manna from heaven ( short stories ) . children and young people . atsuko asano – no . 6 ( あさの あつこ ) cressida cowell – how to train your dragon ( first in the eponymous series of 16 books ) elizabeth laird – the garbage king jim murphy – an american plague jenny nimmo – charlie bone and the time twister tyne o'connell – pulling princes j . k . rowling – harry potter and the order of the phoenix lemony snicket – the slippery slope dugald steer ( with helen ward , wayne anderson , etc . ) – dragonology : the complete book of dragons ann turnbull – no shame , no fear jacqueline wilson – girls in tears ( fourth in the girls series of four books ) kay winters ( with barry moser ) – voices of ancient egypt yang hongying ( 楊紅櫻 ) – four troublemakers ( 四个调皮蛋 , first in the mo 's mischief – 淘气包马小跳 – series of eight books ) . drama . jordi galceran – el mètode grönholm ( the grönholm method ) richard greenberg – the violet hour david hare – the permanent way kwame kwei-armah – elmina 's kitchen lynn nottage – intimate apparel mark o'rowe – crestfall abhi subedi – agniko katha . poetry . lavinia greenlaw – minsk pope john paul ii – roman triptych . meditations dean kalimniou – kipos esokleistos . non–fiction . banglapedia – national encyclopedia of bangladesh neal bascomb – higher : a historic race to the sky and the making of a city patricia brown – a league of my own : memoir of a pitcher for the all-american girls andrea curtis – into the blue goodreads , into the blue , book review , retrieved 11/27/2012 gerina dunwich – dunwich 's guide to gemstone sorcery marc ferro – le livre noir du colonialisme john fowles – the journals – volume 1 anna funder – stasiland mattias gardell – gods of the blood a . c . grayling – what is good ? : the search for the best way to live erik larson – the devil in the white city bethany mclean – the smartest guys in the room don miller – blue like jazz michael moore – dude , where 's my country ? azar nafisi – reading lolita in tehran alanna nash – the colonel : the extraordinary story of colonel tom parker and elvis presley daniel okrent – great fortune : the epic of rockefeller center chuck palahniuk – fugitives and refugees : a walk in portland , oregon rudy ruiz – ¡adelante ! : una guía personal del éxito para usted y su familia ( a guide for success for immigrants ) jane smiley – charles dickens clark ashton smith – selected letters of clark ashton smith david starkey – six wives : the queens of henry viii lynne mctaggart – the field : the quest for the secret force of the universe amy tan – the opposite of fate : a book of musings lynne truss – eats , shoots & leaves penny wolfson – moonrise . deaths . january 5 – jean kerr , american author and playwright ( born 1923 ) january 21 – paul haines , american-born canadian poet and songwriter ( born 1933 ) february 16 – aleksandar tišma , serbian novelist ( born 1924 ) february 26 – quentin keynes , english explorer , writer and filmmaker ( born 1921 ) march 11 – brian cleeve , english-born irish writer and broadcaster ( born 1921 ) march 12 – howard fast , american novelist ( born 1914 ) march 14 – lucian boz , romanian and australian literary critic ( born 1908 ) april 3 – michael kelly , american journalist ( born 1957 ) april 7 – cecile de brunhoff , french children 's writer ( born 1903 ) june 21 george axelrod , american dramatist and screenwriter ( born 1922 ) leon uris , american novelist ( born 1924 ) july 6 – kathleen raine , english poet , scholar , and translator ( born 1908 ) july 10 – winston graham , english novelist ( born 1908 ) july 14 – éva janikovszky , hungarian novelist and children 's writer ( born 1926 ) july 15 – roberto bolaño , chilean-born fiction writer ( born 1953 ) july 16 – carol shields , american-born canadian novelist ( breast cancer , born 1935 ) september 3 – alan dugan , american poet ( born 1923 ) november 9 – alan davidson , northern irish historian and food writer ( born 1924 ) december 12 – fadwa toukan , palestinian poet ( born 1917 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : j . m . coetzee . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : nicholas angel , drown them in the sea c . j . dennis prize for poetry : emma lew , anything the landlord touches kenneth slessor prize for poetry : jill jones , screens jets heaven miles franklin award : alex miller , journey to the stone country . canada . giller prize : m . g . vassanji – the in-between world of vikram lall see 2003 governor general 's awards for a complete list of the winners of those awards . griffin poetry prize : margaret avison , concrete and wild carrot and paul muldoon , moy sand and gravel edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : alison watt , the last island faculty of arts , 2003 , edna staebler award , wilfrid laurier university , previous winners , alison watt , retrieved 11/27/2012 . united kingdom . booker prize : dbc pierre , vernon god little caine prize for african writing : yvonne adhiambo owuor , '' weight of whispers '' carnegie medal for children 's literature : jennifer donnelly , a gathering light cholmondeley award : ciarán carson , michael donaghy , lavinia greenlaw , jackie kay eric gregory award : jen hadfield , zoe brigley , paul batchelor , olivia cole , sasha dugdale , anna woodford james tait black memorial prize for biography : janet browne , charles darwin : volume 2 – the power of place james tait black memorial prize for fiction : andrew o'hagan , personality orange prize for fiction : valerie martin , property queen 's gold medal for poetry : u . a . fanthorpe 2003 whitbread awards : mark haddon , the curious incident of the dog in the night-time : a novel . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : david shumate , high water mark american academy of arts and letters gold medals poetry : w . s . merwin bernard f . connors prize for poetry : julie sheehan , '' brown-headed cow birds '' bollingen prize for poetry : adrienne rich brittingham prize in poetry : brian teare , the room where i was born compton crook award : patricia bray , devlin 's luck frost medal : lawrence ferlinghetti hugo award : robert j . sawyer , hominids lambda literary awards : multiple categories ; see 2003 lambda literary awards national book award for fiction : shirley hazzard , the great fire national book critics circle award : edward p . jones , the known world newbery medal for children 's literature : avi , crispin : the cross of lead pen/faulkner award for fiction : sabina murray , the caprices pulitzer prize for fiction : jeffrey eugenides , middlesex wallace stevens award : richard wilbur whiting awards : : fiction : courtney angela brkic ( fiction/nonfiction ) , alexander chee , agymah kamau , ann pancake , lewis robinson , jess row : nonfiction : christopher cokinos , trudy dittmar : plays : sarah ruhl : poetry : major jackson . other . camões prize : rubem fonseca international dublin literary award : orhan pamuk my name is red premio nadal : andrés trapiello , los amigos del crimen perfecto saarc literary award : tissa abeysekara , laxman gaikwad . see also . 2003 in comics 2003 in australian literature . references .