Sandia National Laboratories

legal issues . on february 13 , 2007 , a new mexico state court found sandia corporation liable for 4.7 million in damages for the firing of a former network security analyst , shawn carpenter , who had reported to his supervisors that hundreds of military installations and defense contractors ' networks were compromised and sensitive information was being stolen including hundreds of sensitive lockheed documents on the mars reconnaissance orbiter project . when his supervisors told him to drop the investigation and do nothing with the information , he went to intelligence officials in the united states army and later the federal bureau of investigation to address the national security breaches . when sandia managers discovered his actions months later , they revoked his security clearance and fired him . scott sandlin , '' analyst , sandia settle suit '' , albuquerque journal , 14 october 2007 in 2014 an investigation determined sandia corp . used lab operations funds to pay for lobbying related to the renewal of its 2 billion contract to operate the lab . sandia corp . and its parent company , lockheed martin , agreed to pay a 4.8 million fine . coleman , michael . ( august 24 , 2015 ) . '' feds fine sandia for improper lobbying '' albuquerque journal website retrieved january 27 , 2017 . . technical areas . snl/nm consists of five technical areas ( ta ) and several additional test areas . each ta has its own distinctive operations ; however , the operations of some groups at sandia may span more than one ta , with one part of a team working on a problem from one angle , and another subset of the same team located in a different building or area working with other specialized equipment . a description of each area is given below . ta-i operations are dedicated primarily to three activities the design , research , and development of weapon systems ; limited production of weapon system components ; and energy programs . ta-i facilities include the main library and offices , laboratory , and shops used by administrative and technical staff . ta-ii is a facility that was established in 1948 for the assembly of chemical high explosive main charges for nuclear weapons and later for production scale assembly of nuclear weapons . activities in ta-ii include the decontamination , decommissioning , and remediation of facilities and landfills used in past research and development activities . remediation of the classified waste landfill which started in march 1998 , neared completion in fy2000 . a testing facility , the explosive component facility , integrates many of the previous ta-ii test activities as well as some testing activities previously performed in other remote test areas . the access delay technology test facility is also located in ta-ii . ta-iii is adjacent to and south of ta-v both are approximately seven miles ( 11 & nbsp ; km ) south of ta-i . ta-iii facilities include extensive design-test facilities such as rocket sled tracks , centrifuges and a radiant heat facility . other facilities in ta-iii include a paper destructor , the melting and solidification laboratory and the radioactive and mixed waste management facility ( rmwmf ) . rmwmf serves as central processing facility for packaging and storage of low-level and mixed waste . the remediation of the chemical waste landfill , which started in september 1998 , is an ongoing activity in ta-iii . ta-iv , located approximately 1/2 mile ( 1 & nbsp ; km ) south of ta-i , consists of several inertial-confinement fusion research and pulsed power research facilities , including the high energy radiation megavolt electron source ( hermes-iii ) , the z facility , the short pulsed high intensity nanosecond x-radiator ( sphinx ) facility , and the saturn accelerator . ta-iv also hosts some computer science and cognition research . ta-v contains two research reactor facilities , an intense gamma irradiation facility ( using cobalt and caesium sources ) , and the hot cell facility . snl/nm also has test areas outside of the five technical areas listed above . these test areas , collectively known as coyote test field , are located southeast of ta-iii and/or in the canyons on the west side of the manzanita mountains . facilities in the coyote canyon test field include the solar tower facility ( 34.9623 n , 106.5097 w ) , the lurance canyon burn site and the aerial cable facility . open-source software . in the 1970s , the sandia , los alamos , air force weapons laboratory technical exchange committee initiated the development of the slatec library of mathematical and statistical routines , written in fortran 77 . today , sandia national laboratories is home to several open-source software projects : fclib ( feature characterization library ) is a library for the identification and manipulation of coherent regions or structures from spatio-temporal data . fclib focuses on providing data structures that are '' feature-aware '' and support feature-based analysis . it is written in c and developed under a '' bsd-like '' license . lammps ( large-scale atomic/molecular massively parallel simulator ) is a molecular dynamics library that can be used to model parallel atomic/subatomic processes at large scale . it is produced under the gnu general public license ( gpl ) and distributed on the sandia national laboratories website as well as sourceforge . libvmi is a library for simplifying the reading and writing of memory in running virtual machines , a technique known as virtual machine introspection . it is licensed under the gnu lesser general public license . mapreduce-mpi library is an implementation of mapreduce for distributed-memory parallel machines , utilizing the message passing interface ( mpi ) for communication . it is developed under a modified bsd licenses . multithreaded graph library ( mtgl ) is a collection of graph-based algorithms designed to take advantage of parallel , shared-memory architectures such as the cray xmt , symmetric multiprocessor ( smp ) machines , and multi-core workstations . it is developed under a bsd license . paraview is a cross-platform application for performing data analysis and visualization . it is a collaborative effort , developed by sandia national laboratories , los alamos national laboratories , and the united states army research laboratory , and funded by the advanced simulation and computing program . it is developed under a bsd license . pyomo is a python-based optimization algebraic modeling language which supports most commercial and open-source solver engines . soccoro , a collaborative effort with wake forest and vanderbilt universities , is object-oriented software for performing electronic-structure calculations based on density-functional theory . it utilizes libraries such as mpi , blas , and lapack and is developed under the gnu general public license . titan informatics toolkit is a collection of cross-platform libraries for ingesting , analyzing , and displaying scientific and informatics data . it is a collaborative effort with kitware , and uses various open-source components such as the boost c++ libraries . it is developed under a new bsd license . trilinos is an object-oriented library for building scalable scientific and engineering applications , with a focus on linear algebra techniques . most trilinos packages are licensed under a modified bsd license . xyce is an open source , spice-compatible , high-performance analog circuit simulator , capable of solving extremely large circuit problems . in addition , sandia national laboratories collaborates with kitware , inc . in developing the vtk ( vtk ) , a cross-platform graphics and visualization software suite . this collaboration has focused on enhancing the information visualization capabilities of vtk and has in turn fed back into other projects such as paraview and titan . . self-guided bullet . on january 30 , 2012 , sandia announced that it successfully test-fired a self-guided dart that can hit targets at . the dart is long , has its center of gravity at the nose , and is made to be fired from a small-caliber smoothbore gun . it is kept straight in flight by four electromagnetism actuated fins encased in a plastic puller sabot that fall off when the dart leaves the bore . the dart can not be fired from conventional rifled barrels because the gyroscopic stability provided by rifling grooves for regular bullets would prevent the self-guided bullet from reliably turning towards a target when in flight , so fins are responsible for stabilizing rather than spinning . a laser designator marks a target , which is tracked by the dart 's optical sensor and 8-bit cpu . the guided projectile is kept cheap because it does not need an inertial measurement unit , since its small size allows it to make the fast corrections necessary without the aid of an imu . the natural body frequency of the bullet is about 30 hertz , so corrections can be made 30 times per second in flight . muzzle velocity with commercial gunpowder is ( mach 2.1 ) , but military customized gunpowder can increase its speed and range . computer modeling shows that a standard bullet would miss a target at by , while an equivalent guided bullet would hit within . accuracy increases as distances get longer , since the bullet 's motions settle more the longer it is in flight . laser-guided bullets : sub-moa at over a mile - guns.com , 2 february 2012 the first self guided bullet - thefirearmblog.com , 31 january 2012 self-guided bullet could hit laser-marked targets from a mile away - gizmag.com , 31 january 2012