United States abortion-rights movement

overview . abortion-rights advocates argue that whether or not a pregnant woman continues with a pregnancy should be her personal choice , as it involves her body , personal health , and future . they also argue that the availability of legal abortions reduces the exposure of women to the risks associated with illegal abortions . more broadly , abortion-rights advocates frame their arguments in terms of individual liberty , reproductive freedom , and reproductive rights . the first of these terms was widely used to describe many of the political movements of the 19th and 20th centuries ( such as in the abolition of slavery in europe and the united states , and in the spread of popular democracy ) whereas the latter terms derive from changing perspectives on sexual freedoms and bodily integrity . abortion-rights supporters rarely consider themselves '' pro-abortion '' , because they consider termination of a pregnancy as a bodily autonomy issue , and find forced abortion to be as legally and morally indefensible as the outlawing of abortion . indeed , some who support abortion rights consider themselves opposed to some or all abortions on a moral basis , but believe that abortions would happen in any case and that legal abortion under medically controlled conditions is preferable to illegal back-alley abortion without proper medical supervision . such people believe the death rate of women due to such procedures in areas where abortions are only available outside of the medical establishment is unacceptable . some who argue from a philosophical viewpoint believe that an embryo has no rights as it is only a potential and not an actual person and that it should not have rights that override those of the pregnant woman at least until it is viable . many abortion-rights campaigners also note that some anti-abortion activists also oppose practices that correlate with less demand for abortion , namely sex education and the ready availability of contraception . proponents of this argument point to cases of areas with limited sex education and contraceptive access that have high abortion rates , either legal or illegal . some women also travel to another jurisdiction or country where they may obtain an abortion . for example , a large number of irish women would visit the united kingdom for abortions , as would belgium women who travelled to france before belgium legalized abortion . similarly , women would travel to the netherlands when it became legal to have abortions there in the 1970s . some people who support abortion rights see abortion as a last resort and focus on situations where they feel abortion is a necessary option . among these situations are those where the woman was raped , her health or life ( or that of the fetus ) is at risk , contraception was used but failed , the fetus has acute congenital disorder and defects , incest , financial constraints , overpopulation , or she feels unable to raise a child . one common reason women give for terminating unintended pregnancies is that having a baby would prevent them from achieving goals such as pursuing an education . some abortion-rights moderates , who would otherwise be willing to accept certain restrictions on abortion , feel that political pragmatism compels them to oppose any such restrictions , as they could be used to form a slippery slope against all abortions . on the other hand , even some abortion rights advocates feel uncomfortable with the use of abortion for sex-selection , as is practiced in some countries , such as india . history . prior to 1973 , abortion rights in the united states were not seen as a constitutional issue . abortion was seen as a purely state matter , all of which had some type of restrictions . the first legal restrictions on abortion appeared in the 1820s , forbidding abortion after the fourth month of pregnancy . a number of early feminism expressed decided skepticism about outlawing abortion . they disliked abortion but thought anti-abortion laws did not apply “ the proper remedies , ” according to one nineteenth-century women ’ s rights pioneer . by 1900 , legislators at the urgings of the american medical association ( ama ) had enacted laws banning abortion in most u.s . states . the ama played a vital role in stigmatizing abortions by using their status and power to create a moral stance against abortion . the ama viewed abortion providers as unwanted healthcare competitors . due to the high maternal morbidity and mortality rates caused by back alley abortions , physicians , nurses , and social workers pushed for legalization of abortion from a pro-public health perspective . support for abortion rights went beyond feminists and medical professions . the broad support for legalizing abortion in the 1960s also derived from certain religious leaders . for example , there were 1,400 clergy operating on the east coast for the clergy consultation service on abortion—an underground network that connected women seeking abortions to doctors—during the 1960s . as the historian christine stansell explained , many religious leaders came to approach the abortion rights argument from a position of individual conscience instead of from dogma by witnessing the '' strains unwanted pregnancies put on members of their congregations '' . christine stansell , the feminist promise : 1792 to the present ( new york : modern library , 2010 ) , 317 . in its landmark 1973 case , roe v . wade where a woman challenged the texas laws criminal law abortion , the u.s . supreme court reached two important conclusions : that state abortion laws are subject to the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment to the united states constitution ; and that the procurement of an abortion was a constitutional right during the first and second trimesters of a pregnancy based on the constitutional right to privacy , but that the state 's interest in protecting '' potential life '' prevailed in the third trimester unless the woman 's health was at risk . in subsequent rulings , the court rejected the trimester framework altogether in favor of a cutoff at the point of fetal viability ( cf . planned parenthood v . casey ) . abortion-rights groups are active in all american states and at the federal level , campaigning for legal abortion and against the reimposition of anti-abortion laws , with varying degrees of success . only a few states allow abortion without limitation or regulation , but most do allow various limited forms of abortion . in the wake of extreme abortion restrictions in states like georgia , alabama , missouri and ohio , transgender , intersex and other gender-nonconforming people felt forgotten in this movement . abortion is one of the most common medical interventions undergone by women aged 15–44 . in the usa childbirth carries a risk of death about 14 times higher than abortion . in the united states , the democratic party 's platform endorses the abortion-rights position , stating that abortion should be '' safe and legal '' . not all democrats agree with the platform , however , and there is a small anti-abortion faction within the party , expressed in such groups as democrats for life of america . similarly , there is a small abortion-rights faction within the republican party . the libertarian party platform holds '' that government should be kept out of the matter '' . plank 1.4 abortion , at libertarian party website . . organizations and individuals . the abortion rights movement includes a variety of organizations , with no single centralized decision-making body . many more individuals who are not members of these organizations also support their views and arguments . planned parenthood , naral pro-choice america , the national abortion federation , the national organization for women , and the american civil liberties union are the leading abortion-rights advocacy and lobbying groups in the united states . most major feminist organizations also support abortion-rights positions , as do the american medical association , the american congress of obstetricians and gynecologists , and pro-abortion rights physicians such as eugene gu and warren hern who have fought political opposition from anti-abortion senator marsha blackburn . faith-based groups that advocate for abortion rights include notably the religious coalition for reproductive choice and catholics for choice .