Incidence (epidemiology)

incidence proportion . incidence proportion ( ip ) , also known as cumulative incidence , is defined as the probability that a particular event , such as occurrence of a particular disease , has occurred before a given time . it is calculated dividing the number of new cases during a given period by the number of subjects at risk in the population initially at risk at the beginning of the study . where the period of time considered is an entire lifetime , the incidence proportion is called lifetime risk . for example , if a population initially contains 1,000 non-diseased persons and 28 develop a condition over two years of observation , the incidence proportion is 28 cases per 1,000 persons per two years , i.e . 2.8 % per two years . ip is related to incidence rate ( ir ) and duration of exposure ( d ) as follows : : ip ( t ) 1-e^\ , . . incidence rate . the incidence rate is a measure of the frequency with which a disease or other incident occurs over a specified time period . it is also known as the incidence density rate or person-time incidence rate , when the denominator is the combined person-time of the population at risk ( the sum of the time duration of exposure across all persons exposed ) . in the same example as above , the incidence rate is 14 cases per 1000 person-years , because the incidence proportion ( 28 per 1,000 ) is divided by the number of years ( two ) . using person-time rather than just time handles situations where the amount of observation time differs between people , or when the population at risk varies with time . use of this measure implies the assumption that the incidence rate is constant over different periods of time , such that for an incidence rate of 14 per 1000 persons-years , 14 cases would be expected for 1000 persons observed for 1 year or 50 persons observed for 20 years . when this assumption is substantially violated , such as in describing survival after diagnosis of metastatic cancer , it may be more useful to present incidence data in a plot of cumulative incidence , over time , taking into account loss to follow-up , using a kaplan-meier plot . incidence vs . prevalence . incidence should not be confused with prevalence , which is the proportion of cases in the population at a given time rather than rate of occurrence of new cases . thus , incidence conveys information about the risk of contracting the disease , whereas prevalence indicates how widespread the disease is . prevalence is the proportion of the total number of cases to the total population and is more a measure of the burden of the disease on society with no regard to time at risk or when subjects may have been exposed to a possible risk factor . prevalence can also be measured with respect to a specific subgroup of a population ( see : denominator data ) . incidence is usually more useful than prevalence in understanding the disease etiology : for example , if the incidence rate of a disease in a population increases , then there is a risk factor that promotes the incidence . for example , consider a disease that takes a long time to cure and was widespread in 2002 but dissipated in 2003 . this disease will have both high incidence and high prevalence in 2002 , but in 2003 it will have a low incidence yet will continue to have a high prevalence ( because it takes a long time to cure , so the fraction of individuals that are affected remains high ) . in contrast , a disease that has a short duration may have a low prevalence and a high incidence . when the incidence is approximately constant for the duration of the disease , prevalence is approximately the product of disease incidence and average disease duration , so prevalence incidence × duration . the importance of this equation is in the relation between prevalence and incidence ; for example , when the incidence increases , then the prevalence must also increase . note that this relation does not hold for age-specific prevalence and incidence , where the relation becomes more complicated . brinks r ( 2011 ) '' a new method for deriving incidence rates from prevalence data and its application to dementia in germany '' , . example . consider the following example . say you are looking at a sample population of 225 people , and want to determine the incidence rate of developing hiv over a 10-year period : at the beginning of the study ( t 0 ) you find 25 cases of existing hiv . these people are not counted as they can not develop hiv a second time . a follow-up at 5 years ( t 5 years ) finds 20 new cases of hiv . a second follow-up at the end of the study ( t 10 years ) finds 30 new cases . if you were to measure prevalence you would simply take the total number of cases ( 25 + 20 + 30 75 ) and divide by your sample population ( 225 ) . so prevalence would be 75/225 0.33 or 33 % ( by the end of the study ) . this tells you how widespread hiv is in your sample population , but little about the actual risk of developing hiv for any person over a coming year . to measure incidence you must take into account how many years each person contributed to the study , and when they developed hiv . when it is not known exactly when a person develops the disease in question , epidemiologists frequently use the actuarial method , and assume it was developed at a half-way point between follow-ups . citation needed in this calculation : at 5 yrs you found 20 new cases , so you assume they developed hiv at 2.5 years , thus contributing ( 20 2.5 ) 50 person-years of disease-free life . at 10 years you found 30 new cases . these people did not have hiv at 5 years , but did at 10 , so you assume they were infected at 7.5 years , thus contributing ( 30 7.5 ) 225 person-years of disease-free life . that is a total of ( 225 + 50 ) 275 person years so far . you also want to account for the 150 people who never had or developed hiv over the 10-year period , ( 150 10 ) contributing 1500 person-years of disease-free life . that is a total of ( 1500 + 275 ) 1775 person-years of life . now take the 50 new cases of hiv , and divide by 1775 to get 0.028 , or 28 cases of hiv per 1000 population , per year . in other words , if you were to follow 1000 people for one year , you would see 28 new cases of hiv . this is a much more accurate measure of risk than prevalence . see also . attack rate attributable risk denominator data rate ratio . references . external links . calculation of standardized incidence rate pamcomp person-years analysis and computation programme for calculating standardized incidence rates ( sirs )