Black bloc

history . precursors . in february 1967 , the anarchist group black mask marched on wall street in new york city wearing black clothes and balaclavas . this was the first instance of a social movement in the western world utilizing masks and black dress , which were used not for purposes of disguise but to signify a militant identity . in this regard , black mask anticipated and may have indirectly influenced the black bloc tactic . . west german origins . this tactic was developed in response to increased use of police force following the 1977 brokdorf demonstration . on 1 may 1987 , demonstrators in berlin-kreuzberg were confronted by west berlin police . after this , thousands of people attacked the police with rocks , bottles and molotov cocktails . the riots at the may day in kreuzberg became famous after the police had to completely pull out of the '' so 36 '' neighborhood in kreuzberg for several hours , and rioters looted shops together with residents . when ronald reagan came to berlin in june 1987 , he was met by around 50,000 demonstrators protesting against his cold war policies . this included a black bloc of 3,000 people . in november 1987 , the residents were joined by thousands of other protesters and fortified their squat , built barricades in the streets and defended themselves against the police for nearly 24 hours . after this the city authorities legalised the squatters residence . on 1 may 1988 , radical left groups organised a may day demonstration through berlin-kreuzberg , ending in riots even heavier than the year before . the police were attacked with steel balls fired by slingshots , stones , fireworks and molotov cocktails . on 2 may , headline of the berlin newspaper bz was '' beirut ? ? nein , das ist berlin ! '' ( beirut ? ? no , it 's berlin ! ) . the riots finally became a tradition in berlin-kreuzberg and have recurred every 1 may since , but never as fatally as in the first two years . when the world bank and the international monetary fund met in berlin in 1988 , the autonomen hosted an international gathering of anti-capitalist activists . numbering around 80,000 , the protesters greatly outnumbered the police . officials tried to maintain control by banning all demonstrations and attacking public assemblies . nevertheless , there were riots and upmarket shopping areas were destroyed . . unified germany . in the period after the fall of the berlin wall , the german black bloc movement continued traditional riots such as may day in berlin-kreuzberg , but with decreasing intensity . their main focus became the struggle against the recurring popularity of neo-nazism in germany . the '' turn '' came in june 2007 , during the 33rd g8 summit . a black bloc of 2,000 people built barricades , set cars alight and attacked the police during a mass demonstration in rostock . 400 police officers were injured , as well as about 500 demonstrators and activists . according to the german verfassungsschutz , the weeks of organisation before the demonstration and the riots themselves amounted to a revival for the militant left in germany . since the '' battle of rostock '' , traditional '' may day riots '' after demonstrations every 1 may in berlin , and since 2008 also in hamburg , became more intense . . international development . . north america . the first prominent use of the tactic in united states of america occurred at the pentagon , in washington , d.c . on 17 october 1988 , although anarchists had been using similar tactics in small numbers in preceding years in places like san francisco , culminating with several hundred anarchists in black smashing glass store fronts and attacking vehicles in the berkeley anarchist riot of 1989 . in d.c . , over one thousand demonstrators—a small number consisting of a black bloc—called for the end to u.s . support for the right wing death squads in el salvador . see the black bloc papers , page 35 , breaking glass press , shawnee mission , ks , 2010 a black bloc caused damage to property of gap , starbucks , old navy , and other retail locations in downtown seattle during the 1999 anti-wto demonstrations . they were a common feature of subsequent anti-globalization protests . in the years after the end of the vietnam war , protest in the us came to assume more legalistic , orderly forms , and was increasingly dominated by the middle-class . doug mcadam , et al . '' there will be fighting in the streets : the distorting lens of social movement theory '' , mobilization : an international journal 10 ( 1 ) : 1-18 . this corresponded with the rise of a highly effective police strategy of crowd control called '' negotiated management . '' mcphail , clark , david schweingruber and john mccarthy . 1998 . '' policing protest in the united states : 1960-1995 '' , pp . 49-69 , in della porta , donatella and herbert reiter ( eds ) , policing protest : the control of mass demonstrations in western democracies . minneapolis : university of minnesota press . many social scientists have noted the '' institutionalization of movements '' in this period . doug mcadam , et al . '' there will be fighting in the streets : the distorting lens of social movement theory '' , mobilization : an international journal 10 ( 1 ) : 1-18 . these currents largely constrained disruptive protest until 1999 . in an unprecedented success for post-vietnam era civil disobedience , the wto ministerial conference opening ceremonies were shut down completely , host city seattle declared a state of emergency for nearly a week , multilateral trade negotiations between the wealthy and developing nations collapsed , and all of this was done without fatalities . this occurred in the midst of mass rioting which had been set off by militant anarchists , some of them in a black bloc formation . '' day 2- november 30 , 1999 '' , wto history project , university of washington . '' seattle declares civil emergency '' , bbc news , 1 december 1999 . john vidal , '' the real battle of seattle '' , the guardian , 5 december 1999 . in the lead up to the shutdown , local group seattle anarchist response ( sar ) had circulated ward churchill 's text pacifism as pathology freely among protesters . sar actively promoted among the rank-and-file of the direct action network ( dan ) and criticized ngo hegemony of the protests . they often found an enthusiastic response . seattle anarchist response bulletin , 15 november 1999 . the call for the seattle protest had originally come from peoples ' global action ( a network co-founded by the ezln ) which supported diversity of tactics and a highly flexible definition of nonviolence . geov parrish , '' beyond gandhi '' , the seattle weekly , 17 november 1999 . in the aftermath of the shutdown , however , various ngo spokespeople associated with seattle dan claimed that the riotous aspect of the wto protests was counterproductive and undemocratic . they also asserted that it was only an insignificantly small group from eugene , oregon that engaged in property destruction . medea benjamin told the new york times that '' these anarchists should have been arrested , '' alexander cockburn and our readers , '' wto : workers of the world united ? '' the nation , 14 february 2000 . timothy egan , '' black masks lead to pointed fingers in seattle '' , the new york times , 2 december 1999 . while lori wallach of public citizen stated that she had instructed teamsters to assault black bloc participants . '' lori 's war '' , foreign policy , spring 2000 , p . 49 . barbara ehrenreich decried the ngo leaders as '' hypocrites , '' and wrote that nonviolent activists ought to be '' treating the young rock-throwers like sisters and brothers in the struggle . '' she also criticized the dominant nonviolent paradigm as '' absurdly ritualized . '' barbara ehrenreich , '' anarkids and hyprocrites '' , the progressive , june 2000 . the solution to ehrenreich 's impasse was the growing acceptance of black bloc tactics in the anti-globalization movement . '' hallmarks of people 's global action ( amended at the 3rd pga conference at cochamamba , 2001 ) '' . cindy milstein , '' something did start in quebec city : north america 's revolutionary anti-capitalist movement '' , institute for social ecology , 13 june 2001 . during protests against the 2010 g20 summit in toronto , a black bloc riot damaged a number of retail locations including an urban outfitters , american apparel , adidas store , starbucks and many banking establishments . on the day of president donald trump 's inauguration , black bloc groups were present among other protests in washington , d.c . and other places . the groups engaged in vandalism , rioting , and violence . at least 217 were arrested and six police officers sustained minor injuries , and at least one other person was injured . in february 2017 , an event at the university of california , berkeley by commentator milo yiannopoulos was cancelled by college administrators after protestors of a black bloc broke windows , shot fireworks , and caused a light fixture to catch fire . the cancellation of the event brought mainstream attention to anarchism and black bloc tactics , and led to a larger conversation about the role of violence in protest movements . tactics of a black bloc primarily include vandalism of private property , rioting , and demonstrating without a permit . tactics can also include use of defensive measures such as misleading the authorities , assisting in the escape of people arrested by the police ( '' un-arrests '' or '' de-arrests '' ) , administering first aid to persons affected by tear gas , rubber bullets and other riot control measures in areas where protesters are barred from entering , building barricades , resisting the police , and practicing jail solidarity . property destruction carried out by black blocs tends to have symbolic significance : common targets include banks , institutional buildings , outlets for multinational corporations , gasoline stations , and video-surveillance cameras . there may be several blocs within a particular protest , with different aims and tactics . k , 2001 , '' being black block '' in on fire : the battle of genoa and the anti-capitalist movement , p . 31 , one off press . as an ad hoc group , blocs often share no universally common set of principles or beliefs apart from an adherence to—usually—leftist or autonomist values , although some anarchist groups have called for the saint paul principles to be adapted as a framework in which diverse tactics can be deployed . a few radical right-wing groups , like some of the '' autonomous nationalists '' of europe or the australian so-called '' national-anarchism '' have adopted '' black bloc '' tactics and dress . the political scientist nicholas apoifis , in his ethnography of anarchism in athens , greece , argues that black bloc action can constitute a form of prefigurative politics , due to its '' flat and horizontal organisational structure , alongside its focus on solidarity . '' in 2000 , some months after the battle of seattle and the a16 protests against the imf in washington dc , the green mountain anarchist collective ( based out of rural vermont ) , called for black bloc activities to be coordinated on the tactical level , through the temporary election of street officers democratically empowered to make fast tactical decisions , especially concerning movement , while in confrontation with state police forces . this collective also called for black bloc actions to entail reserve groups , who could be called into a clash by these elected officers . these proposals were mapped out in the first edition of the pamphlet communique on tactics . the pamphlet was controversial within the anarchist community . some anarchists attacked this approach be being too formal and bordering on leninist in structure . the green mountain anarchist collective countered that the direct election of tactical officers was historically in line with the cnt and fai anarchist militias during the spanish civil war . of those early segments of the anarchist scene that agreed , in principle , with these assertions were the barricada collective ( boston , ma ) and columbus anti-racist action ( ohio ) . the barricada collective , in their publication of the same name , published the pamphlet , and also wrote their own essays calling for a more nuanced and more militant use of the black bloc in the north american anarchist movement . in july 2001 the green mountain anarchist collective would go on to produce a second edition of the communique on tactics pamphlet in cooperation with columbus ara . this second edition further refined the proposal to suggest , among other things , that large black blocs , composed of numerous affinity groups , could reach a further level of tactical sophistication by each affinity group further specializing their capabilities ( i.e . offense , defense , recon , etc . ) and by investing coordinating ability to the elected officer core . this pamphlet , like the first , was debated among anarchists . aspects of these tactical reforms were field tested with some success at the festival de la pueblo 5 may march in boston in 2002 , and the siege of the lewiston armory ( in opposition to a failed neo-nazi organizing meeting ) , maine , 2003 . both these actions were organized largely by the northeast federation of anarcho-communist ( whom the green mountain anarchist collective and barricada were then affiliated ) . see also . anti-nazi league antifa ( germany ) antifa ( united states ) battle of cable street diversity of tactics green mountain anarchist collective primera línea rebecca riots rock against racism unite against fascism . references . further reading . gee , teoman ( 2001 ) '' militancy beyond black blocs '' . alpine anarchist productions . katsiaficas , george . the subversion of politics : european social movements and the decolonization of everyday life . oakland and edinburgh : ak press , 2006 . mohandesi , salar ( 2012 ) '' on the black bloc . '' viewpoint magazine . shantz , jeff . active anarchy : political practice in contemporary movements . lanham , md : lexington books , 2011 . black blocs and contemporary propaganda of the deed , by jeff shantz green mountain anarchist collective ( nefac-vt ) & columbus anti-racist action ; a communiqué on tactics and organization to the black bloc , from within the black bloc , black clover press , 2001 . van deusen , david ; west , sean ; green mountain anarchist collective ; neither washington nor stowe : common sense for the working vermonter , catamount tavern press , this pamphlet shows a genesis of focus from organizing bloc blocs to organizing towards a libertarian-socialist society in northern new england . van deusen , david ; on anarchism : dispatches from the people 's republic of vermont , forward by jeff jones of the weather underground , algora publishing , 2017 , . van deusen , david ; van deusen on north american black blocs 1996-2001 , the anarchist library , 2017 . van deusen , david ; green mountain anarchist collective ; the question of violence and nonviolence as a tactic and strategy within the social protest movement : an anarchist perspective , black clover press , 2001 . van deusen , david ; massot , xavier ; green mountain anarchist collective ; the black bloc papers : an anthology of primary texts from the north american anarchist black bloc 1988–2005 , breaking glass press , shawnee mission , ks , 2010 . van deusen , david ; the rise and fall of the green mountain anarchist collective , 2015 , this article looks at the green mountain anarchist collective , why they came to take part in black blocs , and how they moved beyond the black bloc . external links . infoshop : black blocs for dummies '' blocs , black and otherwise '' by crimethinc .