Hōgen rebellion

context . a simmering power struggle in the imperial court was focused on three figures in 1155 . after the former emperor toba and the former emperor sutoku abdicated , each intended to continue to wield various kinds of power behind the throne during the reign of emperor konoe ; however , when young konoe died , the dynamics of the contending factions changed . august 23 , 1155 ( kyūju 2 , 24th day of the 7th month ) : in the 14th year of konoe-tennō 's reign ( 近衛天皇14年 ) , the emperor died ; and despite an ensuing dispute over who should follow him as sovereign , contemporary scholars then construed that the succession ( senso ) was received by a younger brother , the 4th son of former-emperor toba . shortly after that , emperor go-shirakawa is said to have acceded to the throne ( sokui ) . titsingh , isaac . ( 1834 ) . ; brown , delmer et al . ( 1979 ) . gukanshō , p . 326 ; varley , h . paul . ( 1980 ) . jinnō shōtōki , p . 44 ; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to emperor tenji ; and all sovereigns except jitō , yōzei , go-toba , and fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of emperor go-murakami . when go-shirakawa ascended the chrysanthemum throne , a new phase of this multi-faceted power struggle began to unfold . a bitter dispute between two of toba 's sons was paralleled by divisions within the several kuge families and others . toba had forced one of his sons to abdicate in favor of the son of another consort ; and after 1142 , former emperor sutoku harbored the expectation that his son would follow emperor konoe on the throne . sutoku 's hopes were frustrated by the elevation of another brother who would become known as go-shirakawa . keene , donald . ( 1999 ) july 20 , 1156 ( hōgen 1 , 2nd day of the 7th month ) : the former-emperor toba died at the age of 54 . keene , ; kitagawa , p . 783 . after the death of the toba , forces loyal to reigning emperor go-shirakawa and the forces supporting retired former emperor sutoku disputed the accession of go-shirakawa and his continued possession of the throne . the opposing groups were also contending over continuation of cloistered rule . battle . go-shirakawa and sutoku were rival sons of toba . fujiwara no tadamichi , first son of regent fujiwara no tadazane , sided with go-shirakawa while his younger brother fujiwara no yorinaga sided with sutoku . each rival side in turn beckoned the minamoto and taira clans of samurai . minamoto no tameyoshi , head of the minamoto clan , and taira no tadamasa , head of the taira contingent , sided with sutoku and yorinaga . minamoto no yoshitomo , first son of minamoto no tameyoshi , and taira no kiyomori , head of the taira clan and nephew of taira no tadamasa , sided with go-shirakawa and tadamichi . july 28 , 1156 ( hōgen 1 , 10th day of the 7th month ) : both forces faced each other in kyoto . on the sutoku side , minamoto no tametomo ( son of minamoto no tameyoshi and younger brother of yoshitomo ! ) suggested a night attack on an enemy palace , but fujiwara no yorinaga rejected this strategy . meanwhile , their enemy minamoto no yoshitomo suggested the same , and followed through on it . july 29 , 1156 ( hōgen 1 , 11th day of the 7th month ) : at night , kiyomori and yoshitomo led 600 cavalry and attacked sutoku in the siege of shirakawa-den . kiyomori attacked the west gate where tametomo defended it . tametomo repulsed kiyomori 's force with his outstanding archery units . then yoshitomo attacked tametomo but he was also repulsed . sutoku 's samurai fought hard , and a fierce battle continued . yoshitomo suggested that they set the enemy palace on fire . this was done and , fighting both the flames and go-shirakawa 's forces , sutoku 's samurai fled , leaving go-shirakawa 's allies victorious on the battlefield . . outcome . the forces of the reigning emperor go-shirakawa went on to defeat the forces of the former emperor sutoku . this made way for go-shirakawa to abdicate while still continuing to exercise unfettered imperial powers . go-shirakawa became the new cloistered emperor in 1158 , and he would continue to exercise power throughout the reigns of five emperors : emperor nijō , emperor rokujō , emperor takakura , emperor antoku , and emperor go-toba . his influence only ceased with his death in 1192 . sutoku was banished to sanuki province of shikoku ; fujiwara no yorinaga was killed in battle , and minamoto no tameyoshi and taira no tadamasa were executed . tametomo survived the battle and was forced to flee . minamoto no yoshitomo became head of his clan after the death of his father and together with taira no kiyomori , succeeded in establishing the two samurai clans as major new political powers in kyoto . . legacy . the outcome of the hōgen rebellion and the rivalry established between the minamoto and taira clans led to the heiji rebellion in 1159 . in the name '' heiji rebellion , '' the noun '' heiji '' refers to the nengō ( japanese era name ) after '' hōgen '' and before '' eiryaku . '' in other words , the heiji rebellion occurred during the heiji period , which spanned the years 1159 through 1160 . the kamakura period epic tale of hōgen is about the exploits of the samurai who participated in the hōgen rebellion . together with the tale of heiji and the tale of heike , these war stories ( gunki monogatari ) describe the rise and fall of the minamoto and taira samurai clans . sidensticker , edward . ( 1975 ) . the tale of the heike ( kitagawa et al . , editors ) . pp . xiv-xix . . notes . references . brown , delmer m . and ichirō ishida , eds . ( 1979 ) . gukanshō : the future and the past . berkeley : university of california press . ; oclc 251325323 donald keene . ( 1999 ) . seeds in the heart : japanese literature from earliest times to the late sixteenth century . new york : columbia university press . ; oclc 246429887 kitagawa , hiroshi and bruce t . tsuchida . ( 1975 ) . the tale of the heike . tokyo : university of tokyo press . oclc 262297615 richard ponsonby-fane . ( 1959 ) . the imperial house of japan . kyoto : ponsonby memorial society . oclc 194887 isaac titsingh ( 1834 ) . nihon ōdai ichiran ; ou , annales des empereurs du japon . paris : royal asiatic society , oriental translation fund of great britain and ireland . oclc 5850691 h . paul varley ( 1980 ) . jinnō shōtōki : a chronicle of gods and sovereigns . new york : columbia university press . ; oclc 59145842