Methaqualone

medical use . methaqualone is a sedative that increases the activity of the gaba receptors in the brain and nervous system , similarly to benzodiazepines and barbiturates . when gaba activity is increased , blood pressure drops and breathing and pulse rates slow , leading to a state of deep relaxation . these properties explain why methaqualone was originally mainly prescribed for insomnia . methaqualone was not recommended for use while pregnant and is in pregnancy category d . . overdose . an overdose can lead to nervous system shutdown , coma and death . additional effects are delirium , convulsions , hypertonia , hyperreflexia , vomiting , kidney failure , coma , and death through cardiac or respiratory arrest . it resembles barbiturate poisoning , but with increased motor difficulties and a lower incidence of cardiac or respiratory depression . the standard single tablet adult dose of quaalude brand of methaqualone was 300 & nbsp ; mg when made by lemmon . a dose of 8000 & nbsp ; mg is lethal and a dose as little as 2000 & nbsp ; mg could induce a coma if taken with an alcoholic drink . . pharmacology . methaqualone peaks in the bloodstream within several hours , with a half-life of 20–60 hours . while the salt methaqualone hydrochloride is typically used clinically , methaqualone free-base was also marketed , namely as the methaqualone component of mandrax , a combination drug which contained 250mg methaqualone and 25mg diphenhydramine within the same tablet . oral dosage forms of methaqualone hydrochloride were manufactured as capsules , whereas oral dosage forms of methaqualone free-base were manufactured as tablets . regular users build up a physical tolerance , requiring larger doses for the same effect . history . methaqualone was first synthesized in india in 1951 by indra kishore kacker and syed husain zaheer , who were doing research to find a new antimalarial medication . by 1965 , it was the most commonly prescribed sedative in britain , where it has been sold legally under the names malsed , malsedin , and renoval . in 1965 , a methaqualone/antihistamine combination was sold as the sedative drug mandrax in europe , by roussel laboratories ( now part of sanofi ) . in 1972 , it was the sixth-bestselling sedative in the us , where it was legal under the brand name quaalude . quaalude in the united states was originally manufactured in 1965 by the fort washington , pennsylvania , based pharmaceutical firm william h . rorer , inc . the drug name '' quaalude '' combined the words '' quiet interlude '' and shared a stylistic reference to another drug marketed by the firm , maalox . in 1978 , rorer sold the rights to manufacture quaalude to the lemmon company of sellersville , pennsylvania . at that time , rorer chairman john eckman commented on quaalude 's bad reputation stemming from illegal manufacture and use of methaqualone , and illegal sale and use of legally prescribed quaalude : '' quaalude accounted for less than 2 % of our sales , but created 98 % of our headaches . '' both companies still regarded quaalude as an excellent sleeping drug . lemmon , well aware of quaalude 's public image problems , used advertisements in medical journals to urge physicians '' not to permit the abuses of illegal users to deprive a legitimate patient of the drug '' . lemmon also marketed a small quantity under another name , mequin , so doctors could prescribe the drug without the negative connotations . the rights to quaalude were held by the jb roerig & company division of pfizer , before the drug was discontinued in the united states in 1985 , mainly due to its psychological addictiveness , widespread abuse , and illegal recreational use . . society and culture . brand names . it was sold under the brand name quaalude and sometimes stylized '' quāālude '' in the united states and mandrax in the united kingdom and south africa . regulation . methaqualone was initially placed in schedule i as defined by the un convention of psychotropic substances , but was moved to schedule ii in 1979 . in canada , methaqualone is listed in schedule iii of the controlled drugs and substances act and requires a prescription , but it is no longer manufactured . methaqualone is banned in india . . recreational . methaqualone became increasingly popular as a recreational drug in the late 1960s and 1970s , known variously as '' ludes '' or '' sopers '' ( also '' soaps '' ) in the united states and '' mandrakes '' and '' mandies '' in the uk , australia and new zealand . the drug was more tightly regulated in britain under the misuse of drugs act 1971 and in the u.s . from 1973 . it was withdrawn from many developed markets in the early 1980s . in the united states it was withdrawn in 1982 and made a schedule i drug in 1984 . it has a dea acscn of 2565 and in 2013 the aggregate annual manufacturing quota for the united states was 10 grams . mention of its possible use in some types of cancer and aids treatments has periodically appeared in the literature since the late 1980s ; research does not appear to have reached an advanced stage . the dea has also added the methaqualone analogue mecloqualone ( also a result of some incomplete clandestine syntheses ) to schedule i as acscn 2572 , with zero manufacturing quota . gene haislip , the former head of the chemical control division of the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , told the pbs documentary program frontline , '' we beat 'em . '' by working with governments and manufacturers around the world , the dea was able to halt production and , haislip said , '' eliminated the problem '' . ferns , sean , '' lecture : gene haislip : the chemical connection : a historical perspective on chemical control '' , drug enforcement administration museum lecture series , arlington , virginia , october 25 , 2007 piccini , sara , '' drug warrior : the dea 's gene haislip '60 , b.c.l . '63 battled worldwide against the illegal drug trade – and scored a rare victory '' , william & mary alumni magazine , college of william & mary , spring 2010 methaqualone was manufactured in the united states under the name quaalude by the pharmaceutical firms rorer and lemmon with the numbers 714 stamped on the tablet , so people often referred to quaalude as 714 's , '' lemmons '' , or '' lemmon 7 's '' . methaqualone was also manufactured in the us under the trade names sopor and parest . after the legal manufacture of the drug ended in the united states in 1982 , underground laboratories in mexico continued the illegal manufacture of methaqualone throughout the 1980s , continuing the use of the '' 714 '' stamp , until their popularity waned in the early 1990s . drugs purported to be methaqualone are in a significant majority of cases found to be inert , or contain diphenhydramine or benzodiazepines . illicit methaqualone is one of the most commonly used recreational drugs in south africa . manufactured clandestinely , often in india , it comes in tablet form , but is smoked with marijuana ; this method of ingestion is known as '' white pipe '' . it is also popular elsewhere in africa and in india .