Mickey Cochrane

playing career . philadelphia athletics . cochrane was born in bridgewater , massachusetts . his father , john cochrane , had immigrated from omagh , county tyrone in what is now northern ireland and his mother , sadie campbell , had come from prince edward island , canada , whence her family had immigrated from scotland . he was also known as '' black mike '' because of his fiery , competitive nature . cochrane was educated at boston university , where he played five sports , excelling at football and basketball . although cochrane considered himself a better football player than a baseball player , professional football was not as established as major league baseball at the time , so he signed with the portland beavers of the pacific coast league in . after just one season in the minor leagues , cochrane was promoted to the major leagues , making his debut with the philadelphia athletics on april 14 , 1925 at the age of 22 . he made an immediate impact by becoming connie mack 's starting catcher in place of cy perkins , who was considered one of the best catchers in the major leagues at the time . a left-handed batter , he ran well enough that mack would occasionally have him bat leadoff . he hit third more often , but whatever his place in the order his primary role was to get on base so that hard-hitting al simmons and jimmie foxx could drive him in . in may , he tied a twentieth-century major league record by hitting three home runs in a game . he ended his rookie season with a . 331 batting average and a . 397 on-base percentage , helping the athletics to a second-place finish . by the start of the 1926 season , cochrane was already considered the best catcher in the major leagues . he won the american league most valuable player award , mostly for his leadership and defensive skills , when he led the american league in putouts and hit . 293 along with 10 home runs and 58 runs batted in . cochrane was a catalyst in the athletics ' pennant-winning years of 1929 , 1930 and 1931 , during which he hit . 331 , . 357 and . 349 respectively . he played in those three world series , winning the first two , but was sometimes blamed for the loss of the 1931 world series , when the st . louis cardinals , led by pepper martin , stole eight bases and the series . however , in his book the life of a baseball hall of fame catcher , author charlie bevis cites the philadelphia pitching staff 's carelessness in holding runners as a contributing factor . notwithstanding this , the blame for the 1931 world series loss dogged cochrane for the rest of his life . . detroit tigers . in 1934 , mack started to disassemble his dynasty for financial reasons and put cochrane on the trade block . he found a willing recipient in the detroit tigers . their owner , frank navin , was also suffering from financial troubles . they had not finished higher than third since 1923 , and had developed a reputation for being content with mediocrity . attendance at navin field had sagged for some time . navin had originally hoped to acquire babe ruth and name him player-manager , but after those talks fizzled , he turned to the a's . ferkovich , scott . a look back at when babe ruth nearly became the detroit tigers ’ player-manager . seamheads.com , 2014-07-14 . a deal to send cochrane to detroit was quickly arranged , and navin immediately named him player-manager . it was with detroit where cochrane cemented his reputation as a team leader and his competitive nature drove the tigers , who had been picked to finish in fourth or fifth place , to the american league championship , their first pennant in 25 years . cochrane routinely platooned gee walker , a right-handed batter , to spell left fielder goose goslin and center fielder jo-jo white , who were both left-handed batters . cochrane 's leadership and strategic skills won him the 1934 most valuable player award , remarkable considering that lou gehrig had won the triple crown . he followed this by leading the tigers to another american league pennant in and earning a victory over the chicago cubs in the 1935 world series . in late 1935 , the detroit free press speculated cochrane might eventually succeed navin as team president . due in part to his high-strung nature , however , he suffered a nervous breakdown during the 1936 season . on may 25 , 1937 ; cochrane was hit in the head by a pitch from yankees pitcher bump hadley . cochrane had homered in his previous at-bat that day . hospitalized for seven days , cochrane nearly died from the injury . this accident generated a call for protective helmets for batters , although tradition won out at that time . cochrane was forced to retire at the age of 34 after doctors ordered him not to attempt to play baseball again . cochrane compiled a . 320 batting average while hitting 119 home runs and 830 runs batted in over a 13-year playing career . he also had 1,652 hits , 1,041 runs scored , 333 doubles , 64 triples , 64 stolen bases and a . 478 slugging percentage . his . 320 batting average was the highest career mark for catchers until joe mauer surpassed it in . his . 419 on-base percentage is among the best in baseball history , and is the highest all-time among catchers . in , he became the first major league catcher to score 100 runs and produce 100 runs batted in during the same season . he hit for the cycle twice in his career , on july 22 , 1932 and august 2 , 1933 . in his first 11 years , he never caught fewer than 110 games . he led american league catchers six times in putouts and twice each in double plays assists and fielding percentage . cochrane returned to the dugout to continue managing the tigers but had lost his competitive fire . he managed for the remainder of the 1937 season but was replaced midway through the 1938 season by coach and former catcher del baker . his all-time managerial record was 348-250 , for a . 582 winning percentage . . later life and legacy . despite his head injury , cochrane served in the united states navy during world war ii . commissioned as a lieutenant and assigned to naval station great lakes , he oversaw physical training of new recruits and coached the base baseball team . on july 7 , 1942 , cochrane managed an all-service team that played against an american league all-star squad at cleveland ’ s municipal stadium ; the american league team beat the servicemen , 5-0 . later in the war cochrane , by now a lieutenant commander , was assigned to a similar role in the pacific war . in 1947 , cochrane became the third catcher enshrined in the baseball hall of fame , after roger bresnahan and buck ewing . long after the athletics left philadelphia for kansas city in 1954 without retiring his uniform number 2 , the philadelphia phillies honored him by electing him to the philadelphia baseball wall of fame at veterans stadium . the athletics ' plaques from that display have since been moved to the philadelphia athletics museum in hatboro , pennsylvania . the tigers honored him by renaming national avenue ( behind the third-base stands of the old tiger stadium ) cochrane avenue , but have never retired the uniform number 3 he wore with them . cochrane briefly worked in baseball after world war ii , notably serving as a coach , and then as general manager , of the athletics during the season , mack 's last year as manager . he also owned an automobile business after his baseball days ; he sold it in the mid-1950s . a heavy smoker , cochrane was only 59 when he died in 1962 in lake forest , illinois of lymphatic cancer . in his book , the bill james historical baseball abstract , baseball historian bill james ranked cochrane fourth all-time among major league catchers . in 1999 , he was ranked 65th on the sporting news list of the 100 greatest baseball players , and was a nominee for the major league baseball all-century team . yankee hall of fame slugger mickey mantle was named after him . . see also . list of major league baseball career runs scored leaders list of major league baseball players to hit for the cycle list of major league baseball player-managers . references . further reading . mickey cochrane at thehitters.com . external links . baseball : the fans ' game manuscript at dartmouth college library :