RV Calypso

world war ii british minesweeper ( 1941–1947 ) . calypso was originally a minesweeper built by the ballard marine railway company of seattle , washington , united states for the united states navy for loan to the british royal navy under lend-lease . a wooden-hulled vessel , she is built of douglas fir . she was a byms-class minesweeper , laid down on 12 august 1941 with yard designation byms-26 and launched on 21 march 1942 . she was commissioned into the royal navy in february 1943 as hms j-826 and assigned to active service in the mediterranean sea , based in malta , and was reclassified as byms-2026 in 1944 . following the end of world war ii , she was decommissioned in july 1946 and laid up at malta . on 1 august 1947 she was formally handed back to the us navy and then struck from the us naval register , remaining in lay-up . . maltese ferry ( 1949–1950 ) . in may 1949 she was bought by joseph gasan of malta , who had secured the mail contract on the ferry route between marfa , in the north of malta , and mġarr , gozo in 1947 . she was converted to a ferry and renamed calypso g after the nymph calypso , whose island of ogygia was mythically associated with gozo , entering service in march 1950 . after only four months on the route , gasan received an attractive offer and sold her . . jacques cousteau 's calypso ( 1950–1997 ) . the british millionaire and former mp , thomas loel guinness bought calypso in july 1950 . he leased her to cousteau for a symbolic one franc a year . he had two conditions : that cousteau never ask him for money and that he never reveal his identity , which only came out after cousteau 's death . cousteau restructured and transformed the ship into an expedition vessel and support base for diving , filming and oceanographic research . one of the more unusual expeditions involving the vessel was a survey of abu dhabi waters conducted by cousteau on behalf of bp ( bp ) in 1954 the first and last time it was used for an oil survey . calypso carried advanced equipment , including one- and two-man mini submarines developed by cousteau , sp-350 denise , and underwater scooters . the ship was also fitted with a see-through '' nose '' and an observation chamber below the waterline , and was modified to house scientific equipment and a helicopter pad . the calypso ( camera ) is named after this ship . on 8 january 1996 , a barge accidentally rammed calypso and sank her in the port of singapore . on 16 january , she was raised by a crane , patched , and pumped dry before being put in a shipyard . . restoration ( 1997–present ) . calypso was later towed to the maritime museum of la rochelle in 1998 to be an exhibit . a legal dispute between jacques cousteau 's widow , francine cousteau , and loel guinness , the grandson of the original owner delayed restoration work . during this time the city of la rochelle withdrew its funding for the restoration . calypso remained in disrepair . in 2002 , alexandra , cousteau 's granddaughter from his first marriage , tried to become involved in the restoration . the cousteau society , controlled by francine cousteau , reportedly spent hundreds of thousands of dollars to defend francine 's exclusive use of the name and to prevent alexandra 's participation in the restoration of calypso . in 2006 loel guinness transferred ownership of calypso to the cousteau society for the sum of one euro . in october 2007 the ship was at the piriou shipyard . work on calypso stopped in 2009 because of the non-payment of bills by francine cousteau . piriou claimed to be owed €850,000 for work already done . the cousteau society counter-sued for defective work . in 2015 a french court ordered francine cousteau to settle outstanding yard bills and remove calypso from a brittany shipyard or allow the shipyard to sell the vessel . the cousteau society announced in 2016 that a solution had been found to allow the ship to return to service with new engines . in 2017 a fire damaged new wooden parts of the calypso at a shipyard near istanbul , turkey , where her refitting had been in progress . . calypso in popular culture . calypso was the main ship in all three feature documentary films that cousteau directed in his career : the silent world ( 1956 , awarded with the academy award for documentary feature and the 1956 palme d'or ) , world without sun ( 1964 , which also won the academy award for documentary feature ) and voyage to the edge of the world ( 1976 ) . john denver wrote a 1975 hit song '' calypso '' as a tribute to calypso and her crew . additionally , he gave all the royalties for the song to the cousteau society . jean michel jarre wrote a four-part composition in tribute to the ship , called waiting for cousteau ( 1990 ) . gwar wrote a song entitled '' je m'appelle j . cousteau '' , which was featured on their album hell-o , originally released in 1988 . it is not entirely clear whether this song is in tribute or slander , but the song is entirely about jacques cousteau and his ship calypso . the captain 's yacht of the uss enterprise-d , on star trek : the next generation , was named calypso by actor patrick stewart . he also gave the name cousteau to the captain 's yacht of the uss enterprise-e in homage to the calypsos famous former captain . bill murray starred in a film homage of jacques cousteau 's life called the life aquatic with steve zissou . in the movie , zissou travels the seas in a ship called belafonte . this is an oblique reference to jacques cousteau 's ship calypso . harry belafonte is a noted musician who played calypso music on an album called calypso . while in the film , belafonte is described as a '' long-range sub-hunter '' , like calypso she was also a former british minesweeper , the ton-class . nasa astronaut sunita williams bestowed the name calypso on the third boeing starliner space capsule built for the commercial crew program after the ship . the character rebecca from the television series theodore tugboat is based on calypso . see also . for cousteau 's experimental turbosail ship . for the royal navy ships of the same name . sp-350 denise first diving saucer boeing starliner calypso , boeing starliner space capsule named for the ship . references . external links . calypso page from the cousteau society . byms-26 wwii construction records yard minesweepers ( yms ) miquel pontes - '' el calypso : historia de un mito '' in aquanet 67 , 2005 ( pdf ) chantiers piriou , restoration of the calypso passion calypso , including history and photos of the ship 's restoration ( in french ) update regarding calypso 's refitting