Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam

plot . set in the year universal century ( uc ) 0087 , eight years after the events of mobile suit gundam ( 0079 ) , and four years after the events of '' mobile suit gundam 0083 : stardust memory '' ( 0083 to 0084 ) the series follows a rebel group called the anti-earth union group ( aeug ) as they try to defeat the titans , an elite task force of the earth federation designed to hunt down zeon remnants but which ruthlessly kills anyone demanding equal rights for the space citizens in cold blood . the story of zeta gundam is told through the viewpoint of kamille bidan , a civilian teenager and amateur mobile suit pilot whose parents are engineers working for the earth federation and the titans . while traveling to the green noa colony to meet his parents , kamille is insulted by and strikes a titans officer named jerid messa . following an aeug attack led by quattro bajeena on the colony to capture a trio of gundam mk-ii mobile suits undergoing field tests , kamille takes the opportunity to steal messa 's mk-ii to repel the attack and follows quattro back to the aeug mothership argama . the titans , under the order of bask om , take kamille 's parents in an attempt to force the return of the stolen gundam mk-ii 's . jerid , unaware of the hostage plot , mistakenly kills kamille 's mother . because of this , and many other reasons , kamille eventually joins the aeug . as the war escalates , kamille encounters people from all sides of the conflict , including brainwashed titans , artificial newtypes and the leaders of anaheim electronics , who are secretly funding the aeug . the aeug eventually launch a full-scale attack on the earth federation 's assembly at dakar , leading to an earth sphere civil war . quattro reveals himself to be char aznable and presents evidence of the titans ' tyranny including using g3 nerve gas on a defenseless colony . the earth federation court soon rules the titans ' actions to be illegal and backs the aeug in hunting down titans leader jamitov hymem . after losing the support of the earth federation , the titans turn to their original enemy , remnants of the principality of zeon now known as axis zeon , to form an alliance to regain control of the earth sphere . axis zeon 's leader haman karn contacts the aeug , using the civil war of the earth federation at hand to politically ask for the control of side 3 , the former zeon colony . axis involvement and jamitov 's assassination by jupiter fleet commander paptimus scirocco soon leads to a battle over the colony headquarters of the titans , gryps , which has been modified to be a colony laser . the war ends when kamille , piloting the titular mobile suit z gundam , kills scirocco in battle and the aeug sinks scirocco 's flagship and most of the titans ' fleet . however , kamille himself is psychologically broken and although survives without any physical harm to him or the zeta gundam , becomes mentally unstable with signs of memory lapse and/or insanity . the series concludes with both the aeug and earth federation , after suffering considerable losses over the course of the war , facing the full force of axis zeon , leading into mobile suit gundam zz . production . yoshiyuki tomino crammed his frustrations into zeta gundam . he created the anime with the idea of telling viewers '' hey , watch my new gundam , youngsters . why are you not so lively like them in z ? '' tomino has mixed feelings about zeta gundam . tomino did not like the series and believes he should have ended the story in the first tv series . however , at the same time he noted that thanks to zeta the franchise became more popular . . soundtrack . a majority of the series background music was written by japanese composer shigeaki saegusa . the melodies of the two opening themes and sole ending theme were written by american pop singer/songwriter neil sedaka . the first opening song used is called which was performed by mami ayukawa , and used for the first twenty-three episodes . zeta - toki wo koete was based upon the song '' better days are coming '' from sedaka 's 1972 album solitaire . the second opening song used is entitled and was performed by hiroko moriguchi , this second opening song is used in episodes twenty-four to fifty . the song '' mizu no hoshi e ai wo komete '' was derived from an unreleased song entitled '' for us to decide '' . the sole ending song used for the series is called which was sung by mami ayukawa . '' hoshizora no believe '' was adapted from the song '' bad and beautiful '' from the 1976 album steppin ' out . in addition to the opening/ending songs an insert song was also made called . this song is sung by hiroko moriguchi and is used in episode twenty . the opening and ending songs differed for the international release version , as well as japanese streaming versions , as opposed to the original . the opening song used is called which was composed by saegusa , while the song used for the endings entitled was also written by saegusa . the songs used for the three movies that came out of mobile suit zeta gundam were all performed by gackt , and were compiled and released on his tribute album 0079-0088 . the first movie heirs to the stars uses two songs ; metamorphoze is used as the opening song while is used for the ending . the second movie lovers uses just one new song called mind forest for the ending song . mind forest is also featured on gackt 's album called '' crescent '' . the final movie made love is the pulse of the stars uses two new songs . love letter is used as an insert song followed by the song dybbuk which is used as the ending song . international release . the show has been placed on rerun on the anime satellite television network , animax , across japan and later its respective networks worldwide , including east asia , southeast asia , south asia , and other regions . in 2004 , after almost 2 years of delays and failed television and merchandising deals , bandai released a limited edition zeta gundam boxset with dubbed english and original japanese audio tracks . the box-set includes pencil sharpener collectibles and a 48-page booklet and poster . the english dub was done by ocean productions based in calgary in canada . due to bandai not having rights to the theme songs outside of asia , the opening and closing sequences were altered . the english subtitles were criticized as inaccurate and appeared to be based on the script for the english dub , rather than a direct translation of the original japanese script . bandai corrected the subtitles to a properly translated version for later dvd releases in 5 cases with 2 discs each . each disc contained five episodes . in 2006 , bandai entertainment acquired the rights to the us release of the '' a new translation '' movie trilogy , originally slated for release on june 22 , 2010 but was later changed to july 6 . the series and movies have been out of print , following the closure of bandai entertainment . on october 11 , 2014 at their 2014 new york comic-con panel , sunrise announced they will be releasing all of the gundam franchise , including the zeta gundam tv series and movies in north america though distribution from right stuf inc . , beginning in spring 2015 . . reception . critical reception . mobile suit zeta gundam is praised by fans of the universal century sect of the franchise , with many lauding it for its bleak tone , character development , and its complicated expression of war . however , the series has also been criticized for being overtly depressing , and frequently exhibiting a directionless plot . even the series ' director , yoshiyuki tomino , has expressed not liking the show , finding in retrospect much of the hostility and abuse inflicted upon characters to undermine any realistic depiction of war . the review website mania.com gave the anime an overall ' b+ ' rating , regarding it as '' one of yoshiyuki tomino 's greatest works . '' they stated that the '' lack of an a/a+ is that this is recommended for fans who are already familiar with the universal century storyline , '' recommending that audiences view '' the original movie trilogy '' first before watching zeta gundam . the reviewer chris beveridge of mania.com gave certain volumes of the series a full ' a ' rating , describing the last ten episodes as being '' the huge payoff episodes '' where '' you can almost feel the characters being rushed around a bit and moved through the paces . but at the same time , it all comes so fast that it 's simply enjoyable to watch so much happen and change so quickly . '' beveridge would later review the blu-ray releases of the series for the fandom post , giving both sets of blu-rays a ' a- ' rating . beveridge writes in the review for the first set , '' it ’ s hard to believe that it ’ s been almost ten years since i last saw this series as you realize just how much anime you consume . but it also makes you realize which ones truly stand out over the course of time and this one is definitely one of them . '' beveridge found the second half of the series weaker , though still claims that the show '' hits most things right '' . while reviewing for the blu-ray release of the series , ollie barder of forbes gave the show a rave review , even titling it as '' possibly the greatest 'gundam ' series ever made '' . barder praised the series ' more realistic approach to war and its striking designs for the many different robots , though did find the transforming mechas out of placed in zeta 's more grounded reality . lauren orsini of anime news network also praised the series in a review for the first blu-ray release , giving the dub for the first set a ' b ' , praising it for its powerful storytelling . orsini was more critical of the second half of the series , finding the plot too chaotic and calling it gundam 's '' awkward coming-of-age '' . but orsini still praised the second half for its mecha designs and strong emotional payoffs , ultimately giving the subtitle version of the series a ' b' . in the nhk 2018 mega '' all gundam poll '' , mobile suit zeta gundam was place as the second best anime in the gundam franchise , only behind the original 1979 gundam show . the nhk reported that there was a total of 1,740,280 votes in the poll , with 46 % of the votes for zeta coming from voters between the ages 40 to 46 . . related media . manga . a manga adaptation of the series was released by kodansha under the comic bon bon label in 1994 , three volumes were serialized . an official manga remake was also made entitled . this remake was written and illustrated by hiroyuki kitazume and serialized in gundam ace on june 25 , 2011 . compilation movies . in celebration of gundam 's 25th anniversary ( and also the 20th anniversary of zeta gundam ) , the 50-episode series was compiled into a movie trilogy called mobile suit zeta gundam : a new translation . according to tomino , the movies were created to fix some of the problems he identified in the television series and to bring it into a 21st-century context for a new generation now experiencing the increasingly commercialized series , such as mobile suit gundam seed . the first movie , heirs to the stars , opened on may 28 , 2005 , followed by lovers on october 29 , 2005 , and love is the pulse of the stars on march 6 , 2006 . the compilations digitally remastered the television series of zeta gundam with new footage . around 33 % of '' heir to the stars '' was remastered footage , with 70 % for '' lovers '' and almost 80 % for '' love is the pulse of the stars '' . however , several major plot events from the tv series were either edited or removed to allow the films to flow more smoothly , unlike tomino 's previous gundam film compilations . likewise , the fate of some characters in the television version were entirely changed , notably kamille 's — in the original , his final battle renders him into a vegetative state , while he remains physically and mentally fit by the end of the movie trilogy . in addition , mobile suits belonging to the gundam timeline , but designed after the television broadcast of zeta gundam , were also placed into the movies . shigeaki saegusa 's musical score from the tv series was reused for the films , with the addition of new songs by japanese singer-songwriter gackt . a music video for the first film 's opening theme '' metamorphoze '' featured gackt singing inside a mobile suit cockpit during battle . majority of the original tv voice cast returned to reprise their respective roles . yō inoue , who died in 2003 - was posthumously credited , as an archived recording of her voice was used for a cameo appearance of sayla mass in the third film . there were some changes to the voice cast - namely yukana replacing saeko shimazu as four murasame , satomi arai replacing miyuki matsuoka as fa yuiry , and a few others . this change sparked controversy among fans , who suspected that yukana used her relationship with sound director sadayoshi fujino to land her role . the films were a box office success in japan . . games . in 1985 , bandai released a special boardgame based on the series . designed for two to four players , mobile suit gundam : take off mkii has a paper map and 12 miniatures of various aeug and titans mobile suits , plus game rules and mission files . kidō senshi z-gundam : hot scramble followed in 1986 . the first gundam video game for home consoles , hot scramble featured first-person and side-scrolling stages . this would be followed by a 3d-fighting game , mobile suit z gundam , for the sony playstation in 1997 . featuring remastered cutscenes from the series , it comes on two discs , allowing players to experience the series from the viewpoints of kamille and char . bandai later added the series ' mobile suits as part of gundam vs . zeta gundam in 2004 . in addition , tecmo koei and namco bandai have co-published the dynasty warriors : gundam franchise since 2007 .