Barbershop quartet

history . while many sources claim that barbershop singing originated in the late 19th and early 20th centuries in the united states of america , some maintain that the origins of barbershop singing are '' obscure '' . the style is considered a blend of white and african american musical styles . although the african american influence is sometimes overlooked , these quartets had a formative role in the development of the style . by the 1920s , the popularity of the style had begun to fade . it was revived in the late 1930s along with the founding of the society for the preservation and encouragement of barber shop quartet singing in america ( spebsqsa ) , now known as the barbershop harmony society , or bhs . the society 's first meeting was held at the tulsa club in tulsa , oklahoma , on april 11 , 1938 , and it was open only to male singers . in 1945 , a parallel organization for women was also founded in tulsa , called sweet adelines international ( sai ) . harmony , incorporated ( hi ) , also serving women , was established in rhode island in 1959 . in 1971 , president of bhs ralph ribble launched the '' barberpole cat program '' to encourage barbershop singing as widely as possible . well-known and popular barbershop songs were published and promoted in order to provide a core set of pieces for barbershop quartets . the current list of 12 songs , commonly known as '' polecats '' , was selected in 1987 . these songs , plus the tag end of two others , are : . style of dress . in competition , barbershop quartets generally wear coordinated outfits to mark them as members of the same group . a group 's visual impression is rated as part of the '' showmanship '' score . the society contest and judging committee of the barbershop harmony society notes in their rule book that aesthetics are important to competitive success : '' the judge responds to both the vocal and visual aspects of the performance , but the judge principally evaluates the interaction of those aspects as they work together to create the image of the song . '' traditionally , barbershop quartet members wore a vest , straw hat , and spats ; this is known as the gay nineties style . in popular culture , this style exemplifies the stereotypical barbershop quartet . several walt disney theme parks feature a dedicated barbershop quartet called the dapper dans ( disney world version pictured ) . the outfits worn by these performers vary depending on location but do feature vests and straw hats . roles of vocal parts . as a general rule , barbershop quartets use a ttbb ( tenor—tenor—baritone—bass ) arrangement , with the second tenor singing the lead . since the 1940s , barbershop singers have tuned their seventh chords with just intonation to maximize the overtones , yielding a distinctive '' ringing '' sound . tenor : the tenor generally harmonizes above the lead , making the part the highest in the quartet . so as not to overpower the lead singer , who carries the tune , the part is often sung in falsetto , which is of a softer quality than singing in the modal register , though some quartets do make use of tenors with a softer full voice quality . notable examples of barbershop quartets which made use of the full-voiced tenor include the buffalo bills and boston common . the range of a tenor in barbershop music does not necessarily closely correspond to that of a tenor 's range in classical repertoire , often being more in the range of the classical countertenor range . lead : the lead , often a lower or second tenor , usually sings the main melody . baritone : the baritone often completes the chord with a medium voice , usually slightly below the lead , but sometimes above it . bass : the bass always sings and harmonizes the lowest notes , often setting the root of the chord for root position chords , or singing the lowest note of the chord for inverted chords . in popular culture . the tv sitcom i love lucy used the cast in a barbershop quartet in the 1952 episode , '' lucy 's show-biz swan song ; '' the same footage was used for a dream sequence in their 1956 christmas show . in the 1957 meredith willson broadway musical the music man , the barbershop harmony society international quartet contest champions the buffalo bills ( vern reed , al shea , wayne '' scotty '' ward , bill spangenberg ) were such a hit that they were cast in the 1962 film adaptation starring robert preston as harold hill and shirley jones as marian paroo . cheers featured a barbershop quartet in the season 4 episode , '' dark imaginings '' ( 1986 ) . a 1993 episode of the simpsons , '' homer 's barbershop quartet '' , parodied the journey of the beatles as though they were each members of a barbershop quartet named '' the be sharps '' . the episode starred the dapper dans , a quartet who sing on main street in disneyland in california . martin , jeff ( 2004 ) . the simpsons season 5 dvd commentary for the episode '' homer 's barbershop quartet '' ( dvd ) . 20th century fox . in the 1997 friends episode titled '' friends ( season 3 ) '' , dr . ross geller hires a barbershop quartet and sends it to rachel 's office to sing her a love song . frasier featured a barbershop quartet in the episode , '' frasier 's curse '' ( 1998 ) . in every episode of nick jr . 's television program blue 's clues ( 1996–2006 ) , a barbershop quartet can be heard saying '' mailtime '' , after which steve ( portrayed by steve burns ) or joe ( portrayed by donovan patton ) sings the mail time song before the mail arrives at their house . psych 's fourth season 's seventh episode of , '' high top fade out '' , prominently features the murder of a member of gus ' college barbershop quartet . originally called '' blackapella '' , the quartet is renamed '' quarterblack '' once shawn ( a white man ) joins . the internet webcomic homestuck ( 2009–2016 ) features a barbershop cover of the eddie morton song , '' i 'm a member of the midnight crew . '' the cover was sung by a fan of the series and was put into the comic on the page , '' dd : ascend more casually . '' the 2017 video game cuphead , known for its 1900s cartoon style , contains two songs sung by barbershop quartet '' 'shoptimus prime '' : '' do n't deal with the devil '' and '' a quick break '' . an animatronic barbershop quartet is one of the scenery pieces in the theme park video game planet coaster . it is part of the vintage pack , a dlc pack that focuses on classic rides and theming . in a 2019 geico television commercial , a barbershop quartet sings while playing a four-on-four basketball game . barbershop music is featured extensively in the 1975 post-apocalyptic film a boy and his dog .