Cytokine

discovery . interferon-alpha , an interferon type i , was identified in 1957 as a protein that interfered with viral replication . the activity of interferon-gamma ( the sole member of the interferon type ii class ) was described in 1965 ; this was the first identified lymphocyte-derived mediator . macrophage migration inhibitory factor ( mif ) was identified simultaneously in 1966 by john david and barry bloom . in 1969 , dudley dumonde proposed the term '' lymphokine '' to describe proteins secreted from lymphocytes and later , proteins derived from macrophages and monocytes in culture were called '' monokines '' . in 1974 , pathologist stanley cohen , m.d . ( not to be confused with the nobel laureate ) published an article describing the production of mif in virus-infected allantoic membrane and kidney cells , showing its production is not limited to immune cells . this led to his proposal of the term cytokine . ogawa described the early acting growth factors , intermediate acting growth factors and late acting growth factors . . difference from hormones . classic hormones circulate in nanomolar ( 10 m ) concentrations that usually vary by less than one order of magnitude . in contrast , some cytokines ( such as il-6 ) circulate in picomolar ( 10 m ) concentrations that can increase up to 1,000 times during trauma or infection . the widespread distribution of cellular sources for cytokines may be a feature that differentiates them from hormones . virtually all nucleated cells , but especially endo/epithelial cells and resident macrophages ( many near the interface with the external environment ) are potent producers of il-1 , il-6 , and tnf-α . in contrast , classic hormones , such as insulin , are secreted from discrete glands such as the pancreas . the current terminology refers to cytokines as immunotherapy . a contributing factor to the difficulty of distinguishing cytokines from hormones is that some immunomodulating effects of cytokines are systemic rather than local . for instance , to accurately utilize hormone terminology , cytokines may be autocrine or paracrine in nature , and chemotaxis , chemokinesis and endocrine as a pyrogen . essentially , cytokines are not limited to their immunomodulatory status as molecules . nomenclature . cytokines have been classed as lymphokines , interleukins , and chemokines , based on their presumed function , cell of secretion , or target of action . because cytokines are characterised by considerable redundancy and pleiotropy , such distinctions , allowing for exceptions , are obsolete . the term interleukin was initially used by researchers for those cytokines whose presumed targets are principally white blood cells ( leukocytes ) . it is now used largely for designation of newer cytokine molecules and bears little relation to their presumed function . the vast majority of these are produced by t-helper cells . lymphokines : produced by lymphocytes monokines : produced exclusively by monocytes interferons : involved in antiviral responses colony stimulating factors : support the growth of cells in semisolid media chemokines : mediate chemoattraction ( chemotaxis ) between cells . classification . structural . structural homogeneity has been able to partially distinguish between cytokines that do not demonstrate a considerable degree of redundancy so that they can be classified into four types : the four-helix bundle family : member cytokines have three-dimensional structures with a bundle of four α-helices . this family , in turn , is divided into three sub-families : the il-2 subfamily . this is the largest family . it contains several non-immunological cytokines including erythropoietin ( epo ) and thrombopoietin ( tpo ) . they can be grouped into long-chain and short-chain cytokines by topology . some members share the common gamma chain as part of their receptor . the interferon subfamily . the il-10 subfamily . the il-1 family , which primarily includes il-1 and il-18 . the cysteine knot cytokines include members of the transforming growth factor beta superfamily , including tgf-β1 , tgf-β2 and tgf-β3 . the il-17 family , which has yet to be completely characterized , though member cytokines have a specific effect in promoting proliferation of t-cells that cause cytotoxic effects . functional . a classification that proves more useful in clinical and experimental practice outside of structural biology divides immunological cytokines into those that enhance cellular immune responses , type 1 ( tnfα , ifn-γ , etc . ) , and those that enhance antibody responses , type 2 ( tgf-β , il-4 , il-10 , il-13 , etc . ) . a key focus of interest has been that cytokines in one of these two sub-sets tend to inhibit the effects of those in the other . dysregulation of this tendency is under intensive study for its possible role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disorders . several inflammatory cytokines are induced by oxidative stress . the fact that cytokines themselves trigger the release of other cytokines and also lead to increased oxidative stress makes them important in chronic inflammation , as well as other immunoresponses , such as fever and acute phase proteins of the liver ( il-1,6,12 , ifn-a ) . cytokines also play a role in anti-inflammatory pathways and are a possible therapeutic treatment for pathological pain from inflammation or peripheral nerve injury . there are both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines that regulate this pathway . receptors . in recent years , the cytokine receptors have come to demand the attention of more investigators than cytokines themselves , partly because of their remarkable characteristics and partly because a deficiency of cytokine receptors has now been directly linked to certain debilitating immunodeficiency states . in this regard , and also because the redundancy and pleomorphism of cytokines are , in fact , a consequence of their homologous receptors , many authorities think that a classification of cytokine receptors would be more clinically and experimentally useful . a classification of cytokine receptors based on their three-dimensional structure has , therefore , been attempted . such a classification , though seemingly cumbersome , provides several unique perspectives for attractive pharmacotherapeutic targets . immunoglobulin superfamily , which are ubiquitously present throughout several cells and tissues of the vertebrate body , and share structural homology with immunoglobulins ( antibody ) , cell adhesion molecules , and even some cytokines . examples : il-1 receptor types . hemopoietic growth factor ( type 1 ) family , whose members have certain conserved motifs in their extracellular amino-acid domain . the il-2 receptor belongs to this chain , whose γ-chain ( common to several other cytokines ) deficiency is directly responsible for the x-linked form of severe combined immunodeficiency ( x-scid ) . interferon ( type 2 ) family , whose members are receptors for ifn β and γ . tumor necrosis factors ( tnf ) ( type 3 ) family , whose members share a cysteine-rich common extracellular binding domain , and includes several other non-cytokine ligands like cd40 , cd27 and cd30 , besides the ligands on which the family is named . 7tm receptor family , the ubiquitous receptor type of the animal kingdom . all g protein-coupled receptors ( for hormones and neurotransmitters ) belong to this family . chemokine receptors , two of which act as binding proteins for hiv ( cd4 and ccr5 ) , also belong to this family . interleukin-17 receptor ( il-17r ) family , which shows little homology with any other cytokine receptor family . structural motifs conserved between members of this family include : an extracellular fibronectin iii-like domain , a transmembrane domain and a cytoplasmic serif domain . the known members of this family are as follows : il-17ra , il-17rb , il-17rc , il17rd and il-17re . . cellular effects . each cytokine has a matching cell-surface receptor . subsequent cascades of intracellular signaling then alter cell functions . this may include the upregulation and/or downregulation of several genes and their transcription factors , resulting in the production of other cytokines , an increase in the number of surface receptors for other molecules , or the suppression of their own effect by enzyme inhibitor . the effect of a particular cytokine on a given cell depends on the cytokine , its extracellular abundance , the presence and abundance of the complementary receptor on the cell surface , and downstream signals activated by receptor binding ; these last two factors can vary by cell type . cytokines are characterized by considerable redundancy , in that many cytokines appear to share similar functions . it seems to be a paradox that cytokines binding to antibody have a stronger immune effect than the cytokine alone . this may lead to lower therapeutic doses . it has been shown that inflammatory cytokines cause an il-10-dependent inhibition of t-cell expansion and function by up-regulating pd-1 levels on monocytes , which leads to il-10 production by monocytes after binding of pd-1 by pd-l . adverse reactions to cytokines are characterized by local inflammation and/or ulceration at the injection sites . occasionally such reactions are seen with more widespread papule . james , william ; berger , timothy ; elston , dirk ( 2005 ) . andrews ' diseases of the skin : clinical dermatology . ( 10th ed . ) . saunders . . roles in health and disease . cytokines are often involved in several developmental processes during embryonic development . saito explains '' much evidence has suggested that cytokines and chemokines play a very important role in the reproduction , i.e . embryo implantation , endometrial development , and trophoblast growth and differentiation by modulating the immune and endocrine systems . '' ( 15 ) chen explains the regulatory activity of lif in human and murine embryos : '' in conclusion , human preimplantation embryos express lif and lif-r mrna . the expression of these transcripts indicates that preimplantation embryos may be responsive to lif originating either from the surrounding environment or from the embryos themselves and exerting its function in a paracrine or autocrine manner . '' ( 719 ) cytokines are crucial for fighting off infections and in other immune responses . however , they can become dysregulated and pathological in inflammation , trauma , sepsis , and hemorrhagic stroke . . adverse effects . adverse effects of cytokines have been linked to many disease states and conditions ranging from schizophrenia , major depression and alzheimer 's disease to cancer . normal tissue integrity is preserved by feedback interactions between diverse cell types mediated by adhesion molecules and secreted cytokines ; disruption of normal feedback mechanisms in cancer threatens tissue integrity . over-secretion of cytokines can trigger a dangerous cytokine storm syndrome . cytokine storms may have been the cause of severe adverse events during a clinical trial of tgn1412 . cytokine storms are also suspected to be the main cause of death in the 1918 flu pandemic . deaths were weighted more heavily towards people with healthy immune systems , because of their ability to produce stronger immune responses , with dramatic increases in cytokine levels . another example of cytokine storm is seen in acute pancreatitis . cytokines are integral and implicated in all angles of the cascade , resulting in the systemic inflammatory response syndrome and multi-organ failure associated with this intra-abdominal catastrophe . in the covid-19 pandemic , some deaths from covid-19 have been attributable to cytokine release storms . current data suggest cytokine storms may be the source of extensive lung tissue damage and dysfunctional coagulation in covid-19 infections . . medical use as drugs . some cytokines have been developed into protein therapeutics using recombinant dna technology . recombinant cytokines being used as drugs as of 2014 include : bone morphogenetic protein ( bmp ) , used to treat bone-related conditions erythropoietin ( epo ) , used to treat anemia granulocyte colony-stimulating factor ( g-csf ) , used to treat neutropenia in cancer patients granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor ( gm-csf ) , used to treat neutropenia and fungal infections in cancer patients interferon alfa , used to treat hepatitis c and multiple sclerosis interferon beta , used to treat multiple sclerosis interleukin 2 ( il-2 ) , used to treat cancer . interleukin 11 ( il-11 ) , used to treat thrombocytopenia in cancer patients . interferon gamma is used to treat chronic granulomatous disease and osteopetrosis