Shūzō Kuki

early life . kuki was the fourth child of baron kuki ryūichi ( 九鬼 隆一 ) a high bureaucrat in the meiji ministry for culture and education ( monbushō ) . since it appears that kuki 's mother , hatsu , was already pregnant when she fell in love with okakura kakuzō ( 岡倉 覚三 ) , otherwise known as okakura tenshin ( 岡倉 天心 ) , a protégé of her husband 's ( a notable patron of the arts ) , the rumour that okakura was kuki 's father would appear to be groundless . it is true , however , that shūzō as a child , after his mother had separated and then divorced his father , thought of okakura , who often visited , as his real father , and later certainly hailed him as his spiritual father . from okakura , he gained much of his fascination for aesthetics and perhaps foreign languages , as indeed his fascination with the peculiar cultural codes of the pleasure quarters of japan owes something to the fact that his mother had once been a geisha . at age 23 in 1911 ( meiji 44 ) , kuki converted to catholicism ; and he was baptized in tokyo as franciscus assisiensis kuki shūzō . the idealism and introspection implied by this decision were early evidence of issues which would have resonance in the characteristic mindset of the mature man . nara , hiroshi . ( 2004 ) . the structure of detachment : the aesthetic vision of kuki shūzō with a translation of '' iki no kōzō , '' pp . 96–97 . a graduate in philosophy of university of tokyo , kuki spent eight years in europe to polish his knowledge of languages and deepen his already significant studies of contemporary western thought . at the university of heidelberg , he studied under the neo-kantian heinrich rickert , and he engaged eugen herrigel as a tutor . nara , p . 172 . at the university of paris , he was impressed by the work of henri bergson , whom he came to know personally ; and he engaged the young jean-paul sartre as a french tutor . nara , p . 173 . it is little known outside japan that kuki influenced jean-paul sartre to develop an interest in heidegger 's philosophy . parkes , graham . ( 1990 ) . heidegger and asian thought , p . 158 . at the university of freiburg , kuki studied phenomenology under edmund husserl ; and he first met martin heidegger in husserl 's home . he moved to the university of marburg for heidegger 's 1927/1928 winter semester lectures on the phenomenological interpretation of kant 's critique of pure reason ( published as volume 25 in the heidegger gesamtausgabe ) , and for heidegger 's seminar '' schelling 's essay on the essence of human freedom . '' the following semester ( summer , 1928 ) he attended heidegger 's lecture on logic in the light of leibniz ( hga 26 ) and his seminar on aristotle physics . marra ( 2004 ) , p . 9 fellow students during these years in europe were tetsurō watsuji and kiyoshi miki . career . shortly after kuki 's return to japan , he wrote and published his masterpiece , the structure of iki ( 1930 ) . in this work he undertakes to make a phenomenological analysis of iki , a variety of chic culture current among the fashionable set in edo in the tokugawa period , and asserted that it constituted one of the essential values of japanese culture . kuki took up a teaching post at kyoto university , then a prominent center for conservative cultural values and thinking . his early lectures focused on descartes and bergson . in the context of a faculty with a primarily germanic philosophical background , his lectures offered a somewhat different perspective based on the work of french philosophers . he became an associate professor in 1933 ( shōwa 8 ) ; and in that same year , he published the first book length study of martin heidegger to appear in japanese . nara , p . 174 . in this context , it is noteworthy that the german philosopher explicitly referenced a conversation '' between a japanese and an inquirer '' zwischen einem japaner und einem fragendenin in on the way to language ( aus einem gespräch von der sprache ) . marra , michael f . ( 2002 ) . also , heidegger expressed a desire to have written the preface to the german translation of the structure of '' iki '' light , stephen . ( 1987 ) . kuki shūzō and jean-paul sartre , p . 31 . at the university of kyoto , kuki was elevated to professor of philosophy in march 1934 ( shōwa 10 ) . the next year , he published the problem of contingency , also known as the problem of the accidental . nussbaum , louis-frédéric . ( 2005 ) . '' kuki shūzō '' in . this work was developed from his personal experiences in europe and the influences of heidegger . as a single japanese man within an encompassing '' white '' or non-japanese society , he considered the extent to which he became a contingency ( philosophy ) . his kyoto university lectures on heidegger , man and existence , were published in 1939 . nara , p . 161 . from the mid-thirties , while japan drifted towards totalitarianism and the war in china dragged on , kuki seemed not to be much disturbed by the growth of fascism . nara , p . 149 . in 1941 , kuki died prematurely from consequences following an attack of peritonitis . nara , p . 175 . his manuscripts are now kept in the konan university library . major works . 1930 1933 1935 1939 1941 . complete works . kuki 's complete works in twelve volumes , the kuki shuzo zenshu ( abbreviated ksz in scholarly publications that reference the collection ) , are published by the japanese company iwanami shoten : takada , passim nara , p . 9 volume one : 「いき」の構造 '' iki '' no kozo , '' the structure of iki '' . : this volume also contains : : glauben und wissen ( '' beliefs and knowledge '' , kuki 's thesis written during his time at the university of tokyo on the subject of faith and knowledge in european medieval philosophy ) : propos sur le temps ( '' on time '' , which contains two lectures that kuki delivered at pontigny in august 1928 : la notion du temps et la reprise sur le temps en orient and l'expression de l'infini dans l'art japonais ) : choses japonaises ( '' japanese things '' , a series of short essays which the editors surmise were written during kuki 's stay in paris , including '' bergson au japon '' and '' à la manière d'hérodote '' ) . takada , p . 288 pincus , p . 52 volume two : 偶然性の問題 guzensei no mondai , '' the problem of contingency '' volume three : 人間と実存 ningen to jitsuzon , '' man and existence '' volume four : 文芸論 bungeiron , '' theory of the arts '' volume five : をりにふれて 押韻論 ori ni furete , oin-ron , contains '' theory of rhyme '' volume six : 西洋近世哲学史稿 ( 上 ) seiyo kinsei tetsugaku-shi ko 1/2 , '' history of early modern western philosophy , first part '' volume seven : 西洋近世哲学史稿 ( 下 ) seiyo kinsei tetsugaku-shi ko 2/2 , '' history of early modern western philosophy , second part '' volume eight : 現代フランス哲学講義 gendai furansu tetsugaku kogi , '' lecture : modern french philosophy '' volume nine : 講義 現代哲学・講演 現代哲学の動向 kogi gendai tetsugaku , koen gendai tetsugaku no doko , '' lecture : modern philosophy '' and '' speech : the trend of modern philosophy '' volume ten : 講義 ハイデッガーの現象学的存在論 kogi haideggā no genshō-gaku-teki sonzai-ron , '' lecture : the phenomenological ontology of heidegger '' volume eleven : 講義 文学概論・講義 偶然性 kogi bungaku gairon , kogi guzen-sei , '' lectures : outline of literature '' and '' lecture : accidentality '' . : the lectures entitled outline of literature were delivered by kuki at the university of tokyo in 1933 . marra , 2011 p . 396 among them is the lecture guzen ( contingency ) which is translated in marra , 2011 . volume twelve : 資料篇 shiryo-hen , documents . notes . references and further reading . secondary sources . thorsten botz-bornstein . '' contingency and the time of the dream : kuki shuzo and french prewar philosophy '' in philosophy east and west 50:4 ( 2000 ) . ——— . '' iki , style , trace : shuzo kuki and the spirit of hermeneutics '' in philosophy east and west 47 : 4 ( 1997 ) : 554–580 . light , stephen . kuki shūzō and jean-paul sartre : influence and counter-influence in the early history of existential phenomenology . carbondale : southern illinois university press , 1987 . marra , michael f . kuki shuzo : a philosopher 's poetry and poetics . honolulu : university of hawai ' i press , 2004 . ——— japanese hermeneutics : current debates on aesthetics and interpretation . honolulu : university of hawai ' i press , 2002 . ——— japan 's frames of reference : a hermeneutics reader . honolulu : university of hawai ' i press , 2011 . mayeda , graham . '' is there a method to chance ? contrasting kuki shūzō ’ s phenomenological methodology in the problem of contingency with that of his contemporaries wilhelm windelband and heinrich rickert . '' in frontiers of japanese philosophy ii : neglected themes and hidden variations . edited by victor s . hori and melissa anne-marie curley . nagoya : nanzan institute for religion and culture , 2008 . ——— . japanese philosophers on society and culture : nishida kitarō , watsuji tetsurō , and kuki shūzō . lanham : lexington books , 2020 . ——— . '' time for ethics : temporality and the ethical ideal in emmanuel levinas and kuki shūzō '' in comparative and continental philosophy 4 : 1 ( 2012 : 105-124 . ——— . time , space and ethics in the philosophy of watsuji tetsurō , kuki shūzō , and martin heidegger . new york : routledge , 2006 . nara , hiroshi . the structure of detachment : the aesthetic vision of kuki shūzō with a translation of '' iki no kōzō . '' honolulu : university of hawaii press , 2004 . parkes , graham . heidegger and asian thought . honolulu : university of hawaii press , 1990 . pincus , leslie . authenticating culture in imperial japan : kuki shūzō and the rise of national aesthetics . berkeley : university of california press , 1996 . saitō , takako ) . nagoya : nanzan institute for religion and culture , 2008 . ——— . '' in search of the absolute : kuki shūzō and shinran '' ( archive ) . in volume 7 of frontiers of japanese philosophy , 232–246 . edited by james w . heisig and rein raud . nagoya : nanzan institute for religion and culture , 2010 . sakabe , megumi . washida seiichi and fujita masakatsu , eds . kuki shūzō no sekai . tokyo : minerva shobō , 2002 . st . clair , robert n . '' the phenomenology of self across cultures . '' in intercultural communication studies 13 : 3 ( 2004 ) : 8–26 . takada , yasunari . '' shuzo kuki : or , a sense of being in-between '' ( archive ) in : takada , yasunari . transcendental descent : essays in literature and philosophy ( collection utcp-2 ) . the university of tokyo center for philosophy ( utcp ) . p . & nbsp ; 281–295 . yasuda , takeshi and michitarō tada . '' iki '' no kōzō ’ o yomu . tokyo : asahi sensho , 1979 . external links . 九鬼 周造 ( kuki shūzō ) at www.aozora.gr.jp 九鬼周造 ( kuki shūzō ) at www.isis.ne.jp