Chinese astrology

background . chinese astrology was elaborated during the zhou dynasty ( 1046–256 bc ) and flourished during the han dynasty ( 2nd century bc to 2nd century ad ) . during the han period , the familiar elements of traditional chinese culture—the yin-yang philosophy , the theory of the five elements , the concepts of heaven and earth , and confucian morality—were brought together to formalize the philosophical principles of chinese medicine and divination , astrology and alchemy . xiaochun sun , jacob kistemaker , the chinese sky during the han : constellating stars and society , pp.3-4 . brill , 1997 . the five classical planets are associated with the wuxing : venus—metal ( white tiger ) jupiter—wood ( azure dragon ) mercury—water ( black tortoise ) mars—fire ( vermilion bird ) ( may be associated with the phoenix which was also an imperial symbol along with the dragon ) saturn—earth ( yellow dragon ) according to chinese astrology , a person 's destiny can be determined by the position of the major planets at the person 's birth along with the positions of the sun , moon , comets , the person 's time of birth , and zodiac sign . the system of the twelve-year cycle of animal signs was built from observations of the orbit of jupiter ( the year star ; . following the orbit of jupiter around the sun , chinese astronomers divided the celestial circle into 12 sections , and rounded it to 12 years ( from 11.86 ) . jupiter is associated with the constellation sheti - boötes ) and is sometimes called sheti . a system of computing one 's fate and destiny based on one 's birthday , birth season , and birth hours , known as zi wei dou shu , or purple star astrology , is still used regularly in modern-day chinese astrology to divine one 's fortune . the 28 chinese constellations , xiu , are quite different from western constellations . for example , the big bear ( ursa major ) is known as dou ; the belt of orion is known as shen , or the '' happiness , fortune , longevity '' trio of demigods . the seven northern constellations are referred to as xuan wu . xuan wu is also known as the spirit of the northern sky or the spirit of water in taoism belief . in addition to astrological readings of the heavenly bodies , the stars in the sky form the basis of many fairy tales . for example , the summer triangle is the trio of the cowherd ( altair ) , the weaving maiden fairy ( vega ) , and the '' tai bai '' fairy ( deneb ) . the two forbidden lovers were separated by the silvery river ( the milky way ) . each year on the seventh day of the seventh month in the chinese calendar , the birds form a bridge across the milky way . the cowherd carries their two sons ( the two stars on each side of altair ) across the bridge to reunite with their fairy mother . the tai bai fairy acts as the chaperone of these two immortal lovers . chinese and east-asian . chinese astrology has a close relation with chinese philosophy which the core values and concepts are originated from taoism or '' tao '' . . luni-solar calendar . the 60-year cycle consists of two separate cycles interacting with each other . the first is the cycle of ten heavenly stems , namely the five elements ( in order wood , fire , earth , metal , and water ) in their yin and yang forms . the second is the cycle of the twelve zodiac animal signs shēngxiào ) or earthly branches . they are in order as follows : the rat , ox , tiger , rabbit , dragon , snake , horse , goat , monkey , rooster , dog , and pig . in vietnam the rabbit is replaced by the cat . this combination creates the 60-year cycle due to the fewest years ( least common multiple ) it would take to get from yang wood rat to its next iteration , which always starts with yang wood rat and ends with yin water pig . since the zodiac animal cycle of 12 is divisible by two , every zodiac sign can occur only as either yin or yang : the dragon is always yang , the snake is always yin , etc . the current cycle began in 1984 ( as shown in '' table of the sixty-year calendar '' below ) . when trying to traverse the lunisolar calendar , an easy rule to follow is that years that end in an even number are yang , those that end with an odd number are yin . the cycle proceeds as follows : if the year ends in 0 it is yang metal . if the year ends in 1 it is yin metal . if the year ends in 2 it is yang water . if the year ends in 3 it is yin water . if the year ends in 4 it is yang wood . if the year ends in 5 it is yin wood . if the year ends in 6 it is yang fire . if the year ends in 7 it is yin fire . if the year ends in 8 it is yang earth . if the year ends in 9 it is yin earth . however , since the ( traditional ) chinese zodiac follows the ( lunisolar ) chinese calendar , the switch-over date is the chinese new year , not january 1 as in the gregorian calendar . therefore , a person who was born in january or early february may have the sign of the previous year . for example , if a person was born in january 1970 , his or her element would still be yin earth , not yang metal . similarly , although 1990 was called the year of the horse , anyone born from january 1 to january 26 , 1990 , was in fact born in the year of the snake ( the sign of the previous year ) , because the 1990 year of the horse did not begin until january 27 , 1990 . for this reason , many online sign calculators ( and chinese restaurant place mats ) may give a person the wrong sign if he/she was born in january or early february . the start of a new zodiac is also celebrated on chinese new year along with many other customs . table of the sixty-year calendar . the following table shows the 60-year cycle matched up to the western calendar for the years 1984–2043 ( see sexagenary cycle article for years 1924–1983 ) . this is only applied to chinese lunar calendar . the sexagenary cycle begins at lichun . each of the chinese lunar years are associated with a combination of the ten heavenly stems and the twelve earthly branches which make up the 60 stem-branches in a sexagenary cycle . see also . chinese calendar correspondence table chinese calendar da liu ren four pillars of destiny qimen dunjia sexagenary cycle shēngxiào symbolic stars synoptical astrology tai yi shen shu zi wei dou shu . references . sources . shelly wu . ( 2005 ) . chinese astrology . publisher : the career press , inc .