Pierre Monteux

life and career . early years . pierre monteux was born in paris , the third son and the fifth of six children of gustave élie monteux , a shoe salesman , and his wife , clémence rebecca née brisac . canarina , p . 20 the monteux family was descended from sephardic jews who settled in the south of france . canarina , p . 19 the monteux ancestors included at least one rabbi , but gustave monteux and his family were not religious . monteux ( 1965 ) , pp 18–19 among monteux 's brothers were henri , who became an actor , and paul , who became a conductor of light music under the name paul monteux-brisac . canarina , pp . 20 ( paul ) and 148 ( henri ) gustave monteux was not musical , but his wife was a graduate of the conservatoire de musique de marseille and gave piano lessons . pierre took violin lessons from the age of six . when he was nine years old monteux was admitted to the conservatoire de paris . he studied the violin with jules garcin and henri berthelier , composition with charles lenepveu , and harmony and theory with albert lavignac . canarina , p . 21 his fellow violin students included george enescu , carl flesch , fritz kreisler and jacques thibaud . among the piano students at the conservatoire was alfred cortot , with whom he developed a lifelong friendship . at the age of twelve , monteux organised and conducted a small orchestra of conservatoire students to accompany cortot in performances of concertos in and around paris . he attended the world premiere of césar franck 's symphony in february 1889 . canarina , john . '' peerless pierre '' . classic record collector , autumn 2003 , number 34 , pp . 9–15 from 1889 to 1892 , while still a student , he played in the orchestra of the folies bergère ; he later said to george gershwin that his rhythmic sense was formed during the experience of playing popular dance music there . swain , jonathan . '' pierre monteux edition '' , gramophone , september 1994 , p . 131 at the age of fifteen , while continuing his violin studies , monteux took up the viola . he studied privately with benjamin godard , with whom he performed in the premiere of saint-saëns 's septet , with the composer at the keyboard . monteux joined the geloso quartet as violist ; he played many concerts with them , including a performance of fauré 's second piano quartet with the composer at the piano . canarina , p . 22 on another occasion he was the violist in a private performance of a brahms quartet given before the composer in vienna . monteux recalled brahms 's remark , '' it takes the french to play my music properly . the germans all play it much too heavily . '' canarina , p . 24 monteux remained a member of the geloso quartet until 1911 . with johannes wolff and joseph hollman he also played chamber music for grieg . years later , in his seventies , monteux deputised with the budapest quartet without rehearsal or score ; swain , jonathan . '' reputations – pierre monteux '' , gramophone , january 1998 , p . 35 asked by erik smith if he could write out the parts of the seventeen beethoven quartets , he replied , '' you know , i can not forget them . '' smith ( 2005 ) , pp . 36–38 in 1893 , when he was eighteen , monteux married a fellow student , the pianist victoria barrière . with her he played the complete beethoven violin sonatas in public . neither family approved of the marriage ; although the monteux family were not religious , both they and the roman catholic barrières were doubtful about an interfaith marriage ; furthermore , both families thought the couple too young to marry . there were a son and a daughter from the union . during his formative years monteux belonged to a group which toured with the casadesus family of musicians and the pianist alfredo casella . the combination played supposed '' ancient pieces '' , allegedly discovered in libraries by one or other of the casadesus family ; marius casadesus later revealed that he or his brother henri had written the music . scheijen , p . 238 while still a student , in 1893 monteux was successful in the competition for the chair of first viola of the concerts colonne , of which he became assistant conductor and choirmaster the following year . this gave him a link via the orchestra 's founder , édouard colonne , to berlioz . colonne had known berlioz , and through the older conductor monteux was able to mark his scores with notes based on the composer 's intentions . canarina , p . 23 & 25 monteux ( 1965 ) , p . 49 he was also employed on a freelance basis at the opéra-comique , where he continued to play from time to time for several years ; he led the viola section at the 1902 premiere of pelléas et mélisande under the baton of andré messager . '' obituary – m . pierre monteux '' , the times , 2 july 1964 , p . 14 in 1896 he graduated from the conservatoire , sharing first prize for violin with thibaud . cooper , martin , josé a bowen and charles barber '' monteux , pierre '' , grove music online , oxford music online , accessed 16 march 2012 . first conducting posts . monteux 's first high-profile conducting experience came in 1895 , when he was barely 20 years old . he was a member of the orchestra engaged for a performance of saint-saëns 's oratorio la lyre et la harpe , to be conducted by the composer . at the last minute saint-saëns judged the player engaged for the important and difficult organ part to be inadequate and , as a celebrated virtuoso organist , decided to play it himself . he asked the orchestra if any of them could take over as conductor ; there was a chorus of '' oui – monteux ! '' . with great trepidation , monteux conducted the orchestra and soloists including the composer , sight-reading the score , and was judged a success . monteux ( 1965 ) , p . 45 monteux 's musical career was interrupted in 1896 , when he was called up for military service . as a graduate of the conservatoire , one of france 's grandes écoles , he was required to serve only ten months rather than the three years generally required . he later described himself as '' the most pitifully inadequate soldier that the 132nd infantry had ever seen '' . monteux ( 1965 ) , p . 63 he had inherited from his mother not only her musical talent but her short and portly build and was physically unsuited to soldiering . canarina , pp . 20 and 26 returning to paris after discharge , monteux resumed his career as a violist . hans richter invited him to lead the violas in the bayreuth festival orchestra , but monteux could not afford to leave his regular work in paris . '' unquenchable mr . monteux '' , the times , 4 may 1961 , p . 16 in december 1900 monteux played the solo viola part in berlioz 's harold in italy , rarely heard in paris at the time , with the colonne orchestra conducted by felix mottl . d'udine , jean . paraphrases musicales sur les grand concerts du dimanche colonne et lamoureux 1900–1903 . a joanin et cie , paris , 1904 , p . 68 ( in french ) in 1902 he secured a junior conducting post at the dieppe casino , a seasonal appointment for the summer months which brought him into contact with leading musicians from the paris orchestras and well-known soloists on vacation . by 1907 he was the principal conductor at dieppe , in charge of operas and orchestral concerts . as an orchestral conductor he modelled his technique on that of arthur nikisch , under whose baton he had played , and who was his ideal conductor . he can be heard rehearsing in the original lp issues of beethoven 's eroica symphony with the concertgebouw orchestra ( philips 835132 ay ) and beethoven 's 9th with the london symphony ( westminster , wst 234 ) . video recordings of monteux are scarcer . he is seen conducting berlioz 's roman carnival overture and beethoven 's 8th symphony with the chicago symphony orchestra , potter , tully . '' review of vai and emi dvds '' , classic record collector , autumn 2003 , number 34 , pp . 61–62 and dukas ' l'apprenti sorcier with the london symphony orchestra in an '' unshowy , deeply satisfying humane way '' . ivry b . review of emi/img classic archive dvd . classic record collector , winter 2004 , number 39 , p . 64 . notes and references . notes references . sources . . external links . pierre monteaux music manuscripts at the newberry library