Telemarketing

history . the term telemarketing was first used extensively in the late 1970s to describe bell system communications which related to new uses for the outbound wats and inbound toll-free services . . telephonists . the rise of telemarketing can be traced back to the 19th century telephonists , or switchboard operators . trans-cultural hiring of switchboard operators ( mostly women ) became especially popular in north america throughout the 20th century , partially due to popularity gained through advertising . after the shift from public switched telephone network to computer-based electronic switching system , the job of switchboard operators gradually diminished . however , with the rise of advertising and with the popularity of the telephone use , new jobs , including telemarketing jobs , were created . women in telemarketing . telemarketing , as was the case with telephone operators , is one of the fields known to be occupied mostly by women . the central reason for hiring women operators lay in the fact that women 's work was considered a form of cheap labor : female telemarketers earned about one-half to one-quarter of men 's wages . it was also highlighted , however , that women were more polite and well mannered than male operators . moreover , the calming , more delicate nature of a woman 's voice was considered to be women 's natural quality , although no scientific evidence supports this statement . this naturalization led to normalizing the perception of women as telephone operators and consultants , which is currently reflected in the telemarketing industry . categories . the two major categories of telemarketing are business-to-business and business-to-consumer . subcategories . lead generation , the gathering of information and contacts sales , using persuasion to sell a product or service outbound , proactive marketing in which prospective and preexisting customers are contacted directly inbound , reception of incoming orders and requests for information . demand is generally created by advertising , publicity , or the efforts of outside salespeople . left . service styles . call to action , the implementation of outbound telemarketing to '' activate '' or elicit an action or response from prospects ( i.e . , entice prospects to visit a client 's website ) appointment setting , utilizing inbound or outbound telemarketing to create face-to-face or telephone appointments for sales purposes . database cleansing , the outbound calling of databases with the particular purpose to clean and prepare data ( i.e . removing outdated and incorrect data ) and contact details for future telemarketing campaigns . surveys , the implementation of telemarketing ( can be inbound or outbound ) with the particular purpose of collecting data and information from specific target markets for qualitative research purposes . telesales , telemarketing ( inbound or outbound ) with the specific intention of making an actual sale/transaction over the phone . often includes the collection of credit card details over the phone for payment purposes , which allows for faster sales cycles and payment confirmation . procedure . telemarketing may be done from a company office , from a call center , or from home . it may involve a live operator voice broadcasting which is most frequently associated with political messages . an effective telemarketing campaign often involves two or more calls . the first call ( or series of calls ) determines the customer 's needs . the final call ( or series of calls ) motivates the customer to make a purchase . prospective customers are identified by various means , including past purchase history , previous requests for information , credit limit , competition entry forms , and application forms . names may also be purchased from another company 's consumer database or obtained from a telephone directory or another public list . the qualification process is intended to determine which customers are most likely to purchase the product or service . in business-to-business lead generation scenarios , telemarketing often targets perceived decision-makers who might be good prospects for a business product or service . the telemarketing approach is often combined with outreach via email or social media , typically referred to as a cadence . calls are usually made by sales development representatives with the goal of this outreach being a subsequent meeting—often with an account executive at the vendor organization . charitable trust , alumni associations , and political party often use telemarketing to solicit donations . marketing research companies use telemarketing techniques to survey the prospective or past customers of a client 's business in order to assess market acceptance of or satisfaction with a particular product , service , brand , or company . public opinion polls are conducted in a similar manner . telemarketing techniques are also applied to other forms of electronic marketing using e-mail or fax messages , in which case they are frequently considered spam by receivers . thumb . negative perceptions and criticism . telemarketing has been negatively associated with various scams and frauds , such as pyramid schemes , and with deceptively overpriced products and services . fraudulent telemarketing companies are frequently referred to as '' telemarketing boiler rooms '' or simply '' boiler rooms '' . telemarketing is often criticized as an business ethics due to the perception of high-pressure sales techniques during unsolicited calls . telemarketers marketing telephone companies may participate in telephone slamming , the practice of switching a customer 's telephone service without their knowledge or authorization . telemarketing calls are often considered an annoyance , especially when they occur during the dinner hour , early in the morning , or late in the evening . some companies have capitalized on these negative emotions . since 2007 several forums have sprouted and act as complaint boards where consumers can voice their concerns and criticism . in response some telemarketing companies have filed lawsuits against these portals . the current legal system in the u.s grants such forums a certain degree of protection through '' communications decency act , 47 u.s.c 230 '' and california 's anti-slapp law . robotic telemarketing and ringless voicemail . a recent trend in telemarketing is to use robocalls : automated telephone calls that use both computerized autodialers and computer-delivered pre-recorded messages in a sales pitch . some can simulate a personalized phone call through personalized pre-recorded messages . telemarketing has recently been advanced to implement a programmed women 's voice as the operator instead of hiring a real woman to perform the task ( see example of samantha west ) . this attempt has been shown to be unsuccessful . however , some scholars argue that such technological advancements reinforce commoditization of a woman 's speech as a marketable entity and lead to '' gendered hierarchy of communication '' . others tactics , such as ringless voicemail , can directly deliver a voice message directly to a landline 's or cellphone 's voicemail . its original purpose was to provide a nonintrusive method of delivering valuable messages . there has been debate on ringless voicemail causing issues relating to '' hijacking '' of the voicemail by companies , which would disallow family and friends to access the voicemail . . regulations . in some countries telemarketing is subject to regulatory and legislative controls related to consumer privacy and protection . united states . telemarketing in the united states of america is restricted at the federal level by the telephone consumer protection act of 1991 ( tcpa ) and the ftc 's telemarketing sales rule ( tsr ) . the fcc derives regulatory authority from the tcpa , adopted as cfr 64.1200 and the telemarketing and consumer fraud and abuse prevention act , 15 u.s.c . 6101–6108 . many professional associations of telemarketers have codes of ethics and standards that member businesses follow to encourage public confidence . some jurisdictions have implemented '' do not call '' lists through industry organizations or legislation ; telemarketers are restricted from initiating contact with participating consumers . legislative versions often provide for heavy penalties on companies which call individuals on these listings . the u.s . federal trade commission has implemented a national do not call registry in an attempt to reduce intrusive telemarketing nationwide . telemarketing corporations and trade groups challenged this as a violation of commercial speech rights . miller , jacqui brown . '' mainstream marketing services , et al . v . federal trade commission : resources and legal analysis . '' reclaimdemocracy.org . january 20 , 2004 . however , the u.s . 10th circuit court of appeals upheld the national do not call registry on february 17 , 2004 . text of the case and the decision . findlaw . companies that use telemarketing as a sales tool are governed by the united states federal regulations outlined in the tsr ( amended on january 29 , 2003 originally issued in 1995 ) and the tcpa . in addition to these federal regulations , telemarketers calling nationally must also adhere to separate state regulations . most states have adapted '' do not call '' files of their own , of which only some states share with the u.s . federal do not call registry . each u.s . state also has its own regulations concerning : permission to record , permission to continue , no rebuttaling statutes , sunday and holiday calls ; as well as the fines and punishments exacted for violations . september 1 , 2009 , ftc regulations banning most robocalls went into effect . since many telemarketing calls now originate offshore , beyond the reach of us legal or regulatory agencies , the national do not call registry is usually ignored , as well as ftc regulations , and every possible number is called in an area code block . some automated services are sophisticated enough to analyze the audio from the answering party , and if it determines that a human did not respond , will call repeatedly until one does or a limit is reached . this may be coupled with a fake caller id display ( '' spoofing '' ) to mislead the call recipient into answering , or even thinking it is a local number calling . these are not actions of legitimate businesses . telemarketing techniques are increasingly used in political campaigns . because of free-speech issues , the laws governing political phone calls are much less stringent than those applying to commercial messages . even so , a number of states have barred or restricted political robocalls . the national do not call registry has helped to substantially curb telemarketing calls to landlines and has also helped with the increasing trend for telemarketers to target mobile phones . as a result , there has been a greater push for mobile applications to help with unwanted calls from telemarketers , like privacystar . these companies have helped to log thousands of complaints to the dnc registry , since the inception of the registry itself . matt brownell , the street . '' march 1 , 2012 . retrieved august 27 , 2012 . . canada . telemarketing in canada is regulated by the canadian radio-television and telecommunications commission ( crtc ) , an agency of the federal department innovation , science and economic development canada . canadians can register with the national do not call list ( dncl ) to reduce the number of telemarketing calls received . national dncl . anyone who has received a telemarketing call which is in violation of one or more of the unsolicited telecommunications rules may file a complaint to the national dncl . the national dncl operator then forwards all complaints to the crtc , which determines whether a complaint warrants further investigation , based on their initial assessment . . australia . telemarketing in australia is restricted by the australian federal government and policed by the australian communications and media authority ( acma ) . australian federal legislation provides for a restriction in calling hours for both research and marketing calls . telecommunications ( do not call register ) ( telemarketing and research calls ) industry standard 2007 acma . in 2007 a do not call register was established for australian inbound telephone numbers . the register allows a user to register private use telephone numbers . australian federal legislation limits the types of marketing calls that can be made to these registered telephone numbers ; however , research calls are allowed . other exemptions include calls made by charities and political members , parties and candidates do not call register faq acma faq . however any organisation that is instructed by the recipient of a telemarketing call , not to call that number again , is legally obliged to comply , and must remove the phone number from the organisations calling list ( s ) . inbound telemarketing is another major industry . it involves both live operators and ivr—interactive voice response . ivr is also known as audio text or automated call processing . usually , major television campaigns and advertisers use toll-free telephone number that are answered by ivr service bureaus . such service bureaus have the technology and call capacity to process the large amounts of simultaneous calls that occur when a toll-free telephone number is advertised on television . england/uk . british police , after noting the high rate of pensioners affected , recommended use of do-not-call registry enrollment to enhance '' phone security . '' british crime survey ; callpreventionregistry.com or . freephone . 0800 652 7780 . specific mention was also made of calls from '' overseas companies . '' . finland . in finland , call centres employ an estimated 100,000 people , but most work with customer relations in larger companies . 10,000 people are working for companies involved with telemarketing . telemarketing often is the first job young people get . but it is also a way out or back to the labour market for handicapped , immigrants and pensioners . in finland , the profession has had a bad reputation because of work-related injuries . the strain on neck , shoulders , eyes and ears can be considerable . health problems have however been reduced considerably thanks to lightweight headsets , ergonomic working stations and more tasks , like documentation , done automatically by computers . . france . the ability to cause a french phone number to appear on a caller id display , when the call originates outside of france was removed by a law passed in july 2018 ; implementation was delayed until august 1 of the following year . . technology . agent-assisted automation autodialer automatic call distributor customer relationship management predictive dialer private branch exchange teleblock natural predictive dialing ringless voicemail . see also . boiler room ( business ) call centre cold calling direct marketing list of call centre companies marketing reloading scam spamming sucker list nuisance call . references . external links . file a complaint to the do not call registry federal trade commission do not call registry laws regulating telemarketers telephone preference service – uk do not call registry