Orange Walk Town

ethnicities . the region is highly populated by mestizos , yucatec mayas , kriols , mennonites , china , taiwanese , indians , and other people from central america . approximately 78 % of the population identifies as hispanic/latino ( mestizo ) , 11.1 % identify as mennonite , maya make up 1.7 % of the populace , garifuna 0.8 % , east indian 0.7 % , creole 7.2 % , white 0.3 % , and asian 0.8 % . as a whole , orange walk is the least ethnically diverse city in belize , with a mainly hispanic population . religion . religion is important to most in orange walk , to some more than others . there is a large catholic presence , although many evangelicals can also be found preaching in the streets and proselytizing . there are many churches and ministries in orange walk . about 65 % of orange walk residents are roman catholic , protestants make up 22 % , jehovah 's witnesses 2 % , and hindu , buddhist , islam , mormons , and salvation army make up about 1 % each . there are about fifty registered churches in the orange walk region . the following are some of the ministries and churches located in the greater orange walk area : harvest bible chapel orange walk church of the nazarene lighthouse mennonite church immaculate conception catholic church betel evangelical church iglesia cristiana josue ad full gospel church of god ( idec ) la inmaculada roman catholic church koinonia ministries jesus deaf church hall of jehovah 's witnesses ow awakening ministries st michael catholic church alfa y omega church maranatha seventh day adventist church carmelita baptist chapel mision internacional vida abundante temple missionary baptist church united in christ evangelical church shalom mennonite church world wide missionary movement church rio hondo mennonite church . language . the most used language in orange walk town is english , but spanish is also very common and almost everyone speaks it to some extent . the official statistics as of 2010 report that 0.7 % speak chinese , 16.8 % speak kriol , 62.2 % speak english , 0.5 % speak garifuna , 10 % speak german ( low german or '' plattdeutsch '' ) , 2.3 % speak maya/indigenous tongues , 85.6 % speak spanish , and 0.6 % speak other languages . population and housing . 2010 population and housing census has orange walk town 's total population as 13,400 residents . of this 6,642 are males and 6,758 are females . the total number of households is 3,361 and the average household size is 4.4 . 88.1 % of these orange walk residents live in a full private house , 5.9 % in part of a private house , 1.3 % in an apartment , and 4.5 % in other . about 14 % of orange walkeños rent a dwelling , whereas about 59.4 % own houses mortgage free . most of the buildings in the city were built from 1990–1999 . of these , over half are made of brick , and a quarter of wood . about three-fourths of all roofs are made of sheet metal . homes and buildings in orange walk are the best kept , with the lowest rate of necessary repair in the country . acoording to official sources , orange walk is becoming more congested and densely populated , and is moving toward apartment flats as an alternative to traditional houses . however , up to 1,200 plots of land are abandoned or have dilapidated , derelict housing . the 2019 population estimate is around 22,000 . the growth is about 2.7 % , far larger than the national population growth of 1.9 % . . education . orange walk has one of the highest qualities of education in belize . students from orange walk frequently score high on standardized examinations and are heavily present at other academic contests . the literacy rate of orange walk is 72.6 % , which is the second-lowest rate in the country after punta gorda . the school attendance figure is about 55 % of males and 45 % of females for primary school , 50 % -50 % for high schools , and 40 % of males versus 60 % of females attend college . in orange walk about a quarter of all students surpass 70 % on their standardized exams , compared with only 15 % doing so in stann creek district . orange walk has the highest rate of trained teachers in the country , second only to corozal . despite the high quality of education , orange walk has the second-highest rate of children aged 5–13 outside of school in the country , at 24.1 % . orange walk has one of the lowest student budgets in the country , less than half that of belize city . most orange walk residents pay for education out of their own pockets , spending 12 % of their total budgets on it . this is almost double the 7.4 % that toledo residents spend on education . primary schools . primary schools include : trial farm government school louisiana government school chapel school new life presbyterian primary school solomon 's sda school la inmaculada primary school st peter 's anglican school carmelita government school . high schools . high schools in the orange walk metropolitan area include : orange walk technical high school new hope high school bishop martin high school muffles high school san juan bautista high school . tertiary schools and colleges . the following are the tertiary institutions/universities located in orange walk : orange walk itvet muffles college university of belize orange walk campus galen university . parks and public spaces . orange walk has many parks , public spaces , and green areas . there are large , ancient , sprawling trees scattered throughout the city . parks . the town council in orange walk has done well in creating many parks in the area . they are mostly clean and family-friendly . they include : queen elizabeth park and market area union town park louisiana nature park san lorenzo site park trial farm park orange walk central park independence park . public spaces . multipurpose complex east sports center people 's stadium trial farm basketball and sports area . monuments and historical sites . marcos canul monument adjacent to the town barracks la inmaculada church and monolith unnamed soldier world war 2 statue in independence park trenches constructed to protect the colonial settlement in 1876 fort mundy colonial anglican church and many other british-style colonial edifices ancient standard colonial water tower downtown represents centuries of british influence the police station sits atop a buried mayan pyramid - it was known as dzuluinicob , or “ land of foreigners . '' in the pre-columbian era . statue of yucatec maya woman breastfeeding in queen victoria park . transportation . the locality is served by the orange walk airport . local bus service to and from belize city to the south and corozal town to the north operates approximately every half-hour . taxis and minibuses are also available for transportation within the city and to surrounding villages and towns . the town is a mid-stop point between belize city and chetumal , mexico , and for this reason many large tour buses pass through on a regular basis . the orange walk district in general , and orange walk town in particular , are drug-trafficking centers due to their close proximity to mexico . the streets in orange walk town are very well paved in most areas , with almost no potholes . be aware that there are some speed bumps throughout the town , as well as traffic lights at main intersections ( these are rare in belize ) . statistics . in accordance with the orange walk transport authority , there are about twenty daily buses coming into orange walk from the surrounding areas . about fifty buses leave orange walk to surrounding towns , villages , and to quintana roo , mexico . social issues . orange walk is generally a safe city . only about 0.5 people per 1,000 are homeless . orange walk has a very low internet access rate at 22.3 % , compared with 38.2 % in belize city . orange walk has the second-highest marriage rate in the country at 43.7 % of all persons . a relatively low number of foreign-born persons live in the city ( 10.8 % , as opposed to 14.5 % national average ) . healthcare . the town is served by the northern regional hospital , formerly called the orange walk hospital , and a second major private hospital named northern medical specialist plaza . orange walk has a very good quality of healthcare . the infant mortality rate is 8.5 per 1,000 live births , and the crude death rate was 4.2 per 1,000 persons in 2010 . several clinics are available in orange walk , including , but not limited to : la asuncion radio-diagnostic center & medical lab on asuncion street sonoscan ultrasound care on baker 's street dr correa 's clinic on ketz lagoon street david 's clinic ultrasound on corozal street sugar city medical center polaris medical clinic on cinderella street genesis medical clinic on san antonio road brigido 's medical and dental clinic osorio 's family health clinic on queen victoria street the dental clinic of dr silvia rios on otro benque street dialisis de belice ( belize-corozal road ) northern veterinary clinic on guadelupe street there are also many pharmacies : alex pharmacy ( alex lopez ) ( 157 belize corozal rd ) de la fuente 's pharmacy ( 16 main st ) pharmacy lucille ( beytias st ) de la fuente pharmacy - holy trinity branch ( holy trinity st ) brismas pharmacy ( san antonio rd ) medigreen pharmacy ( 28 belize-corozal road ) dr 's pharmacy ltd . ( santa ana st . ) selene 's pharmacy ( progress street ) rad 's pharmacy ( san antonio road ) dknn 's pharmacy ( main street ) . references . external links .