Theatre in the round

configuration of the stage . the stage is always in the centre with the audience arranged on all sides , and is most commonly rectangular , circular , diamond , or triangular . actors may enter and exit through the audience from different directions or from below the stage . the stage is usually on an even level with or below the audience in a '' pit '' or '' arena '' formation . this configuration lends itself to high-energy productions and anything that requires audience participation . it is favoured by producers of classical theatre and it has continued as a creative alternative to the more common proscenium format . in effect , theatre-in-the-round removes fourth wall and brings the actor into the same space as the audience . this is often problematic for proscenium or end stage trained actors who are taught that they must never turn their backs to the audience , something that is unavoidable in this format . however , it allows for strong and direct engagement with the audience . it is also employed when theatrical performances are presented in non-traditional spaces such as restaurants , public areas such as fairs or festivals , or street theater . set design is often minimal in order not to obscure the audience 's view of the performance . history of theatre-in-the-round . theatre-in-the-round was common in ancient theatre , particularly that of greece and rome , but was not widely explored again until the latter half of the 20th century . in margo jones ' survey of theatre-in-the-round , jones , margo . 1951 . theatre-in-the-round . rinehard & company , inc . ; sec . pr . edition the first two sources of central staging in the united states she identified were the productions by azubah latham and milton smith at columbia university dating from 1914 , and t . earl pardoe 's productions at brigham young university in 1922 . in 1924 , gilmore brown founded the fair oaks playbox in pasadena , california , an important early practitioner of central staging in addition to other stage configurations that it pioneered in its advent of flexible staging . altenberg , roger . 1964 . a historical study of gilmore brown 's fair-oaks play box : 1924–1927 as indicated by jones , jones , margo . 1951 . theatre-in-the-round , p . 38 the centrally staged productions of the fair-oaks play box were followed approximately eight years later by the work of glenn hughes in his seattle penthouse . stephen joseph was the first to populise the form in the united kingdom from the us in the 1950s and set up theatres-in-the-round in new vic theatre and the studio theatre in scarborough . the current theatre , opened in 1996 , is known as the stephen joseph theatre . joseph was reputed to have once rhetorically asked , '' why must authorities stand with their back to a wall ? '' his answer was : '' so nobody can knife them from behind . '' sam walters set up an impromptu performance space in the upstairs of the orange tree pub in richmond , london in the early 1970s and subsequently moved across the road to a permanent orange tree theatre . in 1972 , rg gregory set up the word and action theatre company in dorset in england to work exclusively in theatre-in-the-round . gregory sought to create a grammar that would enable actors to maximise the form 's potential for connecting with the audience both as individuals and as a collective . all word and action productions were performed in normal lighting conditions , without costumes or makeup . uses in television and concert halls . the innovations of margo jones were an obvious influence on albert mccleery when he created his cameo theatre for television in 1950 . continuing until 1955 , mccleery offered dramas seen against pure black backgrounds instead of walls of a set . this enabled cameras in the darkness to pick up shots from any position . richard nixon 's 1968 u.s . presidential campaign staged nine live televised question and answer sessions using a ground-breaking theatre-in-the-round format , adapted for a live televised audience . the first time use of the staging device was memorialized in the book , the selling of the president 1968 by joe mcginniss . the producer of these nixon '' man in the arena '' programs was roger ailes , who later went to on start fox news . ailes ' innovation of the theatre-in-the-round format for candidate forums became the blueprint for modern '' town hall '' candidate formats and even multiple-candidate debates . elvis presley 's '68 comeback special tv program was performed with the musicians seated using a raised staging in-the-round format . when an arena staging was conceived for the progressive-rock group yes by their tour manager jim halley in the mid-1970s , it prompted a redesign of rock concerts and venue seating arrangements . the politics of the round . the politics of theatre-in-the-round were explored most deliberately by rg gregory . in his view the lit space of a proscenium arch is analogous to the seat of power ; the audience adopts the role of passive receivers . in traditional theatre design , maximum care is taken with sight lines in order to ensure that the actor can engage every member of the audience at the same time . however , once removed from the picture frame of the arch , the actors are compelled to turn their back on some members of the audience and so necessarily lose exclusive command of the acting space . all members of the audience can see the actor , but the actor can no longer see all of them . at this point , in order for the play to function , the audience themselves must be allowed to become key conductors of the meaning of the performance . some , like the writer mick fealty , have stressed a close analogy between gregory 's description of the rudimentary dynamics of theater-in-the-round with the network effect of internet-based communication in comparison to traditional broadcast and marketing channels . arena stage archive . george mason university in fairfax , virginia is home to the largest arena stage archive and contains material from the theatre 's 50-year history . included in the collection are photographs , production notebooks , scrapbooks , playbills , oral histories and handwritten correspondence . according to their website , the total volume is or linear and is housed in the fenwick library . theatres in the round . australia . la boite theatre building , brisbane ( no longer used as a theatre ) roundhouse theatre , brisbane ( replacing the la boite theatre building ) . canada . globe theatre , regina , saskatchewan seton auditorium , mount saint vincent university , halifax , nova scotia . france . l'européen , paris théâtre en rond , sassenage and fresnes . hong kong . theater in the wild , hong kong disneyland , lantau island . japan . the enchanted tiki room : stitch presents aloha e komo mai ! , tokyo disney resort , urayasu , chiba . malta . saint james cavalier theatre , valletta . poland . theater scena stu , kraków . united kingdom . . greater london . cockpit theatre , marylebone orange tree theatre , richmond pembroke theatre , croydon ( closed 1962 ) . greater manchester . octagon theatre , bolton royal exchange theatre , manchester . elsewhere . blue orange theatre , birmingham the castle theatre , wellingborough ( can be in the round or normal theatre format ) new vic theatre , newcastle-under-lyme the round , newcastle upon tyne ( closed 2008 ) stephen joseph theatre , scarborough the dukes , lancaster everyman theatre , liverpool pyramid theatre , leeds university union , leeds ( formerly raven theatre ) . united states . . arizona . nau theatre , flagstaff , arizona celebrity theatre , phoenix , arizona hale centre theatre , gilbert , arizona hale centre theatre in arizona . accessed 2014-06-20 theater works , peoria , arizona . california . wells fargo pavilion , sacramento , california ( home of california musical theatre 's music circus california musical theatre at the wells fargo pavilion ) the rock forum , anaheim , california glendale centre theatre , glendale , california golden bough playhouse , carmel-by-the-sea , california marian theatre , santa maria , california solvang festival theater , solvang , california old globe theatre , san diego cassius carter centre stage ( demolished 2008 ) cheryl and harvey white theatre circle star theater , san carlos , california ( torn down for office buildings ) riverside community players , riverside , california ( built in 1953 ) valley music theater , los angeles ( built 1963 , demolished 2007 ) walt disney 's enchanted tiki room , disneyland , anaheim , california . colorado . the space theatre , denver . district of columbia . arena stage , washington , d.c . florida . walt disney 's enchanted tiki room , advetureland , magic kingdom ( walt disney world resort ) , bay lake , florida stitch 's great escape ! , tomorrowland , magic kingdom ( walt disney world resort ) , bay lake , florida festival of the lion king , disney 's animal kingdom ( walt disney world resort ) , lake buena vista , florida . illinois . marriott theatre , lincolnshire , illinois mill run playhouse , niles , illinois ( demolished 1984 ) richmond hill theatre , geneseo , illinois cornstock theatre , peoria , illinois . indiana . wagon wheel theatre , warsaw , indiana . iowa . flanagan studio theater , grinnell , iowa . kansas . mark a . chapman theatre , kansas state university , manhattan , kansas . maryland . colonial players , annapolis , maryland shady grove music fair , gaithersburg , maryland ( demolished ) painters mill music fair , owings mills , maryland ( demolished 1991 ) . massachusetts . north shore music theatre , beverly , massachusetts cape cod melody tent , hyannis , massachusetts cape cod melody tent official web site south shore music circus , cohasset , massachusetts south shore music circus official web site the little theatre , newton tufts university , medford , massachusetts . minnesota . theatre in the round players , minneapolis theatre in the round , minneapolis , official web site rarig center , minneapolis , minnesota arena theater , northfield , minnesota ( built 1967 , mothballed 2011 ) . missouri . kauffman center for the performing arts , kansas city , missouri . nevada . le rêve ( show ) inside wynn las vegas , las vegas valley love theatre inside the mirage , las vegas , nevada . new jersey . seton hall university , south orange , new jersey . new york . circle repertory company , new york city the irish classical theatre in buffalo , new york nycb theatre at westbury , westbury , new york circle in the square theatre in new york city ( can also be configured as a thrust stage ) arena theatre at university at albany , suny in albany , new york . ohio . the front row , highland heights , ohio ( demolished 1994 ) porthouse theatre , kent , ohio . oregon . the new theater , ashland , oregon ( one of the theaters used for the oregon shakespeare festival ) . pennsylvania . f . otto haas stage , philadelphia valley forge music fair , devon , pennsylvania ( demolished 1997 ) . south carolina . longstreet theatre , columbia , south carolina . tennessee . ula love doughty carousel theatre , knoxville , tennessee . texas . plaza theatre company , cleburne , texas plaza theatre company official web site artisan center theater , hurst artisan center theatre official web site zach theatre , austin , texas casa mañana , fort worth , texas ( converted to thrust stage in 2003 ) theatre '47 , dallas mary moody northen theatre , austin , texas arena theater , houston , texas . utah . hale center theatre , sandy , utah harman theatre , west valley city , utah . virginia . the barksdale theater in richmond , virginia . washington . glenn hughes penthouse theatre , seattle act theatre , seattle , washington . wisconsin . fireside dinner theater , fort atkinson , wisconsin melody top theatre , milwaukee , wisconsin ( 1963-86 ) . in popular culture . in the novel the prestige by christopher priest , the magician rupert angier courts controversy by writing that stage magic should be performed '' in the round '' rather than in theatres with a proscenium arch . the english progressive rock band yes were the first rock-era group to perform '' in the round '' during their 1978–79 tormato tour . the band also performed using a round , rotating stage during portions of their drama and union tours in 1980 and 1991 , respectively . the second tour of the global country-pop superstar shania twain , the up ! tour ( 2003/04 ) , had a stage configuration in the style of '' in the round '' . the tour was one of the most successful tours of 2004 , and served to promote the riaa diamond certified album , '' up ! '' ( 2002 ) . the into the millennium tour of the american boy band backstreet boys also featured an '' in the round '' stage . the tour started in 1999 and ended in march 2000 . the tour is one of the most successful tours of all time . british rock band def leppard played '' in the round '' for several tours in the late 1980s and early 1990s . their 1989 live vhs release was entitled live : in the round , in your face . in order to give a show similar to a three ring circus , american singer britney spears used an in-the-round setting for her 2009 the circus starring britney spears tour . stand-up comedians have performed specials '' in the round , '' such as dane cook : vicious circle and louis c.k . 's oh my god . the spice girls used a circular stage in the round setting for their christmas in spiceworld tour in 1999 . u2 's 360° tour uses a very large circular stage structure . the dixie chicks ' top of the world tour used a circular stage , except in venues where it was an end stage . metallica have been known to use a rectangular , diamond or oval shaped stage that is placed in the center of the arena beginning with their 1991 wherever we may roam tour . on different tours , they have also included areas within the stage , called '' the snake pit '' , where audience members can watch the show . most recently , their 2012 european black album tour used this format . in a curb your enthusiasm season finale , larry david , while playing the producers character max bialystock , said he invented '' theater in the square '' . see also . arena the castle of perseverance thrust stage . references .