Lilian, Princess of Réthy

background and education . mary lilian baels was born in london , england , where her parents had fled during world war i . she was one of the nine children of henri baels from ostend and his wife , anne marie de visscher , a member of the belgian nobility from dentergem . lilian was called '' lily '' in her family circle . lilian was initially educated in english , but , upon her parents ' return to belgium , she attended the college of the sacred heart in ostend , where she learned dutch . lilian continued her studies in french in brussels . she was also fluent in german . lilian completed her education by attending the holy child finishing school in london . in addition to academic work , lilian participated extensively in sports , such as skiing , swimming , golfing , and hunting . above all , however , she enjoyed , as did her father , literature and the arts . as a teenager , she was presented to king george v and queen mary of the united kingdom at buckingham palace . jean cleeremans , léopold iii , sa famille , son peuple sous l'occupation . friendship with the belgian royal family . in 1933 , lilian saw her future husband , king leopold iii of belgium , then still duke of brabant , for the first time during a military review . a few years later , when her father , then governor of west flanders , took his daughter to a public ceremony , she had the occasion to meet king leopold , who presided at the event , for the second time . in 1937 , lilian and her mother met the king , now a widower , again on another ceremonial occasion . soon afterwards , king leopold iii contacted governor baels to invite him and his daughter to join him in a golfing party the next day . lilian also saw the king in 1939 at a garden-party organised in honour of queen wilhelmina of the netherlands , and later at the golf course at laeken , where she was invited to lunch by queen elisabeth of belgium , king leopold 's mother . a final golf party near the belgian coast occurred in may 1940 , shortly before the battle of belgium . jean cleeremans , , roger keyes , echec au roi : léopold iii , 1940–1951 . beginnings of world war ii in belgium . following the nazi invasion of belgium , lilian 's mother put herself at the service of the red cross during the belgian and allied military campaign against the invaders . lilian helped her mother actively in her new role , transporting belgian and french wounded by car to the hospital of st . john in bruges . meanwhile , her father , governor baels , attempted to alleviate the plight of his invaded province . on 18 may , henri baels went in search of the minister of the interior , thinking he had left for france , to obtain his signature for an important relief measure . on his journey , however , governor baels had a car accident and injured his legs . he was admitted to a hospital in le havre . as the military situation in belgium headed towards disaster , his wife decided to bring her daughters to safety in france , and lilian drove the family car on the trip . governor baels ' wife and daughters met him again , by pure chance , in a hospital in poitiers . baels was subsequently accused of having abandoned his post as governor without justification by fleeing to france . he succeeded , however , in obtaining an audience with the king following the capitulation of the belgian army on 28 may 1940 and the king 's own imprisonment by the germany at laeken castle . baels and his daughter lilian , who drove him to the audience , explained the real circumstances of his departure from belgium , and the governor was thereby vindicated . subsequently , lilian and her father returned to france and occupied themselves with the care of belgian refugees in the region of anglet . after belgium 's liberation , henri baels was accused of collaborating with the nazis during the war , but this is clearly false , since he did not act as governor during the occupation and lived in france throughout the period . jean cleeremans , , roger keyes , . marriage and controversy . in 1941 , at the invitation of queen elisabeth , lilian visited laeken castle , where king leopold iii , now a prisoner of war , was held by the germans under house arrest . this visit was followed by several others , with the result that leopold iii and lilian fell in love . leopold proposed marriage to lilian in july 1941 , but lilian declined his offer . '' kings only marry princesses , '' she said . queen elisabeth , however , prevailed upon lilian to accept the king 's offer . lilian agreed to marry the king , but declined the title of queen . instead , the king gave lilian the title princess of belgium , and retie with the style royal highness . it was agreed that descendants of the king 's new marriage would be titled prince/princess of belgium with the style royal highness but excluded from succession to the throne . leopold and lilian initially planned to hold their official , civil marriage after the end of the war and the liberation of belgium , but in the meantime , a secret religious marriage ceremony took place on 11 september 1941 , in the chapel of laeken castle , in the presence of queen elisabeth , henri baels , and cardinal van roey , archbishop of mechelen and primate of belgium . this actually contravened belgian law , which required that the religious wedding be preceded by the civil one . although lilian and leopold had originally planned to postpone their civil marriage until the end of the war , lilian was soon pregnancy her first child , necessitating a civil marriage , which took place on 6 december 1941 . the civil marriage automatically made lilian a princess of belgium . lilian proved a devoted wife to the king and an affectionate and vivacious stepmother to his children by his first wife , queen astrid . jean cleeremans , , roger keyes , when the civil marriage of leopold and lilian was made public in a pastoral letter by cardinal van roey read throughout belgian churches in december 1941 , there was a mixed reaction in belgium . some showed sympathy for the new couple , sending flowers and messages of congratulations to the palace at laeken . jean cleeremans , others , however , argued that the marriage was incompatible with the king 's status as a prisoner-of-war and his stated desire to share the hard fate of his conquered people and captive army , and was a betrayal of queen astrid 's memory . they also branded lilian as a social-climber . léopold iii , by vincent dujardin , mark van den wijngaert , et al . one of the leading belgian newspapers rebuked king leopold : '' sire , we thought you had your face turned towards us in mourning . instead you had it hidden in the shoulder of a woman . '' leopold and lilian were also blamed for violating belgian law by holding their religious marriage before their civil one . these criticisms would continue for many years , even after the war . according to lilian 's account , the news of her secret marriage with king leopold upset and worried her mother , who foresaw that it would provoke a political storm . her mother quoted '' my little one , you do n't know what 's in store for you . it will be appalling , they will all attack you , you will have a terribly hard life . '' un couple dans la tempête : le destin malheureux de léopold iii de belgique et de la princesse lilian ( 2004 ) ( pp . 36-37 ) . queen astrid 's parents , prince carl and princess ingeborg of sweden , did not take the hard line against king leopold 's remarriage . princess ingeborg told a belgian journalist that she could n't understand all the animus in belgium against the king 's second marriage , that it was perfectly natural for a young man not to want to remain alone forever . she said she was happy about her son-in-law 's new marriage , both for his own sake and for the sake of her grandchildren . deportation to nazi germany . in 1944 , the belgian royal family was deported to nazi germany , where they were strictly guarded by 70 members of the ss , under harsh conditions . the family suffered from a deficient diet and lived with the constant fear that they would be massacred by their jailers , as an act of revenge on the part of the nazis , angered at their defeat ( by now becoming increasingly certain ) by the allies , or that they would be caught in the cross-fire between allied forces and their captors , who might try to make a desperate last stand at the site of the royal family 's internment . the family 's fears were not unfounded . at one point , a nazi official tried to give them cyanide , pretending it was a mixture of vitamins to compensate for the captives ' poor diet during their imprisonment . lilian and leopold , however , were rightly suspicious and did not take the pills or give them to their children . during their period of captivity in germany , ( and later austria ) , leopold and lilian jointly homeschooled the royal children . the king taught scientific subjects ; his wife , arts and literature . in 1945 , the belgian royal family was liberated by american troops under the command of lieutenant general alexander patch , who thereafter became a close friend of king leopold and princess lilian . jean cleeremans , in léopold iii by vincent dujardin , mark van den wijngaert , et al . . '' royal question '' and the aftermath . following his liberation , king leopold was unable to return to belgium ( by now liberated as well ) due to a political controversy that arose in belgium surrounding his actions during world war ii . he was accused of having betrayed the allies by an allegedly premature surrender in 1940 and of collaborating with the nazis during the occupation of belgium . in 1946 , a juridical commission was constituted in brussels to investigate the king 's conduct during the war and occupation . during this period , the king and his family lived in exile in pregny-chambésy , switzerland , and the king 's younger brother , prince charles of belgium , was made regent of the country . the commission of inquiry eventually exonerated leopold of the charges and he was able , in 1950 , to return to belgium and resume his royal duties . political agitation against the king continued , however , leading to civil disturbances in what became known as the royal question . as a result , in 1951 , to avoid tearing the country apart and to save the embattled monarchy , king leopold iii abdicated in favour of his 21-year-old son , prince baudouin . in the first nine years reign of her stepson , king baudouin , lilian acted as first lady of belgium . at the same period , lilian also became the senior lady of the court and the lady of the household . king leopold and princess lilian continued to live in the royal palace at laeken until baudouin 's marriage to doña fabiola de mora y aragón in 1960 . . life in argenteuil . in 1960 , following the marriage of king baudouin , leopold and lilian moved out of the royal palace to a government property , the estate of argenteuil , belgium . lilian employed various designers to transform the dilapidated mansion on the property into a distinguished and elegant residence for the ex-king . argenteuil became a cultural centre under the auspices of leopold and lilian , who cultivated the friendship of numerous prominent writers , scientists , mathematicians , and doctors . leopold and lilian also travelled extensively all over the world . following her son alexandre 's heart surgery in the united states during his childhood , princess lilian became very interested in medicine , and , in particular , in cardiology , and founded a cardiological foundation which , through its work , has saved the lives of hundreds of people . both before and after her husband 's death in 1983 , lilian pursued her interests in intellectual and scientific spheres with energy and passion . michel verwilghen , her belongings from the chateau were put up at auction in amsterdam . '' sotheby 's princess lilian of belgium amsterdam 22 and 23 september 2003 '' ( catalogue , 185 pages ) . character and reputation . lilian was known as a woman who was terribly strict and demanding towards herself , and , a result , as one who could be excessively severe with others as well . due to the controversy surrounding king leopold 's wartime actions , and , in particular , his second marriage , lilian was widely unpopular in belgium . however , she also had a circle of close friends , who saw her as a woman of great beauty , charm , intelligence , elegance , strength of character , kindness , generosity , humor and culture . they admired her for the courage and dignity with which she faced a long series of personal attacks , both during the royal question and for decades afterwards . michel verwilghen , , 2006 '' '' , an article by jacques franck , published in , 29 october 2003 . children . lilian had three children with king leopold iii : prince alexandre of belgium ( 1942–2009 ) . married léa wolman in 1991 ( the marriage became public knowledge in 1998 ) . princess marie-christine of belgium , born in brussels on 6 february 1951 . first marriage to paul drucker in 1981 ( separated 1981 , divorced 1985 ) ; second marriage to jean-paul gourgues in 1989 . resides in las vegas . princess marie-esméralda of belgium , born in brussels on 30 september 1956 . married salvador moncada in 1998 . they have two children : alexandra and leopoldo . a journalist , she writes under the professional name of esmeralda de réthy . death . princess lilian died at the domaine d'argenteuil in waterloo , belgium . before her death , she had expressed the desire to be buried at argenteuil . her wish was denied , however , and she was buried in the royal crypt of the church of our lady , laeken , belgium , with king leopold and his first wife , queen astrid . queen fabiola and lilian 's stepchildren attended the funeral , as did lilian 's son alexandre and her daughter marie-esmeralda . lilian 's long-estranged daughter marie-christine did not attend . following princess lilian 's death , a cardiological conference was organised and prominent doctors and surgeons such as debakey and many others rendered an homage to lilian and her contributions to cardiology . jacques franck , '' '' , published 29 october 2003 in