Jules Simon

biography . simon was born at lorient . his father was a linen-draper from lorraine , who renounced protestantism before his second marriage with a catholic breton . jules simon was the son of this second marriage . the family name was suisse , which simon dropped in favour of his third forename . by considerable sacrifice he was enabled to attend a seminary at vannes , and worked briefly as usher in a school before , in 1833 , he became a student at the école normale supérieure in paris . there he came in contact with victor cousin , who sent him to caen and then to versailles to teach philosophy . he helped cousin , without receiving any recognition , in his translations from plato and aristotle , and in 1839 became his deputy in the chair of philosophy at the university of paris , with the meagre salary of 83 francs per month . he also lectured on the history of philosophy at the école normale supérieure . at this period he edited the works of nicolas malebranche ( 2 vols , 1842 ) , of rené descartes ( 1842 ) , bossuet ( 1842 ) and of antoine arnauld ( 1843 ) , and in 1844–1845 appeared the two volumes of his histoire de l'école d'alexandrie . he became a regular contributor to the revue des deux mondes , and in 1847 , with amédée jacques and émile saisset , founded the liberté de penser , with the intention of throwing off the yoke of cousin , but he retired when jacques allowed the insertion of an article advocating the principles of collectivism , with which he was at no time in sympathy . political career from 1848 to 1871 . in 1848 he represented the côtes-du-nord in the national assembly , and next year entered the council of state , but was retired on account of his republican opinions . his refusal to take the oath of allegiance to the government of louis napoleon after the coup d'état was followed by his dismissal from his professorship , and he devoted himself to philosophical and political writings of a popular order . le devoir ( 1853 ) , which was translated into modern greek and swedish , was followed by la religion naturelle ( 1856 , eng . trans . , 1887 ) , la liberté de conscience ( 1857 ) , la liberté politique ( 1859 ) , la liberté civile ( 1859 ) , l'ouvrière ( 1861 ) , l'ecole ( 1864 ) , le travail ( 1866 ) , l'ouvrier de huit ans ( 1867 ) and others . in 1863 he was returned to the corps législatif for the 8th circonscription of the seine département , and supported '' les cinq '' in their opposition to the government . he became minister of instruction in the government of national defense on 5 september 1870 . after the capitulation of paris in january 1871 he was sent down to bordeaux to prevent the resistance of léon gambetta to the peace . but at bordeaux , gambetta , who had issued a proclamation excluding from the elections those who had been officials under the empire , was all-powerful . pretending to dispute jules simon 's credentials , he issued orders for his arrest . meanwhile , simon had found means of communication with paris , and on 6 february was reinforced by eugène pelletan , e . arago and garnier-pages . gambetta resigned , and the ministry of the interior , though nominally given to arago , was really in simon 's hands . third republic . defeated in the département of the seine , he sat for the marne in the national assembly , and resumed the portfolio of education in the first cabinet of adolphe thiers 's presidency . he advocated free primary education yet sought to conciliate the clergy by all the means in his power ; but no concessions removed the hostility of dupanloup , who presided over the commission appointed to consider his draft of an elementary education bill . the reforms he was actually able to carry out were concerned with secondary education . he encouraged the study of living languages , and limited the attention given to the making of latin verse ; he also encouraged independent methods at the école normale , and set up a school at rome where members of the french school of athens should spend some time . he retained office until a week before the fall of in 1873 . he was regarded by the monarchical right as one of the most dangerous obstacles in the way of a restoration , which he did as much as any man ( except perhaps the comte de chambord himself ) to prevent , but by the extreme left he was distrusted for his moderate views , and gambetta never forgave his victory at bordeaux . in 1875 , he became a member of the académie française and a life senator , and in 1876 , on the resignation of jules dufaure , was summoned to form a cabinet . he replaced anti-republican functionaries in the civil service by republicans , and held his own until 3 may 1877 , when he adopted a motion carried by a large majority in the chamber inviting the cabinet to use all means for the repression of clerical agitation . his clerical enemies then induced marshal macmahon to take advantage of a vote on the press law carried in jules simon 's absence from the chamber to write him a letter regretting that he no longer preserved his influence in the chamber , and thus practically demanding his resignation . his resignation in response to this act of the president , known as the '' seize mai '' , which he might have resisted by an appeal to the chamber , proved his ruin , and he never again held office . he justified his action by his fear of providing an opportunity for a coup d'état on the part of the marshal . however , the may 1877 crisis eventually ended in macmahon 's demise and in the victory of the republicans over the monarchist orleanists and legitimists . the rejection ( 1880 ) of article 7 of jules ferry laws , by which the profession of teaching would have been forbidden to members of non-authorized congregations , was due to his intervention . he was in fact one of the chief of the left centre opportunist republicans faction , opposed in the same faction to jules grévy and also to the radical gambetta . he was director of le gaulois from 1879 to 1881 , and his influence in the country among moderate republicans was retained by his articles in le matin from 1882 onwards , in the journal des débats , which he joined in 1886 , and in le temps from 1890 . works . his own accounts of some of the events in which he had been involved appear in souvenirs du 4 septembre ( 1874 ) , le gouvernement de m . thiers ( 2 vols . , 1878 ) , in mémoires des autres ( 1889 ) , nouveaux mémoires des autres ( 1891 ) and les derniers mémoires des autres ( 1897 ) , while his sketch of victor cousin ( 1887 ) was a further contribution to contemporary history . for his personal history , the premiers mémoires ( 1900 ) and le soir de ma journée ( 1902 ) , edited by his son gustave simon , may be supplemented by léon séché 's figures bretonnes , jules simon , sa vie , son œuvre ( new ed . , 1898 ) , and georges picot , jules simon : notice historique ( 1897 ) ; also by many references to periodical literature and collected essays in hugo paul thieme 's guide bibliographique de la littérature française de 1800 à 1906 ( 1907 ) . simon 's ministry , 12 december 1876 – 17 may 1877 . jules simon – president of the council and minister of the interior louis decazes – minister of foreign affairs jean auguste berthaud – minister of war léon say – minister of finance louis martel – minister of justice and worship martin fourichon – minister of marine and colonies william henry waddington – minister of public instruction albert christophle – minister of public works pierre teisserenc de bort – minister of agriculture and commerce . references . . external links .