Application server

history . the term was originally used when discussing early client–server systems to differentiate servers that contain application logic sql services and middleware servers as distinct from other types of data-servers . currently , despite the fact that web-browsers have become ubiquitous and are typically the client for end-users in many application deployment strategies , browser-based web apps represent only a subset of application-server technologies . application server definition . application servers are system software upon which web applications or desktop applications run . application servers consist of web server connectors , computer programming languages , runtime library , database connectors , and the administration code needed to deploy , configure , manage , and connect these components on a web host . an application server runs behind a web server ( e.g . apache or microsoft internet information services ( iis ) ) and ( almost always ) in front of an sql database ( e.g . postgresql , mysql , or oracle ) . web applications are computer code which run atop application servers and are written in the language ( s ) the application server supports and call the runtime libraries and components the application server offers . many application servers exist . the choice impacts the cost , performance , reliability , scalability , and maintainability of a web application . proprietary application servers provide system services in a well-defined but proprietary manner . the application developers develop programs according to the specification of the application server . dependence on a particular vendor is the drawback of this approach . an opposite but analogous case is the java ee platform . java ee application servers provide system services in a well-defined , open , industry standard . the application developers develop programs according to the java ee specification and not according to the application server . a java ee application developed according to java ee standard can be deployed in any java ee application server making it vendor-independent . java application servers . java platform , enterprise edition or java ee ( was j2ee ) defines the core set of api and features of java application servers . the java ee infrastructure is partitioned into logical containers . ejb container : enterprise javabeans are used to manage transactions . according to the java blueprints , the business logic of an application resides in enterprise javabeans—a modular server component providing many features , including declarative transaction management , and improving application scalability . web container : the web modules include servlets and javaserver pages ( jsp ) . jca container ( java ee connector architecture ) jms provider ( java message service ) some java application servers leave off many java ee features like ejb and java message service ( jms ) . their focus is more on java servlets and javaserver pages . there are many open source java application servers that support java ee . commercial java application servers have been dominated by weblogic application server by oracle , websphere application server from ibm and the open source jboss enterprise application platform by red hat . a java server page ( jsp ) executes in a web container . jsps provide a way to create html pages by embedding references to the server logic within the page . html coders and java programmers can work side by side by referencing each other 's code from within their own . the application servers mentioned above mainly serve web applications , and services via rmi , ejb , jms and soap . some application servers target networks other than web-based ones : session initiation protocol servers , for instance , target telephony networks . net framework . microsoft . microsoft positions their middle-tier applications and services infrastructure in the windows server operating system and the . net framework technologies in the role of an application server . technet : application server the windows application server role includes internet information services ( iis ) to provide web server support , the . net framework to provide application support , asp.net to provide server side scripting , com+ for application component communication , message queuing for multithreaded processing , and the windows communication foundation ( wcf ) for application communication . technet : application server role . third-party . mono ( a cross platform open-source implementation of . net supporting nearly all its features , with the exception of windows os-specific features ) , sponsored by microsoft and released under the mit license . php application servers . php application servers are used for running and managing php applications . zend server , built by zend technologies , provides application server functionality for the php-based applications . appserver.io , built by techdivision gmbh is a multithreaded application server for php written in php . roadrunner , built by spiral scout is a high-performance php application server , load-balancer , and process manager written in golang . mobile application servers . a mobile app server is mobile middleware that makes back-end systems accessible to mobile application to support mobile application development . much like a web server that stores , processes , and delivers web pages to clients , a mobile app server bridges the gap from existing infrastructure to mobile devices . purpose . although most standards-based infrastructure ( including soas ) are designed to connect to any independent of any vendor , product or technology , most enterprises have trouble connecting back-end systems to mobile applications , because mobile devices add the following technological challenges : limited resources – mobile devices have limited power and bandwidth intermittent connectivity – cellular service and wifi coverage is often not continuous difficult to secure – mobility and byod make it hard to secure mobile devices the purpose of a mobile application server is to build on existing infrastructure to accommodate mobile devices . common features . core capabilities of mobile application services include data routing– data is packaged in smaller ( rest ) objects with some business logic to minimize demands on bandwidth and battery orchestration– transactions and data integration across multiple sources authentication service– secure connectivity to back-end systems is managed by the mobile middleware off-line support– allows users to access and use data even though the device is not connected security– data encryption , device control , ssl , call logging . mobile application servers vs . application servers vs . web servers . mobile application servers , application servers , and web servers serve similar purposes : they are pieces of middleware that connect back-end systems to the users that need to access them , but the technology in each of the three differs . application servers—developed before the ubiquity of web-based applications—expose back-end business logic through various protocols , sometimes including http , and manage security , transaction processing , resource pooling , and messaging . when web-based applications grew in popularity , application servers did not meet the needs of developers , and the webserver was created to fill the gap . web servers provide the caching and scaling functionality demanded by web access and not provided by application servers . they convert requests to static content and serve only http content . over time , application servers and web servers have morphed from two previously distinct categories , blended features , and arguably have merged . mobile application servers are on a similar path . the emergence of mobile devices presents the need for functionality not anticipated by the developers of traditional application server developers , and mobile application servers fill this gap . they take care of the security , data management and off-line requirements not met by existing infrastructure , and present content exclusively in rest . over time , these three categories may fully merge and be available in a single product , but the root functions differ . deployment models . an application server can be deployed : on premises cloud private cloud platform as a service ( paas ) . see also . application service provider ( asp ) . references .