Riverdale (Archie Comics)

overview . riverdale is the setting of the stories in the archie comics universe . it is usually depicted as a medium-sized town ( possibly a suburb of a bigger city ) , with all the usual amenities of shopping malls , restaurants , and parks . in the first archie stories in the 1940s , it was identified as riverdale , new york , a real neighborhood in the bronx . in jackpot comics 5 ( spring 1942 ) , a story written by bob montana has the gang going on a river trip . one panel says '' . the good ship 'peter stuyvesant ' settles into the hudson , as riverdale high clambers aboard for a happy trip to bear mountain . '' riverdale has been shown to have beaches , lakes , rivers , deserts , farmland , woodland , mountains , plains , a transit system , and four distinct seasons with changes in climate . archie comics publisher john l . goldwater and initial archie artist bob montana differed on the inspiration for riverdale , with goldwater saying it was based on his hometown of hiawatha , kansas , and montana saying the town 's high school was based on his own in haverhill , massachusetts , where as in the comics a replica of auguste rodin 's famous statue the thinker stands . in one issue of archie and jughead digest , when one of the readers asked in a letter , '' where is riverdale located ? '' , the editor replied , '' riverdale is more of a state of mind than an actual physical location . it could be anywhere that kind people live and just have fun , like archie and his friends . it could be in the midwest , or along the eastern seaboard , or even a town in canada , mexico , or england . '' . riverdale high school . riverdale high school is the local educational institution of riverdale where archie and his friends attend the 11th grade . its school colors are blue and gold , and its school newspaper is the blue and gold . only a few of riverdale high 's staff appear regularly in the comics ; these include the school principal mr . weatherbee , homeroom teacher miss grundy , chemistry teacher mr . flutesnoot , history teacher miss haggly , physical education teachers coach kleats and coach clayton , cafeteria cook miss beazley , custodian mr . svenson , secretary miss phlips , and superintendent of schools mr . hassle . in the tv show , the staff frequently shown/mentioned in riverdale are mr . weatherbee ( principal ) , miss grundy ( former , deceased music teacher ) , coach clayton ( football coach ) and mr . svenson ( caretaker ) in the five-issue miniseries faculty funnies ( cover-dated june 1989may 1990 ) by writer george gladir and penciler stan goldberg , faculty members mr . weatherbee , mr . flutesnoot , miss grundy and coach clayton secretly become the superhero team the awesome foursome after a lab accident involving archie 's science project . they lose their powers after putting out a chemical fire . faculty funnies at the grand comics database . the series archie at riverdale high ran 113 issues ( august 1972february 1987 ) . archie at riverdale high at the grand comics database . this was followed by riverdale high , which ran six issues ( augustjune 1990 ) . after a brief hiatus , it was retitled archie 's riverdale high and then canceled with issue 8 ( augustoctober 1991 ) . riverdale high and archie 's riverdale high at the grand comics database . . places . places in riverdale besides the high school include the following : pop tate 's chocklit shoppe , the soda shop frequented by the teenaged cast . pickens park , the community park named for the fictional civil war hero general pickens . the lodge mansion , the large and luxurious home of wealthy veronica lodge and her parents . homes of other members of the gang , including the andrews residence , jones residence and cooper residence . dilton doiley 's science lab , a home-based setup where dilton invents and conducts experiments . chuck clayton 's studio , where chuck draws his cartoons at home . the beach , where archie and the gang spend much of their time in the summer . the riverdale mall , a source of shopping and entertainment , particularly for the girls . the blossom mansion , the larger and luxurious home where wealthy cheryl blossom and her family live . riverdale high , where all the teens go to school , and where all the dances , and some parties are hosted . for example , homecoming . nearby towns . some nearby towns include greendale and midvale . greendale is the home of sabrina , the teenage witch , who once lived in riverdale but eventually moved . characters who appear in josie and the pussycats come from midvale . riverdale high school 's main scholastic and athletic rival is central high school , located in another nearby community . central high seems to consist of nothing but villainous types . the males are generally thuggish , conniving brutes , and the females are usually lecherous , scheming vamps . in most of their encounters , central students seldom compete without using unsportsmanlike conduct , if not out-and-out cheating . the coaches and teachers often are not only aware of this skullduggery , but encourage it . in most cases , central 's team colors are bright red and silver-white . in the fourth season of the iconic show , stonewall prep is heavily mentioned as one of the nearby rival schools . student often dress in rabbit memorabilia and carry fake looking axes to intimidate unwanted newcomers . in a rather charming episode , betty and jughead have relations in jughead 's dorm during the winter months . as jughead courageously ventures outside their cozy abode to buy them an extravagant meal of vending machine memorabilia , he is nearly attacked by one of these bunny loving students . pembrooke academy is a private school attended by siblings cheryl and jason blossom and their snobbish friends bunny and cedric . they look down on riverdale students as '' townies '' and will not ( except for the blossom twins ) willingly associate with them . other schools that have been featured as riverdale rival schools include hadley high and southside high . in one comic , a letter sent to riverdale has '' u . '' where the state should be , and a zip code of 10543 ( which in real life is mamaroneck , new york , the home of michael silberkleit , an archie comics editor ) . related media . in the pilot of the 2017 series riverdale , the town is described as being located in '' rockland county . '' only one county in the us has that name , rockland county , new york , close to archie comics ' headquarters in pelham , new york . . cultural references . in the simpsons episode '' sideshow bob roberts '' ( episode 2f02 ) , several archie comics characters , including archie andrews , reggie mantle , moose mason and jughead jones , make a brief cameo appearance . after sideshow bob 's stooges pull up to the simpsons ' house , and toss bart simpson ( who had been investigating bob ) out of their car , the archie gang , in one of the show 's frequent non sequiturs , pull up to the simpsons ' house and toss homer simpson out of their car . moose warns homer to '' duh , stay out of riverdale ! '' later in the episode , homer is reading an issue of archie comics and mutters , '' stuck-up riverdale punks , think they 're too good for me ! '' in the simpsons episode '' marge the lumberjill '' ( episode zabf02 ) , several students of springfield elementary perform dramatic scenes that they write themselves , based on tv shows and youtube . the scenes the children perform are from riverdale and a parody of the simpsons . see also . new riverdale duckburg springfield . references . external links . archie comics official site