Sprachbund

history . in a 1904 paper , jan baudouin de courtenay emphasised the need to distinguish between language similarities arising from a genetic relationship ( rodstvo ) and those arising from convergence due to language contact ( srodstvo ) . nikolai trubetzkoy introduced the russian term ; '' language union '' ) in a 1923 article . in a paper presented to the first international congress of linguists in 1928 , he used a german calque of this term , sprachbund , defining it as a group of languages with similarities in syntax , morphological structure , cultural vocabulary and sound systems , but without systematic sound correspondences , shared basic morphology or shared basic vocabulary . later workers , starting with trubetzkoy 's colleague roman jakobson , reprinted in r . jakobson : selected writings , vol . 1 : phonological studies . the hague : mouton de gruyter , 1971 , pp . 137–148 . have relaxed the requirement of similarities in all four of the areas stipulated by trubetzkoy . . examples . western europe . standard average european ( sae ) is a concept introduced in 1939 by benjamin whorf to group the modern indo-european languages of europe with shared common features . '' the relation of habitual thought and behavior to language '' , published in ( 1941 ) , language , culture , and personality : essays in memory of edward sapir edited by leslie spier , a . irving hallowell , stanley s . newman . menasha , wisconsin : sapir memorial publication fund . pp 75–93 . reprinted in ( 1956 ) , language , thought and reality : selected writings of benjamins lee whorf . edited by john b . carroll . cambridge , mass . : mit press . pp . 134–159 . quotation is whorf ( 1941:77–78 ) and ( 1956:138 ) . the work began to assume the character of a comparison between hopi and western european languages . it also became evident that even the grammar of hopi bore a relation to hopi culture , and the grammar of european tongues to our own '' western '' or '' european '' culture . and it appeared that the interrelation brought in those large subsummations of experience by language , such as our own terms '' time , '' '' space , '' '' substance , '' and '' matter . '' since , with respect to the traits compared , there is little difference between english , french , german , or other european languages with the 'possible ' ( but doubtful ) exception of balto-slavic and non-indo-european , i have lumped these languages into one group called sae , or '' standard average european . '' ( quotation pp . 77–78 ) and as whorf , b . l . whorf argued that these languages were characterized by a number of similarities including syntax and grammar , vocabulary and its use as well as the relationship between contrasting words and their origins , idioms and word order which all made them stand out from many other language groups around the world which do not share these similarities ; in essence creating a continental sprachbund . his point was to argue that the disproportionate degree of knowledge of sae languages biased linguists towards considering grammatical forms to be highly natural or even universal , when in fact they were only peculiar to the sae language group . whorf likely considered romance and west germanic to form the core of the sae , i.e . the literary languages of europe which have seen substantial cultural influence from latin during the medieval latin . the north germanic and balto-slavic languages tend to be more peripheral members . alexander gode , who was instrumental in the development of interlingua , characterized it as '' standard average european '' . the romance , germanic , and slavic control languages of interlingua are reflective of the language groups most often included in the sae sprachbund . the standard average european sprachbund is most likely the result of ongoing language contact in the time of the migration period '' language typology and language universals '' accessed 2015-10-13 and later , continuing during the middle ages and the renaissance . inheritance of the sae features from proto-indo-european can be ruled out because proto-indo-european , as currently reconstructed , lacked most of the sae features . haspelmath , martin , 1998 . how young is standard average european ? language sciences . . the balkans . the idea of areal convergence is commonly attributed to jernej kopitar 's description in 1830 of albanian , bulgarian and romanian as giving the impression of '' nur eine sprachform . mit dreierlei sprachmaterie '' , jernej k . kopitar , “ albanische , walachische und bulgarische sprache ” , wiener jahrbücher der literatur 46 ( 1830 ) : 59–106 . which has been rendered by victor friedman as '' one grammar with the three lexicons '' . the balkan sprachbund comprises albanian , romanian , the south slavic languages of the southern balkans ( bulgarian , macedonian and to a lesser degree serbo-croatian ) , greek , balkan turkish , and romani . all but one of these are indo-european languages but from very divergent branches , and turkish is a turkic language . yet they have exhibited several signs of grammatical convergence , such as avoidance of the infinitive , future tense formation , and others . the same features are not found in other languages that are otherwise closely related , such as the other romance languages in relation to romanian , and the other slavic languages such as polish in relation to bulgaro-macedonian . . indian subcontinent . in a classic 1956 paper titled '' india as a linguistic area '' , murray emeneau laid the groundwork for the general acceptance of the concept of a sprachbund . in the paper , emeneau observed that the subcontinent 's dravidian and indo-aryan languages shared a number of features that were not inherited from a common source , but were areal features , the result of diffusion during sustained contact . these include retroflex consonants , echo words , subject–object–verb word order , discourse markers , and the quotative . emeneau specified the tools to establish that language and culture had fused for centuries on the indian soil to produce an integrated mosaic of structural convergence of four distinct language families : indo-aryan , dravidian , munda and tibeto-burman . this concept provided scholarly substance for explaining the underlying indian-ness of apparently divergent cultural and linguistic patterns . with his further contributions , this area has now become a major field of research in language contact and convergence . . mainland southeast asia . the mainland southeast asia linguistic area is one of the most dramatic of linguistic areas in terms of the surface similarity of the languages involved , to the extent that early linguists tended to group them all into a single family , although the modern consensus places them into numerous unrelated families . the area stretches from thailand to china and is home to speakers of languages of the sino-tibetan , hmong–mien ( or miao–yao ) , tai–kadai , austronesian ( represented by chamic ) and mon–khmer families . neighbouring languages across these families , though presumed unrelated , often have similar features , which are believed to have spread by diffusion . a well-known example is the similar tone systems in sinitic languages ( sino-tibetan ) , hmong–mien , tai languages ( kadai ) and vietnamese ( mon–khmer ) . most of these languages passed through an earlier stage with three tones on most syllables ( but no tonal distinctions on checked syllables ending in a stop consonant ) , which was followed by a tone split where the distinction between voiced and voiceless consonants disappeared but in compensation the number of tones doubled . these parallels led to confusion over the classification of these languages , until andré-georges haudricourt showed in 1954 that tone was not an invariant feature , by demonstrating that vietnamese tones corresponded to certain final consonants in other languages of the mon–khmer family , and proposed that tone in the other languages had a similar origin . similarly , the unrelated khmer ( mon–khmer ) , cham ( austronesian ) and lao ( kadai ) languages have almost identical vowel systems . many languages in the region are of the isolating ( or analytic ) type , with mostly monosyllabic morphemes and little use of inflection or affixes , though a number of mon–khmer languages have derivational morphology . shared syntactic features include classifiers , ov language and topic–comment structure , though in each case there are exceptions in branches of one or more families . . northeast asia . some linguists , such as matthias castrén , g . j . ramstedt , nicholas poppe and pentti aalto supported the idea that the mongolic , turkic , and tungusic families of asia ( and some small parts of europe ) are genetically related , in a controversial group they call altaic . koreanic and japonic languages , which are also hypothetically related according to some scholars like william george aston , shōsaburō kanazawa , samuel martin and sergei starostin , are sometimes included as part of the purported altaic family . this latter hypothesis was supported by people including roy andrew miller , john c . street and karl heinrich menges . gerard clauson , gerhard doerfer , juha janhunen , stefan georg and others dispute or reject this . a common alternative explanation for similarities between said altaic languages such as vowel harmony and agglutination is that they are due to areal diffusion . . others . sumerian and akkadian in the 3rd millennium bc in the ethiopian highlands , ethiopian language area shimaore and kibushi on the comorian island of mayotte . in the sepik river basin of new guinea in the baltics ( northeast europe ) the standard average european area , comprising romance , germanic and balto-slavic languages , the languages of the balkans , and western uralic languages in the caucasus , though this is disputed the gilaki and mazandarani languages with kartvelian languages pama–nyungan languages of australia several linguistic areas of the americas , including : mesoamerican language area pueblo linguistic area pacific northwest languages austronesian and papuan languages spoken in eastern indonesia and east timor east anatolia -- proposed , though currently uncertain . see also . isogloss koiné language geolinguistics . references .