Per Albin Hansson

early life and career . per albin hansson was born in kulladal , a neighborhood in malmö , sweden , on 28 october 1885 . one of the first professional politicians of sweden , hansson participated in the creation of the swedish social democratic youth in 1903 and presided over it as its chairman in 1908–09 , a period in which universal suffrage and proportional representation was gradually to be enacted for all swedish males by conservative prime minister arvid lindman , later a rival of hansson . influenced generally by karl kautsky 's views on socialism , hansson succeeded hjalmar branting as editor of social-demokraten in 1917 & nbsp ; and was appointed his minister of defence in sweden 's first social democratic cabinet in 1920 , following a liberal-social democratic coalition enacting equal suffrage for men and women ( in effect as of the 1921 election ) . per albin hansson held this office in all of branting 's three cabinets between 1920 and 1925 ( years which saw eight governments ) , performing numerous cut-backs on the military budget . upon branting 's death in 1925 , hansson rose to be embraced as chairman of the party . his legitimacy remained under dispute , however , and only in 1927 did he become the head of the riksdag faction , before having been confirmed undisputedly as branting 's successor in a 1928 congress . upon losing power to carl gustaf ekman 's prohibition liberals in 1926 , hansson worked from the opposition bench and , although heading what was to remain the largest party of the riksdag to date , faced a major setback upon cooperating with the communists in the infamous election of 1928 . hansson 's party did poorly as a result , and not until the 2010 election would the social democrats and the communists ( the latter changed its name , in 1995 , to the left party ) would the two parties run in tandem again . in opposition to the conservative – though equally pragmatic and staunchly anti-fascist – lindman cabinet , hansson pressed for the introduction of a welfare state rather than wide-scale nationalizations . he called his vision folkhemmet ( '' the people 's home '' ) in a riksdag debate in 1928 . following the fall of ekman in 1932 due to a corruption scandal involving the recently deceased industrialist ivar kreuger , the social democrats made gains , which altogether gave them 104 riksdag seats and 41.7 % of the popular vote . though this left them short of a majority , they benefited from the inability of the liberal parties ( themselves unable to form a single faction until 1934 ) , the conservatives and the agrarians to form a stable administration of their own . this inability gave hansson his chance . he courted and eventually obtained support from the farmers ' league , through promising an agriculture policy favoring the interests of the league ( kohandeln ) , although he stopped short of giving league parliamentarians any cabinet posts . in june 1936 , the combined efforts of the liberals , the conservatives and the agrarians brought the hansson-led government to an end and ensured hansson 's own resignation as prime minister . following hansson 's departure , league chairman axel pehrsson-bramstorp was able to form a three-month '' vacation cabinet '' . that lasted until the elections in september , which saw a rise in support of the social democrats . this time hansson invited certain league members into the cabinet , and pehrsson-brahmstorp therefore became minister of agriculture . the administration enjoyed a substantial parliamentary majority that lasted until 1939 . world war ii . following the invasion of poland in 1939 , hansson declared strict neutrality and called for the formation of a broad coalition government involving all major parties under his leadership , which was realized in december except only the stalinism communist party and its short-lived pro-german splinter faction , the socialist party . alone in europe save for spain , portugal , switzerland , ireland and the vatican , sweden maintained neutrality throughout all world war ii , but like the mentioned countries , cooperated and traded with both sides . winston churchill claimed that sweden during world war ii ignored the greater moral issues and played both sides for profit , a criticism mimicked in criticism towards sweden 's policy towards the operation weserübung upheld partly by transportation reinforcement through swedish territory , sanctioned by hansson 's cabinet . winston churchill – the second world war . the german invasion of the soviet union on 22 june 1941 , operation barbarossa sparked an ultimatum known as the midsommarkrisen by the government of nazi germany to hansson 's cabinet , demanding some military concessions , including german troop transports on swedish railways in order to support germany 's ally finland . political deliberations surrounding this ultimatum have been dubbed the '' midsummer crisis '' , which ultimately , allegedly following king gustav v 's decision to resign should the concessions not be made , fell out in favor of the axis . the 83-year-old king formally ( although having not directly intervened in the government 's policies since 1914 ) had the powers to appoint his own cabinet , and his open intervention in the issue was seen as a threat to the stability of the government and , given the ongoing war , to the sovereignty of the nation . recent research by carl-gustaf scott argues however that there never was a '' crisis '' and that '' the crisis was created in historical hindsight in order to protect the political legacy of the social democratic party and its leader per albin hansson . '' carl-gustaf scott , '' the swedish midsummer crisis of 1941 : the crisis that never was '' journal of contemporary history , vol . 37 , no . 3 , 371–394 ( 2002 ) ( sage journals online ) to get the steel required by the german ruhr and upper silesia industry , germany was , in 1939–1940 , dependent on shipments of swedish iron ore , since access to the supplies from the mines in france , the traditional supplier , were cut off until the invasion of france . in 1939–1940 the allies tried various ways to stop the shipments of swedish ore , for example by plan r 4 . a downed stray v2 rocket was also sold to the allies in 1942 , passing details of advanced nazi rocket engineering over . in effect , the main political priority was to avoid direct war engagement of sweden during world war ii . following germany 's setbacks around 1942–43 , sweden was no longer seriously threatened by invasion from the third reich and subsequently rolled back most of its concessions . death and political legacy . following v-e day , hansson wanted to maintain a social democratic-led coalition government of all non-communist parties . however , he failed to achieve this as a result of strong opposition within his own party which favoured a radical reformist agenda following the war . hansson reluctantly agreed to a single-party government . he had abandoned his early revolutionary and strictly anti-militarist views in favor of social corporatism , class collaboration and a reformist agenda involving few nationalizations but stable armed forces in order to secure neutrality . he died from a heart attack in stockholm on 6 october 1946 while stepping off a tram at the ålstens gård station . he was succeeded as party chairman and prime minister by minister of education tage erlander , who held both offices concurrently until 1969 , completing most of hansson 's legacy . per albin hansson , seen often as the most successful prime minister in swedish history , is interred in norra begravningsplatsen in stockholm . per albin hansson young.jpg per albin hansson in his youth peralbinhanssoncaricature-hp-1927.png communist caricature of per albin hansson , portraying his transition from anti-militarist agitator to defense minister the cabinet of sweden 1939 and prime minister hansson.jpg the newly appointed swedish cabinet , assembled outside the royal palace in stockholm , december 13 , 1939 . in popular culture . in the swedish television movie four days that shook sweden – the midsummer crisis 1941 from 1988 , he is played by swedish character actor ernst-hugo järegård . in the world war ii grand strategy game hearts of iron iv made by paradox interactive , he appears as sweden 's leader . see also . sweden during world war ii skåne line . references . . external links .