E-card

printed e-cards . some e-cards are intended to be printed out rather than sent via e-mail ; to most people , however , these are not considered e-cards , but are simply home-made greeting cards . the advantage to this over a traditional greeting sometimes can be cost savings , or sometimes simply the ability to '' create '' something for the recipient rather than choosing a fully completed paper card . technological evolution . since its conception in 1994 by judith donath , the technology behind the e-card has changed significantly . one technical aspect that has remained mostly constant is the delivery mechanism : the e-mail received by the recipient contains not the e-card itself , but an individually coded link back to the publisher 's web site that displays the sender 's card . postcards and greeting cards . like their paper counterparts , '' postcards '' use visual art ( static or animated images or video ) and provide a space for a personal note to be added . these were the first type of e-card in use . like their paper counterparts , cyber '' greeting cards '' provide a greeting along with the visual art . variations range from e-cards with fixed greetings like a paper card to selectable greetings ( from drop-down lists or other selection options ) to changeable suggested greetings . flash animation . this type of e-card is based on two-dimensional vector animation controlled with a scripting language . the format is proprietary to adobe ; however , widespread usage of adobe 's software allows this type of card to be easily viewed on most of today 's computers . the recipient sees an animated short usually 15–30 seconds in duration . the animation often appears to have a cartoon style due to the nature of the content , though some flash creations can be quite sophisticated and realistic . a sound track which may contain speech or music usually accompanies the animation . flash animated greeting cards can include interactivity , for example , asking the viewer to choose a picture to animate ; however , most flash e-cards are designed to convey the sentiment of the sender through simple observation . flash animated cards are offered today by almost all major e-card publishers and are consequently the most common format used . video e-cards . '' video e-cards '' use a combination of personalized text , photo , and video to convey the message to the recipient . a number of such services exist such as rattlebox where the user selects and customizes text on a prerecorded video , and dvcards.com where a user with a web camera actually records their own video to send . mobile e-cards . 6 with the advance in mobile technologies , multimedia messaging service ( mms ) which is basically picture sms , became more and more popular . e-cards can now be sent to mobile devices and phones . mobile e-cards or 'mcards ' as they are more commonly known are then offered by different mobile content providers and carriers . similar to e-cards , mcards can contain multiple pictures , music and text messages . also mcards are considered the cards sent via one or another mobile application . one of the first companies that created mcards is a dutch company called mgreetings ( established in 2003 ) . mcards can be sent from a pc in a similar way as sending e-cards . users can go to a website online , select a card enter the recipient 's mobile number , and that card will be sent to the recipient 's mobile phone as an mms . web based multi-media e-cards . the web-based card creation has been evolving becoming more creative . the user can create greeting cards online choosing backgrounds , drag and drop images , animations , smilies and write text that look like handwriting . the e-card may contain videos and music as well . face upload e-cards . flash 10 technology now enables sites to develop bespoke applications which can upload photos , manipulating them and cut out the head from it . the user can then embed it onto an animation so as to achieve a much higher level of personalization . e-cards games . some e-cards include interactive games . the games usually contain animation and music much like other animated e-cards and have the same functionality allowing the sender to add a personal message . collaborative . these cards are specialized in gathering the wishes of many people into one common card . they normally allow contributors to type their messages , although there are platforms like www.wishyoo.com , which allows users to handwrite their messages and attach pictures and gifts to them . history . the greeting card metaphor was employed early in the life of the world wide web . the first postcard site , the electric postcard was created in late 1994 by judith donath at the mit media lab . it started slowly : 10-20 cards a day were sent in the first weeks , 1000-2000 a day over the first summer , and then it gained momentum rapidly . during the 1995-96 christmas season , there were days when over 19,000 cards were sent ; by late spring of 1996 over 1.7 million cards had been sent in total . the source code for this service was made publicly available , with the stipulation that users share improvements with each other . the electric postcard won numerous awards , including a 1995 gnn best of the net award . gnn 2nd annual best of the net , partial list of references to the electric postcard mit ’ s postcards and remained the dominant and the only documented e-card service until the late fall of 1995 . in nov 1995 , registry data network solutions awesome cyber cards and also then known as marlo.com ( located at marlo.com until oct 2010 , now moved ) , began developing the internet greeting card , a digital internet card including a fixed or suggested greeting as well as an image . when the internet archive began capturing web sites across the internet in the fall of 1996 , it created a reservoir of information about e-card development by preserving internet history from that time and from earlier time-marked internet pages captured at that time . the awesome cards web pages , captured on nov 10,1996 and available at the wayback machine demonstrate its development of the cyber greeting card through the year 1996 as one drills down through its card collections . specifically , the holiday collections from earlier that same year give a virtual time-stamp , . of greeting card development , starting with valentines with fixed or semi-fixed greetings in february 1996 and progressing through greeting cards with changeable suggested greetings by the thanksgiving collection . by mid-1996 , a number of sites had developed e-cards . by mid october 1996 , directly emailable greeting cards and postcards ( '' email express '' ) were developed and introduced by awesome cards , based on new capabilities introduced in the netscape 3.0 browser . this is the first time the e-card itself could be emailed directly by the card sender to the recipient rather than having an announcement sent with a link to the card 's location at the e-card site . e-cards sent directly within email message , email express between sep 1996 and thanksgiving 1997 , bluemtn ecards , bluemtn 1st archive a paper greeting card company named blue mountain developed e-cards on its web site . blue mountain grew quickly by allowing visitors to create greetings for others to use . blue mountain further expanded when microsoft promoted its service on its free hotmail service . this affiliation ceased and blue mountain sued microsoft in nov 1998 for putting email card announcements from it and other e-card companies in the junk folder of its hotmail users . by 1999 , major capital was starting to flow into the internet , beginning the dotcom boom . of the e-card sites , blue mountain arts was noteworthy in this period for its sale in october 1999 to excite home for 780m ( which represent a price of 71 per unique monthly user ) . the transaction has been referenced by cnn and business 2.0 as evidence of the dot-com bubble . on september 13 , 2001 , three weeks before filing for bankruptcy on october 1 , 2001 , excite home sold bluemountain.com to american greetings for 35m , or 3.23 per unique monthly user . the web site bluemountain.com remains a large web site , primarily focused on e-cards . in june 2008 , justanotherdotcom.com purchased the free e-card site greeting-cards.com and added it to their own greeting card site , which made them one of the largest e-card sites in the world . several non-profit organizations offer free e-cards as a way of having a supporter introduce the organization to another individual . in 2006 , sos children 's villages - usa began offering free e-cards for many occasions such as birthdays , thank yous , and mother 's day . according to data provided by google , searches for e-cards have declined to less than 1 % of their past levels , with interest declining since record-keeping began in 2004 . . security . sending an e-card to a given recipient invariably involves giving that recipient 's email address to the e-card service – a third party . as with other third-party email services ( such as mailing-list companies ) , the operator has the chance to misuse this address . one example of misuse is if the e-card service sends advertisements to the recipient 's address . under anti-spam rules used by major isps , such advertisements would be spam , since the recipient never asked ( '' opted in '' ) to receive them . data privacy laws may prohibit a business from disclosing names , email addresses , or other personal information about customers to a third party . in late june 2007 a spate of emails with the subject line '' you 've received a postcard from a family member ! '' and other similar subjects , was seen making their way across the internet . unfortunately most of these emails contained links to malicious web sites where javascript was used to exploit the browser in order to compromise a system , or contained a link to a malware file masquerading as an e-card . . see also . cardmaking e-mail greeting cards love coupons