Ceremony

church and civil ( secular ) ceremonies . according to dally messenger and alain de botton , in most western countries the values and ideals articulated in both church and civil ceremonies are generally similar . the difference is in what messenger calls the '' supernatural infrastructure '' or de botton the '' implausible supernatural element '' . messenger , dally , murphy 's law and the pursuit of happiness : a history of the civil celebrant movement , spectrum publications , melbourne ( australia ) , 2012 kelly , fran ; radio interview with alain de botton , rn breakfast , australian broadcasting commission , podcast 2012 . most churches and religions claim some extra advantage conferred by the deity e.g . roman catholics believe that through the words of consecration in the mass ceremony , god himself becomes actually present on the altar . both church and civil ceremonies share the powerful psychological , social and cultural influences which all ceremony seeks to attain . obviously , the style of music played , words used , other components and the structure vary . shared traditions . writes about the marriage ceremony , there are a surprising number of ancient traditional elements in both church and civil ceremonies in the western world . key ceremonies date from the pre-christian roman and greek times and their practices have continued through the centuries . for example , from pre-christian roman times in the marriage ceremony , we inherit best men and bridesmaids , processions , signing of the contract , exchange of rings and even the wedding cake . schillebeeckx , edward ; translated by n.d . smith : ; secular reality and saving mystery . volumes 1 & 2 , sheed and ward , london , 1963 . note : later versions have these isbns : . sharing non-supernatural content . writer and philosopher alain de botton maintains atheists should appropriate many of the useful insights , artistic treasures and symbolism inspired by religion . he argues that the secular world can also learn from the religions the importance of community and continuity . de botton , alain : religion for atheists : a non-believer 's guide to the uses of religion , 2013 , vintage books , 2013 , messenger agrees , and points out that the success of civil celebrants in australia has been partly due to their espousing of these principles , both in theory and practice , since 1973 . messenger , dally ; alain de botton and humanists , australian humanist magazine , no . 106 , winter 2012 , p10 messenger iii , dally ( 1999 ) , ceremonies and celebrations , hachette -livre australia ( sydney ) , . history of secular ceremony . the main impetus to the development of quality civil ceremonies in the western world was the foresight of the australian statesman , senator and high court judge , lionel murphy . in 1973 in australia the civil celebrant program entrusted appropriately selected individuals to provide non-church people with ceremonies of substance and dignity . this initiative to a great extent has now been followed by new zealand , canada , the united kingdom and some states of the usa . messenger , dally ( 2012 ) , murphy 's law and the pursuit of happiness : a history of the civil celebrant movement , spectrum publications , melbourne ( australia ) , . purpose of secular ceremony . according to dally messenger iii secular ceremonies are “ roadmap ” influences which lead to an acceptable , ethical and dignified life . ceremonies contribute to the unseen ingredients of psychological stability , a sense of identity , reassurances of life 's purposes , and the personal sense of self worth . the mysterious cultural power of quality ceremonies lead our society along an honourable and ethical path . lionel murphy considered that personal genuine ceremonies were central to a civilised , stable and happy society . here he echoed the conviction of the renowned mythologist joseph campbell who had maintained the strongly asserted generality that the level of civilised behaviour in a society is directly linked to the practice of ceremonies and rites of passage . messenger iii , dally , we had a dream , in the australian humanist , no 121 , autumn 2016 , published by the australian humanist society , canberra act . ceremony is serious communication . ceremonies are the time and place setting wherein people seriously communicate . for example , in front of witnesses the groom tells the bride that he loves her and wants to be with her for the rest of his life . such a statement has much more force than if said privately . it is in the ceremony that groups of people come together . it is in the ceremony that they make compacts , that they recognise achievement , that they assert identity , that they established connections , that they declare love , that they pay tribute , that they express grief . in addition messenger makes the following observations : a complex of good ceremonies raise the level of human happiness in society . ceremonies assist humans to adjust to change . ceremonies are signposts of the culture and indicate that such a culture has life-affirming substance . ceremonies are an important means of expressing , reinforcing and transmitting values . ceremonies are constructed from the visual and performing arts . in a chosen setting they are an important vehicle for telling stories , reciting great poetry and prose , using symbolism , and performing great music . ceremonies , done well , leave lifelong lasting memories and therefore permanent good effects . the better a ceremony is done , the better its psychological , cultural , and social outcomes . messenger , dally , murphy 's law and the pursuit of happiness : a history of the civil celebrant movement , spectrum publications , melbourne ( australia ) , pp1-8 2012 . the components of ceremony . to be powerful and effective , such ceremonies , in the view of all the scholars in the field , had to have impact . this occurred when the ceremony was framed by the visual and performing arts . great care had to be taken in creating and choosing the poetry , prose , stories , personal journeys , myths , silences , dance , music and song , shared meditations , choreography and symbolism which comprised a ceremony . to reinforce the psychological and cultural power of ceremony it should be enacted , as fas as possible , in a beautiful interior and exterior place . beauty is the essential core of ceremony , having always been part of “ raising the spirit ” and embedding the good in the memory . ceremonies , as they always had been , are historically the bridge between the visual and performing arts and the people . murphy and his followers , and international practitioners such as david oldfield of washington dc understand that ceremonies are core expressions of the culture . done well , they can assist in major decision making , bring emotional security , strengthen bonds between people , and communicate a sense of contentment . to quote david oldfield rituals and ceremonies are an essential and basic means for human beings to give themselves and others the necessary messages which enable the individual to stay human . they communicate acceptance , love , a sense of identity , esteem , shared values and beliefs and shared memorable events . every ritual contains tender and sacred moments . and in those moments of sensitivity we are taken out of the normal flow of life , and out of our routines . we are then in an event that is irreplaceable and sacred . in ritual we participate in something deep and significant . they are moments which move our heart and touch our spirit . oldfield , david , the journey : an experiential rite of passage for modern adolescents , as a contributor in mahdi , louise carus ( editor ) , crossroads : the quest for contemporary rites of passage , open court publishing , 1996 , chicago p145ff fierst , gerald , the heart of the wedding , parkhurst brothers , chicago , 2011 , p.76ff . qualities of a celebrant . lionel murphy also knew that the superficial , the unaware , were not the right persons to bring this about . the civil celebrant needs to have a rich skill-set and knowledge base . murphy is on the record as asserting that the civil celebrant needed to have a “ feel ” for ceremony and be professional , knowledgeable , educated , creative , imaginative , inspired , well presented , idealistic , and well practised . the civil celebrant should be a person inspired to improve lives at a deep and lasting level . for this reason must be carefully chosen . the ideal is that they be educated in the humanities and trained to expertly co-create , creatively write and perform ceremonies . messenger iii , dally ( 1999 ) , ceremonies and celebrations , hachette -livre australia ( sydney ) , pp . 16ff . ceremonial occasions . marriage , or a wedding , is the flagship ceremony of every culture . almost as important is the funeral or burial ceremony . the funeral ritual , too , is a public , traditional and symbolic means of expressing our beliefs , thoughts and feelings about the death of someone loved . rich in history and rife with symbolism , the funeral ceremony helps us acknowledge the reality of the death , gives testimony to the life of the deceased , encourages the expression of grief in a way consistent with the culture ’ s values , provides support to mourners , allows for the embracing of faith and beliefs about life and death , and offers continuity and hope for the living . birth i.e . a naming naming ceremonies existed in human culture long before christianity or any of the major religions came on the scene . every community has a ceremony to welcome a new child into the world , to give that child recognition , and to celebrate the birth of new life . birth baptism ceremony . initiation ( college orientation week ) puberty social adulthood ( bar mitzvah ) graduation awarding retirement death ( day of the dead ) spiritual ( baptism , communion ) grand opening aging . celebration of events . other , society-wide ceremonies may mark annual or seasonal or recurrent events such as : vernal equinox , winter solstice and other annual astronomical positions weekly sabbath day inauguration of an elected office-holder occasions in a liturgical year or '' feasts '' in a calendar of saints opening and closing of a sports event , such as the olympic games other ceremonies underscore the importance of non-regular special occasions , such as : coronation of a monarch victory in battle in some asian cultures , ceremonies also play an important social role , for example the tea ceremony . process . ceremonies may have a physical display or theatre component : dance , a procession , the laying on of hands . a declaratory verbal pronouncement may explain or cap the occasion , for instance : i now pronounce you husband and wife . i swear to serve and defend the nation . i declare open the games of . i/we dedicate this . to . both physical and verbal components of a ceremony may become part of a liturgy . see also . builders ' rites ceremonial dance cornerstone event planning gift groundbreaking ceremony human condition liturgy opening ceremony ribbon cutting ceremony rite of passage tjurunga topping out ( when the last beam is placed at the top of a building ) . worship . notes . external links .