Pica (disorder)

complications . complications may occur due to the substance consumed . for example , lead poisoning may result from the ingestion of paint or paint-soaked plaster , hairballs may cause intestinal obstruction and toxoplasma or toxocara infections may follow ingestion of feces or soil . spitzer , robert l . diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : ( dsm iii ) . cambridge : univ . of cambridge , 1986 . print . . causes . according to the dsm-5 , mineral deficiencies are occasionally associated with pica , but biological abnormalities are rarely found . people practicing forms of pica , such as geophagy , pagophagy , and amylophagy , are more likely anemic or have low hemoglobin concentration in their blood , lower levels of red blood cells ( hematocrit ) , or lower plasma zinc levels . specifically , practicing geophagy is more likely to be associated with anemia or low hemoglobin . practicing pagophagy and amylophagy is more highly associated with anemia . additionally , children and pregnant women may be more likely to have anemia or low hemoglobin relative to the general population . more recently , cases of pica have been tied to the obsessive–compulsive spectrum , and a move has arisen to consider ocd in the cause of pica . however , pica is currently recognized as a mental disorder by the widely used diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders ( dsm-4 ) . sensory , physiological , cultural , and psychosocial perspectives have also been used by some to explain the causation of pica . mental-health conditions , such as obsessive-compulsive disorder ( ocd ) and schizophrenia , have been proposed as causes of pica . however , pica can also be a cultural practice not associated with a deficiency or disorder . ingestion of kaolin ( white clay ) among african-american women in the us state of georgia shows the practice there to be a dsm-4 '' culture-bound syndrome '' and '' not selectively associated with other psychopathology '' . similar kaolin ingestion is also widespread in parts of africa . such practices may stem from health benefits such as the ability of clay to absorb plant toxins and protect against toxic alkaloids and tannic acids . . diagnosis . no single test confirms pica , but because pica can occur in people who have lower than normal nutrient levels and poor nutrition ( malnutrition ) , the health care provider should test blood levels of iron and zinc . hemoglobin can also be checked to test for anemia . lead levels should always be checked in children who may have eaten paint or objects covered in lead-paint dust . the healthcare provider should test for infection if the patient has been eating contaminated soil or animal waste . . dsm-5 . the dsm-5 posits four criteria that must be met for a person to be diagnosed with pica : person must have been eating non-nutritive nonfoods for at least one month . this eating must be considered abnormal for the person 's stage of development . eating these substances can not be associated with a cultural practice that is considered normal in the social context of the individual . for people who currently have a medical condition ( e.g . : pregnancy ) or a mental disorder ( e.g . : autism spectrum disorder ) , the action of eating non-nutritive nonfoods should only be considered pica if it is dangerous and requires extra medical investigation or treatment on top of what they are already receiving for their pre-existing condition . . differential diagnosis . in individuals with autism , schizophrenia , and certain physical disorders ( such as kleine-levin syndrome ) , non-nutritive substances may be eaten . in such instances , pica should not be noted as an additional diagnosis . . treatment . treatment for pica may vary by patient and suspected cause ( e.g . , child , developmentally disabled , pregnant , or psychogenic ) and may emphasize psychosocial , environmental and family-guidance approaches ; iron deficiency may be treatable through iron supplements or through dietary changes . an initial approach often involves screening for , and if necessary , treating any mineral deficiencies or other comorbidity . for pica that appears to be of psychogenic cause , therapy and medication such as ssris have been used successfully . however , previous reports have cautioned against the use of medication until all non-psychogenic causes have been ruled out . looking back at the different causes of pica related to assessment , the clinician tries to develop a treatment . first , there is pica as a result of social attention . a strategy might be used of ignoring the person 's behavior or giving them the least possible attention . if their pica is a result of obtaining a favorite item , a strategy may be used where the person is able to receive the item or activity without eating inedible items . the individual 's communication skills should increase so that they can relate what they want to another person without engaging in this behavior . if pica is a way for a person to escape an activity or situation , the reason why the person wants to escape the activity should be examined and the person should be moved to a new situation . if pica is motivated by sensory feedback , an alternative method of feeling that sensation should be provided . other nonmedication techniques might include other ways for oral stimulation such as gum . foods such as popcorn have also been found helpful . these things can be placed in a '' pica box '' that should be easily accessible to the individual when they feel like engaging in pica . behavior-based treatment options can be useful for developmentally disabled and mentally ill individuals with pica . behavioral treatments for pica have been shown to reduce pica severity by 80 % in people with intellectual disabilities . these may involve using positive reinforcement normal behavior . many use aversion therapy , where the patient learns through positive reinforcement which foods are good and which ones they should not eat . often , treatment is similar to the treatment of obsessive-compulsive or addictive disorders ( such as exposure therapy ) . in some cases , treatment is as simple as addressing the fact they have this disorder and why they may have it . a recent study classified nine such classes of behavioral intervention : success with treatment is generally high and generally fades with age , but it varies depending on the cause of the disorder . developmental causes tend to have a lower success rate . treatment techniques include : . epidemiology . the prevalence of pica is difficult to establish because of differences in definition and the reluctance of patients to admit to abnormal cravings and ingestion , thus leading to the prevalence recordings of pica among at-risk groups being in the range of 8 % to 65 % depending on the study . based on compiled self-report and interview data of pregnant and postpartum women , pica is most prevalent geographically in africa , with an estimated prevalence of 44.8 % , followed by north and south america ( 23.0 % ) and eurasia ( 17.5 % ) . factors associated with pica in this population were determined to be anemia and low levels of education , both of which are associated with low socioeconomic backgrounds . two studies of adults with intellectual disability living in institutions found that 21.8 % and 25.8 % of these groups suffered from pica . prevalence rates for children are unknown . young children commonly place non-nutritious material into their mouths . this activity occurs in 75 % of 12-month-old infants , and 15 % of two- to three-year-old children . in institutionalized children with mental retardation , pica occurs in 10 & ndash ; 33 % . . history . the condition currently known as pica was first described by hippocrates . prior to the elimination of the category of '' feeding disorders in infancy and early childhood '' , which is where pica was classified , from the dsm-5 , pica was primarily diagnosed in children . however , since the removal of the category , psychiatrists have started to diagnose pica in people of all ages . the term pica originates in the latin word for magpie , picave , a bird that is famed for its unusual eating behaviors , where it is known to eat almost anything . in 13th-century latin work , pica was referenced by the greeks and romans ; however , it was not addressed in medical texts until 1563 . in the southern united states in the 1800s , geophagia was a common practice among the slave population . geophagia is a form of pica in which the person consumes earthly substances such as clay , and is particularly prevalent to augment a mineral-deficient diet . noteworthy is the fact that kaolin was consumed by west africans enslaved in the southeastern united states , particularly the georgia belt , due to the antidiarrheal qualities in the treatment of dysentery and other abdominal ailments . the practice of consuming kaolin rocks was thereafter studied scientifically , the results of which led to the subsequent pharmaceutical commercialization of kaolinite , the clay mineral contained in kaolin . kaolinite became the active ingredient in drugs such as kaopectate and pepto-bismol , although the formulations have since found additional active ingredients to replace kaolinite . research on eating disorders from the 16th to the 20th centuries suggests that during that time in history , pica was regarded more as a symptom of other disorders rather than its own specific disorder . even today , what could be classified as pica behavior is a normative practice in some cultures as part of their beliefs , healing methods , or religious ceremonies . . animals . unlike in humans , pica in dogs or cats may be a sign of warm autoimmune hemolytic anemia , especially when it involves eating substances such as tile grout , concrete dust , and sand . dogs exhibiting this form of pica should be tested for anemia with a complete blood count or at least hematocrit levels . although several theories have been proposed by experts to explain pica in animals , insufficient evidence exists to prove or disprove any of them .