Regino of Prüm

biography . according to the statements of a later era , regino was the son of noble parents and was born at the stronghold of altrip on the rhine near speyer at an unknown date . from his election as abbot and from his writings , it is evident that he had entered the benedictine order , probably at prüm itself , and that he had been a diligent student . the rich and celebrated imperial abbey of prüm suffered greatly during the 9th century from the marauding incursions of the norsemen . it had been twice seized and ravaged , in 882 ad and 892 ad . after its second devastation by the danes , the abbot farabert resigned his office and regino was elected his successor in 892 ad . his labours for the restoration of the devastated abbey were hampered by the struggle between contending parties in lorraine . in 899 ad regino was driven from his office by richarius , later bishop of liège , the brother of count gerhard and count mattfried of hainaut . richarius was made abbot ; regino had lost the position and relocated to trier , where he was honourably received by archbishop ratbod and was appointed abbot of st martin 's , a house which he later reformed . he supported the archbishop in the latter 's efforts to carry out ecclesiastical reforms in that troubled era , rebuilt the abbey of st . martin that had been laid waste by the norsemen , accompanied the archbishop on visitations , and used his leisure for writing . regino died at trier in 915 ad and was buried in st . maximin 's abbey , trier , his tomb being discovered there in 1581 . works . regino 's works are edited in volume 132 of migne 's patrologia latina . de harmonica institutione and tonarius . regino 's earliest work was epistola de harmonica institutione , a treatise on music which he wrote in the form of a letter to archbishop radbod . its primary objective was to improve the liturgical singing in the churches of the diocese and probably to ensure radbod 's support for this . he also wrote the tonarius , a collection of chants . ed . edmond de coussemaker , scriptores de musica medii aevi , ii ( paris , 1867 ) , 1-73 . . chronicon . regino 's most influential work is his chronicon , a human history from the incarnation of jesus christ to 906 ad . the chronicon is a history of the carolingian empire that connected the rise and fall of the carolingian dynasty with his own affairs . stuart airlie , '' sad stories of the death of kings '' : narrative patterns and structures of authority in regino of prum 's chronicle . '' in narrative and history in the early medieval west , ( eds ) elizabeth m . tyler and ross balzaretti ( turnhout , 2006 ) , p . 109 . the works intended recipient is unknown , but may have been louis the child ( r.900-911 ) , and was dedicated to adalberon , bishop of augsburg ( †909 ) , someone personally close to the child king . the work was later continued and edited by adalbert , a monk at the benedictine st . maximin 's abbey , trier in trier , possibly adalbert , archbishop of magdeburg . the first book contains broad narratives on the fortunes of various rulers and church men , which are organised against the regnal spans of roman and byzantine emperors and ends in the year 741 ad with the death of charles martel . it consists of extracts taken from bede , paulus diaconus , the deeds of dagobert , the annals of saint amand and the chronicle liber historiae francorum . of the second book ( 741-906 ad ) , the first part is a long excerpt of the royal frankish annals down to 813 . from 814 onwards however , the work is made up of eyewitness accounts , paulus diaconus and in relation to events in lotharingia , the work of adventius , bishop of metz . in the later sections of book two , regino discusses and deals with the various kings attempting to take power in lotharingia , in particular criticising zwentibald , the son of powerful magnate and later king arnulf , duke of bavaria . the chronological accuracy of the work has been questioned , however , regino had adapted and changed bede 's anno mundi dating system to anno domini to reflect the works starting point of the incarnation . simon maclean , history and politics in late carolingian and ottonian europe : the chronicle of regino of prum and adalbert of magdeburg , ( manchester , 2009 ) pp . 20–22 . the work is deemed important by modern scholars due to the fact it is the first chronicle to conventionally apply the ad dating system . regino 's chronicle is an important source on history of bulgaria in that it is the only contemporary text hinting at the organisation of the council of preslav ( '' … boris i gathered his entire empire and placed his younger son simeon i as prince… '' ) . historians who made use of regino 's chronicle include cosmas of prague . marie bláhová , '' the function of the saints in early bohemian historical writing . '' in the making of christian myths in the periphery of latin christendom ( ca 1000–1300 ) , ed . lars boje mortensen . copenhagen : museum tusculanums forlag , 2006 . p . 97 . the chronicle was first printed at mainz in 1521 . de ecclesiasticis disciplinis . regino also drew up , at the request of his friend and patron radbod , archbishop of trier ( d . 915 ) , a collection of canons , libri duo de synodalibus causis et disciplinis ecclesiasticis , dedicated to hatto i , archbishop of mainz . it was a work on ecclesiastical discipline for use in ecclesiastical visitations . the work is divided into 434 sections . the title of the work in migne 's edition is libellus de ecclesiasticis disciplinis et religione christiana , collectus ex jussu domini metropolitani rathbodi trevericae urbis episcopi , a reginone quondam abbate prumiensis monasterii , ex diversis sanctorum patrum conciliis et decretis romanorum pontificum . substantial portions of this work were included in the decretum burchardi of 1012 . section 364 ( corresponding to burchard 10.1 ) is the so-called canon episcopi ( after its incipit ut episcopi episcoporumque ministri omnibus viribus elaborare studeant ) dealing with popular superstition . miscellaneous . around 900 , regino lists four distinctive features of ethnicity : ( origin , race ) , ( customs , behavior ) , ( language ) , and ( law ) . these categories would be considered key nominal qualifiers for ethnic identity from the carolingian period onwards . . references . sources . ( see p . & nbsp ; 196 . ) catholic encyclopedia : regino of prum h . ermisch , die chronik des regino bis 813 ( göttingen , 1872 ) p . schulz , die glaubwürdigkeit des abtes regino van prüm ( hamburg , 1894 c . wawra , de reginone prumensis ( breslau , 1901 ) a . molinier , les sources de l'histoire de france , tome i ( 1901 ) w . wattenbach , deutschlands geschichtsquellen , band i ( 1904 ) . editions and translations . chronicon : maclean , simon ( ed . and tr . ) . history and politics in late carolingian and ottonian europe . the chronicle of regino of prüm and adalbert of magdeburg . manchester , 2009 . kurze , friedrich ( ed . ) . reginonis abbatis prumiensis chronicon cum continuatione treverensi . mgh ss rerum germanicarum in usum scholarum separatim editi 50 . hanover , 1890 . available from the digital mgh an earlier edition is in volume i of the monumenta germaniae historica ( 1826 ) . german translation ( only 2.book ) : by ernst dümmler '' die chronik des abtes regino von prüm '' . several editions , introduction dated twice , 1856 & 1889 ; 5 . unveränderte auflage ( 1939 ) , at archive.org tonarius tonarius , ed . edmond de coussemaker , scriptores de musica medii aevi . vol . ii . paris , 1867 . 1-73 . de harmonica institutione , ed . gerbert , scriptores ecclesiastici de musica sacra . vol . i . 1784 . libri duo de synodalibus causis et disciplines ecclesiasticis opera omnia by migne patrologia latina , vol . 132 , with analytical indexes das sendhandbuch des regino von prüm , ed . f . w . h . wasserschleben and wilfried hartmann ( darmstad , 2004 ) . further reading . open access version “ ubaldo di saint-amand , musica . reginone di prüm , epistola de harmonica institutione ” , introduzione , traduzione e commento a cura di alessandra fiori , firenze , sismel - edizioni del galluzzo , 2011 ( società internazionale per lo studio del medioevo latino ) . external links . reginon and music , musicologie.org . chartier , yves . reginon de prüm : epistola de armonica institutione . musicologie.org digitized edition of the chronicon at e-codices .