Fulk, King of Jerusalem

count of anjou . fulk was born at angers , between 1089 and 1092 , the son of count fulk iv of anjou and bertrade de montfort . in 1092 , bertrade deserted her husband , and bigamously married king philip i of france . fulk v became count of anjou upon his father 's death in 1109 . in the next year , he married countess ermengarde of maine , cementing angevin control over the county of maine . fulk was originally an opponent of king henry i of england and a supporter of king louis vi of france , but in 1118 or 1119 he allied with henry when he arranged for his daughter matilda to marry henry 's son william adelin . fulk went on crusade in 1119 or 1120 , and became attached to the knights templar ( orderic vitalis ) . he returned , late in 1121 , after which he began to subsidize the templars , maintaining two knights in the holy land for a year . much later , henry arranged for his own daughter matilda to marry fulk 's son geoffrey , which she did in 1127 or 1128 . crusader and king . by 1127 fulk was preparing to return to anjou when he received an embassy from king baldwin ii of jerusalem . baldwin ii had no male heirs but had already designated his daughter melisende to succeed him . baldwin ii wanted to safeguard his daughter 's inheritance by marrying her to a powerful lord . fulk was a wealthy crusader and experienced military commander , and a widower . his experience in the field would prove invaluable in a frontier state always in the grip of war . however , fulk held out for better terms than mere consort of the queen ; he wanted to be king alongside melisende . baldwin ii , reflecting on fulk 's fortune and military exploits , acquiesced . fulk abdicated his county seat of anjou to his son geoffrey and left for jerusalem , where he married melisende on 2 june 1129 . later baldwin ii bolstered melisende 's position in the kingdom by making her sole guardian of her son by fulk , baldwin iii , born in 1130 . fulk and melisende became joint rulers of jerusalem in 1131 with baldwin ii 's death . from the start fulk assumed sole control of the government , excluding melisende altogether . he favored fellow countrymen from anjou to the native nobility . the other crusader states to the north feared that fulk would attempt to impose the suzerainty of jerusalem over them , as baldwin ii had done ; but as fulk was far less powerful than his deceased father-in-law , the northern states rejected his authority . melisende 's sister alice of antioch , exiled from the principality by baldwin ii , took control of antioch once more after the death of her father . she allied with pons of tripoli and joscelin ii of edessa to prevent fulk from marching north in 1132 ; fulk and pons fought a brief battle before peace was made and alice was exiled again . in jerusalem as well , fulk was resented by the second generation of jerusalem christians who had grown up there since the first crusade . these '' natives '' focused on melisende 's cousin , the popular hugh ii of le puiset , count of jaffa , who was devotedly loyal to melisende . fulk saw hugh as a rival , and it did not help matters when hugh 's own stepson accused him of disloyalty . in 1134 , in order to expose hugh , fulk accused him of infidelity with melisende . hugh rebelled in protest . hugh secured himself to jaffa , and allied himself with the muslims of ascalon . he was able to defeat the army set against him by fulk , but this situation could not hold . the patriarch interceded in the conflict , perhaps at the behest of melisende . fulk agreed to peace and hugh was exiled from the kingdom for three years , a lenient sentence . however , an assassination attempt was made against hugh . fulk , or his supporters , were commonly believed responsible , though direct proof never surfaced . the scandal was all that was needed for the queen 's party to take over the government in what amounted to a palace coup . author and historian wrote that fulk 's supporters '' went in terror of their lives '' in the palace . contemporary author and historian william of tyre wrote of fulk : '' he never attempted to take the initiative , even in trivial matters , without ( melisende 's ) consent . '' the result was that melisende held direct and unquestioned control over the government from 1136 onwards . sometime before 1136 fulk reconciled with his wife , and a second son , amalric , was born . securing the borders . jerusalem 's northern border was of great concern . fulk had been appointed regent of the principality of antioch by baldwin ii . as regent he had raymond of poitou marry the infant princess constance of antioch , his and melisende 's niece . however , the greatest concern during fulk 's reign was the rise of atabeg zengi of mosul . in 1137 fulk was defeated in battle near baarin but allied with mu'in ad-din unur , the vizier of damascus . damascus was also threatened by zengi . fulk captured the fort of banias , to the north of lake tiberias and thus secured the northern frontier . fulk also strengthened the kingdom 's southern border . his butler paganus built the fortress of kerak to the east of the dead sea , and to help give the kingdom access to the red sea , fulk had blanchegarde , ibelin , and other forts built in the south-west to overpower the egyptian fortress at askelon . this city was a base from which the egyptian fatimids launched frequent raids on the kingdom of jerusalem and fulk sought to neutralise this threat . in 1137 and 1142 , byzantine emperor john ii comnenus arrived in syria attempting to impose byzantine control over the crusader states . john 's intention of making a pilgrimage , accompanied by his impressive army , to jerusalem alarmed fulk , who wrote to john pointing out that his kingdom was poor and could not support the passage of a large army . this lukewarm response dissuaded john from carrying through his intention , and he postponed his pilgrimage . john died before he could make good his proposed journey to jerusalem . runciman , ( 1952 ) a history of the crusades , vol . ii : the kingdom of jerusalem , cambridge university press . pp . 212-213 , 222-224 . death . in 1143 , while the king and queen were in akko , fulk was killed in a hunting accident . life among the europeans in palestine and syria in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries , urban tignor holmes , a history of the crusades : the art and architecture of the crusader states , volume iv , ed . kenneth m . setton and harry w . hazard , ( university of wisconsin press , 1977 ) , 19 . his horse stumbled , fell , and fulk 's skull was crushed by the saddle , '' and his brains gushed forth from both ears and nostrils '' , as william of tyre describes . he was carried back to acre , where he lay unconscious for three days before he died . he was buried in the church of the holy sepulchre in jerusalem . though their marriage started in conflict , melisende mourned for him privately as well as publicly . fulk was survived by his son geoffrey by his first wife , and baldwin and amalric by melisende . legacy . depictions . according to william , fulk was '' a ruddy man , like david . faithful and gentle , affable and kind . an experienced warrior full of patience and wisdom in military affairs . '' his chief fault was an inability to remember names and faces . william of tyre described fulk as a capable soldier and able politician , but observed that fulk did not adequately attend to the defense of the crusader states to the north . ibn al-qalanisi ( who calls him al-kund anjur , an arabic rendering of '' count of anjou '' ) says that '' he was not sound in his judgment nor was he successful in his administration . '' the zengids continued their march on the crusader states , culminating in the fall of the county of edessa in 1144 , which led to the second crusade ( see siege of edessa ) . family . in 1110 , fulk married ermengarde of maine ( died 1126 ) , the daughter of elias i of maine . their four children were : geoffrey v of anjou ( 1113 & ndash ; 1151 ) , father of henry ii of england . sibylla of anjou ( 1112 & ndash ; 1165 , bethlehem ) , married in 1123 william clito ( div . 1124 ) , married in 1134 thierry , count of flanders . matilda of anjou ( 1106 & ndash ; 1154 , fontevrault ) , married william adelin ; after his death in the white ship disaster of 1120 , she became a nun and later fontevraud abbey . elias ii of maine ( died 1151 ) his second wife was melisende , queen of jerusalem baldwin iii of jerusalem amalric of jerusalem . references . sources . orderic vitalis robert of torigny william of tyre steven runciman ( 1952 ) a history of the crusades , vol . ii : the kingdom of jerusalem , cambridge university press . medieval women , edited by derek baker , the ecclesiastical history society , 1978 payne , robert . the dream and the tomb , 1984 the damascus chronicle of crusades , trans . h.a.r . gibb , 1932 .