Princess Ingeborg of Denmark

early life . image : charlottenlund slot feb06.jpg thumb left princess ingeborg 's birthplace , charlottenlund palaceprincess ingeborg was born on 2 august 1878 at her parents ' country residence , the charlottenlund palace north of copenhagen , during the reign of her paternal grandfather , king christian ix . she was the second daughter and fifth child of frederick viii of denmark , and his wife louise of sweden . her father was the eldest son of christian ix of denmark and louise of hesse-kassel , and her mother was the only daughter of charles xv of sweden and louise of the netherlands . she was baptised with the names ingeborg charlotte caroline frederikke louise , and was known as princess ingeborg . princess ingeborg was raised with her siblings at the royal household in copenhagen , and grew up between her parents ' city residence , the frederick viii 's palace , an 18th-century palace which forms part of the amalienborg palace complex in central copenhagen , and their country residence , the charlottenlund palace , located by the coastline of the øresund strait north of the city . marriage . thumb in may 1897 , princess ingeborg was engaged to prince carl , duke of västergötland . prince carl was the third son of oscar ii of sweden and sophia of nassau . they were , therefore , first cousins once-removed . they married on 27 august 1897 in the chapel at christiansborg palace in copenhagen and spent their honeymoon in germany . the couple had four children : princess margaretha of sweden , later princess axel of denmark ( 1899–1977 ) . princess märtha of sweden , later crown princess of norway ( 1901–1954 ) . astrid of sweden , later queen of the belgians ( 1905–1935 ) . prince carl bernadotte , known as carl jr . , later prince bernadotte , a belgian title ( 1911–2003 ) . in 1947 , on the occasion of their wedding anniversary , her spouse admitted that their marriage had been completely arranged by their respective fathers , and ingeborg herself added : '' i married a complete stranger ! '' lars elgklou : familjen bernadotte . en kunglig släktkrönika ( the bernadotte family . a royal family chronicle ) ( in swedish ) . public role . the marriage was popular because she was the granddaughter of the popular king charles xv of sweden and iv of norway , and she was a personal success in sweden . it was said of her , that of all foreign princesses married into the swedish royal house , she was perhaps the one best suited to be queen consort of sweden , staffan skott : alla dessa bernadottar ( all of the bernadottes ) ( 1996 ) ( in swedish ) and for the first ten years in sweden , she almost was : from 1897 until 1907 , queen sophia seldom attended public events and victoria of baden spent most of her time abroad for health reasons , princess ingeborg was thereby given more public duties , unofficially performing much of the role associated with the queen consort at the swedish court . ingeborg c c f l , urn : sbl:11950 , svenskt biografiskt lexikon ( art av ragnar amenius ) , hämtad 2015-02-27 . she is perceived as having performed her representational duties with a combination of dignity and easygoing friendliness , and as attracting a social circle with her wit . her sister-in-law , crown princess victoria , however , did not approve of her informality and once remarked : '' one does not enter the chamber of the crown princess of sweden without knocking , even if one is princess ingeborg . '' heribert jansson ( 1963 ) . drottning victoria . stockholm : hökerbergs bokförlag ingeborg was interested in sports , especially ice skating , and at the automobile exhibition of stockholm in 1903 , she and gustaf v of sweden , made a spontaneous demonstration trip in a car from scania . in 1908 , she accompanied her husband 's nephew prince william to his wedding with her paternal first cousin once removed grand duchess maria pavlovna in russia . family life . she lived a harmonious family life , and the family was known as '' the happy family '' . the children were given a simple upbringing , and expected to learn household tasks : they were , for example , given a real stove in their play cottage , on which they cooked real food . she and carl lived an informal and intimate family life with their children . ingeborg was admired for her handling of the economic difficulties experienced when a bank they invested in crashed in 1922 and they had to sell their home . she was portrayed as a symbol of a wife and mother in many magazines and was for many years the most popular member of the royal house . in 1905 , the norwegian government discussed making them king and queen of norway , but carl declined the offer . instead , her brother was elected monarch of norway . ingeborg 's kinship to the scandinavian dynasties helped bring the three royal houses together again after tension created due to norway 's 1905 secession . politically , ingeborg had democratic and liberal sympathies and disliked the conservatives , views she expressed during the governmental crisis in 1918 . she detested the conservative hammarsköljd cabinet and the 1914 policy , criticized the conservative press and viewed the resignation of the liberal-social democratic cabinet of 1918 as a disaster , reportedly commented it with the words : '' it must not happen ! no no no ! '' during world war ii in 1940–45 , she demonstrated publicly against nazi germany by blocking the window of her house which faced the german embassy in stockholm . princess ingeborg has the distinction of being the grandmother of three european monarchs : king harald v of norway , king baudouin of belgium and king albert ii of belgium ; and the great-grandmother of two : henri , grand duke of luxembourg and king philippe of belgium . she is also grandaunt of queen margrethe ii of denmark and great-grandaunt of carl xvi gustaf of sweden . honours . national . : knight grand cross with collar of the order of the elephant : dame of the royal family order upload.wikimedia.org , ingeborg wearing the family decorations of her grandfather , father and brother 41.tumblr.com , ingeborg wearing the family decorations of her grandfather , father , brother and father-in-law : dame of the royal family order : dame of the royal family order : dame of the royal family order : member of the royal family order sweden . foreign . ottoman dynasty : dame grand cordon of the imperial order of charity başbakanlık osmanlı arşivi ( i̇.tal . 169-13 1316-za-099 ) . ancestry . references . external links . lars elgklou : familjen bernadotte . en kunglig släktkrönika ( the bernadotte family . a royal family chronicle ) ( in swedish ) staffan skott : alla dessa bernadottar ( all of the bernadottes ) ( 1996 ) ( in swedish ) ingeborg c c f l , urn : sbl:11950 , svenskt biografiskt lexikon ( art av ragnar amenius ) , hämtad 2015-02-27 . further reading . rotbain , avigail .