R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul

facts and procedural background . in the early morning hours of june 21 , 1990 , the petitioner and several other teenagers allegedly assembled a crudely made cross by taping together broken chair legs . the cross was erected and burned in the front yard of an african american family that lived across the street from the house where the petitioner was staying . petitioner , who was a juvenile at the time , was charged with two counts , one of which a violation of the st . paul bias-motivated crime ordinance . the ordinance provided ; petitioner moved to dismiss the count under the bias-motivated crime ordinance on the ground that it was substantially overbroad and impermissibly content based , and therefore facially invalid under the first amendment . 505 u.s . at 380 . the trial court granted the motion , but the minnesota supreme court reversed , rejecting petitioner 's overbreadth claim because , as the minnesota court had construed the ordinance in prior cases , the phrase '' arouses anger , alarm or resentment in others '' limited the reach of the ordinance to conduct that amounted to fighting words under the chaplinsky v . new hampshire decision . 505 u.s . at 380-381 . the minnesota court also concluded that the ordinance was not impermissibly content based , because '' the ordinance is a narrowly tailored means towards accomplishing the compelling governmental interest in protecting the community against bias-motivated threats to public safety and order . '' in re welfare of r.a.v . , 464 n.w.2d 507 , 510 ( minn . 1991 ) . petitioner appealed , and the united states supreme court granted certiorari . . . decision . antonin scalia delivered the opinion of the court , in which william rehnquist , anthony kennedy , david souter , and clarence thomas joined . byron white wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment , which harry blackmun and sandra day o'connor joined in full , and john paul stevens joined in part . justice blackmun wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment . justice stevens wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment , which was joined in part by justice white and justice blackmun.image : antonin scalia , scotus photo portrait.jpg 200px thumb antonin scalia , who wrote the majority opinion in r.a.v . the majority decision . the court began with a recitation of the relevant factual and procedural background , noting several times that the conduct at issue could have been prosecuted under different minnesota statutes . 505 u.s . at 379–380 , n.1 . in construing the ordinance , the court recognized that it was bound by the construction given by the minnesota supreme court . 505 u.s . at 381 . therefore , the court accepted the minnesota court 's conclusion that the ordinance reached only those expressions that constitute '' fighting words '' within the meaning of chaplinsky . petitioner argued that the chaplinsky formulation should be narrowed , such that the ordinance would be invalidated as '' substantially overbroad , '' but the court declined to consider this argument , concluding that even if all of the expression reached by the ordinance was proscribable as '' fighting words , '' the ordinance was facially unconstitutional in that it prohibited otherwise permitted speech solely on the basis of the subjects the speech addressed . the court began its substantive analysis with a review of the principles of free speech clause jurisprudence , beginning with the general rule that the first amendment prevents the government from proscribing speech , . or even expressive conduct , texas v . johnson , because of disapproval of the ideas expressed . 505 u.s . at 382 . the court noted that while content-based regulations are presumptively invalid , society has permitted restrictions upon the content of speech in a few limited areas , which are '' of such slight social value as a step to truth that any benefit that may be derived from them is clearly outweighed by the social interest in order and morality . '' 505 u.s . at 382–383 , citing . the court then clarified language from previous free speech clause cases , including roth v . united states , beauharnais v . illinois , and chaplinsky that suggested that certain categories of expression are '' not within the area of constitutionally protected speech , '' and '' must be taken in context . '' 505 u.s . at 383 . the court 's clarification stated that this meant that certain areas of speech '' can , consistently with the first amendment , be regulated because of their constitutionally proscribable content ( obscenity , defamation , etc . ) —not that they are categories of speech entirely invisible to the constitution , so that they may be made the vehicles for content discrimination . '' 505 u.s . at 383-384 , emphasis in original thus , as one of the first of a number of illustrations that justice scalia would use throughout the opinion , the government may '' proscribe libel , but it may not make the further content discrimination of proscribing only libel critical of the government . '' 505 u.s . at 384 . the court recognized that while a particular utterance of speech can be proscribed on the basis of one feature , the constitution may prohibit proscribing it on the basis of another feature . 505 u.s . at 385 . thus , while burning a flag in violation of an ordinance against outdoor fires could be punishable , burning a flag in violation of an ordinance against dishonoring the flag is not . in addition , other reasonable '' time , place , or manner '' restrictions were upheld , but only if they were '' justified without reference to the content of the regulated speech . '' . 505 u.s . at 386 . the court recognized two final principles of free speech jurisprudence . one of these described that when '' the entire basis for the content discrimination consists entirely of the very reason the entire class of speech is proscribable , no significant danger of idea or viewpoint discrimination exists . '' as examples , justice scalia wrote , the other principle of free speech jurisprudence was recognized when the court wrote that a valid basis for according different treatment to a content-defined subclass of proscribable speech is that the subclass '' happens to be associated with particular 'secondary effects ' of the speech , so that 'the regulation is justified without reference to the content of the . speech ' '' 505 u.s . at 389 , quoting renton v . playtime theatres , inc . , ( emphasis in original ) . as an example , the court wrote that a state could permit all obscene live performances except those involving minors . 505 u.s . at 389 . applying these principles to the st . paul bias-motivated crime ordinance , the court concluded that the ordinance was facially unconstitutional . justice scalia explained the rationale , writing , the court went on to explain that , in addition to being an impermissible restriction based on content , the ordinance was also viewpoint- based discrimination , writing , displays containing some words , such as racial slurs , would be prohibited to proponents of all views , whereas fighting words that '' do not themselves invoke race , color , creed , religion , or gender—aspersions upon a person 's mother , for example—would seemingly be usable ad libitum in the placards of those arguing in favor of racial , color , etc . , tolerance and equality , but could not be used by those speakers ' opponents . '' the court concluded that '' st . paul has no such authority to license one side of a debate to fight freestyle , while requiring the other to follow marquess of queensberry rules . '' the court concluded , '' let there be no mistake about our belief that burning a cross in someone 's front yard is reprehensible . but st . paul has sufficient means at its disposal to prevent such behavior without adding the first amendment to the fire . '' 505 u.s . at 396 . . limitation . in virginia v . black ( 2003 ) , the united states supreme court deemed constitutional part of a virginia statute outlawing the public burning of a cross if done with an intent to intimidate , noting that such expression '' has a long and pernicious history as a signal of impending violence . '' . . see also . list of united states supreme court cases , volume 505 list of united states supreme court cases lists of united states supreme court cases by volume list of united states supreme court cases by the rehnquist court