1930 in literature

events . january 6 – an early literary character-licensing agreement is signed by a . a . milne , giving stephen slesinger u.s . and canadian merchandising rights to the winnie-the-pooh works . february – the censorship of publications board begins to function in the irish free state . among the first 13 books banned ( announced in may ) are point counter point by aldous huxley , the well of loneliness by radclyffe hall and several on sex and marriage by margaret sanger and marie stopes . iris oifigiúil ( official gazette ) , 14 may 1930 . february 23 – erich maria remarque 's anti-war novel all quiet on the western front is banned in thuringian schools by education minister wilhelm frick . march 19 – paul robeson plays the title role of othello at the savoy theatre , london , with peggy ashcroft as desdemona . may 6 – the collins crime club is launched as a crime fiction imprint by the u.k . firm william collins . may 10 – john masefield becomes poet laureate of the united kingdom . sunday times ( perth , wa ) , 11 may 1930 . accessed 28 october 2012 july 14 – luigi pirandello 's the man with the flower in his mouth becomes the first broadcast television drama , by the bbc in england , directed by val gielgud . july 19 – georges simenon 's detective inspector jules maigret makes a first appearance in print , under simenon 's own name after he abandons pseudonyms , in the novel pietr-le-letton ( the strange case of peter the lett ) , which begins serialization in the french weekly magazine ric et rac published by fayard . it will appear in book form in 1931 as the fifth of 75 novels ( and 28 short stories ) in which simenon features the pipe-smoking paris detective . september 11 – agatha christie marries archaeologist max mallowan in edinburgh . september 24 – the first production of noël coward 's comedy private lives opens at the phoenix theatre ( london ) , featuring coward , gertrude lawrence and laurence olivier in the cast . september 29 – the english satirical novelist evelyn waugh joins the catholic church . october 13 – agatha christie 's the murder at the vicarage , the first full-length novel to feature her amateur detective miss marple , appears in the u.k . in the collins crime club series , after serialization in the united states . november 5 – the american novelist sinclair lewis is awarded the nobel prize in literature . december 10 – the first performance of bertolt brecht 's lehrstück the decision ( die maßnahme ) , written in collaboration with slatan dudow and the composer hanns eisler , occurs at the großes schauspielhaus in berlin , with ernst busch as lead . unknown dates john langalibalele dube publishes the historical novella insila kashaka , the first work of fiction in the zulu language . franz kafka 's novel the castle ( 1926 ) is translated into english for the first time , by willa and edwin muir . new books . fiction . vicki baum – grand hotel max brand – destry rides again ( original serial version as twelve peers ) pearl s . buck – east wind : west wind john dickson carr – it walks by night leslie charteris – enter the saint gabriel chevallier – la peur ( fear ) agatha christie the murder at the vicarage the mysterious mr . quin giant 's bread ( as mary westmacott ) albert cohen – solal of the solals ferreira de castro - a selva ( the forest – a tale of the amazon rubber tappers ) john dos passos – u.s.a . ( trilogy ) william faulkner – as i lay dying rachel field – hitty , her first hundred years zona gale – bridal pond gaito gazdanov – an evening with claire jean giono – second harvest milt gross – he done her wrong ( wordless novel ) ronald gurner – pass guard at ypres dashiell hammett – the maltese falcon a . p . herbert – the water gipsies hermann hesse – narcissus and goldmund georgette heyer – powder and patch robert hichens – the bracelet sydney horler – checkmate langston hughes – not without laughter carolyn keene – the secret of the old clock oliver la farge – laughing boy d . h . lawrence love among the haystacks and other stories the virgin and the gypsy norman lindsay – redheap benito lynch – the romance of a gaucho compton mackenzie – april fools andré malraux – the royal way ( la voie royale ) frederic manning ( as '' private 19022 '' ) – her privates we ( first trade edition ) katherine mansfield ( posthumously ) – the aloe w . somerset maugham – cakes and ale george moore aphrodite in aulis a flood paul morand – world champions ( champions du monde ) w . f . morris – behind the lines robert musil – the man without qualities ( der mann ohne eigenschaften , publication begins ) stratis myrivilis – η ζωή εν τάφω ( i zoí en tafo , '' life in the tomb '' ; book publication ) vladimir nabokov the defense the eye irène némirovsky – le bal camil petrescu – ultima noapte de dragoste , întâia noapte de război ( the last night of love , the first night of war ) j . b . priestley – angel pavement ellery queen – the french powder mystery elizabeth madox roberts – the great meadow joseph roth – job ernst von salomon – the outlaws dorothy l . sayers strong poison the documents in the case ( written with robert eustace ) nan shepherd – the weatherhouse upton sinclair – mental radio olaf stapledon – last and first men miguel de unamuno – san manuel bueno , mártir ion vinea – paradisul suspinelor ( a haven for the sighs ) edgar wallace – the lady of ascot hugh walpole – rogue herries evelyn waugh – vile bodies thornton wilder – the woman of andros charles williams – war in heaven stanisław ignacy witkiewicz – insatiability ( nienasycenie ) gamel woolsey – one way of love ( written ; published 1987 ) philip gordon wylie – gladiator francis brett young – jim redlake . children and young people . william s . gray – first in the dick and jane series of elson-gray readers '' carolyn keene '' – the secret of the old clock and other nancy drew mystery stories andré maurois – fattypuffs and thinifers ( patapoufs et filifers ; illustrated by jean bruller ) anne parrish – floating island watty piper – the little engine that could beatrix potter – the tale of little pig robinson gwynedd rae – mostly mary ( first in the mary plain series of 14 books ) arthur ransome – swallows and amazons ( first in the swallows and amazons series of 12 books ) marion st john webb – mr papingay 's flying shop ( first in the papingay series of four books ) sadie rose weilerstein – the adventures of k'tonton : a little jewish tom thumb ruth plumly thompson – the yellow knight of oz ( 24th in the oz series overall and the 10th written by her ) . drama . rudolf besier – the barretts of wimpole street antoine bibesco – ladies all bertolt brecht rise and fall of the city of mahagonny ( aufstieg und fall der stadt mahagonny ) the decision ( die maßnahme ) ferdinand bruckner – elisabeth von england ( elizabeth of england ) jean cocteau – the human voice ( la voix humaine ) marc connelly – the green pastures noël coward – private lives ian hay and guy bolton – a song of sixpence ian hay and p.g . wodehouse – leave it to psmith nicolae iorga sfântul francisc fiul cel pierdut georgia douglas johnson – blue-eyed black boy geoffrey kerr – london calling kwee tek hoay – nonton tjapgome ( watching the lantern festival ) federico garcía lorca the public ( el público , written ) the shoemaker 's prodigious wife ( la zapatera prodigiosa ) patrick macgill – suspense frank vosper – debonair edgar wallace – on the spot the mouthpiece smoky cell emlyn williams – a murder has been arranged christa winsloe – ritter nérestan ( written as gestern und heute , translated as children in uniform ) w . b . yeats – the words upon the window pane . poetry . w . h . auden – poems samuel beckett – whoroscope hart crane – the bridge laxmi prasad devkota – muna madan ( मुनामदन ) t . s . eliot – ash wednesday d . iacobescu ( died 1913 ) – quasi p . h . b . lyon ( editor ) – the discovery of poetry . non-fiction . adrian bell – corduroy catherine carswell – the life of robert burns e . k . chambers – william shakespeare : a study of facts and problems alphonse daudet ( died 1897 ) – in the land of pain ( la doulou ( la douleur ) : 1887–1895 et le trésor d'arlatan : 1897 ) william empson – seven types of ambiguity dion fortune – psychic self-defence sigmund freud – civilization and its discontents muhammad iqbal – the reconstruction of religious thought in islam james jeans – the mysterious universe g . wilson knight – the wheel of fire : interpretations of shakespearian tragedy bata lobagola ( joseph howard lee ) – lobagola : an african savage 's own story ( make-believe autobiography ) paul morand – new york edouard de pomiane – cuisine en dix minutes alfred rosenberg – the myth of the twentieth century ( der mythus des zwanzigsten jahrhunderts ) w . c . sellar and r . j . yeatman – 1066 and all that david unaipon ( credited to william ramsay smith ) – myths and legends of the australian aboriginals owen wister – roosevelt : the story of a friendship . births . january 1 – adunis ( ali ahmad said esber ) , syrian-born poet january 20 – blair lent , american children 's author and illustrator ( died 2009 ) january 23 – derek walcott , saint lucian poet and playwright ( died 2017 ) february 17 – ruth rendell ( ruth barbara grasemann ) , english detective and mystery novel writer ( died 2015 ) february 18 – gahan wilson , american author and illustrator ( died 2019 ) february 22 – edward d . hoch , american detective fiction writer ( died 2008 ) february 23 – paul west , english-born american novelist , poet and essayist ( died 2015 ) march 8 – douglas hurd , english politician and novelist march 26 – gregory corso , american poet ( died 2001 ) april 16 – carol bly , american teacher , author of short stories , essays and nonfiction ( died 2007 ) may 3 – juan gelman , argentine poet ( died 2014 ) may 13 – josé jiménez lozano , spanish novelist ( died 2020 ) may 15 – grace ogot , kenyan author ( died 2015 ) may 21 – stanley wells , english shakespearean scholar june 23 – anthony thwaite , english poet june 28 – maureen howard , american writer , editor and lecturer july 6 – gloria skurzynski , american author july 11 – harold bloom , american literary critic ( died 2019 ) july 13 – sam greenlee , african american author ( died 2014 ) july 15 – jacques derrida , french algerian literary critic ( died 2004 ) august 9 – carmen balcells , spanish literary agent ( died 2015 ) august 17 – ted hughes , english poet laureate ( died 1998 ) august 25 – peter trower , canadian poet and novelist ( died 2017 ) august 27 – erzsébet galgóczi , hungarian novelist , playwright and screenwriter ( died 1989 ) september 25 – shel silverstein , american poet ( died 1999 ) september 29 – colin dexter , english detective fiction writer ( died 2017 ) october 2 – antonio gala , spanish poet , playwright and novelist october 10 – harold pinter , english dramatist ( died 2008 ) october 18 – esther hautzig , polish-born american autobiographer ( died 2009 ) october 24 – elaine feinstein , english poet , novelist and literary biographer ( died 2019 ) october 26 – catherine obianuju acholonu , nigerian researcher and poet ( died 2014 ) november 1 – a . r . gurney , american dramatist ( died 2017 ) november 5 – clifford irving , american literary forger ( died 2017 ) november 12 – irma chilton , welsh children 's writer in welsh and english ( died 1990 ) november 16 – chinua achebe , nigerian writer , academic and literary critic ( died 2013 ) november 18 – j . g . ballard , english novelist and essayist ( died 2009 ) november 20 – bai hua , chinese poet , dramatist and novelist ( died 2019 ) november 27 – rex shelley , singaporean author ( died 2009 ) december 2 – jon silkin , english poet ( died 1997 ) . deaths . january 16 – johannes gilhoff , german writer ( born 1861 ) february 27 george haven putnam , american author and publisher ( born 1844 ) joseph wright , english philologist and lexicographer ( born 1855 ) february 28 – charles kenneth scott moncrieff , scottish writer and translator ( born 1889 ) march 2 – d . h . lawrence , english novelist and poet ( born 1885 ) march 12 – alois jirásek , czech novelist and dramatist ( born 1851 ) april 10 – alfred williams , english poet and steam-hammer operator ( born 1877 ) april 14 sigurd ibsen , norwegian politician and writer ( born 1859 ) vladimir mayakovsky , russian poet ( born 1893 ) april 21 – robert bridges , english poet and poet laureate ( born 1844 ) april 22 – jeppe aakjær , danish poet and novelist ( born 1866 ) april 29 – maria polydouri , greek poet ( born 1902 ) may 12 – iso mutsu ( 睦磯 , gertrude ethel passingham ) , english-born japanese travel writer ( born 1867 ) may 15 – william john locke , guyana-born english novelist and playwright ( born 1863 ) may 16 – florence bell , english writer and playwright ( born 1851 ) may 17 – herbert croly , american political writer ( born 1869 ) june 9 arthur st . john adcock , english novelist and poet ( born 1864 ) thomas herbert warren , english scholar and poet ( born 1853 ) june 23 – israel gollancz , english shakespeare scholar ( born 1864 ) july 7 – arthur conan doyle , scottish writer of crime fiction ( born 1859 ) august 23 – lucien wolf , english journalist and historian ( born 1857 ) august 29 – william archibald spooner , english academic and instigator of spoonerisms ( born 1844 ) september 4 – vladimir arsenyev , russian travel writer and explorer ( born 1872 ) september 5 – georges de porto-riche , french novelist and dramatist ( born 1849 ) september 25 – arthur way , english-born australian classicist and translator ( born 1847 ) september thomas nicoll hepburn ( gabriel setoun ) , scottish writer and poet ( born 1861 ) karam singh , sikh historian ( born 1884 ) november 21 – jean-marie-raphaël le jeune , canadian writer , linguist and catholic priest ( born 1855 ) december 22 – neil munro ( hugh foulis ) , scottish humorist , novelist and critic ( born 1863 ) unknown dates – roy horniman , english novelist and playwright ( born 1874 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : e . h . young , miss mole james tait black memorial prize for biography : francis yeats-brown , lives of a bengal lancer newbery medal for children 's literature : rachel field , hitty , her first hundred years nobel prize in literature : sinclair lewis prix goncourt : henri fauconnier , malaisie pulitzer prize for drama : marc connelly , the green pastures pulitzer prize for poetry : conrad aiken , selected poems pulitzer prize for the novel : oliver la farge , laughing boy . references .