1944 in literature

events . february 6 – the première of jean anouilh 's tragedy antigone takes place at the théâtre de l'atelier in nazi-occupied paris . march 19 – the première of pablo picasso 's play desire caught by the tail ( le désir attrapé par la queue ) is a private reading in paris by the author that includes simone de beauvoir , jean-paul sartre , valentine hugo and raymond queneau directed by albert camus . may – the première of jean-paul sartre 's existentialism drama no exit is held at the théâtre du vieux-colombier in nazi-occupied paris . june 1 and 5 – the first and ( modified ) second lines respectively of paul verlaine 's 1866 poem chanson d'automne ( '' les sanglots longs des violons de l'automne / bercent mon cœur d'une langueur monotone '' ) are broadcast by the allies over bbc radio londres among coded messages to the french resistance to prepare for the d-day landings ( second broadcast at 22:15 local time ) . june d-day landings and invasion of normandy : the english soldier-poet keith douglas is killed ; william golding commands landing craft tank ( rocket ) 460 at gold beach ; vernon scannell ( as john bain ) experiences the incident that gives rise to the poem '' walking wounded '' ( 1965 ) and is wounded ; j . d . salinger , having landed on utah beach , works on an early version of the catcher in the rye during lulls in the fighting ; dennis b . wilson writes the poem that appears as elegy of a common soldier in 2012 ; kingsley amis and john wyndham serve as signallers ; alexander baron 's experiences of the invasion form the basis of his novel from the city , from the plough ( 1948 ) . the final edition of the breton nationalist newspaper l'heure bretonne is published . august – with the liberation of paris , jean genet 's novel notre dame des fleurs ( 1943 ) can begin to circulate openly . september 14 – laurence olivier takes the title rôle in the production of richard iii that opens at the old vic in london . october the contents of the załuski library are destroyed during the planned destruction of warsaw by its nazi occupiers . günter grass , having volunteered for active service on his is drafted into the waffen-ss . october 2 after a few months ' internment at drancy and birkenau , benjamin fondane is one of 700 prisoners put to death in the gas chamber – the last such killings before birkenau is evacuated . upon selection , fondane is heard joking about the irony of his misfortune . dylan thomas is to be best man at the wedding of a friend and fellow welsh poet , vernon watkins , in london , but fails to turn up . november 22 – the release in england of laurence olivier 's henry v makes it the first work of shakespeare to be filmed in colour . november 23 – arthur miller 's play the man who had all the luck ( written in 1940 ) has its broadway première at the forrest theatre in new york city , but runs for only four performances . december 26 – tennessee williams ' semi-autobiographical '' memory play '' the glass menagerie , adapted from a short story , is premièred at the civic theatre in chicago . unknown date – the english actor-manager geoffrey kendal arrives in india for the first time with the entertainments national service association , touring patrick hamilton 's drama gaslight ; from 1947 kendal 's touring repertory company '' shakespeareana '' will perform shakespeare in towns and villages across india for some decades . . new books . fiction . samuel hopkins adams – canal town jorge amado – terras do sem fim ( the violent land ) esther averill – the cat club vaikom muhammad basheer – balyakalasakhi h . e . bates – fair stood the wind for france saul bellow – dangling man jorge luis borges – ficciones christianna brand – green for danger john dickson carr till death do us part he would n't kill patience ( as carter dickson ) joyce cary – the horse 's mouth louis-ferdinand céline – guignol 's band agatha christie death comes as the end towards zero absent in the spring ( as mary westmacott ) colette – gigi edmund crispin – the case of the gilded fly a . j . cronin – the green years esther forbes – johnny tremain l . p . hartley – the shrimp and the anemone john hersey – a bell for adano georgette heyer – friday 's child charles r . jackson – the lost weekend kalki krishnamurthy – sivagamiyin sapatham ( சிவகாமியின் சபதம் , the vow of sivagami ) pär lagerkvist – dvärgen margaret landon – anna and the king of siam ( basis for 1951 musical the king and i ) anne morrow lindbergh – the steep ascent h . p . lovecraft – marginalia curzio malaparte – kaputt w . somerset maugham – the razor 's edge oscar micheaux – the case of mrs . wingate alberto moravia – agostino ( two adolescents ) gunnar myrdal – an american dilemma rafael sabatini – king in prussia anna seghers transit '' der ausflug der toten mädchen '' ( the excursion of the dead girls , short story ) anya seton – dragonwyck clark ashton smith – lost worlds eleanor smith – magic lantern howard spring – hard facts philip van doren stern – the greatest gift ( first trade publication ) rex stout – not quite dead enough phoebe atwood taylor ( as alice tilton ) – dead ernest donald wandrei – the eye and the finger henry s . whitehead – jumbee and other uncanny tales martin wickremasinghe – gamperaliya kathleen winsor – forever amber . children and young people . esther averill – the cat club enid blyton – the island of adventure robert bright – georgie alice dalgliesh – the silver pencil eleanor estes – the hundred dresses eric linklater – the wind on the moon feodor rojankovsky – the tall book of nursery tales margery sharp – cluny brown tasha tudor - mother goose . drama . jean anouilh – antigone ugo betti – corruzione al palazzo di giustizia ( corruption in the palace of justice , written ) bertolt brecht – the caucasian chalk circle ( der kaukasische kreidekreis ) , written daphne du maurier – the years between balwant gargi – lohākuṭ ( blacksmith ) philip king – see how they run max otto koischwitz – vision of invasion ( broadcast propaganda ) esther mccracken – no medals terence rattigan - love in idleness ( rewriting of less than kind ) lawrence riley – time to kill jean-paul sartre – no exit ( huis clos ) john van druten – i remember mama franz werfel – jacobowsky and the colonel ( jacobowsky und der oberst ) tennessee williams – the glass menagerie . poetry . james k . baxter – beyond the palisade paul éluard – au rendez-vous allemand ( to the german rendezvous ) five young american poets , volume 3 , including work by eve merriam , john frederick nims , jean garrigue , tennessee williams and alejandro carrión nicholas moore – the glass tower francis brett young – the island . non-fiction . charles william beebe – book of naturalists aleister crowley – the book of thoth friedrich hayek – the road to serfdom max horkheimer and theodor w . adorno – dialectic of enlightenment ( dialektik der aufklärung ) margaret landon – anna and the king of siam gunnar myrdal – an american dilemma beverley nichols – verdict on india mihir bose : '' a hatred for hindus '' , history today ( vol 66/12 , december 2016 ) , p . 3 . karl polanyi – the great transformation l . t . c . rolt – narrow boat charles stevenson – ethics and language g . m . trevelyan – english social history : a survey of six centuries from chaucer to queen victoria . births . january 8 – terry brooks , american writer of fantasy fiction january 17 – jan guillou , swedish author january 21 – jack abbott , american writer ( suicide 2002 ) february 7 – witi ihimaera , new zealand māori writer february 9 – alice walker , american novelist and poet february 11 – joy williams , american fiction writer february 14 carl bernstein , american journalist alan parker , english director and writer february 16 – richard ford , american novelist february 27 ken grimwood , american writer ( died 2003 ) roger scruton , english philosopher and writer ( died 2020 ) sir roger scruton , conservative philosopher of wide accomplishments – obituary april 18 – kathy acker , american postmodernist experimental novelist and punk poet ( died 1997 ) may 13 – armistead maupin , american novelist may 17 – uldis bērziņš , latvian poet and translator may 18 – w . g . sebald , german novelist ( died 2001 ) june 5 john fraser , canadian journalist nigel rees , english writer and broadcaster july 21 – buchi emecheta , nigerian-born novelist and children 's writer ( died 2017 ) august 10 – barbara erskine , english novelist august 18 – paula danziger , american young adult novelist ( died 2004 ) august 19 – bodil malmsten , swedish writer ( died 2016 ) august 22 – tom leonard , scottish dialect poet august 30 – molly ivins , american journalist ( died 2007 ) september 19 – ismet özel , turkish poet september 24 – eavan boland , irish poet ( died 2020 ) october 2 – vernor vinge , american science fiction novelist october 5 – tomás de jesús mangual , puerto rican journalist ( died 2011 ) november 7 – peter wilby , english journalist november 24 – eintou pearl springer , trinidadian poet november 28 – rita mae brown , american writer and political activist december 1 – tahar ben jelloun , french moroccan-born novelist december 9 – ki longfellow , american novelist december 15 – elizabeth arnold , english children 's writer december 17 – jack l . chalker , american science fiction novelist ( died 2005 ) december 21 – james sallis , american crime novelist unknown dates margaret busby , ghanaian-born british publisher patrick o'connell , canadian poet ( died 2005 ) . deaths . january 6 – ida tarbell , american journalist ( born 1857 ) january 7 – napoleon lapathiotis , greek lawyer and poet ( born 1888 ) january 8 – joseph jastrow , polish american psychologist ( born 1863 ) january 15– armand praviel , french poet , novelist , and journalist ( born 1875 ) january 31 – jean giraudoux , french dramatist ( born 1882 ) february – david vogel , hebrew poet ( died in concentration camp , born 1891 ) february 9 – agnes mary frances duclaux , english-born poet , biographer and novelist ( born 1857 ) february 10 – israel joshua singer , yiddish novelist ( born 1893 ) february 12 – olive custance , lady alfred douglas , english poet ( born 1874 ) february 23 – augusta peaux , dutch poet ( born 1859 ) march 5 max jacob , french poet and critic ( died in internment camp , born 1876 ) alun lewis , welsh war poet ( accidental shooting , born 1915 ) march 11 – irvin s . cobb , american writer ( born 1876 ) march 28 – stephen leacock , english-born canadian humorous writer and economist ( born 1869 ) may 3 – anica černej , slovenian poet ( in concentration camp , born 1900 ) may 12 max brand , american western , pulp fiction and screenwriter ( killed as war correspondent , born 1892 ) sir arthur quiller-couch ( '' q '' ) , english author and critic ( born 1863 ) may 16 – george ade , american journalist and dramatist ( born 1866 ) may 24 – harold bell wright , american writer ( born 1872 ) june – joseph campbell , northern irish poet ( born 1879 ) june 9 – keith douglas , english war poet ( killed in action , born 1920 ) june 13 – elizabeth wharton drexel , american socialite and author ( born 1868 ) june 16 – marc bloch , french historian ( executed , born 1886 ) july 31 – antoine de saint-exupéry , french pilot and writer ( lost in aircraft , born 1900 ) august 13 – ethel lina white , welsh-born english crime novelist ( born 1876 ) september 4 – margery williams , english-born american children 's writer ( born 1881 ) september 13 – w . heath robinson , english cartoonist and illustrator ( born 1872 ) october 2 – benjamin fondane , romanian-born french poet , playwright and critic ( nazi gas chamber , born 1898 ) october 19 – karel poláček , czech writer , humorist and journalist ( born 1892 ) october 29 – stephen hudson ( born sydney schiff ) , english novelist , translator and arts patron ( born 1868 ) november 15 – edith durham , english travel writer ( born 1863 ) december 17 – robert nichols , english poet and dramatist ( born 1893 ) december 30 – romain rolland , french author and nobel laureate ( born 1866 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : eric linklater , the wind on the moon james tait black memorial prize for fiction : forrest reid , young tom james tait black memorial prize for biography : c . v . wedgwood , william the silent newbery medal for children 's literature : esther forbes , johnny tremain nobel prize for literature : johannes v . jensen premio nadal ( first award ) : carmen laforet , nada pulitzer prize for poetry : stephen vincent benét , western star pulitzer prize for the novel : martin flavin , journey in the dark shelley memorial award for poetry : e . e . cummings . references .