Jin Shengtan

biography . the year of jin 's birth is unclear , with some sources reporting 1610 and others 1608 . the former estimate is based on the fact that jin 's son was 10 years old in east asian age reckoning in 1641 , and is generally accepted by scholars . he was born jin renrui in the town of suzhou , a place celebrated for its culture and elegance . jin 's family was of the scholar-gentry class , but was constantly plagued by sickness and death , which led in turn to little wealth . jin 's father was apparently a scholar . jin began schooling relatively late , attending a village school at the age of nine . he displayed great intellectual curiosity , and had somewhat unusual ideas . however , he was a conscientious student . early in life , he took the style name '' shengtan '' , a phrase from the analects meaning '' the sage confucius sighed '' . he passed only the lowest of the imperial examinations , and never held public office . in his writings , jin showed a great interest in the ideas of chan buddhism . he claimed that this interest began early , when he first read the lotus sutra at the age of 11 . this inclination toward buddhist ideas became even more pronounced after the fall of the ming dynasty in 1644 . in that year and the one that followed , jin became conspicuously more depressed and withdrawn , as well as more receptive to buddhism . the 20th century scholar zhang guoguang attributed this change to the fall of the short-lived li zicheng regime . throughout his life , jin 's interest in buddhism affected his views , and he considered himself a mere agent of the forces of eternity . jin is sometimes said to have been known by the name zhang cai , but this appears to be a mistake due to confusion with a contemporary , zhang pu . hummel ( 1943 ) , p . 164 . . death . in 1661 , jin joined a number of literati in protesting the appointment of a corrupt official . the protesters first petitioned the government , and then staged a public rally . this was met with swift retaliation from local officials , and jin was sentenced to death . this incident is sometimes called '' lamenting at the temple of confucius '' , and led to a stifling of political dissent for years after . sieber ( 2003 ) , p . 147 . before his death , jin supposedly joked , '' being beheaded is the most painful thing , but for some reason it 's going to happen to me . fancy that ! '' in a 1933 essay , noted writer lu xun admits that this quote may be apocryphal , but condemns it as '' laughing away the cruelty of the human butcher '' . note : to be '' painfully happy '' in chinese does not have any pain-related connotation . it merely means '' happy without restraint '' . it is said that before his death , he asked a letter to be sent home . the official was , however , suspicious of jin defaming him or the royalty , so he opened it after the jin was beheaded , discovering two sentences : : '' eating pickled vegetables and soybeans together tastes quite a bit like walnuts . if this recipe is spread around , i will have died without any regret . '' : 「鹽菜與黃豆同吃，大有胡桃滋味。此法一傳，我無遺憾矣。」 -- > . literary theory and criticism . he was known for listing what he called the '' six works of genius '' : zhuangzi , li sao , shiji , du fu 's poems , romance of the western chamber ( xi xiang ji ) and water margin ( shuihu zhuan ) . this list contained both highly classical works , like li sao and du fu 's poems , and novels or plays in vernacular chinese that had their origins in the streets and marketplace . the six works were chosen based on their literary merit , as opposed to their upstanding morals . for these reasons , jin was considered an eccentric and made many enemies among the conservative confucian scholars of his day . jin edited , commented on , and added introductions and interlinear notes to the popular novels water margin and romance of the three kingdoms , and the yuan dynasty drama , romance of the western chamber . jin is often grouped with mao zonggang , and zhang zhupo as commentator/editors . mao 's commentarial edition of romance of the three kingdoms and zhang 's of jin ping mei featured ( 讀法 lit . '' way to read '' ) which interpreted the novels using a vocabulary and critical standards which up to then had been limited to poetry and painting . this innovation raised the status of fiction for chinese readers and made the writing of fiction into a respectable activity for educated people . jin believed that only the emperor and wise sages could truly '' author '' a work . he points out that even confucius took pains to avoid being named the author of the spring and autumn annals . in jin 's view , the authoring of books by commoners would lead to the undermining of heavenly order and peace . he saw his commentary as the only way to minimize the damage caused by books '' authored '' by those who were unworthy to do so . in writing his commentaries , jin firmly believed that the story that was written should be read on its own terms , apart from reality . in his commentary on romance of the western chamber , he wrote , '' the meaning lies in the writing , and does not lie in the event '' . in other words , it is the story that is written that matters , rather than how well that story emulates reality . ge ( 2003 ) , p . 3 . at the same time , jin believed that authorial intention is less important than the commentator 's reading of a story . in his romance of the western chamber commentary , he writes , '' xixiang ji is not a work written by an individual named wang shifu alone ; if i read it carefully , it will also be a work of my own creation , because all the words in xixiang ji happen to be the words that i want to say and that i want to write down '' . . major works . shuihu zhuan commentary . jin 's first major critical activity , completed in 1641 , was a commentary on the popular chinese novel shuihu zhuan , known in the west as water margin , among other names . the commentary begins with three prefaces , in which jin discusses his reasons for undertaking the commentary , and the achievements of putative water margin author shi naian . the next section is entitled '' how to read the fifth work of genius '' . in addition to advice for the reader , this section contains jin 's thoughts on the literary achievements of the novel as a whole . the novel itself comes next , with introductory marks preceding each chapter , and critical comments inserted frequently between passages , sentences , and even words of the text . wang ( 1972 ) , pp . 53–54 . jin 's version of water margin is most well known for the drastic alterations that he makes to the text . earlier versions of the text are 100- or 120-chapter in length . jin deletes a large portion of the story , from the second half of chapter 71 to the end of the novel . in order to bring the modified text to a conclusion , he composes an episode in which lu junyi has a vision of the execution of the band , and amends this to the second half of chapter 71 . jin also combines the prologue of earlier editions with the first chapter , creating a new , single chapter titled '' induction '' . this forces the renumbering of all subsequent chapters , so jin 's version of water margin is referred to by scholars as the '' 70-chapter edition '' . wang ( 1972 ) , p . 54 . in addition to the large changes described above , jin also changes the text of the remaining chapters in three general ways . first , he improves the consistency of some sections , such that , for example , chapters whose content do not match their titles receive new names . secondly , jin makes the text more compact by removing sections that he feels do not advance the story , and by excising the incidental shi and ci verses . finally , jin makes subtle changes to the text for pure literary effect . these changes range from emphasizing the emotions of characters to changing story elements to make them more compelling . wang ( 1972 ) , pp . 54–59 . jin 's critical commentary frequently oscillates between sympathizing with the individual bandit-heroes and condemning their status as outlaws . on one hand , he criticizes the evil official system that has led many of the 108 heroes to become bandits . he also expresses admiration for several of the men . on the other hand , he calls the band '' malignant '' and '' evil '' . he especially criticizes song jiang , the leader of the group . jin 's removal of the last 30 ( or 50 ) chapters of the novel can be seen as an extension of his condemnation of banditry . in these chapters , the bandits are pardoned by imperial edict , and are put in service of the country . jin 's version , by contrast , has all of the bandits captured and executed . he follows this ending with eight reasons why outlawry can never be tolerated . wang ( 1972 ) , pp . 60–63 . later readers of jin have advanced two main theories for his divergent positions of admiring the bandits and yet denouncing them as a group . hu shih argues that china during jin 's life was being torn apart by two bands of outlaws , so jin did not believe that banditry should be glorified in fiction . this agrees well with jin 's philosophy . his buddhist and taoist beliefs advocated natural development for every individual in society , while the confucian part of him respected the emperor and the state as the ultimate authority . the other possibility is that jin 's attempt to reimage the novel into a condemnation of the bandits was to save the novel after it had been banned by the chongzhen emperor . this second theory is far-fetched , as the emperor 's decree banning the novel was not promulgated until a year after the completion of jin 's commentary . wang ( 1972 ) , pp . 63–65 . jin 's views on the characters aside , he has unconditional praise for the novel as a work of art . he praises the vivid and lively characters of the novel , saying , '' shui-hu tells a story of 108 men : yet each has his own nature , his own temperament , his own outward appearance , and his own voice '' . he also praises the work 's vivid description of events , frequently remarking that the prose is '' like a picture '' . finally , jin appreciates the technical virtuosity of the author , and names 15 separate techniques used by shi naian . wang ( 1972 ) , pp . 65–68 . . xixiang ji commentary . in 1656 , jin completed his second major commentary , written on xixiang ji , a 13th-century yuan dynasty play known in english as romance of the western chamber . this commentary follows a structure very similar to jin 's earlier shuihu zhuan commentary . it begins with two prefaces outlining jin 's reasons for writing the commentary followed by a third with notes on how the play should be read . the play itself follows , with introductory marks preceding each chapter and critical comments frequently inserted in the text itself . jin undertakes fewer major structural alterations in this commentary than he does in critiquing water margin . each of parts i , iii , iv , and v of the play is originally preceded by an '' induction '' . jin merges these into the acts themselves . part ii of the play originally consists of five acts , which jin condenses into four by merging the first and second acts . wang ( 1972 ) , pp . 86–90 . as with water margin , jin frequently makes editorial changes to the play itself . these changes fall into two broad categories . many changes are made in order to make the play 's two young lovers , zhang sheng and cui yingying , act and speak in accordance with their high class backgrounds . jin particularly expresses his admiration for yingying 's beauty and character , and modifies any scenes which he feels painted her in too vulgar a light . other changes are made for the simple reason of achieving superior literary effect . in the arias of the play , these changes include removing supernumerary words and changing words to more vivid descriptors . the strict metrical requirements of the aria format makes it difficult for jin to make large-scale changes to these sections . however , some changes do violate the rhyme scheme as it existed during the tang dynasty or the rules of prosody . in the spoken sections of the play , jin is much more liberal in making editorial changes . many of these are intended to accentuate the emotions of the characters . the end result is that jin 's version of the play is an excellent literary work , but was viewed by contemporaries as unfit for the stage . wang ( 1972 ) , p . 87-90 . in his commentary , jin frequently criticizes previous '' unknowledgeable '' readers , saying that they have missed many hidden meanings in the text . he sees it as his duty as a knowledgeable reader to reveal these meanings which the author has placed for him to find . in doing so , jin also has the goal of portraying the play as worthy of study due to its deep technical , artistic , psychological , and social dimensions . in content , much of jin 's critical comments focus on the skill of the author in conveying emotions . jin praises romance of the west chamber as '' one of the most marvelous pieces of writing between heaven and earth '' . other comments focus on yingying . as mentioned above , jin feels that she is the central character of the play , and a woman of great beauty and character . jin feels that the play shows a great degree of unity and tightness in its structure . this opinion can be seen explicitly in his comments , as well as in the fact that he does not make structural alterations to the play to nearly the degree as in his version of water margin . jin does , however , comment on part v of the play . this part has been thought by some commentators to be a continuation added by an author other than wang shifu . jin agrees with this view , criticizing the last part as being inferior in quality to the previous sections and continuing the story past its vital point . wang ( 1972 ) , p . 90-103 . . reputation and legacy . many of jin 's contemporaries admired him as a man possessing great literary talent . qian qianyi , a famous scholar , official , and historian of the late ming dynasty , proclaimed that jin was possessed by a spirit , explaining his talent . in a biography of jin , liao yan wrote that jin had discovered the entire secret of competition . some contemporaries and later writers did denounce jin on moral grounds . jin 's contemporary kui zhuang called him '' greedy , perverse , licentious , and eccentric '' . wang ( 1972 ) , pp . 120–121 . after the may fourth movement in 1919 , scholars such as hu shih began to advocate the writing of novels in vernacular chinese . as a result , jin gained recognition as a pioneer in the field of chinese popular literature . hu shih himself praised jin in the preface to his commentary on the water margin , saying , '' sheng-t'an 's ability to debate was invincible ; his pen was most persuasive . during his time , he had the reputation of a genius . his death was also a case of extreme cruelty , which shook the whole country . after his death , his reputation became even greater '' . liu bannong , another scholar of the era , also praised jin 's version of water margin as the best edition in terms of literary value . wang ( 1972 ) , pp . 122–123 . after the establishment of the people 's republic of china in 1949 , many common views on history changed . under the communist government , water margin became a tale of peasant resistance to the ruling class , and romance of the west chamber symbolized the casting off of the outmoded traditional marriage system . jin 's critiques and editorial modifications of these works did not mirror the world view of marxism , however , and he began to be criticized . in more recent years , however , chinese historians have adopted a more balanced view of jin . wang ( 1972 ) , pp . 123–125 . . notes and references . further reading . hummel , arthur w . sr . , ed . ( 1943 ) . '' chin shêng t'an '' . eminent chinese of the ch'ing period . united states government printing office . pp . 164–166 . vol 1 online . external links . chin shen t'an ( jin shengtan ) , '' preface to 'sui hu ' shuihu zhuan , '' ( translated by '' t.k.c . '' ) the china critic ( 7 march 1935 ) : 234–235 . accessed through china heritage quarterly