Valiant Is the Word for Carrie

plot . carrie snyder ( gladys george ) is a prostitute who is forced out of the fictional southern town of crebillon after forming a friendship with a young boy named paul ( jackie moran ) , whose dying mother ( janet young ) is unable to stop her son from visiting such a woman . after carrie leaves town , paul runs away from his abusive father ( john wray ) and meets a girl named lady ( charlene wyatt ) who has run away from a burning trainwreck , not wanting to go back to the people she was with . carrie comes back for paul and ends up taking paul and lady to new york with her . carrie gets an apartment and starts a successful chain of laundry stores . eventually they become rich and lady ( arline judge ) becomes attracted to paul ( john howard ) . paul , however , feels obligated to take care of a young woman named lili ( isabel jewell ) whose brother 's death he caused ( the brother had been pushing paul to try to get on the train , but when paul pushed back , the train door closed with the brother on the outside with his coat stuck in the train door , causing him to get dragged along with the train and his legs to be run over ) . lilli pretends to love paul because he is rich , which carrie is able to see , but which paul does not . she devises a plan to make lilli leave . she tells lilli that if she will leave paul , she will help get lilli 's true love out of jail . they attempt to break the man out of jail , but are caught . lilli is fatally shot and carrie is sent to jail . an old lawyer friend ( harry carey ) vows to fight for her freedom , but carrie decides to plead guilty because she does n't want lady to know about her past as a prostitute . she also fears it would tarnish the reputation of the children . the lawyer ends by remarking to paul 's employer ( dudley digges ) that '' valiant is the word for carrie '' . cast . gladys george as carrie snyder arline judge as lady john howard as paul darnley dudley digges as dennis ringrose harry carey as phil yonne isabel jewell as lilli eipper , sister of franz eipper jackie moran as paul darnley as a child charlene wyatt as lady as a child john wray as george darnley , paul darnley 's father william collier , sr . as ed moresby , a town councilman who convinces carrie to leave town before she is forced out hattie mcdaniel as ellen belle , the darnleys ' servant lew payton as lon olds , a horse-and-buggy driver in crebillon maude eburne as maggie devlin , works with paul grady sutton as mat burdon , a man lady meets and hastily marries janet young as mrs . darnley , paul darnley 's dying mother adrienne d'ambricourt as madame odette desolles , owner of the original desolles laundry shop that carrie buys helen lowell as mrs . wadsworth , a town councilwoman in crebillon bernard suss as franz eipper george '' gabby '' hayes as bearded man ( as george f . hayes ) irving bacon as drug store clerk olive hatch as girl nick lukats as boy don zelaya as nick dorapopolos . literary antecedents . the film was preceded by two literary versions by barry benefield : a short story and later a novel based on it . short story . benefield 's original short story , titled '' with banners blowing '' , was published in the woman 's home companion , and later appeared in two collections under the title '' carrie snyder '' . the original story focused entirely on events in the ( fictional ) town of crebillion , louisiana . carrie snyder is 31 years old , lives in a cottage at the edge of town and maintains herself as a prostitute , having a circle of regular customers . she has plenty of free time to cultivate her beloved flower garden , and is content with this life . however , though rather fond of such customers such as u.s . marshall phil yonne , who treat her '' like gentlemen '' , she never felt love for anybody - until the seven-year-old paul comes in to ask for a drink of water . carrie becomes instantly and deeply attached to the clever , sensitive , warm-hearted boy who comes again and again on secret visits , deposits with her his box of '' treasures '' which his father tried to confiscate and lets her take care of wounded creatures which he found - a tomcat and an owl . the african-american taxi driver lon is carrie and paul 's friend and confidant , keeping their secret . ( strangely for modern sensibilities , the word '' nigger '' is repeatedly used for this highly positive and sympathetic character , clearly without any hint of pejorative intent . ) deeply jealous of paul 's mother , who can have him every day , carrie is aware that this friendship would not last , and that the town 's established society would cut it off once discovered . and so indeed it does come to pass , and even worse than carrie feared . hearing that paul was severely beaten by his father , and witnessing him being chased and cruelly teased and hazed by a gang of other boys , carrie realizes that for paul 's sake she must leave the town , let her beloved garden deteriorate , and never come back . the original story ends poignantly with carrie going into a self-imposed exile , with the clear implication that she would never see paul again . novel . barry benefield later took up the story and made a revised version of it the first chapter of what became the 1936 novel valiant is the word for carrie . bar minor differences , the film 's plot , as described above , followed the novel 's plot up to the moment of the attempted jail break . from that point on , however , novel and film drastically diverge . in the original novel , the jailbreak succeeded without a hitch , and lili and her lover were able to escape to canada and start a new life there . carrie returned unscathed to new york , her part in the jail break completely unknown . later , lady divorced the baltimore millionaire mat burdon whom she married to spite paul ; lady and paul then married and lived happily ever after ; and at the end of the novel carrie , who managed to pull her laundry business through the slump of 1929 , is prepared to play loving foster grandmother to their first child . however , the germ of the film 's ending - with the jail break going wrong and carrie being arrested and facing trial - is present in the novel as a conversation about '' what might have been '' and '' how things might have gone wrong '' . reception . frank s . nugent of the new york times called the film '' more moral and uplifting than pollyanna '' and '' irresistibly attractive '' . he criticized the running time for being almost two hours long . he concluded that '' the misfortune is that 'valiant ' is only one of the words for carrie ; another would be 'disproportionate . ' the picture takes too long , although doing it well , to introduce a little which is not well done at all . '' . cultural references . in 1938 , the three stooges made a short titled violent is the word for curly , a takeoff on the name of this then-popular film . solomon , jon ( 2002 ) . the complete three stooges : the official filmography and three stooges companion , p . 133 ; comedy iii productions , inc . . references . external links .