Hall–Héroult process

process . difficulties faced . elemental aluminium can not be produced by the electrolysis of an aqueous aluminium salt , because hydronium ions readily redox elemental aluminium . although a molten aluminium salt could be used instead , aluminium oxide has a melting point of 2072 & nbsp ; °c so electrolysing it is impractical . in the hall–héroult process , alumina , al 2 o 3 , is dissolved in molten synthetic cryolite , na 3 alf 6 , to lower its melting point for easier electrolysis . the carbon source is generally a coke ( fuel ) . { . theory . in the hall–héroult process the following simplified reactions take place at the carbon electrodes : cathode : anode : overall : in reality , much more carbon dioxide is formed at the anode than co : pure cryolite has a melting point of . with a small percentage of alumina dissolved in it , its melting point drops to about 1000 & nbsp ; °c . besides having a relatively low melting point , cryolite is used as an electrolyte because , among other things , it also dissolves alumina well , conducts electricity , dissociates electrolytically at higher voltage than alumina , and also has a lower density than aluminum at the temperatures required by the electrolysis . aluminium fluoride ( alf 3 ) is usually added to the electrolyte . the ratio naf/alf 3 is called the cryolite ratio and it is 3 in pure cryolite . in industrial production , alf 3 is added so that the cryolite ratio is 2–3 to further reduce the melting point , so that the electrolysis can happen at temperatures between 940 and 980 & nbsp ; °c . the density of liquid aluminum is 2.3 & nbsp ; g/ml at temperatures between 950 and 1000 & nbsp ; °c . the density of the electrolyte should be less than 2.1 & nbsp ; g/ml , so that the molten aluminum separates from the electrolyte and settles properly to the bottom of the electrolysis cell . in addition to alf 3 , other additives like lithium fluoride may be added to alter different properties ( melting point , density , conductivity etc . ) of the electrolyte . the mixture is electrolysed by passing a low voltage ( under 5 & nbsp ; v ) direct current at through it . this causes liquid aluminium metal to be deposited at the cathode , while the oxygen from the alumina combines with carbon from the anode to produce mostly carbon dioxide . the theoretical minimum energy requirement for this process is 6.23 kwh/ ( kg of al ) , but the process commonly requires 15.37 kwh . . cell operation . cells in factories are operated 24 hours a day so that the molten material in them will not solidify . temperature within the cell is maintained via electrical resistance . oxidation of the carbon anode increases the electrical efficiency at a cost of consuming the carbon electrodes and producing carbon dioxide . while solid cryolite is denser than solid aluminium at room temperature , liquid aluminium is denser than molten cryolite at temperatures around . the aluminium sinks to the bottom of the electrolytic cell , where it is periodically collected . the liquid aluminium is removed from the cell via a siphon every 1 to 3 days in order to avoid having to use extremely high temperature valves and pumps . alumina is added to the cells as the aluminum is removed . collected aluminium from different cells in a factory is finally melted together to ensure uniform product and made into e.g . metal sheets . the electrolytic mixture is sprinkled with coke to prevent the anode 's oxidation by the oxygen evolved . the cell produces gases at the anode . the exhaust is primarily co 2 produced from the anode consumption and hydrogen fluoride ( hf ) from the cryolite and flux ( alf 3 ) . in modern facilities , fluorides are almost completely recycled to the cells and therefore used again in the electrolysis . escaped hf can be neutralized to its sodium salt , sodium fluoride . particulates are captured using electrostatic or bag filters . the co 2 is usually vented into the atmosphere . agitation of the molten material in the cell increases its production rate at the expense of an increase in cryolite impurities in the product . properly designed cells can leverage magnetohydrodynamic forces induced by the electrolysing current to agitate the electrolyte . in non-agitating static pool cells , the impurities either rise to the top of the metallic aluminium , or sink to the bottom , leaving high-purity aluminium in the middle area . . electrodes . electrodes in cells are mostly coke which has been purified at high temperatures . pitch resin or tar is used as a binder . the materials most often used in anodes , coke and pitch resin , are mainly residues from the petroleum industry and need to be of high enough purity so no impurities end up into the molten aluminum or the electrolyte . there are two primary anode technologies using the hall–héroult process : söderberg technology and prebaked technology . in cells using söderberg or self-baking anodes , there is a single anode per electrolysis cell . the anode is contained within a frame and , as the bottom of the anode turns mainly into co 2 during the electrolysis , the anode loses mass and , being amorphous , it slowly sinks within its frame . more material to the top of the anode is continuously added in the form of briquettes made from coke and pitch . the lost heat from the smelting operation is used to bake the briquettes into the carbon form required for the reaction with alumina . the baking process in söderberg anodes during electrolysis releases more carcinogenic pahs and other pollutants than electrolysis with prebaked anodes and , partially for this reason , prebaked anode-using cells have become more common in the aluminium industry . more alumina is added to the electrolyte from the sides of the söderberg anode after the crust on top of the electrolyte mixture is broken . prebaked anodes are baked in very large gas-fired ovens at high temperature before being lowered by various heavy industrial lifting systems into the electrolytic solution . there are usually 24 prebaked anodes in two rows per cell . each anode is lowered vertically and individually by a computer , as the bottom surfaces of the anodes are eaten away during the electrolysis . compared to söderberg anodes , computer-controlled prebaked anodes can be brought closer to the molten aluminium layer at the bottom of the cell without any of them touching the layer and interfering with the electrolysis . this smaller distance decreases the resistance caused by the electrolyte mixture and increases the efficiency of prebaked anodes over söderberg anodes . prebake technology also has much lower risk of the anode effect ( see below ) , but cells using it are more expensive to build and labor-intensive to use , as each prebaked anode in a cell needs to be removed and replaced once it has been used . alumina is added to the electrolyte from between the anodes in prebake cells . prebaked anodes contain a smaller percentage of pitch , as they need to be more solid than söderberg anodes . the remains of prebaked anodes are used to make more new prebaked anodes . prebaked anodes are either made in the same factory where electrolysis happens , or are brought there from elsewhere . the inside of the cell 's bath is lined with cathode made from coke and pitch . cathodes also degrade during electrolysis , but much more slowly than anodes do , and thus they need neither be as high in purity , nor be maintained as often . cathodes are typically replaced every 2–6 years . this requires the whole cell to be shut down . . anode effect . the anode effect is a situation where too many gas bubbles form at the bottom of the anode and join together , forming a layer . this increases the resistance of the cell , because smaller areas of the electrolyte touch the anode . these areas of the electrolyte and anode heat up when the density of the electric current of the cell focuses to go through only them . this heats up the gas layer and causes it to expand , thus further reducing the surface area where electrolyte and anode are in contact with each other . the anode effect decreases the energy-efficiency and the aluminium production of the cell . it also induces the formation of tetrafluoromethane ( cf 4 ) in significant quantities , increases formation of co and , to a lesser extent , also causes the formation of hexafluoroethane ( c 2 f 6 ) . cf 4 and c 2 f 6 are not cfcs , and , although not detrimental to the ozone layer , are still potent greenhouse gases . the anode effect is mainly a problem in söderberg technology cells , not in prebaked . . history . existing need . aluminium is the most abundant metal in the earth 's crust , but it is rarely found in its elemental state . it occurs in many minerals , but its primary commercial source is bauxite , a mixture of hydrated aluminium oxides and compounds of other elements such as iron . prior to the hall–héroult process , elemental aluminium was made by heating ore along with elemental sodium or potassium in a vacuum . the method was complicated and consumed materials that were in themselves expensive at that time . this meant that the cost to produce the small amount of aluminium made in the early 19th century was very high , higher than for gold or platinum . bars of aluminium were exhibited alongside the french crown jewels at the exposition universelle ( 1855 ) , and emperor napoleon iii of france was said to have reserved his few sets of aluminium dinner plates and eating utensils for his most honored guests . production costs using older methods did come down , but when aluminium was selected as the material for the cap/lightning rod to sit atop the washington monument in washington , d.c . , it was still more expensive than silver . . independent discovery . the hall–héroult process was invented independently and almost simultaneously in 1886 by the american chemist charles martin hall and by the france paul héroult héroult , paul ; french patent no . 175,711 ( filed : 23 april 1886 ; issued : 1 september 1886 ) . —both 22 years old . some authors claim hall was assisted by his sister julia brainerd hall ; however , the extent to which she was involved has been disputed . in 1888 , hall opened the first large-scale aluminium production plant in pittsburgh . it later became the alcoa corporation . in 1997 , the hall–héroult process was designated a national historic chemical landmark by the american chemical society in recognition of the importance of the process in the commercialization of aluminium . . economic impact . aluminum produced via the hall–héroult process , in combination with cheaper electric power , helped make aluminium ( and incidentally magnesium ) an inexpensive commodity rather than a precious metal . this , in turn , helped make it possible for pioneers like hugo junkers to utilize aluminium and aluminium-magnesium alloys to make items like metal airplanes by the thousands , or howard lund to make aluminium fishing boats . lund boat company founder dies at 91 in 2012 it was estimated that 12.7 tons of co 2 emissions are generated per ton of aluminium produced .