Battle of Shrewsbury

background . the percys had previously supported henry iv in a war against king richard ii of england , which ended when henry iv took the throne in 1399 . the percys subsequently supported henry iv in wales , early in the rebellion of owain glyndŵr , and in scotland , in both negotiations and conflict against the scots . king henry iv had been supported by a number of wealthy landowners to whom he had promised land , money and royal favour in return for their continued support . when the war ended , lands in and around cumberland promised to the percys were instead given to a rival . the promised money never materialised , and so the percys revolted . henry percy , 1st earl of northumberland , and thomas percy , 1st earl of worcester , publicly renounced their allegiance to king henry iv . they charged him with perjury because he claimed the throne in addition to his old lands and titles , taxed the clergy despite his promise not to without the consent of parliament , imprisoned and murdered king richard ii , did not allow a free parliamentary election , and refused to pay a just ransom to owain glyndŵr , who was then holding edmund mortimer . the king also retained custody of the scottish nobles captured at homildon hill as prisoners of war rather than permitting the percys to release them for ransom . '' battle of shrewsbury '' , uk battlefields resource centre henry percy , nicknamed '' hotspur , '' raised a group initially of about 200 retainers in early july 1403 , and started the long march south to meet his uncle , thomas percy . some nobles joined him , such as lord bardolf , but he recruited most of his army in cheshire , an area hostile to henry iv , which provided many experienced soldiers , notably its cheshire archers , some of whom had served as richard ii 's bodyguard . henry percy may have hoped for reinforcements from wales under the self-proclaimed prince of wales , owain glyndŵr , but he was disappointed . glyndŵr , at the time fighting in carmarthenshire , was unaware that hotspur had acted . some welsh forces from the cheshire borders may have joined him . the rebels then marched towards shrewsbury , the heavily defended county town in shropshire . king henry iv only became aware of the percy forces on 12 july , apparently while he was marching an army north to assist the percys against the scots , receiving the news at burton-on-trent . he may have anticipated the percys ' change of heart , but instantly altered his plans to meet the immediate threat posed by the percys . he changed direction and marched west towards shrewsbury with his army , arriving before the percys could capture the town . both forces arrived in the shrewsbury area on 20 july and set up camp to the north and south of the river severn , which loops around the town . hotspur based himself initially at the house of william betton , his army camping close to the town . the next day the king 's forces crossed the river severn at uffington , about a mile to the east of shrewsbury to cut off percy 's line of retreat to chester . they failed and the armies took up position in a field that was variously named : '' haytleyfield '' , '' husefeld '' , '' berwykfeld '' , '' bolefeld '' . the battle commenced in the manor of harlescott about a mile south west of where battlefield church now stands . ( the owner of this manor , richard hussey , swore to this fact under oath in the escheator 's court in january 1416 ) . the battle took place in a large field of peas . estimates of the sizes of the two armies vary widely , and the medieval chronicles are subject to exaggeration . annales henrici quarti states 14,000 royal troops , far fewer than waurin 's estimate of 60,000 . although henry 's army is generally agreed to have been larger , john capgrave writing in the chronicle of england quotes percy 's army as 14,000 . for much of the morning of saturday 21 july , the two forces parleyed . thomas prestbury , the abbot of shrewsbury and the abbot of haughmond presented the king 's terms . hotspur declined any terms and thomas percy spoke to the king , trading insults . henry percy was somewhat inclined toward accepting the king 's position , while his uncle thomas percy was not . negotiations ended near noon , and the two forces advanced closer for the fight . one rebel , later pardoned , went over to the royal army and the king knighted several of his followers . the identity of the defectors is not mentioned , although it suggests the 'rebel ' was a senior officer with attendants who would have been of status to be knighted . . battle . about two hours before dusk , king henry iv raised his sword . the battle opened with a massive archery barrage , arrows killing or wounding many men before they could meet hand to hand in the field . percy 's cheshire bowmen proved generally superior . thomas walsingham recorded how the king 's men '' fell like leaves in autumn , every one arrow struck a mortal man '' . according to the dieulacres chronicle the king 's right wing under the command of the earl of stafford ( who was killed ) fled from the field . far more than this wing may have fled as well , as there is evidence that some baggage was looted and after the battle the cheshire rebels were '' prosecuted '' for taking some 7,000 horses with them . henry v of england was hit in the face with an arrow during the fighting , sustaining a terrible wound . he later recovered due to the skilled treatment of the physician general john bradmore , who used honey , alcohol and a specially designed surgical instrument to extract the arrowhead . he was left with a permanent scar . bradmore recorded treating prince henry in his latin manuscript , philomena . an account of this can also be found in thomas morstede 1446 surgical treaty . enough of the king 's men remained on the field , particularly on the left wing , which was under the command of the prince of wales . perhaps in desperation , hotspur led a charge aimed at killing the king himself , during which the royal standard was overthrown and its bearer , sir walter blount , was hacked down by archibald douglas , 4th earl of douglas . hotspur was killed in the charge , reputedly shot in the face with an arrow when he opened his visor . his death was initially not realised , and some point soon afterwards the northumbrian knights hailed the death of henry iv , exclaiming '' henry percy king ! '' . henry iv was not dead however , and retaliated by shouting '' henry percy is dead '' ; the absence of a reply confirmed that henry percy was indeed dead . the battle ended soon after . it is recorded that many did not know who had won . the king 's forces sustained greater losses than the rebels , and henry iv very nearly lost both his life and his throne . aftermath . henry percy was initially buried by his nephew baron furnivall at whitchurch , shropshire , with honours , but rumours soon spread that he was not really dead . in response the king had him disinterred . his body was salted , set up in shrewsbury impaled on a spear between two millstones in the marketplace pillory , with an armed guard and was later quartered and put on display in chester , london , bristol and newcastle upon tyne . his head was sent to york and impaled on the north gate , looking toward his own lands . in november his grisly remains were returned to his widow elizabeth . the earl of worcester was beheaded and sir richard venables , sir richard vernon and sir henry boynton were publicly hanged , drawn and quartered in shrewsbury on 23 july and their heads publicly displayed , thomas percy 's on london bridge . battlefield church is said to have been erected over the site of the mass burial pit dug immediately after the battle . it was built initially as a memorial chapel , on the orders of king henry iv and paid for by him , with prayers and masses being said continually for the dead on both sides . the chapel was replaced in 1460 by a church , which was further restored in 1862 . a drain being dug in a corner of the churchyard may have inadvertently opened part of the burial pit . workmen were surprised by the mass of bones which they thought showed the hurried nature of the burials . they may have merely unearthed a charnel pit containing bones of a variety of different ages . in 2006 , the bbc show two men in a trench proved only that an area to the west of the church was not in fact a graveyard . there were two other 15th century churches associated with battles . the one at towton no longer exists , but wakefield does . neither was near the battlefield . cultural references . the battle itself and many of the key people involved appear in shakespeare 's henry iv , part 1 , with the fictional participation of sir john falstaff and hotspur being killed by prince henry . it is also depicted in the 1966 movie chimes at midnight ( released in the uk as falstaff ) , in the 2012 bbc two adaptation of shakespeare 's play , and in the climax to a historical novel by edith pargeter , a bloody field by shrewsbury ( 1972 ) ( us title : the bloody field ) . the battle features early in the 2019 david michod film the king , in which prince hal offers to duel hotspur in single combat for the outcome of the battle . the duel begins with swords and descends into an armored brawl in the mud , in which hal triumphs when he kills hotspur by stabbing him in the neck with a dagger . notes . references . juliet barker ; agincourt : the king , the campaign , the battle , uk : little , brown , 2005 ; philip j . morgan ; the battle of shrewsbury 1403 michael prestwich ; armies and warfare in the middle ages : the english experience yale university press , 1996 ; priestley , e.j . ; the battle of shrewsbury 1403 . shrewsbury and atcham borough council 1979 ( booklet ) stephen maxfield ; the battlefield of shrewsbury whitewood , dickon ; shrewsbury 1403 : struggle for a fragile crown , uk : osprey , 2017 ; online : alastair dunn , a kingdom in crisis : henry iv and the battle of shrewsbury : alastair dunn discusses the battle and its repercussions in its 600th anniversary year , history today , august 2003