David Hartley (philosopher)

early life and family history . david hartley was born in 1705 in the vicinity of halifax , yorkshire . his mother died three months after his birth . his father , an anglican clergyman , died when david was fifteen . hartley was educated at bradford grammar school and in 1722 was admitted as a sizar to jesus college , cambridge . he received his ba in 1726 and ma in 1729 . in april 1730 he became the first layperson to be master of magnus grammar school ( magnus church of england academy ) , newark , and it was there that he began to practice medicine . on 21 april 1730 , hartley married alice rowley ( 1705–31 ) . the couple moved to bury st edmunds , and alice died there giving birth to their son david hartley ( the younger ) ( 1731–1813 ) . while in bury , hartley met his second wife , elizabeth packer ( 1713–78 ) , the fifth child and only daughter of robert packer ( died 1731 ) and mary winchcombe , a wealthy and influential family with estates in gloucestershire , oxfordshire , and berkshire , including donnington castle , shellingford , and bucklebury , berks . ( mary winchcombe was the daughter of sir henry winchcombe , bart . , and the sister of frances , wife of henry st john , 1st viscount bolingbroke . ) despite the opposition of elizabeth 's family , david and elizabeth wed on 25 august 1735 , after agreeing to a severe set of restrictions that kept the £5,000 elizabeth received upon her marriage completely out of the hands of her husband . allen 1999 , pp . 35–37 . their first child , mary ( 1736–1803 ) , was born eleven months later . in 1736 the family moved to london , and then in 1742 to bath , somerset . when elizabeth 's last surviving elder brother died without issue in 1746 , their son winchcombe henry ( 1740–94 ) inherited the family estates , making the family ( though not hartley himself ) the possessors of significant wealth . hartley died in bath on 28 august 1757 . he was buried at st . john the baptist church , old sodbury , glos . education and professional career . at cambridge , hartley studied with nicholas saunderson , who , though blind since infancy , became the fourth lucasian professor of mathematics . hartley was later instrumental in raising the subscription for the posthumous publication of saunderson 's elements of algebra ( 1740 ) . upon graduation , hartley declined to sign the thirty-nine articles , a requirement for ordination in the church of england . although one point at issue may have been the doctrine of the trinity , hartley 's main dissent from orthodox teaching was his commitment to universal reconciliation . writing to his friend joseph lister in 1736 , hartley stated he believed '' that universal happiness is the fundamental doctrine both of reason & scripture '' , adding that '' nothing is so irreconcilable with reason as eternal punishment , nothing so contrary to all the intimations god has given us in his works . have you read sr . is . newton ’ s commt . upon danl . & the apocalypse ? '' hartley to lister , 13 march 1736 , quoted in allen 1999 , p . 44 . for hartley , on the gates of hell there could be no locks . in the same letter to lister , hartley writes that '' a man who disregards himself , who entirely abandons self-interest & devotes his labours to the service of mankind , or in that beautiful and expressive phrase of the scriptures , who loves his neighbor as himself is sure to meet with private happiness '' . quoted in allen 1999 , p . 44 . this conviction became a guiding principle in hartley 's life , and it led him to devote himself to a various philanthropic projects . these include the publication of saunderson 's elements of algebra and the promotion of the shorthand system of his friend john byrom ( a system that hartley believed could be a '' universal character '' and step toward the creation of a philosophical language ) . allen 1999 , 231–33 . moreover , shortly after turning to medicine , hartley became an advocate of variola inoculation for smallpox . variolation confers personal immunity , and if widespread would be a '' service to mankind '' by furthering herd immunity . however , deliberate infection with the smallpox virus ran the risk of disfigurement or death . ( queen caroline , wife of george ii , was an advocate and had three of their children variolated , but jonathan edwards died from it in 1758 . ) the public good , then , could appear to be at odds with private interest . in his first publication , some reasons why the practice of inoculation ought to be introduced into the town of bury at present ( 1733 ) , hartley developed a statistical argument to show that the conflict is only apparent , that being inoculated furthers both the public good and a person 's self-interest . by the time of his move to london in 1736 , hartley was known other campaigners of variolation , such as hans sloane and james jurin , president of the royal society . he also had the support of important whig families in suffolk , notably of charles townshend , 2nd viscount townshend ( 'turnip ' townshend ) . hartley 's daughter mary wrote that '' the old lord townshend ( then secretary of state ) treated him with as much kindness as he had had been an additional son , and all the sons and daughters as an additional brother '' . quoted in allen 1999 , p . 53 . he was inducted into the royal society , and he also became a physician to thomas pelham-holles , 1st duke of newcastle , and his wife . in 1736 he offered to '' recommend '' john byrom to george ii . allen 1999 , p . 49 . by 1740 , hartley was known to every physician in london and to other medical men throughout europe . he had thrown himself into a controversial attempt to harmonize private interest and public good . hartley had started to experience symptoms of '' the stone '' ( bladder stone ) in early 1736 . a bladder stone , sometimes as large as an egg , could function as a ball-cock on a toilet tank , causing an inability to urinate , excruciating pain , and sometimes death . ( benjamin franklin , a sufferer , sometimes had to stand on his head to relieve himself . ) treatment by surgical removal ( lithotomy ) was a procedure many failed to survive . hartley thought a mrs . joanna stephens had developed a lithontriptic , an oral medicine that would dissolve a stone in situ . he published ten cases of persons who have taken mrs . stephens ’ s medicines for the stone ( 1738 ) , which includes an unsparing account of his own agonies . to make a proprietary medicine freely available to the public , hartley convinced parliament to pay stephens £5,000 for her '' secret '' . allen 1999 , p . 61 . with stephens 's recipe in hand , hartley set to work with stephen hales , along with two colleagues in france , to locate the medicine 's chemically active ingredients . these were slaked lime ( calcium hydroxide ) and alicant soap ( predominantly potassium oleate , like other soaps an alkaline salt of a fatty acid ) . hales had shown that some bladder stones rapidly dissolved in boiled soap-lye ( caustic potash , potassium hydroxide ) . what was needed , then , was a safely ingestible preparation that would turn a person 's urine alkaline ; and this , they concluded , is what the slaked lime and soap combination did . in 1739 hales won the copley medal for his work , and the following year hartley published their results in a latin volume , de lithontriptico , in basel and leiden , the latter being home at the time to the foremost medical school in europe . in 1742 hartley and his family moved to bath , somerset . he continued to practise medicine , and he devoted himself to writing his major work , observations on man , his frame , his duty , and his expectations , published in 1749 by samuel richardson . he was a vegetarian . . observations on man : '' a new and most extensive science '' . in the 18th century , '' observations '' appears in the titles of scientific works – compare benjamin franklin 's experiments and observations on electricity ( 1751 ) and joseph priestley 's experiments and observations of different kinds of air ( 1774 ) . priestley , hartley 's champion , would declare that hartley 's work '' contains a new and most extensive science . … the study of it will be like entering upon a new world . … '' the science is the science of '' man '' , and the '' new world '' is the one embodied in the human '' frame '' itself . the result , on the one hand , is a '' vast haystack of a book '' . as one would expect from a physician with an inquiring mind and active medical practice , hartley draws together a wide range of observations – to name a few , on phantom limbs , savant syndrome , and the experiences and mental development of the blind and the deaf ( om 1 , props . 34 , 69 , 78 , 80 , and 93 ) . because the text of the observations is unchanged throughout the editions , citation is to part , chapter , section , and proposition . the 1791 folio edition numbers all the propositions consecutively , so that prop . 1 of part 2 is given as proposition 100 , prop . 2 as 101 , etc . on the other hand , just as newton 's law of universal gravitation unified celestial and terrestrial mechanics , hartley proposed a single '' law '' — '' association '' — to account for any and all observations of '' man '' . hartley 's many observations are meant to be illustrations of the law . moreover , '' association '' has explanatory power . for example , in the section '' the affections by which we rejoice at the misery of others '' ( om 1.1.4.97–98 ) , hartley presents a detailed analysis of the process by which an abused , bullied child becomes an abusive , bullying adult . see allen 1999 , pp . 19–21 . he traces out how the child 's automatic gesture of raising an arm to ward off a blow becomes , through a series of associative substitutions , the fist the adult raises to strike a child . an initial defensive gesture becomes a general aggressive stance , and thus the source of the insulting words and threatening actions by which the adult '' goes on multiplying perpetually … the occasions of anger and the expressions of it '' . nonetheless , hartley believed that it was no-one 's destiny to be permanently trapped in such a hell . he was , rather , a religious visionary , and his fundamental belief breathtakingly optimistic : that association '' has a tendency to reduce the state of those who have eaten of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil , back again to a paradisiacal one '' ( om 1.1.2.14 , cor . 9 ) . from this vantage point , hartley 's observations on man is a psychological epic , a story of '' paradise regained '' — but an epic describing , ultimately , the life of each human being . hartley 's theories . the outlines of hartley 's theory are as follows . like john locke , he asserted that , prior to sensation , the human mind is a blank slate . by a growth from simple sensations , those states of consciousness which appear most remote from sensation come into being . and the one law of growth of which hartley took account was the law of contiguity , synchronous and successive . by this law he sought to explain , not only the phenomena of memory , which others had similarly explained before him , but also the phenomena of emotion , of reasoning , and of voluntary and involuntary action ( see association of ideas ) . a friend , associate , and one of his chief advocates , was joseph priestley ( 1733–1804 ) , the discoverer of oxygen . priestley was one of the foremost scientists of his age . doctrine of vibrations . hartley 's physical theory gave birth to the modern study of the intimate connection of physiological and psychical facts . he believed that sensation is the result of a vibration of the minute particles of the medullary substance of the nerves , to account for which he postulated , with newton , a subtle elastic ether , rare in the interstices of solid bodies and in their close neighbourhood , and denser as it recedes from them . pleasure is the result of moderate vibrations , pain of vibrations so violent as to break the continuity of the nerves . these vibrations leave behind them in the brain a tendency to fainter vibrations or '' vibratiuncles '' of a similar kind , which correspond to '' ideas of sensation . '' this accounts for memory . . doctrine of associations . the course of reminiscence and of the thoughts generally , when not immediately dependent upon external sensation , is accounted for by the idea that there are always vibrations in the brain on account of its heat and the pulsation of its arteries . the nature of these vibrations is determined by each man 's past experience , and by the circumstances of the moment , which causes one or another tendency to prevail over the rest . sensations which are often associated together become each associated with the ideas corresponding to the others ; and the ideas corresponding to the associated sensations become associated together , sometimes so intimately that they form what appears to be a new simple idea , not without careful analysis resolvable into its component parts . . free will . starting from a detailed account of the phenomena of the senses , hartley tried to show how , by the above laws , all the emotions , which he analyses with considerable skill , may be explained . locke 's phrase '' association of ideas '' is employed throughout , '' idea '' being taken as including every mental state but sensation . he emphatically asserts the existence of pure disinterested sentiment , while declaring it to be a growth from the self-regarding feelings . voluntary action is explained as the result of a firm connexion between a motion and a sensation or '' idea , '' and , on the physical side , between an '' ideal '' and a motory vibration . therefore , in the freewill controversy hartley took his place as a determinist . it was only with reluctance , and when his speculations were nearly complete , that he came to a conclusion on this subject in accordance with his theory . . list of major works . conjecturae quaedam de sensu , motu , et idearum generatione , appendix to de lithontriptico a joanna stephens nuper invento dissertatio epistolaris ( bath , 1746 ) ; repr . in samuel parr ( ed . ) , metaphysical tracts by english philosophers ( 1837 ) ; trans . robert e.a . palmer various conjectures on the perception , motion , and generation of ideas , with an introduction and notes by martin kallich ( augustan reprint society , publication no . 77–8 , los angeles , 1959 ) . observations on man , his frame , his duty , and his expectations . in two parts ( 1749 ; 2nd edn , trans . from the german , with a sketch of the life and character of david hartley by his son david hartley , 1791 ; 1st edn repr . with an introduction by theodore l . huguelet , delmar , new york , 1976 ) . prayers and religious meditations ( bath , 1810 ; r . cruthwell , 1814 ) . david hartley also published numerous medical works . notes . references . allen , richard c . ( 1999 ) . david hartley on human nature . albany , n.y . : suny press . james , william , the principles of psychology ( new york , 1890 ) . rousseau , george s . ( 2004 ) . nervous acts : essays on literature , culture and sensibility . basingstoke : palgrave macmillan . ( paperback ) ( hardcover ) walls , joan . ( 1982 ) . '' the philosophy of david hartley and the root metaphor of mechanism : a study in the history of psychology , '' journal of mind and behavior 3 : & nbsp ; 259–74 . walsh , richard t . g . ( 2017 ) . '' david hartley ’ s enlightenment psychology : from association to sympathy , theopathy , and moral sensibility '' , journal of theoretical and philosophical psychology 37 , no . 1 : 48–63 . webb , robert k . ( 1998 ) . '' perspectives on david hartley , '' enlightenment and dissent 17 : 17–47 . . external links . '' david hartley , '' by richard c . allen , stanford encyclopedia of philosophy '' hartley , david ( 1705-1757 ) , '' by richard c . allen , routledge encyclopedia of philosophy david hartley by victor l . nuovo , in '' the dictionary of eighteenth-century british philosophers '' , thoemmes press .