Kaw people

government . the kaw nation 's headquarters is in kaw city , oklahoma , and the tribal jurisdictional area is within kay county , oklahoma . the elected chairwoman is lynn williams currently serving a four-year term . of the 3,126 enrolled members , 1,428 live within the state of oklahoma . . economic development . kaw nation owns the kanza travel plaza ; woodridge market ; smoke shop i , and ii ; southwind casino ; including a bingo hall , and an off-track wagering facility ; and southwind casino braman , which opened september 2014 . the estimated annual economic impact of the tribe is 200 million . the tribe also operates the kanza health clinic , kanza wellness center , kaw nation school age enrichment center , kanza museum , kaw nation environmental department , kaw nation police department , kaw nation social service and educational department , kaw nation emergency management department , kaw language department and the kaw nation judicial branch . the kaw nation judicial branch includes a domestic violence program . the kaw nation operates its own housing authority , library , title vi food services and issues its own tribal vehicle tags . kanza cultural history . the kaw nation . ( retrieved 29 april 2012 ) the kanza news , the newsletter of kaw nation , is published quarterly . history . early history . the kaw are a member of the dhegiha branch of the siouan language family . oral history indicates that the ancestors of dhegihan history and separation west from the east ( possibly somewhere around the ohio valley ) . the quapaw separated from the other dhegiha at the mouth of the ohio , going down the mississippi river to live in what is today the state of arkansas . the other dhegiha proceeded up the mississippi and missouri rivers . the osage left the main group in central missouri ; the kaw halted upstream on the missouri river in northwestern missouri and northeastern kansas ; the omaha and ponca continued north to settle in nebraska and south dakota . unrau , william e . kansa indians : a history of the wind people , 1673–1873 , norman : university of oklahoma press , 1971 : 12-14 . this tradition is reinforced by the fact that the illinois and miami indians called the lower ohio and wabash rivers the akansea river , because , as they told french explorers , the akansea ( quapaw ) formerly dwelt there . accessed , feb 21 , 2010 the dhegiha may have migrated westward in the early to mid-17th century . their reason for leaving their traditional home may have been due to the displacement westward of indian tribes caused by european settlement on the atlantic coast of the united states . displacement and western migration was the fate of many indian tribes . the first certain knowledge we have of the dhegiha is 1673 when the french explorer of the mississippi river , pere marquette , drew a crude map which showed the dhegiha tribes near their historic locations . dorsey , james owen , '' migration of the siouan tribes , '' the american naturalist , vol xx , mar 1886 , 214 . the french explorer bourgmont was the first european to document his visit to the kaws in 1724 . he found them living in a single large village near the future site of the town of doniphan , kansas . norall , frank . bourgmont , explorer of the missouri , 1698–1725 . lincoln : university of neb press , 1988 , 51 the kaw later lived farther downstream near the french fort de cavagnial ( 1744-1764 ) . by the late 1700s , the kanza took up residence on the kansas river , but the ruins of their earlier villages and fort cavagnial were a landmark for travelers in the early 1800s . when lewis and clark ascended the missouri , they noted passing the site of the french post and kansa village on july 2 , 1804 , accessed , ce 12 , 2020 and the '' old village of the kanzas '' of 1724 on july 2 , 1804 . accessed , feb 23 , 2010 . traditional culture and subsistence . the primary village of the kanza between about 1790 and 1828 was along the kansas river near the confluence with the big blue river ( of kansas ) . the kaw had camped and hunted along the kansas river for at least a century . moving their primary village to the kansas river valley put the kaw closer to the bison herds they hunted annually , while it also removed them from other tribes that visited the trading posts along the missouri river . while being away from the sometimes antagonistic relations with tribes from east of the missouri river , their new settlement was closer to the pawnee , with whom they were often in conflict . lewis and clark noted that their numbers were '' reduced by war with their neighbors '' . they estimated the kaw to number 300 men—about 1,500 persons in all . accessed , feb 23 , 2010 . interaction with the united states . the purchase by the united states of louisiana territory in 1803 led to disastrous impacts on the kaw . they were increasingly hemmed in , first , by eastern indians forced to migrate west and , secondly , by white settlers who coveted the '' beautiful aspects '' and '' rich and exuberant soils '' of kaw lands . unrau , kansa indians , 105 west of the kaw lived the warlike cheyenne and comanche , and to the north were the pawnee , their traditional enemies . in 1825 , the kaw ceded a huge area of land in missouri and kansas to the united states in exchange for a promise of an annuity of 3,500 annually for twenty years . the promised annuity—to be paid in goods and services—was often late in arriving or found its way into the pockets of unscrupulous government officials and merchants . the kaw were indifferent to the pleas of government agents and missionaries that they take up farming as their sole livelihood . meanwhile , the kaw faced smallpox epidemics in 1827–1828 and 1831–1832 , which killed about 500 . unrau , kansa indians , 149-150 during the same period the tribe split into four different competing groups living in different villages , a consequence of rivalry between three groups of conservatives , who favored retaining traditional ways , and one group under white plume which favored accommodation with the united states . important in the latter group were 23 mixed bloods , the sons and daughters of french traders who had taken kaw wives . the french influence among the kaw is still seen today in common surnames such as pappan , bellmard , and chouteau . a disastrous flood in 1844 destroyed most of the land the kaw had planted and left the tribe destitute . in 1846 , the kaw sold most of their remaining of land for 202,000 plus a reservation centered on council grove , kansas . unrau , ibid , 159-161 council grove is a beautiful area of forests , water , and tall grass prairie , but it was probably the worst location that could have been selected for the already weakened and demoralized tribe . it was a favorite stopping place for the rough-hewn teamsters and traders and voracious merchants on the santa fe trail . the first kaw arriving there were beaten up by traders . unrau , kansa indians 163 the flourishing whiskey trade in council grove also proved to be deleterious . whites invaded indian lands and sporadic efforts by soldiers to force them off the reservation were ineffective . in 1860 , the kaw reservation , overrun by white settlers , was reduced to . with the coming of the american civil war in 1861 , the kaw and other indians in kansas suddenly became an asset as the state recruited them as soldiers and scouts to stave off invasions by slave-holding tribes and confederate supporters in indian territory . seventy young kaw men were persuaded—or forced—to join company l , ninth kansas cavalry . they served in indian territory ( oklahoma ) and arkansas during the war and 21 of them never came home—a large loss to the already diminished numbers of the tribe . national archives , record group m-234 , tape 467 , page 476 after the war , european-americans in kansas agitated for indian removal , including the kaw . however , amidst the gloom of a tribe that seemed likely to disintegrate came one colorful moment . the kaw and the cheyenne had long been enemies . on june 1 , 1868 , about one hundred cheyenne warriors descended on the kaw reservation . terrified white settlers took refuge in council grove . the kaw men painted their faces , donned their finery , and sallied forth on horseback to meet the cheyenne . the two indian armies put on a military pageant featuring horsemanship , fearsome howls and curses , and volleys of bullets and arrows . after four hours , the cheyenne retired with a few stolen horses and a peace offering of coffee and sugar by the council grove merchants . nobody was hurt on either side . during the battle , the mixed-blood kaw interpreter , joseph james , jr . ( more commonly known as jojim or joe jim ) galloped 60 miles to topeka to request assistance from the governor . riding along with jojim was an eight-year-old , part-indian boy named charles curtis or '' indian charley '' . curtis would later become a jockey , a lawyer , a politician , and vice president of the united states under herbert hoover . unrau , william e . mixed bloods and tribal dissolution : charles curtis and the quest for indian identity , norman : university of okla press , 1971 : 72-75 . white pressure finally forced the kaw out of kansas . on june 4 , 1873 , they packed up their meager possessions in wagons and headed south to indian territory to a new reservation . two weeks later , 533 men , women , and children arrived at the junction of the arkansas river and beaver creek in what would become kay county , oklahoma . unrau , mixed bloods , 92 the kaw made their last successful buffalo hunt that winter , journeying on horseback to the great salt plains . they preserved the buffalo meat by jerking it and sold the buffalo robes for five thousand dollars . accessed , aug 12 , 1999 . the kaw continued their decline in oklahoma . in 1879 , their agent reported that nearly half of their number had died of contagious diseases in the previous seven years . in the 1880s and 1890s , the kaw derived much of their income from leasing their land to white ranchers for grazing . in 1884 , to manage grazing leases , they elected a government with a chief councilor and a representative from each of the four kaw bands : the picayune , koholo , rock creek , and half-breed . washungah was elected as the chief councilor in 1885 and the tribal headquarters was later named washunga to honor him . finney , frank f . '' the kaw indians and their indian territory agency . '' chronicles of oklahoma . vol . 35 , 1957–58 , p . 418 . 20th century . the kaws found security from white harassment on their indian territory lands , but the tribe continued to decline , especially the full bloods . by 1888 they numbered only 188 persons and the kaws seemed on the road to extinction . accessed , feb 22 , 2010 . however , they slowly acculturated and their numbers increased , mostly through intermarriage as the number of full-bloods continued to decline . by 1910 , only one old woman in the tribe could not speak english and more than 80 percent were literate . the curtis act of 1898 expanded the powers of the federal government over indian affairs . the author of the act was charles curtis , now a congressman . curtis believed that the indians should be assimilated and he supported the break-up of tribal governments and the dawes act of tribal lands to their members . in 1902 , at curtis 's urging , congress abolished the kaw tribal government and reservation and divided tribal lands among members . each of 247 kaw tribal members received , of which were for a personal homestead . curtis and his son and two daughters thus received of land . finney , frank f . '' the kay indians and their indian territory agency . '' chronicles of oklahoma . vol . 35 . no . 4 , 1957 , 416-422 most kaws sold or lost their land . by 1945 , only 13 percent of the land of the former kaw reservation was owned by kaws . chapman , berlin b . '' charles curtis and the kaw reservation . '' kansas historical quarterly.vol xv , no . 4 . nov 1947 , p . 351 much former kaw land was inundated by the creation of kaw lake in the 1960s , including their council house and cemetery at washunga which was moved to newkirk , oklahoma . after the death of washunga in 1908 , the kaw people had no formal organization for many years . in 1922 , washunga 's adopted daughter lucy tayiah eads ( little deer ) was elected principal chief along with a council of eight members , and was the first and only female chief , but in 1928 the government agency to the kaw was abolished and the buildings sold . finney , p . 423 thereafter , the kaw had no recognized government until federal recognition and reorganization of the tribe in 1959 . the last chief of the kaw , ernest emmett thompson , was elected in 1934 . according to dorothy roberts full-blooded kaw women were subject to sterilization by the indian health service in the 1970s . accessed feb 15 , 2019 . truthout : the last time the us wanted a wall 70,000 were sterilized . as dorothy roberts notes in killing the black body : in four indian health service hospitals alone , doctors performed more than 3,000 sterilizations without adequate consent between 1973 and 1976 . for small indian tribes , this policy was literally genocidal . one physician reported that : all the pureblood women of the kaw tribe of oklahoma have now been sterilized . at the end of the generation the tribe will cease to exist . in 1990 , the kaw ratified a new tribal constitution and created a tribal court in 1992 . in 2000 , the tribe purchased lands on their pre-1873 reservation near council grove , kansas to create a park commemorating their history in kansas named the allegawaho memorial heritage park . the last fluent speaker of the kansa language , walter kekahbah , died in 1983 . ranney , dave . '' researchers try to preserve indian languages . '' accessed 8 apr 2011 as of 2012 , the kaw nation offers online language learning for kansa second language speakers . ranney , dave . '' researchers try to preserve indian languages . '' , accessed 12 apr 2011 the last full-blood kaw , william mehojah , died in 2000 . ok/it genweb . '' the kansas/kanza/kaw nation . '' accessed 30 nov 2011 . notable people . allegawaho , b . ca . 1820 , d . ca . 1897 , kaw chief , 1867–1873 . allegawaho heritage memorial park in council grove , kansas is named after him . charles curtis , the only native american to be elected vice president of the united states ( under herbert hoover ( 1929–1933 ) ) . his congressional career was perhaps even more consequential than his term as vice president . curtis served long terms in both the house and senate , where he served as minority whip and majority leader respectively , reflecting his ability to manage legislation and build agreements . curtis 's mother ellen pappan curtis was one-quarter each of kaw , osage , potawatomi and french ancestry ; of these three nations , however , curtis was only enrolled as kaw . lucy tayiah eads , b . 1888 , adopted daughter of washunga . elected chief of kaw in 1920s and attempted to get federal recognition for the tribe . joseph james and joseph james , jr . ( joe jim or jojim ) 19th century interpreters and guides . william a . mehojah , the last kaw full blood , died on april 23 , 2000 . the allegawaho memorial heritage park ( amhp ) was dedicated in his name on june 19 , 2005 near council grove , kansas . jim pepper , the u.s . jazz saxophonist , singer , and composer was of both kaw and creek ancestry washunga , principal chief of the kaws from 1873 until his death in 1908 . washunga , oklahoma was named for him . white plume . monchousia , kaw chief who visited president monroe in 1822 in washington d.c . mark branch , two-time ncaa-champion wrestler and university of wyoming wrestling coach ( 2008–present ) . branch won ncaa championships in the 167-pound weight class in 1994 and 1997 and placed second in 1995 and 1996 . branch won four straight western wrestling conference titles as the coach of wyoming . he has been named wwc coach of the year three times . chris pappan , ledger artist .