Vachel Lindsay

attitudes towards race . most contemporaries acknowledged lindsay 's intention to be an advocate for african-americans . ward , john chapman ward : '' vachel lindsay is 'lying low ' '' , college literature 12 ( 1985 ) : 233–45 ) this intention was particularly evident in the 1918 poem '' the jazz birds '' , praising the war efforts of african-americans during world war i , an issue to which the vast majority of the white us seemed blind . additionally , w.e.b . du bois hailed lindsay 's story '' the golden-faced people '' for its insights into racism . lindsay saw himself as anti-racist not only in his own writing but in his encouragement of a writer ; he credited himself with discovering langston hughes , who , while working as a busboy at a washington , d.c . , was at the restaurant where lindsay ate and gave lindsay copies of his poems . however , many contemporaries and later critics have contended over whether a couple of lindsay 's poems should be seen as homages to african and african-american music , as perpetuation of the '' savage african '' stereotype , or as both . dubois , before reading and praising '' the golden-faced people , '' wrote in a review of lindsay 's '' booker t . washington trilogy '' that '' lindsay knows two things , and two things only , about negroes : the beautiful rhythm of their music and the ugly side of their drunkards and outcasts . from this poverty of material he tries now and then to make a contribution to negro literature . '' dubois also criticized '' the congo , '' which has been the most persistent focus of the criticisms of racial stereotyping in lindsay 's work . subtitled '' a study of the negro race '' and beginning with a section titled '' their basic savagery '' , '' the congo '' reflects the tensions within a relatively isolated and pastoral society suddenly confronted by the industrialized world . the poem was inspired by a sermon preached in october 1913 that detailed the drowning of a missionary in the congo river ; this event had drawn worldwide criticism , as had the colonial exploitation of the congo under the government of leopold ii of belgium . lindsay defended the poem ; in a letter to joel spingarn , chairman of the board of directors of the naacp , lindsay wrote that '' my 'congo ' and 'booker t . washington trilogy ' have both been denounced by the colored people for reasons that i can not fathom . the third section of 'the congo ' is certainly as hopeful as any human being dare to be in regard to any race . '' spingarn responded by acknowledging lindsay 's good intentions , but saying that lindsay sometimes glamorized differences between people of african descent and people of other races , while many african-americans wished to emphasize the '' feelings and desires '' that they held in common with others . similarly , critics in academia often portray lindsay as a well-meaning but misguided primitivism in his representations of africans and african americans . one such critic , rachel duplessis , argues that the poem , while perhaps meant to be '' hopeful , '' actually '' others '' africans as an inherently violent race . in the poem and in lindsay 's defenses of it , duplessis hears lindsay warning white readers not to be '' hoo-doo 'd '' or seduced by violent african '' mumbo jumbo . '' this warning seems to suggest that white civilization has been '' infected '' by african violence ; lindsay thus , in effect , '' blames blacks for white violence directed against them . '' conversely , susan gubar notes approvingly that '' the poem contains lines blaming black violence on white imperialism . '' while acknowledging that the poem seems to have given its author and audiences an excuse to indulge in '' 'romantic racism ' or 'slumming in slang , ' '' she also observes that lindsay was '' much more liberal than many of his poetic contemporaries , '' and that he seems to have intended a statement against the kind of racist violence perpetrated under leopold in the congo . . later years . fame . lindsay 's fame as a poet grew in the 1910s . because harriet monroe showcased him with two other illinois poets—carl sandburg and edgar lee masters—his name became linked to theirs . the success of either of the other two , in turn , seemed to help the third . in 1932 , edgar lee masters published an article on modern poetry in the american mercury that praised lindsay extensively '' the poetry revival of 1914 , '' the american mercury , july 1932 , at pp . 272–80 . and wrote a biography of lindsay in 1935 ( four years after its subject 's death ) entitled vachel lindsay : a poet in america . lindsay himself indicated in the 1915 preface to '' the congo '' that no less a figure than william butler yeats respected his work . yeats felt they shared a concern for capturing the sound of the primitive and of singing in poetry . in 1915 , lindsay gave a poetry reading to president woodrow wilson and the entire cabinet . marriage , children and financial troubles . lindsay 's private life was rife with disappointments , such as his unsuccessful courtship in 1914 of fellow poet sara teasdale before she married rich businessman ernst filsinger . while this itself may have caused lindsay to become more concerned with money , his financial pressures would greatly increase later on . in 1924 he moved to spokane , washington , where he lived in room 1129 of the davenport hotel until 1929 . on may 19 , 1925 , at age 45 , he married 23-year-old elizabeth connor . the new pressure to support his considerably younger wife escalated as she bore him daughter susan doniphan lindsay in may 1926 and son nicholas cave lindsay in september 1927 . desperate for money , lindsay undertook an exhausting string of readings throughout the east and midwest from october 1928 through march 1929 . during this time , poetry magazine awarded him a lifetime achievement award of 500 ( equivalent to about in 2012 dollars ) . in april 1929 , lindsay and his family moved to the house of his birth in springfield , illinois , an expensive undertaking . in that same year , coinciding with the stock market crash of 1929 , lindsay published two more poetry volumes : the litany of washington street and every soul a circus . he gained money by doing odd jobs throughout but in general earned very little during his travels . lindsay had a serious love affair with lucy bates , a professional modern dancer who lived in new york city . his poem '' how a little girl danced '' was dedicated to her . suicide . crushed by financial worry and in failing health from his six-month road trip , lindsay sank into depression . on december 5 , 1931 , he committed suicide by drinking a bottle of lye . his last words were : '' they tried to get me ; i got them first ! '' . legacy . . literary . lindsay , a versatile and prolific writer and poet , helped to '' keep alive the appreciation of poetry as a spoken art '' reading list '' biography , vachel lindsay '' poetry foundation.org , chicago 2015 whose poetry was said to '' abound in meter and rhymes and is no shredded prose '' , howells , william dean harpers magazine , sept . 1915 had a traditional verse structure '' biography of vachel lindsay '' poetry foundation.org , chicago 2015 and was described by a contemporary in 1924 as '' pungent phrases , clinging cadences , dramatic energy , comic thrust , lyric seriousness and tragic intensity '' . van doren , carl many minds knopf , new york 1924 lindsay 's biographer , dennis camp , says that lindsay 's ideas on '' civic beauty and civic tolerance '' were published in 1912 in his broadside '' the gospel of beauty '' and that later , in 1915 , lindsay published the first american study of film as an art form , the art of the moving picture . camp notes that on lindsay 's tombstone is recorded a single word , '' poet '' . camp , dennis dr . '' biography in brief '' . vachel lindsay association ( est 1946 ) , springfield , il . other legacy . the illinois historic preservation agency helps to maintain the vachel lindsay house at 603 south fifth street in springfield , the site of lindsay 's birth and death . the agency donated the house to the state , which then closed it for restoration at a cost of 1.5 million . as of october 8 , 2014 , the site was again open to the public , with guided tours available on thursday through sunday from 1 to 5 pm . lindsay 's grave lies in oak ridge cemetery . the bridge crossing the midpoint of lake springfield , built in 1934 , is named in lindsay 's honor . the vachel lindsay archive resides at the albert and shirley small special collections library at the university of virginia . it comprises his personal papers , manuscripts of his works , correspondence , photographs , artworks , printing blocks , books from his personal library , and a comprehensive collection of books by and about lindsay . the archives and special collections at amherst college holds a small collection of manuscripts and other items sent by lindsay to eugenia graham . selected works . abraham lincoln walks at midnight an indian summer day on the prairie a rhyme about an electrical advertising sign a sense of humor bryan , bryan , bryan , bryan the dandelion drying their wings euclid factory windows are always broken the flower-fed buffaloes general william booth enters into heaventhe american composer charles ives wrote music to this poem ( with minor text alterations ) shortly after its publication in praise of johnny appleseed the kallyope yellsee calliope for additional information the leaden-eyed love and law the mouse that gnawed the oak tree down the north star whispers to the blacksmith 's son on the garden wall the prairie battlements the golden book of springfield prologue to 'rhymes to be traded for bread the congo : a study of the negro race the eagle that is forgotten the firemen 's ball the rose of midnight this section is a christmas tree to gloriana what semiramis said what the ghost of the gambler said why i voted the socialist ticket written for a musician . references and notes . external links . vachel lindsay association website – biography , essays , works profile of vachel linsay from pbs 's '' i hear america singing '' program , hosted by thomas hampson vachel lindsay collection , amherst college archives and special collections entry on vachel lindsay from anthology of modern american poetry '' the chinese nightingale '' '' the congo and other poems by vachel lindsay '' vachel lindsay collection – harry ransom center digital collections ( online audio from recordings made by w . cabell greet and george w . hibbitt ) vachel lindsay collection . yale collection of american literature , beinecke rare book and manuscript library .