1936 in literature

events . january 8 – jewish booksellers throughout nazi germany are deprived of their reich publications chamber membership cards , without which no one can sell books . may – the greek poet and communist activist yiannis ritsos is inspired to write his poem epitaphios by a photograph of a dead protester at a massive tobacco workers ' demonstration in thessaloniki . it is published soon after . in august , the right-wing dictatorship of ioannis metaxas comes to power in greece and copies are burned publicly at the foot of the acropolis in athens . may 16–17 – about 30 left-wing writers of the second polish republic gather at the lviv anti-fascist congress of cultural workers . august 3 – george heywood hill establishes the heywood hill bookshop in london 's mayfair . august 18 – the 38-year-old spanish dramatist , federico garcía lorca , is arrested by francoist militia during the white terror and never seen alive again . his brother-in-law , manuel fernández-montesinos , the leftist mayor of granada , is shot on the same day . lorca 's play the house of bernarda alba ( la casa de bernarda alba ) , completed on june 19 , will not be performed until 1945 . november 6 – after united states publication in 1934 , the u.k . authorities decide they will not prosecute or seize copies of james joyce 's 1922 novel ulysses . november 23 – life magazine begins to appear as a weekly news magazine in the united states , under the management of henry luce . unknown dates the first lighthearted crime novel by scottish-born university teacher of english literature j . i . m . stewart , writing as michael innes , is published : death at the president 's lodging , set in oxford . it introduces his long-running character detective inspector john appleby of scotland yard . the carnegie medal for excellence in children 's literature is inaugurated by the library association in the united kingdom . the first winner is arthur ransome for pigeon post . . new books . fiction . felipe alfau – locos : a comedy of gestures sutan takdir alisjahbana – layar terkembang ( with sails unfurled ) jorge amado – sea of death ( mar morto ) eric ambler – the dark frontier arturo ambrogi – el jetón nigel balchin – lightbody on liberty djuna barnes – nightwood henry bellamann – the gray man walks stephen vincent benét – '' the devil and daniel webster '' ( short story , published in the saturday evening post ) georges bernanos – the diary of a country priest arna bontemps – black thunder mary borden - action for slander carol ryrie brink – caddie woodlawn edgar rice burroughs – tarzan 's quest james m . cain – double indemnity morley callaghan – now that april 's here and other stories karel čapek – war with the newts ( válka s mloky ) john dickson carr the arabian nights murder the punch and judy murders ( as by carter dickson ) willa cather – not under forty louis-ferdinand céline – death on the installment plan ( mort à crédit ) peter cheyney – this man is dangerous agatha christie – hercule poirot novels the a.b.c . murders cards on the table murder in mesopotamia robert p . tristram coffin – john dawn carmen de icaza - cristina guzmán henry de montherlant - les jeunes filles ( the young girls ; first part of tetralogy ) john dos passos – the big money william pène du bois – otto at sea daphne du maurier – jamaica inn walter d . edmonds – drums along the mohawk mircea eliade – miss christina ( domnișoara christina ) william faulkner – absalom , absalom ! gilbert frankau – farewell romance konstantine gamsakhurdia – stealing the moon jean giono – joy of man 's desiring ( que ma joie demeure ) graham greene – a gun for sale winifred holtby – south riding aldous huxley – eyeless in gaza michael innes – death at the president ’ s lodging c . l . r . james – minty alley mikheil javakhishvili – a woman 's burden , storm jameson none turn back ( the mirror in darkness iii ) in the second year arthur joseph – dark metropolis leo kiacheli – gvadi bigva jonathan latimer – the lady in the morgue jean de la varende – leather-nose ( nez-de-cuir ) haniel long – interlinear to cabeza de vaca clare boothe luce – the women andrew lytle – the long night compton mackenzie – figure of eight klaus mann – mephisto a . e . w . mason – fire over england henry miller – black spring margaret mitchell – gone with the wind naomi mitchison – the fourth pig john a . moroso – nobody 's buddy anaïs nin – house of incest george orwell – keep the aspidistra flying john cowper powys – maiden castle premchand – godaan , gōdān , the gift of a cow ) ellery queen – halfway house ayn rand – we the living erich maria remarque – three comrades ( drei kameraden ) kate roberts – traed mewn cyffion ( feet in the stocks ) rafael sabatini – the fortunes of captain blood sim hun – sangnoksu ; '' evergreen ( tree ) '' ; serialization concludes and book publication ) israel joshua singer – the brothers ashkenazi ( di brider ashkenazy , in book format ) eleanor smith – portrait of a lady john steinbeck – in dubious battle rex stout – the rubber band phoebe atwood taylor the crimson patch out of order frank thiess – tsushima aleksey tolstoy – « золотой ключик , или приключения буратино » ( the golden key , or the adventures of buratino ) s . s . van dine – the kidnap murder case vũ trọng phụng – số đỏ ( dumb luck ) sylvia townsend warner – summer will show carolyn wells – murder in the bookshop ethel lina white – the wheel spins ( later the lady vanishes ) francis brett young – far forest . children and young people . edward ardizzone – little tim and the brave sea captain ( journal d'un curé de campagne ) m . e . atkinson – august adventure carol ryrie brink – caddie woodlawn joanna cannan – a pony for jean ( first of nine pony series books ) noel langley – the tale of the land of green ginger munro leaf – the story of ferdinand john a . moroso – nobody 's buddy carola oman – ferry the fearless arthur ransome – pigeon post ruth sawyer – roller skates lester basil sinclair ( as john mystery ) – why cows moo noel streatfeild – ballet shoes ( illustrated by ruth gervis ) barbara euphan todd – worzel gummidge ( first in the worzel gummidge series of eleven books ) aleksey nikolayevich tolstoy – buratino . drama . pralhad keshav atre lagnāchi bedi udyāchā sansār w . h . auden and christopher isherwood – the ascent of f6 s . n . behrman – end of summer charles bennett – page from a diary bertolt brecht – round heads and pointed heads ( die rundköpfe und die spitzköpfe ) noël coward tonight at 8.30 present laughter mazo de la roche and nancy price – whiteoaks henry de montherlant – pasiphaé harley granville-barker – waste ( first public performance , 1927 version ; originally written 1906 ) ian hay – the frog george s . kaufman and moss hart – you ca n't take it with you sinclair lewis and john c . moffitt – it ca n't happen here ( dramatisation ) federico garcía lorca – the house of bernarda alba ( la casa de bernarda alba ; written ) clare boothe luce – the women barré lyndon – the amazing dr . clitterhouse j.b . priestley – bees on the boat deck terence rattigan – french without tears irwin shaw – bury the dead ödön von horváth don juan kommt aus dem krieg ( don juan comes back from the war ) figaro läßt sich scheiden ( figaro gets a divorce ) . poetry . w . h . auden – on this island gottfried benn – ausgewählte gedichte ( selected poems ) t . s . eliot – collected poems 1909–35 including '' burnt norton '' , first of the four quartets patrick kavanagh – ploughman , and other poems michael roberts ( ed . ) – the faber book of modern verse dylan thomas – twenty-five poems w . b . yeats ( ed . ) – the oxford book of modern verse 1892–1935 . non-fiction . a . j . ayer – language , truth , and logic john dickson carr – the murder of sir edmund godfrey victor hugo green – the negro motorist green book ( 1st edn ) graham greene – journey without maps richard foster jones – ancients and moderns : a study of the background of the battle of the books carl gustav jung – the idea of redemption in alchemy ( die erlösungsvorstellungen in der alchemie ) john maynard keynes – the general theory of employment , interest and money osbert lancaster – progress at pelvis bay f . r . leavis – revaluation : tradition and development in english poetry c . s . lewis – the allegory of love karl mannheim – ideology and utopia edwin muir – scott and scotland george orwell – '' bookshop memories '' olavi paavolainen – kolmannen valtakunnan vieraana ( guest of the third reich ) j . r . r . tolkien – '' beowulf : the monsters and the critics '' ( version of a lecture ) . births . january 5 – florence king , american writer ( died 2016 ) january 10 – stephen e . ambrose , american historian ( died 2002 ) january 28 – ismail kadare , albanian novelist and poet february 12 – shawkat ali , bangladeshi writer ( died 2018 ) february 18 – jean m . auel , american historical novelist march 1 – jean-rené huguenin , french novelist and literary critic ( died in 1962 ) march 7 – georges perec , french novelist , filmmaker and essayist ( died 1982 ) march 28 – peter mayer , english-born publisher ( died 2018 ) march 31 – marge piercy , american poet and activist april 30 – viktor likhonosov , soviet russian writer and editor may 10 – anthea bell , english translator ( died 2018 ) may 23 – ian kennedy martin , english scriptwriter and novelist may 27 – ivo brešan , croatian playwright , novelist , screenwriter and satirist ( died 2016 ) june 3 duff hart-davis , english biographer and journalist larry mcmurtry , american novelist , essayist and screenwriter june 9 – nell dunn , english playwright and author june 18 – dick wimmer , american novelist ( died 2011 ) june 23 – richard bach , american novelist and non-fiction writer june 24 – j . h . prynne , english poet june 29 – david rudkin , english playwright july 5 – valerie flint , english medieval historian ( died 2009 ) july 6 – abidullah ghazi , indian-american author , educator and poet july 22 – tom robbins , american novelist august 24 – a . s . byatt , english novelist september 1 – roderick thorp , american novelist ( died 1999 ) september 2 – károly krajczár , hungarian slovene teacher , writer and collector ( died 2018 ) september 20 – andrew davies , welsh novelist and screenwriter september 26 – victor watson , english children 's writer and academic october 1 – kailayar sellanainar sivakumaran , sri lankan writer , art and literary critic , journalist and radio and tv personality october 5 – václav havel , czech dramatist and first president of czech republic ( died 2011 ) november 4 – c . k . williams , american poet ( died 2015 ) november 17 – john wells , english satirical writer and actor ( died 1998 ) november 18 – suzette haden elgin , american science fiction writer ( died 2015 ) november 20 – don delillo , american novelist november 25 – william mcilvanney , scottish novelist , short story writer and poet ( died 2015 ) november 27 – dahlia ravikovitch , israeli poet ( died 2005 ) december 1 – ma văn kháng , vietnamese writer december 2 – hebe uhart , argentine writer ( died 2018 ) december 5 james lee burke , american writer lewis nkosi , zulu writer ( died 2010 ) december 11 – ingvar moe , norwegian poet , novelist and children 's writer ( died 1993 ) december 17 – frank martinus arion , curaçaoan novelist and poet ( died 2015 ) . deaths . january 4 – james churchward , british writer ( born 1851 ) january 5 – ramón del valle-inclán , spanish dramatist and novelist ( born 1866 ) january 17 – mateiu caragiale , romanian novelist and poet ( stroke , born 1885 ) january 18 – rudyard kipling , english writer and nobel laureate ( born 1865 ) february 7 – elizabeth robins pennell , american biographer and critic based in london ( born 1855 ) february 8 – rahel sanzara , german dancer , actress and novelist ( cancer , born 1894 ) february 23 – lidia veselitskaya ( v . mikulich ) , russian novelist , memoirist and translator ( born 1857 ) march 1 – mikhail kuzmin , russian poet , musician and novelist ( born 1872 ) march 9 – a . de herz , romanian playwright and journalist ( hemoptysis , born 1887 ) march 16 – marguerite durand , french actress and journalist ( born 1864 ) april 30 – a . e . housman , english poet ( born 1859 ) june 11 – robert e . howard , american fantasy writer ( suicide , born 1906 ) june 12 – m . r . james , english ghost story writer and scholar ( born 1862 ) june 14 g . k . chesterton , english novelist , poet and catholic apologist ( born 1874 ) maxim gorky , russian dramatist ( born 1868 ) july 25 – donald maxwell , english travel writer and illustrator ( born 1877 ) july 26 – f . j . harvey darton english children 's literature historian and publisher ( born 1878 ) august 8 – mourning dove , native american writer ( born 1884 ) august 15 – grazia deledda , sardinian-born novelist and nobel laureate ( born 1871 ) august 19 – federico garcía lorca , spanish dramatist and poet ( shot , born 1898 ) october 5 – j . slauerhoff , dutch poet and novelist ( born 1898 ) november 12 – stefan grabiński , polish horror writer ( born 1887 ) december 10 – luigi pirandello , italian dramatist and novelist ( born 1867 ) december 24 – frances garnet wolseley , 2nd viscountess wolseley , english horticulturist and garden writer ( born 1872 ) december 27 – kristína royová , slovak novelist , religious writer and poet ( born 1860 ) december 28 – john cornford , english poet ( killed in action , born 1915 ) december 31 – miguel de unamuno , spanish novelist , poet and scholar ( born 1864 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : arthur ransome , pigeon post james tait black memorial prize for fiction : winifred holtby , south riding james tait black memorial prize for biography : edward sackville west , a flame in sunlight : the life and work of thomas de quincey newbery medal for children 's literature : carol ryrie brink , caddie woodlawn nobel prize in literature : eugene o'neill prix goncourt : maxence van der meersch , l'empreinte de dieu pulitzer prize for drama : robert e . sherwood , idiot 's delight pulitzer prize for poetry : robert p . tristram coffin , strange holiness pulitzer prize for the novel : harold l . davis , honey in the horn . references .