Henry Maudslay

early life . maudslay was the fifth of seven children of henry maudslay , a wheelwright in the royal engineers , and margaret ( nee whitaker ) , the young widow of joseph laundy . his father was wounded in action and so in 1756 became an 'artificer ' at the royal arsenal , woolwich ( then in kent ) , where he remained until 1776 maudslay , henry ( 1771 & ndash ; 1831 ) , dictionary of national biography , vol . 13 , p . 81 , accessed on ancestry.co.uk 2016-12-20 and died in 1780 . the family lived in an alley that no longer exists , off beresford square , between powis street and beresford street . career . maudslay began work at the age of 12 as a '' powder monkey '' , one of the boys employed in filling cartridges at the arsenal . after two years , he was transferred to a carpenter 's shop followed by a blacksmith 's forge , where at the age of fifteen he began training as a blacksmith . he seems to have specialised in the lighter , more complex kind of forge work . rolt , l.t.c . , '' great engineers '' , 1962 , g . bell and sons ltd , isbn during his time at the arsenal , maudslay also worked at the royal foundry , where jan verbruggen had installed an innovative horizontal boring machine in 1772 . joseph bramah . maudslay acquired such a good reputation that joseph bramah called for his services on the recommendation of one of his employees . bramah was surprised that he was only eighteen , but maudslay demonstrated his ability and started work at bramah 's workshop in denmark street , st giles . bramah lock . bramah designed and patented an improved bramah lock based on the tumbler principle , but had difficulty manufacturing at an economic price . maudslay built the lock that was displayed in bramah 's shop window with a notice offering a reward of 200 guineas to anyone who could pick it . it resisted all efforts for forty-seven years . maudslay designed and made a set of special tools and machines that allowed the lock to be made at an economic price . . hydraulic press . bramah had designed a hydraulic press , but was having problems sealing both the piston and the piston rod where it fitted into the cylinder . the usual method was hemp packing but the pressures were too high for this to work . maudslay came up with the idea of a leather cup washer , which gave a perfect seal but offered no resistance to movement when the pressure was released . the new hydraulic press worked perfectly thereafter . but maudslay , who had made a major contribution to its success , received little credit for it . . screw cutting lathe . maudslay developed the first industrially practical screw-cutting lathe in 1800 , allowing standardisation of screw thread sizes for the first time . quentin r . skrabec , jr . ( 2005 ) . '' the metallurgic age : the victorian flowering of invention and industrial science '' . p . 169 . mcfarland this allowed the concept of interchangeable parts ( an idea that was already taking hold ) to be practically applied to nuts and screw . when maudslay began working for bramah , the typical lathe was worked by a treadle and the workman held the cutting tool against the work . this did not allow for precision , especially in cutting iron , so screw threads were usually made by chipping and filing ( that is , with skilled freehand use of chisels and files ) . nuts were rare ; metal screws , when made at all , were usually for use in wood . metal bolts passing through wood framing to a metal fastening on the other side were usually fastened in non-threaded ways ( such as clinching or upsetting against a washer ) . maudslay designed a tool holder into which the cutting tool would be clamped , and which would slide on accurately planed surfaces to allow the cutting tool to move in either direction . the slide rest was positioned by a leadscrew to which power was transmitted through a pair of changeable gears so that it traveled in proportion to the turning of the work . this allowed screw threads to be precisely cut . changing the gears gave various pitches . the ability of the slide-rest lathe to produce precision parts revolutionised the production of machine components . he standardized the screw threads used in his workshop and produced sets of tap and die that would make nuts and bolts consistently to those standards , so that any bolt of the appropriate size would fit any nut of the same size . this was a major advance in workshop technology . maudslay did not invent the slide rest ( as others such as james nasmyth have claimed ) , roe 1916:36-40 . and may not have been the first to combine a lead screw , slide rest , and set of change gears all on one lathe ( jesse ramsden may have done that in 1775 ; evidence is scant ) , roe 1916:38 . but he did introduce the three-part combination of lead screw , slide rest , and change gears , sparking a great advance in machine tools and in the engineering use of screw threads . maudslay 's original screw-cutting lathe is at the science museum in london . promotion and ambition . maudslay had shown himself to be so talented that after one year the nineteen-year-old was made manager of bramah 's workshop . henry maudslay and company . in 1797 , after having worked for bramah for eight years , maudslay was refused a wage increase to 30s a week so he decided to set up his own business . in 1798 he obtained a small shop and smithy in wells street , off oxford street but in 1800 he moved to larger premises in margaret street , cavendish square . by 1810 maudslay was employing eighty workers and running out of room at his workshop , so he moved to larger premises in westminster bridge road , lambeth . maudslay also recruited a promising young admiralty draughtsman , joshua field , who proved to be so talented that maudslay took him into partnership . the company later became maudslay , sons and field when maudslay 's sons became partners . . block making machines . following earlier work by samuel bentham , his first major commission was to build a series of 42 woodworking machines to produce wooden rigging blocks ( each ship required thousands ) for the navy under sir marc isambard brunel . the machines were installed in the purpose-built portsmouth block mills , which still survive , including some of the original machinery . the machines were capable of making 130,000 ships ’ blocks a year , needing only ten unskilled men to operate them compared with the 110 skilled workers needed before their installation . deane 1965 , page 131 this was the first well-known example of specialized machinery used for machining in an assembly-line type factory . an entire chapter devoted to the portsmouth machinery , of 18 pages and 7 plates . . micrometer . maudslay invented the first bench micrometer capable of measuring to one ten-thousandth of an inch ( 0.0001 in ≈ 3 µm ) . he called it the '' lord chancellor '' , as it was used to settle any questions regarding accuracy of workmanship . . marine engines . maudslay 's lambeth works began to specialize in the production of marine steam engines . the type of engine he used for ships was a side-lever design , in which a beam was mounted alongside the cylinder . this saved on height in the cramped engine rooms of steamers . his first marine engine was built in 1815 , of 17 h.p . , and fitted to a thames steamer named the richmond . in 1823 a maudslay engine powered the lightning , the first steam-powered vessel to be commissioned by the royal navy . in 1829 a side-lever engine of 400 h.p . completed for hms dee was the largest marine engine existing at that time . the marine engine business was developed by henry 's third son , joseph maudslay ( 1801 - 1861 ) . he had trained in shipbuilding at northfleet and , with joshua field , became a partner in his father 's firm , trading as maudslay , sons and field of north lambeth . in 1838 , after henry 's death , the lambeth works supplied a 750 h.p . engine for isambard kingdom brunel 's famous ss great western , the first purpose-built transatlantic steamship . they patented a double cylinder direct acting engine in 1839 . they introduced some of the earliest screw propulsion units for ships , including one for the first admiralty screw steamship , , in 1841 . by 1850 the firm had supplied more than two hundred vessels with steam engines , though the firm 's dominance was being challenged by john penn 's trunk engine design . they exhibited their engines at the 1862 international exhibition . thames tunnel . in 1825 , marc isambard brunel began work on the thames tunnel , intended to link rotherhithe with wapping . after many difficulties this first tunnel under the thames was successfully completed in 1842 . the tunnel would not have been possible without the innovative tunneling shield designed by marc brunel and built by maudslay sons & field at their lambeth works . maudslay also supplied the steam-driven pumps that were so important for keeping the tunnel workings dry . bagust , harold , '' the greater genius ? '' , 2006 , ian allan publishing , . personal life . in 1791 he married bramah 's housemaid , sarah tindel , and they had four sons together : thomas henry , the eldest , and joseph , the youngest , subsequently joined their father in business . william , the second , became a civil engineer and was one of the founders of the institution of civil engineers . later life . near the end of his life maudslay developed an interest in astronomy and began to construct a telescope . he intended to buy a house in norwood and build a private observatory there , but died before he was able to accomplish his plan . in january 1831 he caught a chill while crossing the english channel after visiting a friend in france . he was ill for four weeks and died on 14 some sources say 15 february february 1831 . he was buried in the churchyard of st mary magdalen woolwich ; he designed the memorial located in its lady chapel . . legacy . maudslay laid an important foundation for the industrial revolution with his machine tool technology . his most influential invention was the screw-cutting lathe . the machine , which created uniformity in screws and allowed for the application of interchangeable parts ( a prerequisite for mass production ) , was a revolutionary development necessary for the industrial revolution . many outstanding engineers trained in his workshop , including richard roberts , david napier , joseph clement , sir joseph whitworth , james nasmyth ( inventor of the steam hammer ) , joshua field . maudslay played his part in the development of mechanical engineering when it was in its infancy , but he was especially pioneering in the development of machine tools to be used in engineering workshops across the world . maudslay 's company was one of the most important british engineering manufactories of the nineteenth century , finally closing in 1904 . pronunciation and spelling . in maudslay 's surname , as in other british names with terminal unstressed syllable -ay such as lindsay or barclay , the terminal syllable is pronounced as /i/ or a reduction thereof ; it therefore sounds the same as '' maudsley '' . many books have spelled his surname with an '' e '' as '' maudsley '' ; a search of google books for the query '' henry+maudsley '' +lathe ( quotes inclusive ) returns several hundred results that clearly are meant to refer to the same identity . but this seems to be an error propagated via citation of earlier books containing the same error . see also . maudslay motor company , founded by walter h . maudslay , great grandson of henry maudslay .