Armorica

name . the name armorica is a latinized form of the gaulish toponym aremorica , which literally means 'place in front of the sea ' . it is formed with the prefix are- ( 'in front of ' ) attached to -mori- ( 'sea ' ) and the feminine suffix - ( i ) cā , denoting the localization ( or provenance ) . the inhabitants of the region were called aremorici ( sing . aremoricos ) , formed with the root are-mori- extended by a determinative suffix -cos . it is glossed by the latin antemarini in endlicher 's glossary . the slavs use a similar formation , po-mor-jane ( 'those in front of the sea ' ) , to designate the inhabitants of pomerania . the latin adjective armoricani was an administrative term designating in particular a sector of the roman defence line in gaul in late antiquity , the tractus armoricani ( 'armorican tract ' ) . in breton , which belongs to the brythonic branch of the insular celtic languages , along with welsh and cornish , '' on the sea '' is war vor ( welsh ar fôr , '' f '' being voiced and pronounced like english '' v '' ) , but the older form arvor is used to refer to the coastal regions of brittany , in contrast to argoad ( ar '' on/at '' , coad '' forest '' welsh ar goed or coed '' trees '' ) for the inland regions . the irish form is ar mhuir , the manx is er vooir and the scottish form air mhuir . however , in those languages , the phrase means '' on the sea '' , as opposed to ar thír or ar thalamh/ar thalúin ( er heer/er haloo , air thìr/air thalamh ) '' on the land '' . the cognate modern usages suggest that the romans first contacted coastal people in the inland region and assumed that the regional name aremorica referred to the whole area , both coastal and inland . history . image : britonia6hcentury.png thumb right 200px map of briton settlements in the 6th-century , including what became brittany and britonia ( in spain ) . pliny the elder , in his natural history ( 4.17.105 ) , claims that armorica was the older name for aquitaine and states armorica 's southern boundary extended to the pyrenees . taking into account the gaulish origin of the name , that is perfectly correct and logical , as aremorica is not a country name but a word that describes a type of geographical region , one that is by the sea . pliny lists the following celtic tribes as living in the area : the aedui and carnuteni as having treaties with rome ; the meaux and segusiavi as having some measure of independence ; and the boii , senones , aulerci ( both the eburovices and cenomani ) , the parisii , tricasses , andicavi , viducasses , baiocasses , veneti , coriosolites , diablinti , rhedones , turones , and the atseui . trade between armorica and britain , described by diodorus siculus and implied by pliny history compass : home was long-established . because , even after the campaign of publius crassus in 56 bc , continued resistance to roman rule in armorica was still being supported by celtic aristocrats in britain . julius caesar led two invasions of britain in 55 and 54 in response . some hint of the complicated cultural web that bound armorica and roman britain ( the '' britains '' of pliny ) is given by caesar when he describes diviciacus of the suessiones as '' the most powerful ruler in the whole of gaul , who had control not only over a large area of this region but also of britain '' caesar , de bello gallico ii.4 . archaeological sites along the south coast of england , notably at hengistbury head , show connections with armorica as far east as the solent . this 'prehistoric ' connection of cornwall and brittany set the stage for the link that continued into the medieval era . still farther east , however , the typical continental connections of the britannic coast were with the lower seine valley instead . image : kartenn galianed.jpg thumb right 300px map of the gauls people of modern brittany : archaeology has not yet been as enlightening in iron-age armorica as the coinage , which has been surveyed by philip de jersey . '' coinage in iron age armorica '' , studies in celtic coinage , 2 ( 1994 ) under the roman empire , armorica was administered as part of the province of gallia lugdunensis , which had its capital in lugdunum , ( modern day lyon ) . when the roman provinces were reorganized in the 4th century , armorica ( tractus armoricanus et nervicanus ) was placed under the second and third divisions of lugdunensis . after the legions retreated from britannia ( 407 ) the local elite there expelled the civilian magistrates in the following year ; armorica too rebelled in the 430s and again in the 440s , throwing out the ruling officials , as the romano-britons had done . at the battle of the catalaunian plains in 451 a roman coalition led by general flavius aetius and the visigothic king theodoric i clashed violently with the hunnic alliance commanded by king attila the hun . jordanes lists aëtius ' allies as including armoricans and other celtic or german tribes ( getica 36.191 ) . the '' armorican '' peninsula came to be settled with britons from britain during the poorly documented period of the 5th & ndash ; 7th centuries . leon fleuriot 's primarily linguistic researches in les origines de la bretagne , emphasizes instead the broader influx of britons into roman gaul that preceded the fifth-century collapse of roman power . even in distant byzantium procopius heard tales of migrations to the frankish mainland from the island , largely legendary for him , of brittia . procopius , in history of the wars , viii , 20 , 6-14 . these settlers , whether refugees or not , made the presence felt of their coherent groups in the naming of the westernmost , atlantic-facing provinces of armorica , cornouaille ( '' cornwall '' ) and domnonée ( '' devon '' ) . k . jackson , language and history in early britain edinburgh , 1953:14f . these settlements are associated with leaders like saints samson of dol and pol aurelian , among the '' founder saints '' of brittany . the linguistic origins of breton are clear : it is a brythonic language descended from the celtic british language , like welsh and cornish one of the insular celtic languages , brought by these migrating britons . still , questions of the relations between the celtic cultures of britain & mdash ; cornish and welsh & mdash ; and celtic breton are far from settled . martin henig ( 2003 ) suggests that in armorica as in sub-roman britain : there was a fair amount of creation of identity in the migration period . we know that the mixed , but largely british and frankish population of kent repackaged themselves as 'jutes ' , and the largely british populations in the lands east of dumnonia ( devon and cornwall ) seem to have ended up as 'west saxons ' . in western armorica , the small élite which managed to impose an identity on the population happened to be british rather than 'gallo-roman ' in origin , so they became bretons . the process may have been essentially the same . '' martin henig , british archaeology , 2003 , review of the british settlement of brittany by pierre-roland giot , philippe guigon & bernard merdrignac according to c.e.v . nixon , the collapse of roman power and the depredations of the visigoths led armorica to act '' like a magnet to peasants , coloni , slaves and the hard-pressed '' who deserted other roman territories , further weakening them . c.e.v . nixon , '' relations between visigoths and romans in fifth century gaul '' , in john drinkwater , hugh elton ( eds ) fifth-century gaul : a crisis of identity ? , cambridge university press , 2002 , p . 69 vikings settled in the cotentin peninsula and the lower seine around rouen in the ninth and early tenth centuries and , as these regions came to be known as normandy , the name armorica fell out of use in the area . with western armorica having already evolved into brittany , the east was recast from a frankish viewpoint as the breton march under a frankish marquis . in popular culture . the home village of the fictional comic-book hero asterix was located in armorica during the roman republic ; there , '' indomitable gauls '' hold out against rome . the unnamed village was reported as having been discovered by archaeologists in a spoof article in the british the independent newspaper on april fool 's day in 1993 . . footnotes . ; bibliography . see also . armoricani breton language saxon shore . external links . martin henig , review in british archaeology 72 ( september 2003 ) john hooker - coriosolite ( armorican ) coinage and classification