1952 in literature

events . february – the historical periodical past & present is launched in oxford , u.k . february 29 – derek j . de solla price reveals his discovery of a lost medieval scientific work entitled equatorie of the planetis , initially attributed to geoffrey chaucer , in the times literary supplement . march 3 – j . l . carr takes over as headmaster of highfields primary school , kettering , which will later feature in his novel the harpole report . may – the works of andré gide are placed on the catholic church 's index of forbidden books by pope pius xii . andre gide , the immoralist ( 1902 ) ; commentary by anais aigner ( 1998 ) . retrieved 12 february 2012 . july 10 – the first issue appears of mad , edited by harvey kurtzman and published by william m . gaines ' ec comics . august 12 – the night of the murdered poets brings the execution of 13 soviet jews in lubyanka prison , moscow , including several writers . september 6 – the universal copyright convention is adopted at geneva . october 17 – samuel beckett 's play waiting for godot is published in paris as en attendant godot by les éditions de minuit . october 28 – e . e . cummings delivers the first of his charles eliot norton lectures at harvard university . november 25 – agatha christie 's play the mousetrap opens at the new ambassadors theatre , london . it will still be running 68 years later , next door at st martin 's theatre from 1974 . unknown dates the publisher diogenes verlag is founded in zurich , switzerland , by daniel keel . the national library of burma is established in rangoon . new books . fiction . isaac asimov the currents of space foundation and empire h . e . bates – love for lydia john bingham – my name is michael sibley pearl s . buck – the hidden flower ivan bunin – the life of arseniev italo calvino the argentine ant ( la formica argentina ) the cloven viscount ( l visconte dimezzato , first of the our ancestors trilogy ) john dickson carr the nine wrong answers behind the crimson blind ( as carter dickson ) louis-ferdinand céline – fable for another time agatha christie mrs mcginty 's dead they do it with mirrors a daughter 's a daughter ( as mary westmacott ) brian cleeve – the far hills branko ćopić – prolom ( the break-out ) thomas b . costain – the silver chalice a . j . cronin – adventures in two worlds august derleth three problems for solar pons night 's yawning peal : a ghostly company ( as editor ) david f . dodge – to catch a thief jean dutourd – the best butter ralph ellison – invisible man edna ferber – giant c . s . forester – lieutenant hornblower paul gallico – the small miracle jean giono – the malediction richard gordon – doctor in the house winston graham – fortune is a woman vasily grossman – stalingrad ( « сталингра́д » ) han suyin – a many-splendoured thing robert a . heinlein – the rolling stones ernest hemingway – the old man and the sea willem frederik hermans – ( the house of refuge or an untouched house , novella ) patricia highsmith ( as claire morgan ) – the price of salt hammond innes – campbell 's kingdom ernst jünger – visit to godenholm frances parkinson keyes – steamboat gothic david h . keller – tales from underwood arthur koestler – arrow in the blue halldór laxness – gerpla doris lessing – martha quest compton mackenzie – the rival monster bernard malamud – the natural ana maria matute – fiesta al noroeste harry mulisch – archibald strohalm c . l . moore – judgment night ( science fiction short stories ) r . k . narayan – the financial expert flannery o'connor – wise blood vin packer – spring fire anthony powell – a buyer 's market barbara pym – excellent women ellery queen – the king is dead lucien rebatet – les deux étendards charles shaw – heaven knows , mr . allison howard spring – the houses in between john steinbeck – east of eden rex stout triple jeopardy prisoner 's base a . c . swinburne ( died 1909 ) – lesbia brandon ( completed c.1868 ) edith templeton – the island of desire jim thompson – the killer inside me agnes sligh turnbull – the gown of glory amos tutuola – the palm-wine drunkard sachchidananda vatsyayan ( agyeya ) – nadi ke dweep ( islands in the stream ) vercors – les animaux dénaturés arved viirlaid – ( graves without crosses ) kurt vonnegut – player piano evelyn waugh – men at arms hillary waugh – last seen wearing . angus wilson – hemlock and after frank yerby – the saracen blade . children and young people . enid blyton – noddy and big ears bruce carter – into a strange lost world alice dalgliesh – the bears on hemlock mountain dorothy edwards – my naughty little sister . stories from '' listen with mother '' rumer godden – mouse house c . s . lewis – the voyage of the dawn treader eloise jarvis mcgraw – moccasin trail farley mowat – people of the deer mary norton – the borrowers ( first in the eponymous series of 6 books ) rhoda power – redcap runs away william matthew scott – the cherrys of river house ( first in the cherrys series of 14 books ) louis slobodkin – the space ship under the apple tree geoffrey trease – the crown of violet ( also web of traitors ) e . b . white – charlotte 's web . drama . rodney ackland – the pink room jean anouilh the lark ( l'alouette ) the waltz of the toreadors ( la valse des toréadors ) jacinto benavente – alice childress – gold through the trees noël coward – quadrille constance cox – lord arthur savile 's crime robertson davies – a masque of aesop henry de montherlant – la ville dont le prince est un enfant ( the city whose prince is a child ; first performance in first published version ) friedrich dürrenmatt – the marriage of mr . mississippi ( die ehe des herrn mississippi , first performance ) charles langbridge morgan – the river line j.b . priestley and jacquetta hawkes – dragon 's mouth terence rattigan – the deep blue sea dodie smith – letter from paris ben travers – wild horses john van druten – i 've got sixpence . poetry . paul celan – poppy and memory david jones – the anathemata : fragments of an attempted writing gabriela mistral – los sonetos de la muerte y otros poemas elegíacos sean o riordain – eireaball spideoige . non-fiction . roland bainton – the reformation of the sixteenth century l . sprague de camp and willy ley – lands beyond dorothy day – the long loneliness lawrence gowing – vermeer heinrich harrer – sieben jahre in tibet . mein leben am hofe des dalai lama ( seven years in tibet , 1954 ) aldous huxley the devils of loudun tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow maurice nicoll – psychological commentaries on the teachings of g . i . gurdjieff and p . d . ouspensky norman vincent peale – the power of positive thinking gwen raverat – period piece pat reid – the colditz story jean-paul sartre – saint genet , comédien et martyr pierre schaeffer – in search of a concrete music ( à la recherche d'une musique concrète ) f . sherwood taylor – the alchemists paul tillich – courage to be immanuel velikovsky – ages in chaos j . m . wallace-hadrill – the barbarian west , 400–1000 raymond williams – drama from ibsen to eliot . births . january 4 – michele wallace , american feminist author january 12 – walter mosley , american novelist january 21 – louis menand , american author and academic february 10 – gail rebuck , english publisher february 19 ryū murakami ( 村上 龍 ) , japanese novelist , essayist and filmmaker amy tan , american novelist february 29 – tim powers , american fantasy author march 5 – robin hobb ( margaret astrid lindholm ogden , megan lindholm ) , american fantasy author march 7 – william boyd , gold coast-born scottish novelist and screenwriter march 11 – douglas adams , english science fiction author ( died 2001 ) march 13 – ágnes rapai , hungarian poet , writer and translator march 26 – t . a . barron , american novelist may 5 – hafsat abdulwaheed , nigerian author and poet june 7 – orhan pamuk , turkish novelist and nobel laureate june 20 vince gotera , american poet and critic vikram seth , indian novelist june 29 – breece d ' j pancake ( breece dexter pancake ) , american short story writer ( suicide 1979 ) july 3 – rohinton mistry , indian-born canadian novelist july 10 – candice f . ransom , american children 's and young adult author july 18 – per petterson , norwegian novelist august 28 – rita dove , american poet october 18 – bảo ninh , vietnamese author november 15 – rick atkinson , american journalist , historian and author november 21 – pedro lemebel , chilean novelist december 19 – sean o'brien , english poet december 22 – mick inkpen , english children 's writer and illustrator . deaths . january 22 – roger vitrac , french poet and dramatist ( born 1899 ) january 26 – lodewijk van deyssel , dutch novelist ( born 1864 ) february 7 – norman douglas , austrian-born scottish novelist ( born 1868 ) february 13 – josephine tey ( elizabeth mackintosh ) , scottish crime novelist ( born 1896 ) february 19 – knut hamsun , norwegian novelist and nobel laureate ( born 1859 ) march 1 mariano azuela , mexican novelist , dramatist and critic ( born 1873 ) masao kume ( 久米 正雄 ) , japanese playwright , novelist and haiku poet ( born 1891 ) march 27 – ioan a . bassarabescu , romanian short story writer and politician ( born 1870 ) april 1 – ferenc molnár ( ferenc neumann ) , hungarian dramatist and novelist ( born 1878 ) may 17 – paul bujor , romanian politician , zoologist and short story writer ( born 1862 ) may 26 – eugene jolas , american/french writer , literary translator and critic ( born 1894 ) june 1 – john dewey , american philosopher and psychologist ( born 1859 ) july 1 – a . s . w . rosenbach , american book collector ( born 1876 ) july 8 – august alle , estonian writer ( born 1890 ) august 9 – jeffery farnol , english historical novelist ( born 1878 ) august 22 – h . j . massingham , english countryside writer ( born 1888 ) september 26 – george santayana , spanish philosopher , poet and novelist writing in english ( born 1863 ) october 4 – keith murdoch , australian journalist ( born 1885 ) october 6 – teffi ( nadezhda alexandrovna buchinskaya ) , russian humorist ( born 1872 ) november 3 – louis verneuil , french playwright ( suicide , born 1893 ) november 4 – gilbert frankau , english novelist ( born 1884 ) november 13 – margaret wise brown , american children 's author ( embolism , born 1910 ) november 16 – charles maurras , french poet and critic ( born 1868 ) november 18 – paul éluard , french surrealist poet ( heart attack , born 1895 ) november 23 – aaro hellaakoski , finnish poet ( born 1893 ) december 6 – cicely hamilton , english dramatist and suffragist ( born 1872 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : mary norton , the borrowers frost medal : carl sandburg james tait black memorial prize for fiction : evelyn waugh , men at arms james tait black memorial prize for biography : g . m . young , stanley baldwin national book award : james jones , from here to eternity . newbery medal for children 's literature : eleanor estes , ginger pye newdigate prize : donald hall nobel prize for literature : francois mauriac premio nadal : maría medio estrada , nosotros , los rivero pulitzer prize for drama : joseph kramm , the shrike pulitzer prize for fiction : herman wouk – the caine mutiny pulitzer prize for poetry : marianne moore , collected poems king 's gold medal for poetry : andrew young national book award for fiction : james jones – from here to eternity . references .