Perovskite (structure)

structure . perovskite structures are adopted by many oxides that have the chemical formula abo 3 . the idealized form is a cubic structure ( space group pmm , no . 221 ) which is rarely encountered . the orthorhombic ( e.g . space group pnma , no . 62 , or amm2 , no . 68 ) and tetragonal ( e.g . space group i4/mcm , no . 140 , or p4mm , no . 99 ) phases are the most common non-cubic variants . although the perovskite structure is named after catio 3 , this mineral forms a non-idealized form . srtio 3 and carbf 3 are examples of cubic perovskites . barium titanate is an example of a perovskite which can take on the rhombohedral ( space group r3m , no . 160 ) , orthorhombic , tetragonal and cubic forms depending on temperature . in the idealized cubic unit cell of such a compound , the type ' a ' atom sits at cube corner position ( 0 , 0 , 0 ) , the type ' b ' atom sits at the body-center position ( 1/2 , 1/2 , 1/2 ) and oxygen atoms sit at face centered positions ( 1/2 , 1/2 , 0 ) , ( 1/2 , 0 , 1/2 ) and ( 0 , 1/2 , 1/2 ) . the diagram to the right shows edges for an equivalent unit cell with a in the cube corner position , b at the body center , and o at face-centered positions . three general categories of cation-pairing are possible : a 2+ b 4+ x 2− 3 , or 2:4 perovskites ; a 3+ b 3+ x 2− 3 , or 3:3 perovskites ; and a + b 5+ x 2− 3 , or 1:5 perovskites . the relative ion size requirements for stability of the cubic structure are quite stringent , so slight buckling and distortion can produce several lower-symmetry distorted versions , in which the coordination numbers of a cations , b cations or both are reduced . tilting of the bo 6 octahedra reduces the coordination of an undersized a cation from 12 to as low as 8 . conversely , off-centering of an undersized b cation within its octahedron allows it to attain a stable bonding pattern . the resulting electric dipole is responsible for the property of ferroelectricity and shown by perovskites such as batio 3 that distort in this fashion . complex perovskite structures contain two different b-site cations . this results in the possibility of ordered and disordered variants . layered perovskites . perovskites may be structured in layers , with the structure separated by thin sheets of intrusive material . different forms of intrusions , based on the chemical makeup of the intrusion , are defined as : aurivillius phase : the intruding layer is composed of a 2+ ion , occurring every n layers , leading to an overall chemical formula of - . their oxide ion-conducting properties were first discovered in the 1970s by takahashi et al . , and they have been used for this purpose ever since . dion−jacobson phase : the intruding layer is composed of an alkali metal ( m ) every n layers , giving the overall formula as ruddlesden-popper phase : the simplest of the phases , the intruding layer occurs between every one ( n 1 ) or two ( n 2 ) layers of the lattice . ruddlesden−popper phases have a similar relationship to perovskites in terms of atomic radii of elements with a typically being large ( such as la or sr ) with the b ion being much smaller typically a transition metal ( such as mn , co or ni ) . thin films . perovskites can be deposited as epitaxial thin films on top of other perovskites , using techniques such as pulsed laser deposition and molecular-beam epitaxy . these films can be a couple of nanometres thick or as small as a single unit cell . the well-defined and unique structures at the interfaces between the film and substrate can be used for interface engineering , where new types properties can arise . this can happen through several mechanisms , from mismatch strain between the substrate and film , change in the oxygen octahedral rotation , compositional changes , and quantum confinement . an example of this is laalo 3 grown on srtio 3 , where the interface can exhibit conductivity , even though both laalo 3 and srtio 3 is non-conductive . . examples . minerals . the perovskite structure is adopted at high pressure by bridgmanite , a silicate with the formula ( mg , fe ) sio 3 , which is the most common mineral in the earth 's mantle . as pressure increases , the sio 4 4− tetrahedral units in the dominant silica-bearing minerals become unstable compared with sio 6 8− octahedral units . at the pressure and temperature conditions of the lower mantle , the second most abundant material is likely the rock-salt structure ( mg , fe ) o oxide , periclase . at the high pressure conditions of the earth 's lower mantle , the pyroxene enstatite , mgsio 3 , transforms into a denser perovskite-structured polymorph ; this phase may be the most common mineral in the earth . this phase has the orthorhombically distorted perovskite structure ( gdfeo 3 -type structure ) that is stable at pressures from ~24 gpa to ~110 gpa . however , it can not be transported from depths of several hundred km to the earth 's surface without transforming back into less dense materials . at higher pressures , silicate perovskite , commonly known as silicate perovskite , transforms to post-perovskite . others . although the most common perovskite compounds contain oxygen , there are a few perovskite compounds that form without oxygen . fluoride perovskites such as namgf 3 are well known . a large family of metallic perovskite compounds can be represented by rt 3 m ( r : rare-earth or other relatively large ion , t : transition metal ion and m : light metalloids ) . the metalloids occupy the octahedrally coordinated '' b '' sites in these compounds . rpd 3 b , rrh 3 b and ceru 3 c are examples . mgcni 3 is a metallic perovskite compound and has received lot of attention because of its superconducting properties . an even more exotic type of perovskite is represented by the mixed oxide-aurides of cs and rb , such as cs 3 auo , which contain large alkali cations in the traditional '' anion '' sites , bonded to o 2− and au − anions . materials properties . perovskite materials exhibit many interesting and intriguing properties from both the theoretical and the application point of view . colossal magnetoresistance , ferroelectricity , superconductivity , charge ordering , spin dependent transport , high thermopower and the interplay of structural , magnetic and transport properties are commonly observed features in this family . these compounds are used as sensors and catalyst electrodes in certain types of sofc and are candidates for memory devices and spintronics applications . many superconductor ceramic materials ( the high temperature superconductors ) have perovskite-like structures , often with 3 or more metals including copper , and some oxygen positions left vacant . one prime example is yttrium barium copper oxide which can be insulating or superconducting depending on the oxygen content . chemical engineers are considering a cobalt-based perovskite material as a replacement for platinum in catalytic converter for diesel vehicles . . applications . physical properties of interest to materials science among perovskites include superconductivity , magnetoresistance , ionic conductivity , and a multitude of dielectric properties , which are of great importance in microelectronics and telecommunication . they are also some interests for scintillator as they have large light yield for radiation conversion . because of the flexibility of bond angles inherent in the perovskite structure there are many different types of distortions which can occur from the ideal structure . these include tilting of the octahedra , displacements of the cations out of the centers of their coordination polyhedra , and distortions of the octahedra driven by electronic factors ( jahn–teller effect ) . . photovoltaics . synthetic perovskites have been identified as possible inexpensive base materials for high-efficiency commercial photovoltaics – they showed a conversion efficiency of up to 25.5 % reported in 2020 by nrel and can be manufactured using the same thin-film manufacturing techniques as that used for thin film silicon solar cells . methylammonium tin halides and methylammonium lead halides are of interest for use in dye-sensitized solar cells . in july 2016 , a team of researchers led by dr . alexander weber-bargioni demonstrated that perovskite pv cells could reach a theoretical peak efficiency of 31 % . among the methylammonium halides studied so far the most common is the methylammonium lead triiodide . it has a high charge carrier mobility and charge carrier lifetime that allow light-generated electrons and holes to move far enough to be extracted as current , instead of losing their energy as heat within the cell . effective diffusion lengths are some 100 & nbsp ; nm for both electrons and holes . methylammonium halides are deposited by low-temperature solution methods ( typically spin-coating ) . other low-temperature ( below 100 & nbsp ; °c ) solution-processed films tend to have considerably smaller diffusion lengths . stranks et al . described nanostructured cells using a mixed methylammonium lead halide ( ch 3 nh 3 pbi 3−x cl x ) and demonstrated one amorphous thin-film solar cell with an 11.4 % conversion efficiency , and another that reached 15.4 % using vacuum evaporation . the film thickness of about 500 to 600 & nbsp ; nm implies that the electron and hole diffusion lengths were at least of this order . they measured values of the diffusion length exceeding 1 & nbsp ; μm for the mixed perovskite , an order of magnitude greater than the 100 & nbsp ; nm for the pure iodide . they also showed that carrier lifetimes in the mixed perovskite are longer than in the pure iodide . liu et al . applied scanning photo-current microscopy to show that the electron diffusion length in mixed halide perovskite along ( 110 ) plane is in the order of 10 & nbsp ; μm . for , open-circuit voltage ( v oc ) typically approaches 1 & nbsp ; v , while for with low cl content , v oc > 1.1 & nbsp ; v has been reported . because the band gaps ( e g ) of both are 1.55 & nbsp ; ev , v oc -to-e g ratios are higher than usually observed for similar third-generation cells . with wider bandgap perovskites , v oc up to 1.3 & nbsp ; v has been demonstrated . the technique offers the potential of low cost because of the low temperature solution methods and the absence of rare elements . cell durability is currently insufficient for commercial use . planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells can be manufactured in simplified device architectures ( without complex nanostructures ) using only vapor deposition . this technique produces 15 % solar-to-electrical power conversion as measured under simulated full sunlight . . lasers . in 2008 , researchers demonstrated that perovskite can generate laser light . laalo 3 doped with neodymium gave laser emission at 1080 & nbsp ; nm . in 2014 it was shown that mixed methylammonium lead halide ( ch 3 nh 3 pbi 3−x cl x ) cells fashioned into optically pumped vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers ( vcsels ) convert visible pump light to near-ir laser light with a 70 % efficiency . wallace , john ( 28 march 2014 ) high-efficiency perovskite photovoltaic material also lases . laserfocusworld . light-emitting diodes . due to their high photoluminescence quantum efficiency , perovskites may be good candidates for use in light-emitting diodes ( leds ) . although the stability of perovskite leds is not yet as good as iii-v or organic leds , there are plenty of ongoing research to solve this problem , such as incorporating organic molecules or potassium dopants in perovskite leds . photoelectrolysis . in september 2014 , researchers at epfl in lausanne , switzerland , reported achieving water electrolysis at 12.3 % efficiency in a highly efficient and low-cost water-splitting cell using perovskite photovoltaics . . scintillators . in 1997 , scintillation properties of cerium doped lutetium aluminum perovskite ( luap : ce ) single crystals were reported . the main property of those crystals is a large mass density of 8.4 g/cm 3 , which gives short x- and gamma-ray absorption length . the scintillation light yield and the decay time with cs 137 radiation source are 11,400 photons/mev and 17 ns , respectively . those properties made luap : ce scintillators attractive for commercials and they were used quite often in high energy physics experiments . until eleven years later , one group in japan proposed ruddlesden-popper solution-based hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite crystals as low-cost scintillators . however , the properties were not so impressive in comparison with luap : ce . until the next nine years , the solution-based hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite crystals became popular again through a report about their high light yields of more than 100,000 photons/mev at cryogenic temperatures . finally , the excellent demonstration of perovskite nanocrystal scintillators for x-ray imaging screen was reported and it is triggering more research efforts for perovskite scintillators . . examples of perovskites . simple : strontium titanate calcium titanate lead titanate bismuth ferrite lanthanum ytterbium oxide silicate perovskite lanthanum manganite yttrium aluminum perovskite ( yap ) lutetium aluminum perovskite ( luap ) solid solutions : lanthanum strontium manganite lsat ( lanthanum aluminate – strontium aluminum tantalate ) lead scandium tantalate lead zirconate titanate methylammonium lead halide . see also . antiperovskite diamond anvil goldschmidt tolerance factor ruddlesden-popper phase spinel . references . further reading . . external links . ( includes a java applet with which the structure can be interactively rotated ) de : perowskit kristallstruktur