Cinco Ranch, Texas

history . the cinco ranch community goes back to before texas became a republic . in the 1820s , pioneer moses austin was granted by the spanish government the authority to settle 300 families in the valleys of the brazos and colorado rivers . he died before he was able to accomplish this , but his son stephen f . austin was able to complete his father 's wishes , even under the newly established mexican government . one of the men who moved into these 300 slots of land ( each one over was randolph foster , whose land spread across fort bend and waller counties and upon which wild horses , deer , native americans and buffalo lived . foster 's daughter married thomas blakeley , cattleman and future sheriff of fort bend county . their son , bassett blakeley , took after his father and grandfather and soon grew into a cowboy and cattleman . bassett blakeley owned of land and 14,000 head of brahman cattle , along with his grandfather 's land . the cowhands of his blakeley ranch annually drove 10,000 head of cattle to the railheads in kansas . in 1937 , blakeley sold the working ranch to william wheless , who convinced four of his friends , j.s . abercrombie , w.b . pryon , h.g . nelms and l.m . josey—all , like him , wealthy from oil—to become his partners at the ranch . in a nod to its spanish roots perhaps , they called it cinco ranch ( cinco means '' five '' in spanish ) . only the wheless family lived on the ranch , but all of the families visited on many holidays and weekends , making use of a huge clubhouse complete with two bedroom wings . the ranch was not merely involved in cattle—it also had several acres of rice—for years , the main output of katy , texas—and peanut production . in february 1984 , the largest raw land transaction in the history of houston took place when cinco ranch venture , consisting of u . s . home , the mischer corporation , and american general corporation , purchased cinco ranch for a master-planned development . american general eventually bought out the other partners . in 1997 , cinco ranch and other american general land development assets were purchased by terrabrook , a wholly owned subsidiary of real estate investor westbrook partners . in 2003 , cinco ranch and other terrabrook developments were purchased by san diego-based newland real estate , llc ( newland ) . also in 2003 , newland purchased west of the grand parkway ( sh-99 ) and contiguous to cinco ranch . this acquisition along with several smaller parcels that were subsequently purchased by newland ultimately increased the size of cinco ranch to approximately . in 2010 , newland purchased an additional for future cinco ranch expansion . this land is located at the intersection of fm 1463 and corbitt road , and is not contiguous with the rest of cinco ranch . cinco ranch now totals and is expected to have over 14,000 homes at build-out , which is currently projected to be around 2016 . amenities . cinco ranch pools . cinco ranch has 11 community pools : water park beach club equestrian village north lake village greenway village south ranch highland park ridgewood springwood lake house rosewood westridge creek . golf . the golf club at cinco ranch , owned by arcis golf , is an 18-hole , par-71 daily fee course , with numerous bunkers and water hazards . the golf academy at cinco ranch hosts junior golf instructional clinics throughout the year and in the summer . . parks and greenbelts . the parks of cinco ranch range from neighborhood pocket parks to major neighborhood recreation centers containing things like swimming pools and tennis courts . lakefront parks are located along south lake , which offers fishing , sailing and paddle boating for residents . a recreation area is nestled along the shore of park lake , the second-largest lake . cinco ranch has a growing network of greenbelt trails , making it possible to jog , bike or rollerblade between almost anywhere in cinco ranch , including recreational facilities and schools in the community . the multi-station exer-trail is for workouts . there is also the bayou nature trail , extending nearly four miles and preserving almost of woodland and wetland habitat . plans are currently underway to connect the bayou nature trail to the buffalo bayou hike and bike trail . this will allow residents of cinco ranch to ride their bikes from the grand parkway to beltway 8 - a bike trail . . ymca . the katy family ymca 's building has of cardio and free weight equipment , including treadmills , bikes , stairclimbers , efx cross trainers and a cybex strength training circuit . the group exercise program offers more than 75 classes in aerobics , kickboxing , pilates , yoga among others . the ymca offers free child watch and kid watch services for members . the ymca also offers before and after school programs for children ages 5–12 in most kisd elementary schools . other activities include spring break and winter break camps . the ymca 's youth sports programs include soccer , flag football , volleyball , basketball and baseball . other youth activities include taekwondo , dance , teen fitness and babysitting certification . the ymca was originally named after ken lay ; in the wake of the corruption scandal that led to the downfall of enron , a major houston-based energy company which lay headed , he asked for his name to be removed from the ymca in june 2006 , shortly before his death . . katy amateur radio society . the katy amateur radio society ( kars ) has about 45 amateur radio operators . the kars net operates every tuesday at 8:00 pm on the kt5tx 147.20 & nbsp ; mhz repeater . kars monthly meetings are held on the 2nd monday of every month at the west i-10 fire station 4 on franz just east of grand parkway . . geography . cinco ranch is located at ( 29.741522 , -95.758343 ) . according to the united states census bureau , the cdp has a total area of 4.9 & nbsp ; square miles ( 12.8 & nbsp ; km 2 ) . none of the area is covered with water . demographics . as of the census of 2000 , there were 11,196 people , 3,375 households , and 3,064 families residing in the cdp . the population density was 2,270.0 people per square mile ( 876.8/km 2 ) . there were 3,594 housing units at an average density of 728.7/sq & nbsp ; mi ( 281.5/km 2 ) . the racial makeup of the cdp was 87.92 % white , 2.85 % african american , 0.23 % native american , 6.63 % asian , 0.02 % pacific islander , 1.06 % from other races , and 1.30 % from two or more races . hispanic or latino of any race were 5.84 % of the population . 14 % of cinco ranch residents report german ancestry , another 14 % report english ancestry , and 10 % report irish . these are the three most common reported ancestries . fourth is asian , at 7 % . there were 3,375 households , out of which 63.7 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 84.9 % were marriage living together , 3.8 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 9.2 % were non-families . 7.5 % of all households were made up of individuals , and 1.2 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . the average household size was 3.32 and the average family size was 3.52 . in the cdp , the population was spread out , with 38.3 % under the age of 18 , 3.8 % from 18 to 24 , 32.5 % from 25 to 44 , 22.2 % from 45 to 64 , and 3.2 % who were 65 years of age or older . the median age was 35 years . for every 100 females , there were 99.9 males . for every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 98.9 males . the median income for a household in the cdp was 111,517 , and the median income for a family was 114,550 . males had a median income of 90,117 versus 42,304 for females . the per capita income for the cdp was 37,747 . about 1.5 % of families and 1.3 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 1.1 % of those under age 18 and 2.6 % of those age 65 or over . ethnic groups . by 2017 the cinco ranch area and the vicinity was known as '' katyzuela '' as there were about 5,000 ethnic venezuelans living in the area . . education . primary and secondary schools . . public schools . pupils in cinco ranch are zoned to schools of the katy independent school district in and around cinco ranch . elementary schools in cinco ranch : betty sue creech elementary school edna mae fielder elementary school odessa kilpatrick elementary school james e . williams elementary school jo ella exley elementary school stan stanley elementary school tom wilson elementary school fred & patti shafer elementary school maydell jenks elementary school other elementary schools serving cinco ranch : michael l . griffin elementary school junior high schools in cinco ranch : rodger & ellen beck junior high school beckendorff junior high school cinco ranch junior high school seven lakes junior high school other junior high schools serving cinco ranch : joe adams junior high school ( opening fall 2019 ) james & sharon tays junior high school garland mcmeans junior high school ( meadow ridge , park view , & park hollow neighborhoods ) high schools in cinco ranch cinco ranch high school ( uninc . fort bend county ) '' cinco ranch attendance zone . '' katy independent school district . accessed september 5 , 2008 . seven lakes high school ( uninc . fort bend county ) '' seven lakes attendance zone . '' katy independent school district . accessed september 5 , 2008 . obra d . tompkins high school ( uninc . fort bend county ) '' cinco ranch attendance zone . '' katy independent school district other high schools serving cinco ranch james e . taylor high school ( meadow ridge , park view , & park hollow neighborhoods ) . private schools . the village school in the energy corridor area has a bus service to cinco ranch . - village bus routes 2018-2019 and cinco ranch bus route . higher education . the houston community college system serves cinco ranch . the northwest college 's katy campus is in an unincorporated section of harris county . '' northwest college . '' houston community college district . accessed september 5 , 2008 . . public libraries . cinco ranch is served by the cinco ranch branch library of the fort bend county libraries system , located across from cinco ranch high school and one block from texas state highway 99 ( grand parkway ) . the library first opened as the katy/fort bend branch library in a room on the campus of the university of houston system at cinco ranch in june 1998 . in 1999 the branch , which outgrew its first location , moved to the former cinco ranch development company sales office as a result of the efforts of the katy/fort bend friends . the community asked for a larger library , and fort bend county judge jim adolphus organized efforts to have a library established . adolphus negotiated the donation of a library site from terrabrook , a developer in cinco ranch , and secured a challenge grant . in addition , adolphus and fort bend county judge candidate bob hebert co-hosted a fundraising gala for the challenge grant . the cinco ranch community , led by the katy/fort bend friends association , worked with fort bend county officials to find funds for the construction of a new library . the current library opened on april 3 , 2004 . '' cinco ranch branch library . '' fort bend county libraries . retrieved on february 15 , 2009 . . shopping . lacenterra at cinco ranch katy mills . references . external links . cinco ranch developer site