Leslie Charteris

early life . charteris was born leslie charles bowyer-yin , in singapore . his mother , lydia florence bowyer , was english . his father , dr s . c . yin ( yin suat chwan , 1877–1958 ) , '' dr s.c . yin ( son created the saint ) dies at age 82 '' . '' the singapore free press , 3 april 1958 . retrieved 10 april 2014 . was a chinese physician who claimed to be able to trace his lineage back to the emperors of the shang dynasty . leslie became interested in writing at an early age . at one point , he created his own magazine with articles , short stories , poems , editorials , serials , and even a comic strip . he attended saint andrew 's school , singapore , and after moving to england , rossall school in fleetwood , lancashire . in 1926 , leslie legally changed his surname to '' charteris '' . in the bbc radio 4 documentary leslie charteris – a saintly centennial , his daughter stated that he had selected the name from a telephone directory . career . charteris wrote his first book during his first year at king 's college , cambridge . once it was accepted , he left the university and embarked on a new career , motivated by a desire to be unconventional and to become financially well off by doing what he liked to do . he continued to write british thriller stories while working at various jobs , from shipping out on a freighter to working as a barman in a country inn . he prospected for gold , dived for pearls , worked in a tin mine and on a rubber plantation , toured britain with a carnival , and drove a bus . origin of simon templar . charteris 's third novel , meet the tiger ( 1928 ) , introduced his most famous creation , simon templar . '' leslie charteris dies ; mystery writer was 85 . '' the new york times 18 april 1993 . however , in his 1980 introduction to a reprint by charter books , charteris indicated he was dissatisfied with the work , suggesting its only value was as the start of the long-running saint series . occasionally , he chose to ignore the existence of meet the tiger altogether and claimed that the saint series actually began with the second volume , enter the saint ( 1930 ) ; an example of this can be found in the introduction charteris wrote to an early 1960s edition of enter the saint published by fiction publishing company ( an imprint of doubleday ) . charteris wrote a few other books , including a novelization of his screenplay for the deanna durbin mystery-comedy lady on a train , and the english translation of juan belmonte : killer of bulls by manuel chaves nogales . however , his lifework – at least in the literary world — consisted primarily of simon templar saint adventures , which were presented in novel , novella , and short-story formats over the next 35 years . from 1963 onward , other authors ghost-wrote the stories , while charteris acted as an editor , approving stories and making revisions when needed . move to the united states . charteris relocated to the united states in 1932 , where he continued to publish short stories and also became a writer for paramount pictures , working on the george raft film , midnight club . delfattore 1989 however , charteris was excluded from permanent residency in the united states because of the chinese exclusion act , a law which prohibited immigration for persons of '' 50 % or greater '' oriental blood . as a result , charteris was forced to continually renew his six-month temporary visitor 's visa . eventually , an act of congress personally granted his daughter and him the right of permanent residence in the united states , with eligibility for naturalization , which he later completed . . other activities . in 1936 , charteris was a passenger on the maiden voyage of the hindenburg . in america , the saint became a radio series starring vincent price . in the 1940s , charteris , besides continuing to write the saint stories , scripted the sherlock holmes radio series featuring basil rathbone and nigel bruce . marks 2008 in 1941 , charteris appeared in a life photographic adaptation of a short story of the saint , with himself playing the saint . charteris , leslie . '' the saint goes west : the mystery of the palm springs playboy . '' life magazine , 19 may 1941 pp99-105 ; 120 . barer 2003 . the saint on film . long-term success eluded charteris ' creation outside the literary arena until rko produced an eight-film series between 1938 and 1943 : the saint in new york ( 1938 ) with louis hayward as the saint ; the saint strikes back ( 1939 ) , the saint in london ( 1939 , filmed on location ) , the saint 's double trouble ( 1940 ) , the saint takes over ( 1940 ) , and the saint in palm springs ( 1941 ) all with george sanders as the saint . another briton , hugh sinclair , took over the role in the saint 's vacation ( filmed by rko 's british studio in 1941 ) and the saint meets the tiger ( again produced by rko in 1941 but shelved until republic pictures released it in 1943 ) . a ninth film , the saint 's return ( known as the saint 's girl friday in the us ) from 1953 , with louis hayward returning as the saint , is sometimes regarded as part of the rko series . however , it was produced by british hammer film productions , based on a special agreement between hammer films and leslie charteris , which gave charteris a percentage in the film . rko acted only as the film 's us distributor , six months after the uk release . both george sanders and leslie charteris had issues with the saint pictures ; sanders because he disliked playing the same role again and again , and charteris because of the liberties taken by the screenwriters . rko dropped the saint series and replaced it with the falcon , another debonair amateur sleuth played by sanders . charteris saw this as a ploy to deprive him of his royalties , and sued rko . sanders bailed out of the falcon series after three films , and was replaced by his brother , tom conway . a film loosely based on the character simply titled '' the saint '' was released in 1997 with val kilmer in the title role . the saint on tv . in 1962–1969 the british-produced television series the saint went into production with roger moore in the simon templar role . many episodes of the tv series were based upon charteris ' short stories . later , as original scripts were commissioned , charteris permitted some of these scripts to be novelized and published as further adventures of the saint in printed form ( these later books , with titles such as the saint on tv and the saint and the fiction makers , carried charteris ' name as author , but were in fact written by others ) . charteris lived to see a second british tv series , return of the saint starring ian ogilvy as simon templar , enjoy a well-received , if brief , run in the late 1970s ( with charteris himself making a cameo appearance in one episode ) and , in the 1980s , a series of tv movies produced by an international co-production and starring simon dutton kept interest in the saint alive . also , an ill-fated attempt at a 1980s tv series was made in the united states , which resulted in only a pilot episode being produced and broadcast . he also produced the original theme tune to the series , as can be seen on the end credits . later life . the adventures of the saint were chronicled in nearly 100 books ( about 50 published in the uk and us , with others published in france ) . charteris himself stepped away from writing the books after the saint in the sun ( 1963 ) . the next year , vendetta for the saint was published and while it was credited to charteris , it was actually written by science fiction writer harry harrison . following vendetta came a number of books adapting televised episodes , credited to charteris , but written by others , although charteris did collaborate on several saint books in the 1970s . charteris appears to have served in an editorial capacity for these later volumes . he also edited and contributed to the saint mystery magazine , a digest-sized publication . the final book in the saint series was salvage for the saint , published in 1983 . two additional books were published in 1997 , a novelization of the the saint ( 1997 film ) , and an original novel published by '' the saint club '' , a fan club that charteris himself founded in the 1930s . both books were written by burl barer , who also wrote the definitive history on charteris and the saint . charteris spent 55 years – 1928 to 1983 – as either writer of or custodian of simon templar 's literary adventures , one of the longest uninterrupted spans of a single author in the history of mystery fiction , equalling that of agatha christie , who wrote her novels and stories featuring detective hercule poirot . personal life and death . charteris also wrote a column on cuisine for an american magazine , and invented a wordless , ideogram called paleneo , which he wrote a book on . charteris was also one of the earliest members of mensa . cos ' è il mensa ? mensa italy contemporary authors , new revision series , volume 58 , page 80 in 1952 , charteris married hollywood actress audrey long ( 1922–2014 ) ; the couple eventually returned to england , where he spent his last years living in surrey . he died at princess margaret 's hospital windsor , berkshire , on 15 april 1993 , survived by his wife and daughter , patricia . family . he was married four times : ( in 1931 ) to pauline schishkin ( 1911–1975 ) , daughter of a russian diplomat ( in 1938 ) to barbara meyer ( 1907–1950 ) , editor at the american magazine ( in 1943 ) to elizabeth bryant borst ( 1909–2003 ) , boston society woman and night club singer ( in 1952 ) to audrey long ( 1922–2014 ) , film actress charteris was the brother of rev roy bowyer-yin . . references . notes . . bibliography . barer , burl . the saint : a complete history in print , radio , film and television 1928–1992 . jefferson , north carolina : macfarland & company , 2003 ( originally published in 1992 ) . delfattore , joan . '' leslie charteris '' . in benstock , bernard and thomas staley . british mystery writers , 1920–39 . detroit : gale research , 1989 . marks , jeffrey alan . anthony boucher : a biobibliography . jefferson , north carolina : mcfarland & company , 2008 . tuska , jon . the detective in hollywoodthe movie careers of the great fictional private eyes and their creators . new york : doubleday , 1978 . further reading . for a list of all charteris 's works , see list of works by leslie charteris ; for a breakdown of simon templar novels , novellas and short story collections by charteris , see the list at simon templar . in addition , charteris authored numerous uncollected short stories and essays . . external links . leslie charteris official site the saintly bible the saint site