1931 in literature

events . january 10 – a rare copy of edgar allan poe 's al aaraaf and first editions of the scarlet letter and moby-dick are stolen from new york public library by samuel dupree , on behalf of a crooked new york antiquarian book dealer , harry gold . january 26 – the play green grow the lilacs , by a cherokee playwright , lynn riggs , opens on broadway . it is later adapted as oklahoma ! by rodgers and hammerstein . lynn riggs : an oklahoma treasure , friends of libraries in oklahoma . march 27 – the english writer arnold bennett dies of typhoid in london , shortly after a visit to paris , where he drank local water in an attempt to prove it was safe . april 11 – gerald brenan and gamel woolsey make a form of marriage in rome . june 1 – the near v . minnesota case in the supreme court of the united states affirms the principle that prior restraint is unconstitutional . july 4 – james joyce marries his long-time partner nora barnacle at kensington register office in london . october 4 – the dick tracy comic strip first appears , created by cartoonist chester gould . october 5 – the first u.k . performance of oscar wilde 's tragedy salome ( 1891 ) is given at the savoy theatre , london , with nancy price as producer and as herodias , and her daughter joan maude in the title role . november – federico garcía lorca is appointed by the leftist second spanish republic as director of a touring theatre company , teatro universitario la barraca ( the shack ) , charged with taking a portable stage into rural areas to introduce audiences to classical spanish theatre without charge . unknown dates the publisher hamish hamilton is founded by jamie hamilton in london . alice 's adventures in wonderland is banned in hunan , china , for anthropomorphism . the marquis de sade 's the 120 days of sodom ( les 120 journées de sodome ) , written in 1785 , has its first publication in a scholarly edition as a literary text . new books . fiction . shmuel yosef agnon – the bridal canopy margery allingham – police at the funeral roberto arlt – los lanzallamas ( the flame-throwers ) e . f . benson – mapp and lucia arna bontemps – god sends sunday pearl s . buck – the good earth morley callaghan – no man 's meat nellie campobello – cartucho john dickson carr castle skull the lost gallows willa cather – shadows on the rock sigurd christiansen – to levende og en død agatha christie – the sittaford mystery elizabeth jane coatsworth – the cat who went to heaven n . d . cocea – vinul de viață lungă a . j . cronin – hatter 's castle e . e . cummings – ciopw sergiu dan – dragoste și moarte în provincie detection club – the floating admiral pierre drieu la rochelle – will o ' the wisp lord dunsany – the travel tales of mr . joseph jorkens william faulkner sanctuary these 13 jessie redmon fauset – the chinaberry tree carlo emilio gadda – la madonna dei filosofi emma goldman – living my life caroline gordon – penhally dashiell hammett – the glass key james hanley – boy serge-simon held – la mort du fer ( the death of iron ) harold heslop – red earth georgette heyer – the conqueror robert hichens – the first lady brendon james hilton ( published under the name '' glen trevor '' ) – murder at school knud holmboe – desert encounter fannie hurst – back street francis iles – malice aforethought carolyn keene – the secret of shadow ranch irmgard keun – gilgi – eine von uns ( gilgi – one of us ) halldór laxness – ( o thou pure vine ) marie belloc lowndes – letty lynton compton mackenzie buttercups and daisies our street w . somerset maugham – six stories written in the first person singular pierre mac orlan – la bandera nancy mitford – highland fling thomas mofolo – chaka leopold myers – prince jali ilf and petrov – the little golden calf andrei platonov – the foundation pit ( котлован , kotlovan ; completed ; not published until after the author 's death in 1951 ) anthony powell – afternoon men ellery queen – the dutch shoe mystery erich remarque – the road back e . arnot robertson – four frightened people sax rohmer - daughter of fu manchu rafael sabatini – captain blood returns vita sackville-west – all passion spent john monk saunders – single lady dorothy sayers – five red herrings george s . schuyler – black no more nevil shute – lonely road georges simenon – pietr-le-letton ( book format ) upton sinclair – roman holiday thomas sigismund stribling – the forge eleanor smith – flamenco phoebe atwood taylor – the cape cod mystery sigrid undset – wild orchid edgar wallace – the man at the carlton hugh walpole – judith paris nathanael west – the dream life of balso snell virginia woolf – the waves p . g . wodehouse big money if i were you francis brett young – mr . and mrs . pennington . children and young people . jean de brunhoff – histoire de babar , le petit éléphant ( translated as the story of babar ) john buchan – the blanket of the dark edgar rice burroughs a fighting man of mars tarzan the invincible erich kästner – the 35th of may , or conrad 's ride to the south seas ( der 35 . mai ) arthur ransome – swallowdale ruth plumly thompson – pirates in oz ( 25th in the oz series overall and the 11th written by her ) . drama . clifford bax – the venetian charles bennett – sensation chen liting – put down your whip ( 放下你的鞭子 , noël coward – post-mortem ( published ) federico garcía lorca – when five years pass ( así que pasen cinco años , written ) jean giraudoux – judith walter c . hackett – the gay adventure good losers ( with michael arlen ) take a chance ian hay mr faint-heart the midshipmaid edward knoblock – grand hotel andré obey noé ( noah ) le viol de lucrèce ( the rape of lucretia ) eugene o'neill – mourning becomes electra marcel pagnol – fanny j . b . priestley and edward knoblock – the good companions ahmed shawqi – qambeez ( cambyses ) dodie smith – autumn crocus gladys bronwyn stern – the man who pays the piper john van druten hollywood holiday london wall sea fever there 's always juliet ödön von horváth – tales from the vienna woods ( geschichten aus dem wiener wald ) edgar wallace – the old man thornton wilder – the long christmas dinner carl zuckmayer – the captain of köpenick ( der hauptmann von köpenick ) . non-fiction . samuel beckett – proust adrian bell – silver ley marc bloch – les caractères originaux de l'histoire rurale française arthur bryant – king charles the second herbert butterfield – the whig interpretation of history w . chapman and v . c . a . ferraro – geomagnetic storm history ali akbar dehkhoda et al . – dehkhoda dictionary of the persian language julius evola – the hermetic tradition dion fortune – spiritualism in the light of occult science john middleton murry – son of woman : the story of d . h . lawrence irma s . rombauer – the joy of cooking helen thomas – world without end . births . january 6 e . l . doctorow , american author ( died 2015 ) p . j . kavanagh , english poet , novelist , and broadcaster ( died 2015 ) january 9 – algis budrys , lithuanian-american science fiction author ( died 2008 ) january 10 – peter barnes , english playwright ( died 2004 ) january 17 – mark brandis ( nikolai von michalewsky ) , german journalist and science fiction author ( died 2000 ) january 24 – leonard baker , american historian and pulitzer-winning author ( died 1984 ) january 27 allan w . eckert , american historian and novelist ( died 2011 ) shirley hazzard , australian author ( died 2016 ) john hopkins , english screenwriter ( died 1998 ) mordecai richler , canadian author ( died 2001 ) february 9 – thomas bernhard , dutch-born austrian author ( died 1989 ) february 11 – larry merchant , american author and boxing commentator february 12 – janwillem van de wetering , dutch-american crime writer ( died 2008 ) february 18 johnny hart , american cartoonist ( died 2007 ) toni morrison , american writer and nobel prize winner ( died 2019 ) february 19 – robert sobel , american business writer ( died 1999 ) march 2 – tom wolfe , american novelist ( died 2018 ) march 16 – augusto boal , brazilian theater director and writer ( died 2009 ) march 22 – leslie thomas , welsh novelist ( died 2014 ) march 26 – alison prince , english-born scottish children 's writer and biographer ( died 2019 ) april 1 – rolf hochhuth , german dramatist ( died 2020 ) april 15 – tomas tranströmer , swedish poet and translator ( died 2015 ) april 21 – gabriel de broglie , french historian april 29 – robert gottlieb , american editor may 2 – ruth fainlight , american-born poet , short story writer , translator and librettist june 12 – robin cook ( derek raymond ) , english crime novelist ( died 1994 ) june 21 – patricia goedicke , american poet ( died 2006 ) july 4 – sébastien japrisot , french novelist and screenwriter ( died 2003 ) july 7 – david eddings , american novelist ( died 2009 ) july 10 nick adams , american screenwriter ( died 1968 ) julian may , american science fiction author alice munro , canadian short story writer july 15 – clive cussler , american thriller writer and underwater explorer ( died 2020 ) august 2 – karl miller , british writer and literary editor ( died 2014 ) august 12 – william goldman , american novelist and screenwriter ( died 2018 ) august 14 – frederic raphael , american-born english screenwriter , novelist and non-fiction author august 16 – marion patrick jones , trinidadian writer ( died 2016 ) september 14 – ivan klíma , czech novelist and dramatist september 15 – kalim siddiqui , pakistani-born british writer and islamic activist ( died 1996 ) september 22 ashokamitran ( jagadisa thyagarajan ) , indian fiction writer ( died 2017 ) fay weldon , english novelist october 8 – dennis silk , american-born english writer on literature and cricket , and first-class cricketer october 13 – janice elliott , english novelist and children 's writer ( died 1995 ) october 19 – john le carré ( david john moore cornwell ) , english spy novelist ( died 2020 ) november 3 – arun sarma , assamese playwright and novelist ( died 2017 ) november 18 – nikoloz janashia , georgian historian ( died 1982 ) november 28 – tomi ungerer , alsatian illustrator and writer ( died 2019 ) . deaths . january 12 – henry gauthier-villars , french writer ( born 1859 ) january 26 – graça aranha , brazilian diplomat and writer ( born 1868 ) march 27 – arnold bennett , english novelist ( born 1867 ) april 4 – andré michelin , french originator of michelin guides ( born 1853 ) april 10 – khalil gibran , lebanese-born american poet ( born 1883 ) june 29 – nérée beauchemin , french-canadian poet ( born 1850 ) july 2 – harald høffding , danish philosopher ( born 1843 ) august 1 – bertha mcnamara , german-born australian pamphleteer and bookseller ( born 1853 ) august 15 – delfín chamorro , spanish poet and language teacher ( born 1863 ) august 27 – frank harris , irish-born american author and editor ( born 1856 ) august 31 – hall caine , manx novelist and dramatist ( born 1853 ) september 9 – matilda cugler-poni , romanian poet ( born 1851 ) october 13 – ernst didring , swedish novelist ( born 1868 ) october 21 – arthur schnitzler , austrian dramatist ( born 1862 ) october 27 – lucas malet ( mary st leger kingsley ) , english novelist ( born 1852 ) november 3 – juan zorrilla de san martín , uruguayan epic poet ( born 1855 ) november 5 – ole edvart rolvaag , norwegian american writer ( born 1876 ) november 19 – xu zhimo ( 徐志摩 ) , chinese poet ( air accident , born 1897 ) december 10 – enrico corradini , italian novelist , essayist and journalist ( born 1865 ) december 26 – melvil dewey , american inventor of library classification system ( born 1851 ) december 27 – alfred perceval graves , irish author and collector of songs and ballads ( born 1846 ) december 31 – ieronim yasinsky , russian writer , poet and essayist ( born 1850 . awards . chancellor 's gold medal : robert gittings james tait black memorial prize for fiction : kate o'brien , without my cloak james tait black memorial prize for biography : j . y . r . greig , david hume newbery medal for children 's literature : elizabeth coatsworth , the cat who went to heaven nobel prize in literature – erik axel karlfeldt pulitzer prize for drama : susan glaspell , alison 's house pulitzer prize for poetry : robert frost , collected poems pulitzer prize for the novel : margaret ayer barnes , years of grace . references .