Earth Girls Are Easy

plot . three furry aliens—the blue mac , the yellow zeebo , and the red wiploc—are traveling in a space ship . it has been a long time since they have had female companionship , and they receive a broadcast showing human females . they are titillated by these '' hairless '' , shapely creatures , and when they discover that the broadcast came from earth , they set off and land in southern california . valley girl valerie gail is a manicure at the '' curl up & dye '' hair salon . when she becomes dissatisfied with the lack of sexual affection from her fiancé , medical doctor ted gallagher , she decides to seduce him by dressing up in lingerie and setting up some romantic touches at home . instead , she catches him cheating on her with his nurse . she kicks him out and refuses to see him again . the next day , she is sunbathing when the aliens ' spaceship crash lands in her pool . she befriends them and calls her friend woody to come drain the pool so the aliens can work on their ship and get it flying again . meanwhile , she brings them into her home ; and , though there is a language barrier at first , the aliens prove to be quick learners and absorb american pop culture and language by watching television . wanting them to blend into their surroundings , valerie takes them to her friend candy pink at the salon . after shaving off the aliens ' fur , they turn out to be human-looking and attractive . they all go out ; and party at los angeles nightclubs where their looks , athleticism , and incredibly long tongues soon catch the eyes of every woman in the place . valerie and mac begin to fall for each other and go back to valerie 's house . there , they find out that they are anatomically compatible and have sex . the next day , the pool is drained , and zeebo and wiploc are working on their ship when woody stops by and offers to take them to the beach . they agree , and after accidentally holding up a convenience store , zeebo and wiploc are soon driving down an l.a . freeway the wrong way , in reverse , with the police in pursuit . mac finds out his crew mates are in trouble and goes to help , but gets arrested along with woody in a case of mistaken identity . valerie smashes the police vehicle to get arrested , too , so she can go with mac . the police pursuit ends in a crash , and zeebo and wiploc are taken to the emergency room . there , they are examined by ted , who discovers they have two hearts . while he is envisioning achieving fame and fortune from his discovery , valerie and mac elude the police and enter the emergency room disguised as a doctor and a nurse ; they manage to convince ted he is delusional . they then escape back to valerie 's house where work continues on the space ship . meanwhile , valerie and ted reconcile and plan to go to las vegas to get married immediately . mac is heartbroken and prepares the ship for take-off . valerie comes out to say good-bye , followed by ted , who discovers the ship . while she is struggling to keep him from calling the authorities , valerie comes to the realization that mac is the one she truly loves . she gets on the space ship , and they take off . cast . geena davis as valerie gail jeff goldblum as mac jim carrey as wiploc damon wayans as zeebo julie brown as candy pink michael mckean as woody charles rocket as dr . ted gallagher larry linville as dr . bob rick overton as dr . rick nedra volz as lana diane stilwell as robin angelyne as herself . production . originally the film was slated to go into production in 1986 for warner bros . but the studio lost confidence in the project when director julien temple 's previous film , absolute beginners , proved to be a dismal box office failure . the role of valerie gail was offered to some of the era 's box-office draws such as madonna and molly ringwald , but when they rejected it , warner bros . dropped the project . several other studios expressed interest in producing the movie , but none wanted temple to direct . ultimately , french bank crédit lyonnais agreed to finance the film with temple at the helm ( if 4 million was shaved off of the film 's estimated 14 million budget ) and the de laurentiis entertainment group agreed to distribute it . principal photography was finally underway in late 1987 and temple brought his own ideas to the project , including peppering the background with then modern sounding pop songs , featuring an homage to the nutty professor and using iconic model/actress angelyne in a brief cameo ( the director declared her '' the patron saint of los angeles '' ) . however , temple 's studious eye for detail caused delays on the set , and according to producer tony garnett , '' the first cut we had of the picture was a problem . '' the film underwent more than five months of post-production tinkering , including the removal of numerous scenes and the production number '' i like 'em big and stupid '' ( a different version of the song plays in the club scene ; the deleted sequence appears on the dvd extras ) and reshoots later commenced ( the song '' 'cause i 'm a blonde '' was injected into the film late in production ) , by which time the de laurentiis entertainment group had filed for bankruptcy . the finished print of the film had several very positive previews , which captured the interest of potential distributors nelson entertainment , new world , mgm and 20th century fox , but ultimately vestron pictures picked up the distribution rights . the film debuted at the toronto festival of festivals in september 1988 and was slated to be released the following february , but legal entanglements delayed its release until may 1989 . . reception . roger ebert concluded , '' earth girls are easy is silly and predictable and as permanent as a feather in the wind , but i had fun watching it . '' leonard maltin called it an '' infectiously goofy musical '' and went on to cite some '' good laughs and an endearing performance by davis . '' george anderson of the pittsburgh post-gazette gushed over the absurdity of the story , and how fun the film was , saying it '' is so cheerful about so many stupid things that you can not , in good conscience , endorse it , but you may be tempted to adopt it . '' some criticized the film for being '' less a movie than a stretched-out , padded music video . '' . box office . box office returns were low , with the film earning only a little more than a third of its 10 million production cost . it made £172,880 in the uk . . cult status . it ultimately developed a cult following , mainly due to jim carrey 's later success as a film comedian , which strongly renewed interest in his earlier films . on rotten tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 69 % based on 35 reviews . the critical consensus says , '' earth girls are easy is messy , silly , and not particularly bright – qualities it comes by honestly and deliberately '' . on metacritic it has a score of 66 % based on reviews from 16 critics , indicating '' generally favorable reviews '' . . legacy . the film has inspired american singer britney spears and australian rapper iggy azalea 's music video for their 2015 song '' pretty girls '' . '' earth girls are easy '' . mtv.com . award nominations . fantasporto nominated : best film , julien temple ( 1990 ) '' awards '' . imdb . retrieved june 30 , 2016 independent spirit awards nominated : best cinematography , oliver stapleton ( 1990 ) golden raspberry awards nominated : worst supporting actress , angelyne ( 1990 ) . soundtrack . a soundtrack album was released on vinyl , cassette and cd by sire records on may 9 , 1989 to coincide with the may 12 release of the film . most of the songs on the album are different mixes than were heard in the movie , several songs from the film were omitted altogether and geena davis ' song '' the ground you walk on '' was replaced with a rendition by jill jones . royalty 's song '' baby gon na shake '' was issued as a single ( available in several formats with numerous remix variations ) and hall & oates ' rendition of '' love train '' was released as a single backed with the film 's title song , performed by the n . . stage show . beginning on september 16 , 2001 , there were several staged reading/performances of a musical play version of the film . based on the movie 's screenplay and written by charlie coffey and michael herrmann , julie brown reprised her role of candy , kristin chenoweth took over the role of valerie , marc kudisch assumed the role of ted and hunter foster was cast as mac . although costumes and props were utilized , there were no sets and the actors carried their scripts around the stage—these stagings were merely devised to find investors for the show . the play did not feature any original songs ; the performers sang renditions of 1980s pop songs along with several numbers from the film . the play followed the film 's story and scenes pretty closely , but a lot of new dialogue was written , a few characters were omitted and there were some other slight deviations . audio and video recordings of the september 30 , 2002 staging are circulating , and several video clips from this performance have surfaced on youtube . despite positive reaction , the timing of the initial staging was bad ( coming mere days after the september 11 attacks ) , and even after subsequent readings , the show never attained the investors needed to become a full-blown production . . cast . kristin chenoweth as valerie gail julie brown as candy pink marc kudisch as dr . ted gallagher hunter foster as mac deven may as wiploc lisa capps as nurse/ensemble roxanne barlow as security guard/ensemble steve wilson as security guard/ensemble . musical numbers . ; act i '' ( shake that ) cosmic thing '' – the b-52 's ( heard on radio ) '' earth girls are easy '' – the n ( heard on radio ) '' eternal flame '' – valerie '' brand new girl '' – candy , valerie & ensemble '' ( let 's get ) physical '' – ted and nurse '' heart of glass '' – valerie '' california girls '' ( partial ) – mac and wiploc '' funkytown '' – ensemble '' i like 'em big and stupid '' – candy ; act ii '' true colors '' – mac '' atomic '' – valerie '' roam '' – entire cast '' just like fred astaire '' – mac & valerie '' 'cause i 'm a blonde '' – candy '' should have known better '' – ted '' moonblind '' – mac and valerie '' scary kisses '' – valerie , mac & cast . references . external links . movie stills at film.virtual-history.com