Kapp Putsch

background . thumb after germany had lost world war i ( 1914–1918 ) , the german revolution of 1918–1919 ended the monarchy . the german empire was abolished and a democratic system , the weimar republic , was established in 1919 by the weimar national assembly . right-wing nationalist and militarist circles opposed the new republic and promoted the stab-in-the-back myth , claiming that the war had been lost only because the efforts of the undefeated german military had been undermined by civilians at home . in 1919–20 , the government of germany was formed by the weimar coalition , consisting of the social democratic party ( spd ) , german democratic party ( ddp , left-of-centre liberals ) , and zentrum ( conservative catholics ) . president friedrich ebert , chancellor gustav bauer , and defence minister gustav noske were all members of the spd . according to the constitution , the president was the commander-in-chief of the armed forces , represented in peace time by the minister of defence . the most senior officer of the land forces was called chef der heeresleitung , a post held in early 1920 by general walther reinhardt . gustav bauer was obliged to sign the treaty of versailles in 1919 , even though he disagreed with it . the treaty had been dictated by the victorious allies of world war i ; it forced germany to assume sole responsibility for the war , reduced the area of germany and imposed reparation payments and military restrictions on the nation . in early 1919 , the strength of the reichswehr , the regular german army , was estimated at 350,000 , with more than 250,000 men enlisted in the various freikorps ( '' free corps '' ) , volunteer paramilitary units , largely consisting of returning soldiers from the war . the german government had repeatedly used freikorps troops to put down communist uprisings after the war . under the terms of the treaty of versailles , which came into effect on 10 january 1920 , germany was required to reduce its land forces to a maximum of 100,000 men . the initial deadline was set for 31 march 1920 ( later extended to the end of the year ) . freikorps units were expected to be disbanded . since the reason for their creation—internal repression—had become obsolete with the crushing of the leftist uprisings , they were becoming a threat to the government . some senior military commanders had started discussing the possibility of a coup as early as july 1919 . . coup . run-up to the coup . thumb although the putsch has been named after wolfgang kapp , a 62-year-old nationalist east prussian civil servant , who had been planning a coup against the republic for a while , it was instigated by the military ; kapp played a supporting role . on 29 february 1920 , the defence minister noske ordered the disbandment of two of the most powerful freikorps , the and . the latter numbered from 5,000–6,000 men and had been stationed at the truppenübungsplatz döberitz , near berlin , since january 1920 . an elite force , it had been created from former imperial navy officers and ncos , boosted later by ( those who had fought the bolsheviks in latvia in 1919 ) . during the civil war in 1919 , the brigade had seen action in munich and berlin . it was extremely opposed to the democratic government of friedrich ebert . its commander , korvettenkapitän hermann ehrhardt , declared that the unit would refuse its dissolution . on 1 march , it staged a parade without inviting noske . general walther von lüttwitz , in command of all the regular troops in and around berlin ( gruppenkommando i ) , the highest ranking general in the army at the time and in command of many freikorps , said at the parade that he would '' not accept '' the loss of such an important unit . several of lüttwitz ' officers were horrified at this open rejection of the government 's authority and tried to mediate , by setting up a meeting between lüttwitz and the leaders of the two major right-wing parties . lüttwitz listened to and remembered their ideas but was not dissuaded from his course of action . noske then removed the marinebrigade from lüttwitz ' command and assigned it to the leadership of the navy , hoping that they would disband the unit . lüttwitz ignored the order but agreed to a meeting with president ebert , suggested by his staff . left in the evening of 10 march , lüttwitz came with his staff to ebert 's office . ebert had also asked noske to attend . lüttwitz , drawing on demands by the right-wing parties and adding his own , now demanded the immediate dissolution of the national assembly , new elections for the reichstag , the appointment of technocrats ( fachminister ) as secretaries for foreign affairs , economic affairs and finance , the dismissal of general reinhardt , appointment of himself as supreme commander of the regular army and the revocation of the orders of dissolution for the marinebrigaden . ebert and noske rejected these demands and noske told lüttwitz that he expected his resignation the next day . lüttwitz went to döberitz on 11 march and asked ehrhardt whether he would be able to occupy berlin that evening . ehrhardt said he needed another day but in the morning of 13 march he could be in the centre of berlin with his men . lüttwitz gave the order and ehrhardt began the preparations . it was only at this point that lüttwitz brought the group known as nationale vereinigung into the plot . these included german national people 's party ( dnvp ) member wolfgang kapp , retired general erich ludendorff and waldemar pabst , who had been behind the murder of karl liebknecht and rosa luxemburg in january 1919 and , the last berlin head of police in the old reich . their goal was to establish an authoritarian regime ( though not a monarchy ) with a return to the federal structure of the empire . lüttwitz asked them to be ready to take over the government on 13 march . the group was unprepared but agreed to the schedule set by lüttwitz . one factor making them support quick action was that sympathetic members of the sicherheitspolizei in berlin informed them that warrants for their arrest had been issued that day . lüttwitz was not dismissed but suspended from his post on 11 march . to defend the government , noske ordered two regiments of sicherheitspolizei and one regular regiment to take position in the government quarter but doubted that a putsch was imminent . the regimental commanders decided not to follow orders to shoot , a decision that received the approval of chef des truppenamts general hans von seeckt . . occupation of berlin . thumb the reluctance to shed blood was one-sided . on the evening of 12 march , ehrhardt ordered his brigade to march into berlin , to '' ruthlessly break any resistance '' ( jeden widerstand rücksichtslos zu brechen ) and to occupy the centre of the city with the government buildings . the brigade , sporting swastikas on their helmets and vehicles , started off towards berlin at around 10:00 & nbsp ; pm . an hour later the gruppenkommando knew about it and informed noske . two general officers met ehrhardt and convinced him to give the government a chance to surrender before being taken into custody , assuming that all of lüttwitz ' demands were accepted by 7:00 & nbsp ; am . this was reported to noske who met with ebert . ebert then called a cabinet meeting for 4:00 & nbsp ; am . at 1:00 & nbsp ; am noske asked the senior commanders to his office in the bendlerblock . noske asked the commanders to defend the government buildings but was turned down . all but two of the officers ( one of them was reinhardt , chef der heeresleitung ) refused to follow an order to shoot at the rebel troops . some suggested negotiations , others claimed that the troops would not understand an order to fire , some argued that the regular units would not be able to defeat the elite marinebrigade . seeckt spoke about comradeship . his exact words were not recorded , but have been reported as : '' troops do not fire on troops . so , you perhaps intend , herr minister , that a battle be fought before the brandenburger tor between troops that have fought side by side against a common enemy ? when reichswehr fires on reichswehr all comradeship within the officers ' corps will have vanished '' . others have quoted seeckt 's words as the even more succinct : '' reichswehr does not fire on reichswehr ! '' noske , depressed enough by the disloyalty of the military to speak about suicide to an aide , reported to the cabinet at 4:00 & nbsp ; am . at a confused meeting at the reichskanzlei , the undefended cabinet took two decisions : to flee the city and to issue a call for a general strike . these were not unanimous , the vice-chancellor eugen schiffer and some of the other non-spd ministers refused to leave the city , to preserve the opportunity to negotiate with the putschists . only ebert and the spd ministers signed the call for a general strike . at 6:15 & nbsp ; am they had to interrupt the meeting and flee . within ten minutes of their departure , the marinebrigade reached the brandenburger tor , where it was met by lüttwitz , ludendorff , kapp and their followers . shortly thereafter , kapp 's men moved into the reichskanzlei . supported by a battalion of regular reichswehr , they occupied the government quarter . kapp declared himself chancellor ( reichskanzler ) and formed a provisional government . lüttwitz served as commander of the armed forces and minister of defence . several well-known conservatives and former secretaries of state were invited to assume government positions but declined . international con-man ignaz trebitsch-lincoln became kapp 's press censor . . reactions . thumb there was no military resistance to the putsch ; the regular troops in berlin , sicherheitspolizei , navy , the army commands of east-prussia , pomerania , brandenburg and silesia , formally accepted the new minister of defence and reichskanzler . nicholls , a . j . weimar and the rise of hitler , london : macmillan 2000 page 70 . admiral adolf von trotha , the navy commander , came out in support of the coup as soon as he learned of it . bird , keith weimar , the german naval officer corps and the rise of national socialism , grüner , 1977 page 69 . in bavaria , the reichswehr toppled the social democratic state government and replaced it with the right-wing regime of gustav ritter von kahr . in the rest of the reich , the commanders of the wehrkreise ( military districts ) did not declare for or against kapp but were not neutral and most sympathised more or less openly with the putschists . the upper echelons of the bureaucracy were still dominated by those who had risen to their positions under the empire and most were sympathetic to the coup , whilst remaining outwardly neutral and biding their time . in the eastern provinces , the bureaucracy fell in line behind kapp and lüttwitz . the government moved to dresden , where they hoped to get support from generalmajor maercker but he had been ordered by berlin to take them into '' protective custody '' and they moved on to stuttgart . the cabinet proclamation on 13 march , calling on german workers to defeat the putsch by means of a general strike met with enormous success and received massive support from the working class . the majority unions , sympathetic to the government dominated by spd , joined the call for a strike on the same day , as did the independent social democratic party ( uspd ) and the democratic party ; the communist party of germany ( kpd ) followed one day later . in berlin , the strike started on 14 march and by the next day it had spread all over the reich . it was the most powerful strike in the history in germany , involving up to 12 & nbsp ; million workers . the country was paralysed . in berlin the gas , water and power supply stopped . adolf hitler , who had been in contact with the members of the nationale vereinigung and was eager to help the coup along , was flown into berlin from munich by the army . the pilot was robert von greim , whom hitler later appointed as the last commander of the luftwaffe . he was met by striking workers at an airfield outside of berlin , where he landed by mistake , and had to disguise himself . eventually hitler could continue his flight together with dietrich eckart to berlin , where they immediately went to the reichskanzlei to meet wolfgang kapp . hitler and eckart were approached by ignaz trebitsch-lincoln , who told them that kapp had fled and the coup failed . werner maser : der sturm auf die republik . frühgeschichte der nsdap . econ verlag , 1994 . page 217 . collapse . left with the country paralyzed , kapp and lüttwitz were unable to govern ; in berlin , communication between military units was by courier only . the rank and file of the bureaucracy were on strike , and there were no newspapers . proclamations asking the workers to return to their jobs , promises of new elections and even the threat of capital punishment for strikers remained without results and the putsch collapsed on 17 march , four days after it had begun . kapp had put vice-chancellor schiffer and the members of the prussian state government into protective custody on 13 march but they were released the next day and on 15 march , negotiations began . representatives of the democratic right , oskar hergt and gustav stresemann also participated . the four big centre-right parties ( democratic party , zentrum , german people 's party and german national people 's party ) agreed that the main threat was now '' bolshevism '' and that they had to '' win back '' the officer corps . it was considered undesirable that kapp and lüttwitz should be toppled , they must be seen to resign voluntarily . the four parties , supported by some social democrats who had remained in berlin , offered fresh elections , a cabinet reshuffle and an amnesty for all participants in the putsch , if kapp and lüttwitz were to resign . the putschists offered only the resignation of kapp , and lüttwitz tried to hold on for another day as head of a military dictatorship but his commanders deserted him . they suggested to schiffer , in the absence of ebert in charge of the government 's affairs , that he appoint seeckt as head of the reichswehr , which schiffer did in the name of ebert . when lüttwitz offered his resignation on 18 march , schiffer accepted—again in ebert 's name—while granting him full pension rights . schiffer also suggested pabst and lüttwitz should leave the country , until the national assembly had decided on the question of an amnesty and even offered them false passports and money . on 18 march , seeckt praised the discipline of the marinebrigade ehrhardt and the next day provided ehrhardt with a written promise that he would not be arrested as long as he was in command of the brigade and the brigade left berlin . when they were heckled by an unfriendly crowd of bystanders , they opened fire with machine guns , leaving twelve civilians dead and thirty severely wounded . kapp remained in the country and only fled to sweden in april . lüttwitz first went to saxony and only later left for hungary . both men used passports provided by supporters in the police . ehrhardt went into hiding in bavaria . . aftermath . image : bahnhof wetter01 crop.jpg thumb memorial for the suppression of the kapp putsch , railway station of wetter . the sign reads : '' for peace , freedom and democracy & nbsp ; — in memory of the suppression of the kapp putsch in march 1920 '' in 2009 , layton wrote , '' at first sight the collapse of the kapp putsch could be viewed as a major success for the weimar republic . in the six days of crisis , it had retained the backing of the people of berlin and had effectively withstood a major threat from the extreme right . '' among the grievances which kapp and his followers had against the government were that the national assembly , which had been elected to serve temporarily , was beginning to act as a permanent reichstag and that it seemed this assembly might revise the constitution with respect to the election of the president of the republic , which would make the reichstag , rather than the electorate , responsible for the presidential election . as a consequence of the promise made to the putschists , the national assembly was dissolved in april and the date of the general election for the first republican reichstag was brought forward to 6 june so that the german people could express their feelings regarding the terms of the versailles treaty . all attempts to change the method of election for the presidency of the republic were abandoned . in the german federal election , 1920 , the number of votes cast for the spd and the democratic party fell by more than half , compared to the january 1919 elections , while the extreme right-wing german national people 's party ( dnvp ) ( whose voters eventually switched to the nazis ) and the extreme left-wing uspd gained substantially . the weimar coalition lost its majority in parliament and would never regain it . the spd had made a pact with the army , which resulted in communist workers being shot dead , so the left was permanently fractured . ebert told the army it was free to arrange its own affairs , thereby forming a state-within-a-state implacably opposed to weimar that eventually was central to the right-wing coup against the prussian state government ( half of german territory ) in 1932 . essentially , the collapse of weimar can not be understood without understanding the kapp putsch and its consequences . the effect of the kapp-lüttwitz putsch throughout germany were more lasting than in berlin . in some parts of the country , the strike had turned into an armed revolt . the violence came from local military commanders who supported the new government and arrested pickets , which the workers resisted . in thuringia and saxony the military defeated the workers after bloody fights . in the ruhr , the workers won and did not stop after the putsch in berlin had collapsed . in what became known as the ruhr uprising , a red ruhr army went on the offensive . on 17 march it took dortmund , on 18 march hamm and bochum and on 19 march essen , causing the local wehrkreiskommando at münster to order a withdrawal . by 22 march , the ruhr was under the control of the revolutionary workers . the legitimate government returned to berlin on 20 march and asked for the general strike to be ended . to achieve this it offered some concessions to the unions , some of them made in bad faith . the unions ( adgb , afa-bund and dbb ) demanded the creation of a new government made up of spd and uspd , led by carl legien but only a new government based on the weimar coalition found a majority in the national assembly and hermann müller ( spd ) replaced bauer as chancellor . the government then tried to negotiate with workers who refused to lay down their arms , after the unions called off the strike on 22 march . when the negotiations failed , the revolt in the ruhr was suppressed by reichswehr and freikorps in early april 1920 . hundreds of people were killed , many in summary executions , some committed by units that been involved in the putsch , including marinebrigade ehrhardt . as in 1918–1919 , those on the left had cause to accuse the spd and the ebert government of siding with the enemies of the workers and of the republic . the putsch left a rump of military conspirators such as pabst and ehrhardt , who found refuge in bavaria under the right-wing government of gustav von kahr ( itself an indirect product of the kapp-lüttwitz putsch ) and there attempted to organize plots against the republican constitution and government of germany . the crisis in the relations of bavaria with the reich ( august–september 1921 ) which ended in kahr 's resignation was a further phase of the same trouble . after the putsch noske named kapp , pabst and ehrhardt as being responsible , despite the support from much higher up in the army . most of the participants were granted an amnesty and on 2 august 1920 , the reichstag passed a law that exculpated crimes committed during the putsch and the subsequent ruhr uprising except those due to '' cruelty '' or '' self-interest '' . of 705 cases brought against civilians , only the prosecution of von jagow ended with a guilty verdict . freikorps and reichswehr members were subject to military law and of 775 court martials , 486 cases were closed . 48 officers were removed from their posts , six resigned , the others were subject to mild disciplinary actions . the marinebrigade ehrhardt was dissolved in may 1920 but most of its members were allowed to join the reichswehr where they had successful careers . the courts were much harsher on the members of the red ruhr army , many of whom were sentenced to lengthy terms of imprisonment . kapp was arrested in sweden on 16 april but not deported to germany . he voluntarily returned to germany in april 1922 and died the same year in prison while awaiting trial . lüttwitz returned to germany as part of an amnesty in 1924 . gustav noske was forced to resign by the unions on 22 march , as a condition for ending the general strike and because some in the spd thought that he had not been tough enough facing up to the putschists ; otto gessler succeeded noske as defence minister . general reinhardt also resigned out of protest at noske 's dismissal . general seeckt became his successor as chef der heeresleitung . . monument to the march dead . image : monument to the march dead.jpg thumb monument to the march dead , by walter gropius between 1920 and 1922 a monument in honour of the workers who were killed in the wake of the kapp putsch was erected in the weimar central cemetery . the memorial was commissioned by the weimar gewerkschaftskartell ( union cartel ) , which conducted a competition to select a design . it was built according to plans submitted by the architectural office of walter gropius . although gropius had said that the bauhaus should remain politically neutral , he agreed to participate in the competition of weimar artists at the end of 1920 . the monument was arranged around an inner space , in which visitors could stand . the repeatedly fractured and highly angular memorial rose up on three sides , as if thrust up from or rammed into the earth . gilbert lupfer & paul sigel , walter gropius , 1883–1969 : the promoter of a new form , p . 31 . the monument was destroyed by the nazis in february 1936 . they objected to it politically and considered it an example of '' degenerate art '' , as hitler characterized modern works . . see also . 1920 in germany civilian-based defense . footnotes .