Acadian French

phonology . since there was relatively little linguistic contact with france from the late 18th century to the 20th century , acadian french retained features that died out during the french standardization efforts of the 19th century such as these : the phoneme , acadian french has retained an alveolar trill or an alveolar flap , but modern speakers pronounced it as in parisian french : ( red ) can be pronounced , or . in nonstandard acadian french , the third-person plural ending of verbs ‹› , such as ( they eat ) , is still pronounced , unlike standard french ( france and quebec ) ( france ) / or ( quebec ) ) , the ‹e› can be pronounced or not , but ‹-nt› is always silent . according to wiesmath ( 2006 ) , accessed 5 may 2011 . some characteristics of acadian are : the verbal ending -ont in the third person plural palatalization of and to and , respectively a featured called '' l'ouisme '' where bonne is pronounced these features typically occur in older speech . many aspects of acadian french ( vocabulary and '' trill r '' , etc . ) are still common in rural areas in the south west of france . speakers of metropolitan french and even of other canadian varieties of french sometimes have difficulty understanding acadian french . within north america , its closest relative is the cajun french spoken in southern louisiana since both were born out of the same population that were affected during the expulsion of the acadians . see also chiac , a variety with strong english influence , and st . marys bay french , a distinct variety of acadian french spoken around clare , tusket , nova scotia and also moncton , new brunswick . affrication . and are commonly replaced by before a front vowel . for example , and are usually pronounced and . is pronounced . and often become ( sometimes before a front vowel . for example , and become and in informal acadian french . becomes . ( this pronunciation led to the word cajun , from acadien . ) . metathesis . metathesis is quite common . for example , ( wednesday ) is , and ( poverty ) is . ( the pronoun '' i '' ) is frequently pronounced and is frequently pronounced . in words , '' re '' is often pronounced '' er '' . for instance : for '' '' , for '' '' , for '' '' , for '' '' , for '' '' . vowels . acadian french has maintained phonemic distinctions between and , and , and , and . in informal speech , the vowel is realized as : pas ( step ) → and bras ( arm ) → , etc . the short is realized as and it 's the same as parisian french . is open to : fête ( party ) → and caisse ( case ) → , etc . the ⟨oi⟩ spelling has different pronunciations . old speakers pronounce it , because the traditional parisian pronunciation was like this : roi ( king ) . but in modern standard acadian french , it is pronounced . even where there is no circumflex , there are some words which are phonemically pronounced and the phoneme is pronounced as in formal speech but in informal speech : trois ( three ) or and noix ( nut ) or . the ⟨oî⟩ spelling is phonemically , but old speakers pronounce it . but modern speakers pronounce it as in quebec french : boîte ( box ) or and croître ( grow ) or , etc . elision of final consonants . consonant clusters finishing a word are reduced , often losing altogether the last or two last consonants in informal speech : table ( table ) → and livre ( book/pound ) → , etc . vocabulary . yves cormier 's dictionnaire du français acadien ( comiersacad ) retrieved 5 may 2011 . includes the majority of acadian regionalisms . from a syntactic point of view , a major feature is the use of je both for the first person singular and plural ; the same phenomenon takes place with i for the third persons . acadian still differentiates the vous form from the tu form . numerals . in the nova scotian communities of wedgeport and pubnico the numbers ( seventy ) , ( eighty ) and ( ninety ) are instead called and respectively , a phenomenon also observed in swiss french and belgian french . others . the following words and expressions are most commonly restricted to acadian french , though some are also used in quebec french ( also known as québécois ) or joual . some examples are : : to bother ( fr : ( very common in quebec french ) : ( variation of , literally '' to complete '' ) a while ago ( fr : : thing , thingy , also the way things join together : the joint or union of two things ( fr : : ( literally , to moor ) to tie ( fr : : ( lit . lover ) burdock ( fr : ; quebec : ( also very common in quebec french ) : ( contraction of now ( fr : ( very common in quebec french ) : to lean ( fr : : earlier ( fr : : to have difficulty ( fr : ( very common in quebec french ) : to give ( fr : ( usually '' to yawn '' ) : a piece of machinery or tool of sorts that does n't work properly anymore . my car is a lemon so it is a baratte ( very common in new brunswick ) : the central passage through a barn flanked by two storage bays adjacent to the eaves . : twin ( fr : : to confuse , disrupt , unsettle ( fr : : a fearful character of fairy tales who would visit unpleasant deeds upon young children if they did not go to bed at the designated hour . : ( literally the side of a ship ) l'autre bord meaning the other side ( of a street , river , etc . ) ; changer de bord meaning changing sides ( in a team competition ) ; virer de bord meaning turning back or retracing one 's steps . : smoke , steam ( fr : ( very common in quebec french ) : fence ( fr : : to cry , weep ( fr : ( very common in quebec french ) : work shoe , old or used shoe ( fr : : drinking binge ( fr : ( common in quebec french ) : to sink ( fr : ( also '' to drink fast in one shot '' , ( very common in quebec french ) : car ( fr : voiture ) ( very common in quebec french ) : window ( fr : : to go crazy ( fr : : i am ( fr : , or , colloquially ( very common in quebec french ) : peas or green beans ( fr : : what or asking for information specifying something . ( fr : : to cheat ( fr : : ship 's knees that are a distinctive and unusual structural feature of early acadian houses . : devil ( fr : : proper , properly ( fr : : ( literally a ship 's ladder ) stairway ( fr : : i ( fr : : moment , while ( fr : : and i ( fr : : to wait ; say welcome , to invite ( fr : : to gross out ( fr : : loose , wild , of easy virtue ( fr : : ( lit . furnace ) a wood stove or an oven : cold ( fr : ( very common in quebec french ) : traditional acadian stew prepared with chicken , potatoes , onions , carrots , dumplings ( lumps of dough ) , and seasoned with savoury : to throw , chuck ( fr : ( very common in quebec french ) : spring cleaning , often more comprehensive than in other cultures . : ( literally , rigging of a ship 's masts ) to describe a woman 's attire or decoration of a youngster 's bicycle . : a sleeping loft . : clothes , clothing ( fr : : to beat , maltreat ( fr : : to cry out , scream ( fr : : here ; around here ( fr : : simple , foolish or stupid ( fr : ( very common in quebec french ) : also , too ( fr : ( common in quebec french ) : ( literally loosening a ship 's mooring lines ) to let go of any object : to overwork , wear out , tire , weaken ( fr : ( very common in quebec french ) : when + future tense ( fr : malin/maline : mean or angry ( lit . malignant ) : to be irritated or angry : middle , centre ( fr : : moose : ( lit . pagan ) hick , uneducated person , peasant ( fr : ) : clumsy ( fr : : park ( fr : : a '' shepherd 's pie '' casserole of mashed potatoes , ground meat , and corn . : bad odor ( fr : : at worst ( fr : : plaice ( fr : : having or showing determined courage ( lit . plucky ) : buckwheat pancake , a tradition of edmundston , new brunswick , also common in acadian communities in maine ( fr : : ( lit . meadow apple ) american cranberry ( vaccinium macrocarpon ) ( fr : ; quebec : : a meat pie of venison , rabbits , and game birds . : a ball made of grated potato with pork in the centre , a traditional acadian dish : a portable wheeled boating pier pulled out of the water to avoid ice damage . : ( from quérir ) to fetch , go get ( fr : : ( lit . to haul oneself ) to hurry ( fr : : to argue ( fr : : see you later ( fr : : i was ( fr : : they were ( fr : : mikmaq woman , traditionally associated with medicine or midewiwin ( fr : : something ( fr : ( quètchose and '' quechose '' is common in quebec french ) : ostrich fern fiddlehead ( matteuccia struthiopteris ) : ( lit . mouse tit ) slender glasswort , an edible green plant that grows in salt marshes ( salicornia europaea ) ( fr : : din ( also refers to an acadian noisemaking tradition whereby people gather in the streets and parade through town ) : meat pies , sometimes with potatoes . : in disorder or confusion : active , hard-working , brave ( fr : ( common in quebec french )