Bulimia nervosa

signs and symptoms . bulimia typically involves rapid and out-of-control eating , which may stop when the person is interrupted by another person or the stomach hurts from over-extension , followed by self-induced vomiting or other forms of purging . this cycle may be repeated several times a week or , in more serious cases , several times a day and may directly cause : chronic gastric reflux after eating , secondary to vomiting dehydration and hypokalemia due to renal potassium loss in the presence of alkalosis and frequent vomiting electrolyte imbalance , which can lead to cardiac arrhythmia , cardiac arrest , and even death esophagitis , or inflammation of the esophagus mallory-weiss tears boerhaave syndrome , a rupture in the esophageal wall due to vomiting oral trauma , in which repetitive insertion of fingers or other objects causes lacerations to the lining of the mouth or throat russell 's sign : calluses on knuckles and back of hands due to repeated trauma from incisors perimolysis , or severe acid erosion of tooth enamel swollen salivary glands ( for example , in the neck , under the jaw line ) gastroparesis , or delayed gastric emptying constipation or diarrhea tachycardia or palpitations hypotension peptic ulcers infertility constant weight fluctuations are common elevated blood sugar , cholesterol , and amylase levels may occur hypoglycemia may occur after vomiting these are some of the many signs that may indicate whether someone has bulimia nervosa : a fixation on the number of calories consumed a fixation on and extreme consciousness of one 's weight low self-esteem and/or self-harming suicidal tendencies an irregular menstrual cycle in women regular trips to the bathroom , especially soon after eating depression , anxiety disorders and sleep disorders frequent occurrences involving consumption of abnormally large portions of food the use of laxatives , diuretics , and diet pills compulsive or excessive exercise unhealthy/dry skin , hair , nails and lips fatigue , or exhaustion as with many psychiatric illnesses , delusions can occur , in conjunction with other signs and symptoms , leaving the person with a false belief that is not ordinarily accepted by others . people with bulimia nervosa may also exercise to a point that excludes other activities . . interoceptive . people with bulimia exhibit several interoception deficits , in which one experiences impairment in recognizing and discriminating between internal sensations , feelings , and emotions . people with bulimia may also react negatively to somatic and affective states . in relation to interoceptive sensitivity , hyposensitive individuals may not detect feelings of fullness in a normal and timely fashion , and therefore are prone to eating more calories . examining from a neural basis also connects elements of interoception and emotion ; notable overlaps occur in the medial prefrontal cortex , anterior and posterior cingulate , and anterior insular cortex , which are linked to both interoception and emotional eating . . related disorders . people with bulimia are more likely than people without bulimia to have an affective spectrum , such as depression or general anxiety disorder . one study found 70 % had depression at some time in their lives ( as opposed to 26 % for adult females in the general population ) , rising to 88 % for all affective disorders combined . another study by the royal children 's hospital in melbourne on a cohort of 2,000 adolescents similarly found that those meeting at least two of the dsm-iv criteria for bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa had a sixfold increase in risk of anxiety and a doubled risk for substance dependency . some with anorexia nervosa exhibit episodes of bulimic tendencies through purging ( either through self-induced vomiting or laxatives ) as a way to quickly remove food in their system . carlson , n.r . , et al . ( 2007 ) . psychology : the science of behaviour – 4th canadian ed . toronto , on : pearson education canada . there may be an increased risk for diabetes mellitus type 2 . bulimia also has negative effects on a person 's teeth due to the acid passed through the mouth from frequent vomiting causing acid erosion , mainly on the posterior dental surface . causes . biological . as with anorexia nervosa , there is evidence of genetic predispositions contributing to the onset of this eating disorder . abnormal levels of many hormones , notably serotonin , have been shown to be responsible for some disordered eating behaviors . brain-derived neurotrophic factor ( bdnf ) is under investigation as a possible mechanism . there is evidence that sex hormones may influence appetite and eating in women , and the onset of bulimia nervosa . studies have shown that women with hyperandrogenism and polycystic ovary syndrome have a dysregulation of appetite , along with carbohydrates and fats . this dysregulation of appetite is also seen in women with bulimia nervosa . in addition , gene knockout studies in mice have shown that mice that have the gene encoding estrogen receptors have decreased fertility due to ovarian dysfunction and dysregulation of androgen receptors . in humans , there is evidence that there is an association between polymorphisms in the erβ ( estrogen receptor β ) and bulimia , suggesting there is a correlation between sex hormones and bulimia nervosa . bulimia has been compared to drug addiction , though the empirical support for this characterization is limited . however , people with bulimia nervosa may share dopamine d2 receptor-related vulnerabilities with those with substance abuse disorders . dieting , a common behaviour in bulimics , is associated with lower plasma tryptophan levels . decreased tryptophan levels in the brain , and thus the synthesis of serotonin , such as via acute tryptophan depletion , increases bulimic urges in currently and formerly bulimic individuals within hours . abnormal blood levels of peptides important for the regulation of appetite and energy balance are observed in individuals with bulimia nervosa , but it remains unknown if this is a state or trait . . social . media portrayals of an 'ideal ' body shape are widely considered to be a contributing factor to bulimia . in a 1991 study by weltzin , hsu , pollicle , and kaye , it was stated that 19 % of bulimics undereat , 37 % of bulimics eat an average or normal amount of food , and 44 % of bulimics overeat . a survey of 15- to 18-year-old high school girls in nadroga , fiji , found the self-reported incidence of purging rose from 0 % in 1995 ( a few weeks after the introduction of television in the province ) to 11.3 % in 1998 . in addition , the suicide rate among people with bulimia nervosa is 7.5 times higher than in the general population . nolen-hoeksema , susan ( 2014 ) . '' bulimia nervosa '' abnormal psychology . 6e . pg 344 . when attempting to decipher the origin of bulimia nervosa in a cognitive context , christopher fairburn et al.s cognitive behavioral model is often considered the golden standard . fairburn et al . 's model discusses the process in which an individual falls into the binge-purge cycle and thus develops bulimia . fairburn et al . argue that extreme concern with weight and shape coupled with low self-esteem will result in strict , rigid , and inflexible dietary rules . accordingly , this would lead to unrealistically restricted eating , which may consequently induce an eventual '' slip '' where the individual commits a minor infraction of the strict and inflexible dietary rules . moreover , the cognitive distortion due to dichotomy thinking leads the individual to binge . the binge subsequently should trigger a perceived loss of control , promoting the individual to purge in hope of counteracting the binge . however , fairburn et al . assert the cycle repeats itself , and thus consider the binge-purge cycle to be self-perpetuating . in contrast , byrne and mclean 's findings differed slightly from fairburn et al.s cognitive behavioral model of bulimia nervosa in that the drive for thinness was the major cause of purging as a way of controlling weight . in turn , byrne and mclean argued that this makes the individual vulnerable to binging , indicating that it is not a binge-purge cycle but rather a purge-binge cycle in that purging comes before bingeing . similarly , fairburn et al.s cognitive behavioral model of bulimia nervosa is not necessarily applicable to every individual and is certainly reductionist . everyone differs from another , and taking such a complex behavior like bulimia and applying the same one theory to everyone would certainly be invalid . in addition , the cognitive behavioral model of bulimia nervosa is very cultural bound in that it may not be necessarily applicable to cultures outside of the western society . to evaluate , fairburn et al . 's model and more generally the cognitive explanation of bulimia nervosa is more descriptive than explanatory , as it does not necessarily explain how bulimia arises . furthermore , it is difficult to ascertain cause and effect , because it may be that distorted eating leads to distorted cognition rather than vice versa . a considerable amount of literature has identified a correlation between sexual abuse and the development of bulimia nervosa . the reported incident rate of unwanted sexual contact is higher among those with bulimia nervosa than anorexia nervosa . when exploring the etiology of bulimia through a socio-cultural perspective , the '' thin ideal internalization '' is significantly responsible . the thin ideal internalization is the extent to which individuals adapt to the societal ideals of attractiveness . studies have shown that young females that read fashion magazines tend to have more bulimic symptoms than those females who do not . this further demonstrates the impact of media on the likelihood of developing the disorder . individuals first accept and '' buy into '' the ideals , and then attempt to transform themselves in order to reflect the societal ideals of attractiveness . j . kevin thompson and eric stice claim that family , peers , and most evidently media reinforce the thin ideal , which may lead to an individual accepting and '' buying into '' the thin ideal . in turn , thompson and stice assert that if the thin ideal is accepted , one could begin to feel uncomfortable with their body shape or size since it may not necessarily reflect the thin ideal set out by society . thus , people feeling uncomfortable with their bodies may result in suffering from body dissatisfaction and may develop a certain drive for thinness . consequently , body dissatisfaction coupled with a drive for thinness is thought to promote dieting and negative effects , which could eventually lead to bulimic symptoms such as purging or bingeing . binges lead to self-disgust which causes purging to prevent weight gain . a study dedicated to investigating the thin ideal internalization as a factor of bulimia nervosa is thompson 's and stice 's research . the aim of their study was to investigate how and to what degree media affects the thin ideal internalization . thompson and stice used randomized experiments ( more specifically programs ) dedicated to teaching young women how to be more critical when it comes to media , in order to reduce thin ideal internalization . the results showed that by creating more awareness of the media 's control of the societal ideal of attractiveness , the thin ideal internalization significantly dropped . in other words , less thin ideal images portrayed by the media resulted in less thin ideal internalization . therefore , thompson and stice concluded that media greatly affected the thin ideal internalization . papies showed that it is not the thin ideal itself , but rather the self-association with other persons of a certain weight that decide how someone with bulimia nervosa feels . people that associate themselves with thin models get in a positive attitude when they see thin models and people that associate with overweight get in a negative attitude when they see thin models . moreover , it can be taught to associate with thinner people . . diagnosis . the onset of bulimia nervosa is often during adolescence , between 13 and 20 years of age , and many cases have previously suffered from obesity , with many sufferers relapsing in adulthood into episodic bingeing and purging even after initially successful treatment and remission . a lifetime prevalence of 0.5 percent and 0.9 percent for adult and adolescent sufferers , respectively , is estimated among the united states population . nolen-hoeksema , s . ( 2013 ) . '' ( ab ) normal psychology '' ( 6th edition ) . mcgraw-hill . p.344 bulimia nervosa may affect up to 1 % of young women and , after 10 years of diagnosis , half will recover fully , a third will recover partially , and 10–20 % will still have symptoms . adolescents with bulimia nervosa are more likely to have self-imposed perfectionism and compulsivity issues in eating compared to their peers . this means that the high expectations and unrealistic goals that these individuals set for themselves are internally motivated rather than by social views or expectations . . criteria . bulimia nervosa can be difficult to detect , compared to anorexia nervosa , because bulimics tend to be of average or slightly above average weight . many bulimics may also engage in significantly disordered eating and exercise patterns without meeting the full diagnostic criteria for bulimia nervosa . recently , the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders was revised , which resulted in the loosening of criteria regarding the diagnoses of bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa . nolen-hoeksema , s . ( 2013 ) . '' ( ab ) normal psychology '' ( 6th edition ) . mcgraw-hill . p.343 the diagnostic criteria utilized by the dsm-5 includes repetitive episodes of binge eating ( a discrete episode of overeating during which the individual feels out of control of consumption ) compensated for by excessive or inappropriate measures taken to avoid gaining weight . the diagnosis also requires the episodes of compensatory behaviors and binge eating to happen a minimum of once a week for a consistent time period of 3 months . nolen-hoeksema , s . ( 2013 ) . '' ( ab ) normal psychology '' ( 6th edition ) . mcgraw-hill . p.343 the diagnosis is made only when the behavior is not a part of the symptom complex of anorexia nervosa and when the behavior reflects an overemphasis on physical mass or appearance . purging often is a common characteristic of a more severe case of bulimia nervosa . nolan-hoeksema , susan ( 2014 ) . abnormal psychology ( 6 ed . ) . mcgraw-hill education . p . 345 . . treatment . there are two main types of treatment given to those suffering with bulimia nervosa ; psychopharmacological and psychosocial treatments . . psychotherapy . there are several supported psychosocial treatments for bulimia . cognitive behavioral therapy ( cbt ) , which involves teaching a person to challenge automatic thoughts and engage in behavioral experiments ( for example , in session eating of '' forbidden foods '' ) has a small amount of evidence supporting its use . by using cbt people record how much food they eat and periods of vomiting with the purpose of identifying and avoiding emotional fluctuations that bring on episodes of bulimia on a regular basis . barker ( 2003 ) states that research has found 40–60 % of people using cognitive behaviour therapy to become symptom free . he states in order for the therapy to work , all parties must work together to discuss , record and develop coping strategies . barker ( 2003 ) claims by making people aware of their actions they will think of alternatives . people undergoing cbt who exhibit early behavioral changes are most likely to achieve the best treatment outcomes in the long run . researchers have also reported some positive outcomes for interpersonal psychotherapy and dialectical behavior therapy . maudsley family therapy , developed at the maudsley hospital in london for the treatment of anorexia has been shown promising results in bulimia . the use of cognitive behavioral therapy ( cbt ) has been shown to be quite effective for treating bulimia nervosa ( bn ) in adults , but little research has been done on effective treatments of bn for adolescents . although cbt is seen as more cost-efficient and helps individuals with bn in self-guided care , family based treatment ( fbt ) might be more helpful to younger adolescents who need more support and guidance from their families . adolescents are at the stage where their brains are still quite malleable and developing gradually . therefore , young adolescents with bn are less likely to realize the detrimental consequences of becoming bulimic and have less motivation to change , which is why fbt would be useful to have families intervene and support the teens . working with bn patients and their families in fbt can empower the families by having them involved in their adolescent 's food choices and behaviors , taking more control of the situation in the beginning and gradually letting the adolescent become more autonomous when they have learned healthier eating habits . . medication . antidepressants of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors ( ssri ) class may have a modest benefit . this includes fluoxetine , which is fda approved , for the treatment of bulimia , other antidepressants such as sertraline may also be effective against bulimia . topiramate may also be useful but has greater side effects . compared to placebo , the use of a single antidepressant has been shown to be effective . combining medication with counseling can improve outcomes in some circumstances . some positive outcomes of treatments can include : abstinence from binge eating , a decrease in obsessive behaviors to lose weight and in shape preoccupation , less severe psychiatric symptoms , a desire to counter the effects of binge eating , as well as an improvement in social functioning and reduced relapse rates . . alternative medicine . some researchers have also claimed positive outcomes in hypnotherapy . . epidemiology . there is little data on the percentage of people with bulimia in general populations . most studies conducted thus far have been on convenience samples from hospital patients , high school or university students . these have yielded a wide range of results : between 0.1 % and 1.4 % of males , and between 0.3 % and 9.4 % of females . studies on time trends in the prevalence of bulimia nervosa have also yielded inconsistent results . according to gelder , mayou and geddes ( 2005 ) bulimia nervosa is prevalent between 1 and 2 percent of women aged 15–40 years . bulimia nervosa occurs more frequently in developed countries and in cities , with one study finding that bulimia is five times more prevalent in cities than in rural areas . there is a perception that bulimia is most prevalent amongst girls from middle-class families ; however , in a 2009 study girls from families in the lowest income bracket studied were 153 percent more likely to be bulimic than girls from the highest income bracket . there are higher rates of eating disorders in groups involved in activities which idealize a slim physique , such as dance , gymnastics , modeling , cheerleading , running , acting , swimming , diving , rowing and figure skating . bulimia is thought to be more prevalent among caucasians ; however , a more recent study showed that african-american teenage girls were 50 percent more likely than caucasian girls to exhibit bulimic behavior , including both binging and purging . . history . etymology . the term bulimia comes from greek boulīmia , '' ravenous hunger '' , a compound of βοῦς bous , '' ox '' and λιμός , līmos , '' hunger '' . literally , the scientific name of the disorder , bulimia nervosa , translates to '' nervous ravenous hunger '' . before the 20th century . although diagnostic criteria for bulimia nervosa did not appear until 1979 , evidence suggests that binging and purging were popular in certain ancient cultures . the first documented account of behavior resembling bulimia nervosa was recorded in anabasis ( xenophon ) around 370 b.c , in which greek soldiers purged themselves in the mountains of asia minor . it is unclear whether this purging was preceded by binging . giannini , a . j . ( 1993 ) . '' a history of bulimia '' . in the eating disorders ( pp . 18–21 ) . springer new york . in ancient egypt , physicians recommended purging once a month for three days in order to preserve health . russell , g . ( 1997 ) . the history of bulimia nervosa . d . garner & p . garfinkel ( eds . ) , handbook of treatment for eating disorders ( 2nd ed . , pp . 11–24 ) . new york , ny : the guilford press . this practice stemmed from the belief that human diseases were caused by the food itself . in ancient rome , elite society members would vomit in order to '' make room '' in their stomachs for more food at all day banquets . emperors claudius and vitellius both were gluttonous and obese , and they often resorted to habitual purging . historical records also suggest that some saints who developed anorexia ( as a result of a life of asceticism ) may also have displayed bulimic behaviors . magdalena de pazzi ( 1566–1607 ) and veronica giuliani ( 1660–1727 ) were both observed binge eating—giving in , as they believed , to the temptations of the devil . catherine of siena ( 1347–1380 ) is known to have supplemented her strict abstinence from food by purging as reparation for her sins . catherine died from starvation at age thirty-three . while the psychological disorder '' bulimia nervosa '' is relatively new , the word '' bulimia , '' signifying overeating , has been present for centuries . the babylon talmud referenced practices of '' bulimia , '' yet scholars believe that this simply referred to overeating without the purging or the psychological implications bulimia nervosa . in fact , a search for evidence of bulimia nervosa from the 17th to late 19th century revealed that only a quarter of the overeating cases they examined actually vomited after the binges . there was no evidence of deliberate vomiting or an attempt to control weight . . 20th century . at the turn of the century , bulimia ( overeating ) was described as a clinical symptom , but rarely in the context of weight control . purging , however , was seen in anorexic patients and attributed to gastric pain rather than another method of weight control . in 1930 , admissions of anorexia nervosa patients to the mayo clinic from 1917 to 1929 were compiled . fifty-five to sixty-five percent of these patients were reported to be voluntarily vomiting in order to relieve weight anxiety . records show that purging for weight control continued throughout the mid-1900s . several case studies from this era reveal patients suffering from the modern description of bulimia nervosa . in 1939 , rahman and richardson reported that out of their six anorexic patients , one had periods of overeating and another practiced self-induced vomiting . wulff , in 1932 , treated '' patient d , '' who would have periods of intense cravings for food and overeat for weeks , which often resulted in frequent vomiting . patient d , who grew up with a tyrannical father , was repulsed by her weight and would fast for a few days , rapidly losing weight . ellen west , a patient described by ludwig binswanger in 1958 , was teased by friends for being fat and excessively took thyroid pills to lose weight , later using laxatives and vomiting . she reportedly consumed dozens of oranges and several pounds of tomatoes each day , yet would skip meals . after being admitted to a psychiatric facility for depression , ellen ate ravenously yet lost weight , presumably due to self-induced vomiting . however , while these patients may have met modern criteria for bulimia nervosa , they can not technically be diagnosed with the disorder , as it had not yet appeared in the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders at the time of their treatment . an explanation for the increased instances of bulimic symptoms may be due to the 20th century 's new ideals of thinness . the shame of being fat emerged in the 1940s , when teasing remarks about weight became more common . the 1950s , however , truly introduced the trend of an aspiration for thinness . in 1979 , gerald russell first published a description of bulimia nervosa , in which he studied patients with a '' morbid fear of becoming fat '' who overate and purged afterwards . he specified treatment options and indicated the seriousness of the disease , which can be accompanied by depression and suicide . in 1980 , bulimia nervosa first appeared in the dsm-iii . after its appearance in the dsm-iii , there was a sudden rise in the documented incidences of bulimia nervosa . in the early 1980s , incidences of the disorder rose to about 40 in every 100,000 people . this decreased to about 27 in every 100,000 people at the end of the 1980s/early 1990s . however , bulimia nervosa 's prevalence was still much higher than anorexia nervosa 's , which at the time occurred in about 14 people per 100,000 . in 1991 , kendler et al . documented the cumulative risk for bulimia nervosa for those born before 1950 , from 1950 to 1959 , and after 1959 . the risk for those born after 1959 is much higher than those in either of the other cohorts .