1921 in literature

events . january 1 – the publishing firm jonathan cape is founded in bloomsbury , london , by herbert jonathan cape and wren howard . february – margaret caroline anderson and jane heap , publishers of the little review , are convicted of obscenity in a new york court for publishing the '' nausicaa '' episode of james joyce 's ulysses . march – jorge luis borges returns to his native buenos aires in argentina after a period living with his family in europe . april 20 – the hungarian ferenc molnár 's play liliom is first produced on broadway in english . may 9 – the première of luigi pirandello 's six characters in search of an author ( sei personaggi in cerca d'autore ) at the teatro valle in rome divides the audience . may – a production of pericles , prince of tyre directed by robert atkins at the old vic , london , restores the unexpurgated text for the first time since shakespeare 's day . june 6 – the première of tristan tzara 's parodic the gas heart ( le cœur à gaz ) takes place at a dada salon at the galerie montaigne in paris . it provokes audience derision . june 10 – d . h . lawrence 's novel women in love is first published commercially by martin secker in london . september 5 – the cervantes theatre ( buenos aires ) opens with a production of lope de vega 's la dama boba ( the foolish lady , 1613 ) . september 26 – the maddermarket theatre in norwich , england , an old chapel , is turned into an english renaissance theatre for period drama by an amateur repertory theatre directed by walter nugent monck . it opens with as you like it . december 9 – john william gott becomes the last person in england imprisoned for blasphemous libel . december 31 – mexican poet manuel maples arce distributes the first stridentism manifesto , comprimido estridentista , in the broadsheet actual no . 1 in mexico city . new books . fiction . ryūnosuke akutagawa – '' autumn mountain '' ( 秋山 , akiyama ) edgar rice burroughs – tarzan the terrible james branch cabell – figures of earth hall caine – the master of man karel čapek – trapné povídky ( embarrassing stories , translated as money and other stories ) willa cather – alexander 's bridge arthur chapman – mystery ranch a . e . coppard – adam & eve & pinch me : tales mary cholmondeley – the romance of his life marie corelli – the secret power miloš crnjanski – the journal of čarnojević ( дневник о чарнојевићу , dnevnik o čarnojeviću ) walter de la mare – memoirs of a midget mary frances dowdall – three loving ladies fran saleški finžgar – pod svobodnim soncem ( under the free sun ) f . scott fitzgerald the beautiful and damned ( serialized in metropolitan magazine ( new york ) ) flappers and philosophers ( short stories ) mikkjel fønhus – troll-elgen john galsworthy – to let ( last book of the forsyte saga ) h . rider haggard – she and allan georgette heyer – the black moth a . s . m . hutchinson – if winter comes aldous huxley – crome yellow frigyes karinthy – capillaria sheila kaye-smith – joanna godden gaston leroux – the crime of rouletabille marie belloc lowndes – what timmy did denis mackail – romance to the rescue compton mackenzie – rich relatives rené maran – batouala l . m . montgomery – rilla of ingleside george moore – heloise and abelard paul morand – tender shoots ( tendres stocks , short stories ) baroness orczy castles in the air ( short stories ) the first sir percy alejandro pérez lugín – currito of the cross ( currito de la cruz ) gene stratton porter – her father 's daughter marcel proust the guermantes way ( le côté de guermantes ii , second part of vol . 3 of in search of lost time ) sodom and gomorrah ( sodome et gomorrhe i , first part of vol . 4 of in search of lost time ) sukumar ray – hajabarala iñigo ed . regalado – may pagsinta ' y walang puso rafael sabatini – scaramouche ( novel ) naoya shiga – a dark night 's passing ( 暗夜行路 , an'ya kōro ; serialized 1921–37 ) booth tarkington – alice adams aleksey nikolayevich tolstoy – the road to calvary ( publication begins ) sigrid undset – husfrue ( the wife or the mistress of husaby , second part of kristin lavransdatter ) edgar wallace the book of all power the law of the four just men eugene walter – the byzantine riddle and other stories elinor wylie – nets to catch the wind francis brett young the black diamond the red knight yevgeny zamyatin – we ( мы ; completed ) . children and young people . dorita fairlie bruce – the senior prefect ( later entitled dimsie goes to school ) eleanor farjeon – martin pippin in the apple orchard charles boardman hawes – the great quest hendrik willem van loon – the story of mankind ( non-fiction ) albert payson terhune – the heart of a dog else ury – nesthäkchen flies from the nest . drama . hjalmar bergman – farmor och vår herre ( grandmother and our lord , translated as thy rod and thy staff ) dorothy brandon – araminta arrives karel čapek – r.u.r . ( performed ) karel and josef čapek – pictures from the insects ' life ( ze života hmyzu , published ) clemence dane – a bill of divorcement gerald du maurier – bulldog drummond ( with h.c . mcneile ) susan glaspell – inheritors ( written ) and the verge ( performed ) ian hay – a safety match a . de herz – mărgeluș ( tiny bead ) avery hopwood – the demi-virgin rené morax – le roi david roland pertwee – out to win luigi pirandello – six characters in search of an author tristan tzara – the gas heart edgar wallace – m'lady raden adipati aria muharam wiranatakusumah – lutung kasarung stanisław ignacy witkiewicz – the water hen ( kurka wodna ) . poetry . robert frost – mountain interval ( second print ) langston hughes – '' the negro speaks of rivers '' , in the crisis charlotte mew – saturday market william carlos williams – sour grapes william butler yeats – michael robartes and the dancer . non-fiction . adolphe appia – l'œuvre d'art vivant ( the living work of art ) charles bean ( ed . ) – official history of australia in the war of 1914–1918 , vol . 1 joseph chaikov – skulptur ( first yiddish-language work on the subject ) frank h . knight – risk , uncertainty , and profit d . h . lawrence sea and sardinia ( as lawrence h . davison ) – movements in european history edward sapir – language : an introduction to the study of speech eugen von böhm-bawerk – capital and interest ludwig wittgenstein – tractatus logico-philosophicus zitkala-sa – american indian stories . births . january 5 – friedrich dürrenmatt , swiss writer ( died 1990 ) january 19 – patricia highsmith , american crime writer ( died 1995 ) february 4 – betty friedan , american feminist author ( died 2006 ) february 5 – marion eames , welsh novelist writing mainly in welsh ( died 2007 ) february 15 – radha krishna choudhary , indian historian and writer ( died 1985 ) march 1 – richard wilbur , american poet and translator ( died 2017 ) march 3 – paul guimard , french novelist ( died 2004 ) march 24 – wilson harris , guyanese-born poet , novelist and essayist ( died 2018 ) april 21 – angela bianchini , italian fiction writer and literary critic ( died 2018 ) may 23 james blish , american science fiction author ( died 1975 ) ray lawler , australian dramatist may 29 mona van duyn , american poet ( died 2004 ) henry scholberg , american bibliographer ( died 2012 ) june 11 – michael meyer , english translator and biographer ( died 2000 ) june 14 – john bradburne , english poet and missionary ( killed 1979 ) august 11 – alex haley , american writer ( died 1992 ) august 17 – elinor lyon , british children 's writer ( died 2008 ) august 18 – frédéric jacques temple , french poet and writer ( died 2020 ) september 12 – stanisław lem , polish science fiction novelist , philosopher , satirist and physician ( died 2006 ) september 15 – richard gordon , english author ( died 2017 ) september 16 – mohamed talbi , tunisian historian ( died 2017 ) september 26 – cyprian ekwensi , nigerian writer ( died 2007 ) october 2 – edmund crispin ( robert bruce montgomery ) , english crime writer ( died 1978 ) october 9 – tadeusz różewicz , polish poet , dramatist and writer ( died 2014 ) october 17 – george mackay brown , scottish poet ( died 1996 ) november 6 – james jones , american novelist ( died 1977 ) november 22 – brian cleeve , irish author ( died 2003 ) december 20 – israil bercovici , romanian dramatist and historian ( died 1988 ) . deaths . february 24 – john habberton , american critic ( born 1842 ) non series 138- trif and trixy // john habberton autograph 7 march 2012 . accessed 9 january 2012 . march 22 – e . w . hornung , english author ( born 1866 ) april 6 – maximilian berlitz , german-born american textbook writer and language school proprietor ( born 1852 ) may 5 – alfred hermann fried , austrian publicist ( born 1864 ) may 12 – emilia pardo bazán , spanish novelist ( born 1851 ) may 13 – jean aicard , french writer ( born 1848 ) june 5 – georges feydeau , french playwright ( born 1862 ) june 26 – alfred percy sinnett , english theosophist author ( born 1840 ) july 4 – antoni grabowski , polish esperantist ( born 1857 ) july 7 – luca caragiale , romanian poet , novelist and translator ( pneumonia , born 1893 ) august 7 – alexander blok , russian poet ( born 1880 ) august 25 – nikolay gumilev , russian poet ( executed , born 1886 ) september 22 - ivan vazov , bulgarian poet , novelist and playwright ( born 1850 ) october 10 – otto von gierke , german historian ( born 1841 ) november 8 – pavol országh hviezdoslav , slovak poet , dramatist and translator ( born 1849 ) november 14 – christabel rose coleridge english novelist and editor ( born 1843 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : walter de la mare , memoirs of a midget james tait black memorial prize for biography : lytton strachey , queen victoria nobel prize in literature : anatole france pulitzer prize for drama : zona gale , miss lulu bett pulitzer prize for poetry : no award given pulitzer prize for the novel : edith wharton , the age of innocence . references .