Fir

leaves . file : abies alba pid1015-3.jpg a . alba – the underside of leaves have 2 whitish strips formed by wax-covered stomatal bands ; the bases of the needles are shaped like suction cups . abgragra-top.jpg a . grandis foliage – upper side of the leaves abies orjen foliage.jpg atypical a . alba foliage from dinaric calcareous fir forests on orjen firs can be distinguished from other members of the pine family by the unique attachment of their needle-like leaf to the twig by a base that resembles a small suction cup . the leaves are significantly flattened , sometimes even looking like they are pressed , as in a . sibirica . the leaves have two whitish lines on the bottom , each of which is formed by wax-covered stomatal bands . in most species , the upper surface of the leaves is uniformly green and shiny , without stomata or with a few on the tip , visible as whitish spots . other species have the upper surface of leaves dull , gray-green or bluish-gray to silvery ( glaucous ) , coated by wax with variable number of stomatal bands , and not always continuous . an example species with shiny green leaves is a . alba , and an example species with dull waxy leaves is a . concolor . the tips of leaves are usually more or less notched ( as in a . firma ) , but sometimes rounded or dull ( as in a . concolor , a . magnifica ) or sharp and prickly ( as in a . bracteata , a . cephalonica , a . holophylla ) . the leaves of young plants are usually sharper . the way they spread from the shoot is very diverse , only in some species comb-shaped , with the leaves arranged on two sides , flat ( a . alba ) . cones . abies cone & bits.jpg intact and disintegrated bulgarian fir cones abies holophylla manchurian fir cones.jpg immature cones of some of species or races are green , not purple-bluish : for instance , manchurian fir . manchurian fir abies holophylla disintegrating cones.jpg disintegrating cones of manchurian fir firs differ from other conifers in having erect , cylindrical cones long that disintegrate at maturity to release the winged seeds . in contrast to spruces , fir cones do not hang . even large fir cones grow upwards like '' candles '' , the new growth of the tree . mature cones are usually brown , young in summer can be green , for example : : a . grandis , a . holophylla , a . nordmanniana or purple and blue , sometimes very dark : : a . fraseri , a . homolepis ( var . umbellata green ) , a . koreana ( 'flava ' green ) , a . lasiocarpa , a . nephrolepis ( f . chlorocarpa green ) , a . sibirica , a . veitchii ( var . olivacea green ) . . classification . section abies . section abies is found in central , south , and eastern europe and asia minor . abies alba – silver fir abies nebrodensis – sicilian fir abies borisii-regis – bulgarian fir abies cephalonica – greek fir abies nordmanniana – nordmann fir or caucasian fir abies nordmanniana subsp . equi – trojani – kazdağı fir , turkish fir abies nordmanniana subsp . bornmülleriana – uludağ fir abies pinsapo – spanish fir abies pinsapo var . marocana – moroccan fir abies numidica – algerian fir abies cilicica – syrian fir . section balsamea . section balsamea is found in northern asia and north america , and high mountains further south . abies fraseri – fraser fir abies balsamea – balsam fir abies balsamea var . phanerolepis – bracted balsam fir abies lasiocarpa – subalpine fir abies lasiocarpa var . arizonica – corkbark fir abies lasiocarpa var . bifolia – rocky mountains subalpine fir abies sibirica – siberian fir abies sibirica var . semenovii abies sachalinensis – sakhalin fir abies koreana – korean fir abies nephrolepis – khinghan fir abies veitchii – veitch 's fir abies veitchii var . sikokiana – shikoku fir . section grandis . section grandis is found in western north america to mexico , guatemala , honduras and el salvador , in lowlands in the north , moderate altitudes in south . abies grandis – grand fir or giant fir abies grandis var . grandis – coast grand fir abies grandis var . idahoensis – interior grand fir abies concolor – white fir abies concolor subsp . concolor – rocky mountain white fir or colorado white fir abies concolor subsp . lowiana – low 's white fir or sierra nevada white fir abies durangensis – durango fir abies durangensis var . coahuilensis – coahuila fir abies flinckii – jalisco fir abies guatemalensis – guatemalan fir abies guatemalensis var . guatemalensis abies guatemalensis var . jaliscana abies vejarii . section momi . section momi is found in east and central asia and the himalaya , generally at low to moderate altitudes . abies kawakamii – taiwan fir abies homolepis – nikko fir abies recurvata – min fir abies recurvata var . ernestii – min fir abies firma – momi fir abies beshanzuensis – baishanzu fir abies holophylla – manchurian fir abies chensiensis – shensi fir abies chensiensis subsp . salouenensis – salween fir abies pindrow – pindrow fir abies ziyuanensis – ziyuan fir . section amabilis . section amabilis is found in the pacific coast mountains in north america and japan , in high rainfall areas . abies amabilis – pacific silver fir abies mariesii – maries ' fir . section pseudopicea . section pseudopicea is found in the himalaya at high altitudes . abies delavayi – delavay 's fir abies delavayi var . nukiangensis abies delavayi var . motuoensis abies delavayi subsp . fansipanensis abies fabri – faber 's fir abies fabri subsp . minensis abies forrestii – forrest 's fir abies densa – bhutan fir abies spectabilis – east himalayan fir abies fargesii – farges ' fir abies fanjingshanensis – fanjingshan fir abies yuanbaoshanensis – yuanbaoshan fir abies squamata – flaky fir . section oiamel . section oiamel is found in central mexico at high altitudes . abies religiosa – sacred fir abies hickelii – hickel 's fir abies hickelii var . oaxacana – oaxaca fir . section nobilis . section nobilis ( western u.s . , high altitudes ) abies procera – noble fir abies magnifica – red fir abies magnifica var . shastensis – shasta red fir . section bracteata . section bracteata ( california coast ) abies bracteata – bristlecone fir . section incertae sedis . section incertae sedis †abies milleri – ( extinct ) early eocene . uses and ecology . wood of most firs is considered unsuitable for general timber use and is often used as pulp or for the manufacture of plywood and rough timber . because this genus has no insect or decay resistance qualities after logging , it is generally recommended in construction purposes for indoor use only ( e.g . indoor drywall on framing ) . fir wood left outside can not be expected to last more than 12 to 18 months , depending on the type of climate it is exposed to . nordmann fir , noble fir , fraser fir and balsam fir are popular christmas trees , generally considered to be the best for this purpose , with aromatic foliage that does not shed many needles on drying out . many are also decorative garden trees , notably korean fir and fraser fir , which produce brightly coloured cones even when very young , still only tall . other firs can grow anywhere between tall . fir tree appreciation day is june 18 . abies religiosa—sacred fir , is the overwinter host for the danaus plexippus . firs are used as food plants by the caterpillars of some lepidoptera species , including chionodes abella ( recorded on white fir ) , autumnal moth , conifer swift ( a pest of balsam fir ) , the engrailed , grey pug , mottled umber , pine beauty and the tortrix moths cydia illutana ( whose caterpillars are recorded to feed on european silver fir cone scales ) and c . duplicana ( on european silver fir bark around injuries or canker ) . abies spectabilis or talispatra is used in ayurveda as an antitussive ( cough suppressant ) drug .