Juilliard School

history . in 1905 , the institute of musical art , juilliard 's predecessor institution , was founded on the premise that the united states did not have a premier music school and too many students were going to europe to study music . the institute opened in the former lenox mansion , fifth avenue and 12th street , on october 11 . it moved in 1910 to 120 claremont avenue in the morningside heights neighborhood of manhattan , onto a property purchased from bloomingdale insane asylum . in 1920 , the juilliard foundation was created , named after textile merchant augustus d . juilliard , who bequeathed a substantial amount of money for the advancement of music in the united states . in 1924 , the foundation purchased the vanderbilt family guesthouse at 49 e . 52nd street , and established the juilliard graduate school . in 1926 , the juilliard school of music was created through a merger of the institute of musical art and the juilliard graduate school . the two schools shared a common board of directors and president ( columbia university professor john erskine ) but retained their distinct identities . the conductor and music-educator frank damrosch continued as the institute 's dean , and the australian pianist and composer ernest hutcheson was appointed dean of the graduate school . in 1937 , hutcheson succeeded erskine as president of the two institutions , a job he held until 1945 . in 1946 , the institute of musical art and the juilliard graduate school completely merged to form a single institution . the president of the school at that time was william schuman , the first winner of the pulitzer prize for music . schuman established the juilliard string quartet in 1946 and the dance division in 1951 , under the direction of martha hill . william schuman graduated from columbia 's teachers college ( bs 1935 , ma 1937 ) and attended the juilliard summer school in 1932 , 1933 and 1936 . while attending juilliard summer school , he developed a personal dislike for traditional music theory and ear training curricula , finding little value in counterpoint and dictation . soon after being appointed as president of the juilliard school of music in 1945 , william schuman created a new curriculum called the literature and materials of music ( l & m ) , designed for composers to teach . l & m was a reaction against more formal theory and ear training , and as a result did not have a formal structure . the general mandate was '' to give the student an awareness of the dynamic nature of the materials of music . '' the quality and degree of each student 's education in harmony , music history , or ear training was dependent on how each composer-teacher decided to interpret this mandate . william schuman resigned as president of juilliard after being elected president of lincoln center in 1962 . peter mennin , another composer with directorial experience at the peabody conservatory , was elected as his successor . mennin made significant changes to the l & m program—ending ear training and music history and hiring the well known pedagogue renée longy to teach solfège . in 1968 , mennin hired john houseman to manage a new drama division , and in 1969 oversaw juilliard 's relocation from claremont avenue to lincoln center . the school 's name was changed to the juilliard school to reflect its broadened mission to educate musicians , directors , and actors . a brief history , the juilliard school . retrieved june 13 , 2010 . juilliard school , the , the columbia electronic encyclopedia , 6th ed . 2007 , columbia university press , found in infoplease . retrieved june 13 , 2010 . dr . joseph w . polisi became president of juilliard in 1984 after peter mennin died . polisi 's many accomplishments include philanthropic successes , broadening of the curriculum and establishment of dormitories for juilliard 's students . in 2001 , the school established a jazz performance training program . in september 2005 , colin davis conducted an orchestra that combined students from the juilliard and london 's royal academy of music at the bbc proms , and during 2008 the juilliard orchestra embarked on a successful tour of china , performing concerts as part of the cultural olympiad in beijing , suzhou , and shanghai under the expert leadership of maestro xian zhang . in 1999 , the juilliard school was awarded the national medal of arts . in 2006 , juilliard received a trove of precious music manuscripts from board chair and philanthropist bruce kovner . the collection includes autograph scores , sketches , composer-emended proofs and first editions of major works by mozart , bach , beethoven , brahms , schumann , chopin , schubert , liszt , ravel , stravinsky , copland , and other masters of the classical music canon . many of the manuscripts had been unavailable for generations . among the items are the printer 's manuscript of beethoven 's ninth symphony , complete with beethoven 's handwritten amendments , that was used for the first performance in vienna in 1824 ; mozart 's autograph of the wind parts of the final scene of the marriage of figaro ; beethoven 's arrangement of his monumental große fuge for piano four hands ; schumann 's working draft of his symphony no . 2 ; and manuscripts of brahms 's symphony no . 2 and piano concerto no . 2 . the entire collection has since been digitized and can be viewed online . in 2010 , philanthropist james s . marcus donated 10 million to the school to establish the ellen and james s . marcus institute for vocal arts at the school . on september 28 , 2015 , the juilliard school announced a major expansion into tianjin during a visit by china 's first lady , peng liyuan , the institution 's first such full-scale foray outside the united states , with plans to offer a master 's degree program . in may 2017 , retired new york city ballet principal dancer damian woetzel was named president , replacing joseph w . polisi . . admission . juilliard admits both degree program seekers and pre-college division students . the latter enter a conservatory program for younger students to develop their skills ; all applicants who wish to enroll in the music advancement program , for the pre-college division , must perform an audition in person before members of the faculty and administration and must be between ages 8 and 18 . the juilliard admissions program comprises several distinct steps . applicants must submit a complete application , school transcripts , and recommendations ; some majors also require that applicants submit prescreening recordings of their work , which are evaluated as part of the application . a limited number of applicants are then invited to a live audition , sometimes with additional callbacks . after auditions , the school invites select applicants to meet with a program administrator . admission to the juilliard school is highly competitive . in 2007 , the school received 2,138 applications for admission , of which 162 were admitted for a 7.6 % acceptance rate . for the fall semester of 2009 , the school had an 8.0 % acceptance rate . in 2011 , the school accepted 5.5 % of applicants . for fall 2012 , 2,657 undergraduate applicants were received by the college division and 7.2 % were accepted . the 75th percentile accepted into juilliard in 2012 had a gpa of 3.96 and an sat score of 1350 . . programs . the school offers courses in dance , drama , and music . the dance division was established in 1951 by william schuman with martha hill as its director . it offers a bachelor of fine arts or a diploma . the drama division was established in 1968 by the actor john houseman and michel saint-denis . its acting programs offer a bachelor of fine arts , a diploma and , beginning in fall 2012 , a master of fine arts . until 2006 , when james houghton became director of the drama division , there was a '' cut system '' that would remove up to one-third of the second-year class . the lila bell wallace american playwrights program , begun in 1993 , offers one-year , tuition-free , graduate fellowships ; selected students may be offered a second-year extension and receive an artist diploma . the andrew w . mellon artist diploma program for theatre directors was a two-year graduate fellowship that began in 1995 ( expanded to three years in 1997 ) this was discontinued from autumn 2006 . the music division is the largest of the school 's divisions . available degrees are bachelor of music or diploma , master of music or graduate diploma , artist diploma and doctor of musical arts . academic majors are brass , collaborative piano , composition , guitar , harp , historical performance , jazz studies , orchestral conducting , organ , percussion , piano , strings , voice , and woodwinds . the collaborative piano , historical performance , and orchestral conducting programs are solely at the graduate level ; the opera studies and music performance subprograms only offer artist diplomas . the juilliard vocal arts department now incorporates the former juilliard opera center . all bachelor and master courses require credits from the liberal arts course ; joseph w . polisi is a member of the liberal arts faculty . . pre-college division . the pre-college division teaches students enrolled in elementary , junior high , and high school . the pre-college division is conducted every saturday from september to may in the juilliard building at lincoln center . all students study solfège and music theory in addition to their primary instrument . vocal majors must also study diction and performance . similarly , pianists must study piano performance . string , brass and woodwind players , as well as percussionists , also participate in orchestra . the pre-college has two orchestras , the pre-college symphony ( pcs ) and the pre-college orchestra ( pco ) . placement is by age and students may elect to study conducting , chorus , and chamber music . the pre-college division began as the preparatory centers ( later the preparatory division ) , part of the institute of musical art since 1916 . the pre-college division was established in 1969 with katherine mcc . ellis as its first director . olegna fuschi served as director from 1975 to 1988 . the fuschi/mennin partnership allowed the pre-college division to thrive , affording its graduates training at the highest artistic level ( with many of the same teachers as the college division ) , as well as their own commencement ceremony and diplomas . in addition to fuschi , directors of juilliard 's pre-college division have included composer dr . andrew thomas . the current director of the pre-college division is yoheved kaplinsky . music technology center . the music technology center at the juilliard school was created in 1993 to provide students with the opportunity to use digital technology in the creation and performance of new music . since then , the program has expanded to include a wide offering of classes such as , introduction to music technology , music production , film scoring , computers in performance and an independent study in composition . in 2009 , the music technology center moved to a new , state of the art facility that includes a mix and record suite and a digital '' playroom '' for composing and rehearsing with technology . together with the willson theater , the music technology center is the home of interdisciplinary and electro-acoustic projects and performances at the juilliard school . juilliard electric ensemble . the juilliard electric ensemble was created in 2003 to provide students from all three of juilliard 's divisions ( dance , drama , and music ) with an opportunity to use new technology in the creation and performance of interactive and multi-disciplinary work . in past performances , the juilliard electric ensemble has used interactive technology to expand the range of their instruments , control audio and visual elements with electronic tools , shape video and projection design in real-time by moving through a virtual field , and interact with artists and computers around the world via the web . since its debut , the electric ensemble has performed works by over 50 composers including joan la barbara , kenji bunch , eric chasalow , sebastian currier , avner dorman , jonathan harvey , jocelyn pook , steve reich , daniel bernard roumain , karlheinz stockhausen , morton subotnick , alejandro viñao , jacob ter veldhuis , david wallace , mark wood , and peter wyer . performing ensembles . the juilliard school has a variety of ensembles , including chamber music , jazz , orchestras , and vocal/choir groups . juilliard 's orchestras include the juilliard orchestra , the new juilliard ensemble , the juilliard theatre orchestra , and the conductors ' orchestra . the axiom ensemble is a student directed and managed group dedicated to well-known 20th-century works . in addition , juilliard resident ensembles , which feature faculty members , perform frequently at the school . these groups include the juilliard string quartet and the american brass quintet . fundraising . the juilliard second century fund aims to raise 300 & nbsp ; million to enable the juilliard school to sustain its eminence in performing arts education well into the school 's next century . the tuition for 2019-20 is 47,370 for the school year , with total expenses of 69–73,500 . expanded and renamed on juilliard 's 100th anniversary , the fund supports six components that help juilliard continue to recruit the world 's best young artists and faculty , offer educational programs that maintain the quality of a juilliard education , and increase the size and functionality of juilliard 's physical plant . fundraising specifically targeted to the pre-college division began during 2004 with a benefit concert given by the park avenue chamber symphony . the event raised 90,000 to establish a pre-college parents ' association scholarship fund . during 2005 , juilliard produced its own benefit concert for the pre-college division featuring its own students directed by faculty member itzhak perlman and hosted by entertainer bill cosby to add to this fund . in april 2009 , it was announced that the music advancement program ( map ) would be curtailed due to budget reductions . after strong opposition to the reductions , the program , which helps inner-city children get music lessons , was then reinstated after several donors pledged money to support it . notable people . references . further reading . ten years of american opera design at the juilliard school of music , published by new york public library , 1941 . the juilliard report on teaching the literature and materials of music , by juilliard school of music . published by norton , 1953 . the juilliard review , by richard franko goldman , published by juilliard school of music , 1954 . the juilliard journal , published by the juilliard school , 1985 . nothing but the best : the struggle for perfection at the juilliard school , by judith kogan . published by random house , 1987 . guide to the juilliard school archives , by juilliard school archives , jane gottlieb , stephen e . novak , taras pavlovsky . published by the school , 1992 . juilliard : a history , by andrea olmstead . published by university of illinois press , 2002 , . a living legacy : historic stringed instruments at the juilliard school , by lisa brooks robinson , itzhak perlman . amadeus press , 2006 . external links . the juilliard school – its history at 100 andrea olmstead papers , 1970–2013 music division , the new york public library . olmstead 's papers hold the research she carried out for her book on juilliard , and include recorded interviews with various faculty , former students , and staff .