Burnside problem

brief history . initial work pointed towards the affirmative answer . for example , if a group g is finitely generated and the order of each element of g is a divisor of 4 , then g is finite . moreover , a . i . kostrikin was able to prove in 1958 that among the finite groups with a given number of generators and a given prime exponent , there exists a largest one . this provides a solution for the restricted burnside problem for the case of prime exponent . ( later , in 1989 , efim zelmanov was able to solve the restricted burnside problem for an arbitrary exponent . ) issai schur had showed in 1911 that any finitely generated periodic group that was a subgroup of the group of invertible n × n complex matrices was finite ; he used this theorem to prove the jordan–schur theorem . nevertheless , the general answer to the burnside problem turned out to be negative . in 1964 , golod and shafarevich constructed an infinite group of burnside type without assuming that all elements have uniformly bounded order . in 1968 , pyotr novikov and sergei adian supplied a negative solution to the bounded exponent problem for all odd exponents larger than 4381 . in 1982 , a . yu . ol'shanskii found some striking counterexamples for sufficiently large odd exponents ( greater than 10 10 ) , and supplied a considerably simpler proof based on geometric ideas . the case of even exponents turned out to be much harder to settle . in 1992 , s . v . ivanov announced the negative solution for sufficiently large even exponents divisible by a large power of 2 ( detailed proofs were published in 1994 and occupied some 300 pages ) . later joint work of ol'shanskii and ivanov established a negative solution to an analogue of burnside problem for hyperbolic groups , provided the exponent is sufficiently large . by contrast , when the exponent is small and different from 2 , 3 , 4 and 6 , very little is known . general burnside problem . a group g is called periodic if every element has finite order ; in other words , for each g in g , there exists some positive integer n such that g n 1 . clearly , every finite group is periodic . there exist easily defined groups such as the prüfer group which are infinite periodic groups ; but the latter group can not be finitely generated . general burnside problem . if g is a finitely generated , periodic group , then is g necessarily finite ? this question was answered in the negative in 1964 by evgeny golod and igor shafarevich , who gave an example of an infinite p-group that is finitely generated ( see golod–shafarevich theorem ) . however , the orders of the elements of this group are not a priori bounded by a single constant . bounded burnside problem . part of the difficulty with the general burnside problem is that the requirements of being finitely generated and periodic give very little information about the possible structure of a group . therefore , we pose more requirements on g . consider a periodic group g with the additional property that there exists a least integer n such that for all g in g , g n 1 . a group with this property is said to be periodic with bounded exponent n , or just a group with exponent n . burnside problem for groups with bounded exponent asks : burnside problem . if g is a finitely generated group with exponent n , is g necessarily finite ? it turns out that this problem can be restated as a question about the finiteness of groups in a particular family . the free burnside group of rank m and exponent n , denoted b ( m , n ) , is a group with m distinguished generators x 1 , . , x m in which the identity x n 1 holds for all elements x , and which is the '' largest '' group satisfying these requirements . more precisely , the characteristic property of b ( m , n ) is that , given any group g with m generators g 1 , . , g m and of exponent n , there is a unique homomorphism from b ( m , n ) to g that maps the ith generator x i of b ( m , n ) into the ith generator g i of g . in the language of group presentations , free burnside group b ( m , n ) has m generators x 1 , . , x m and the relations x n 1 for each word x in x 1 , . , x m , and any group g with m generators of exponent n is obtained from it by imposing additional relations . the existence of the free burnside group and its uniqueness up to an isomorphism are established by standard techniques of group theory . thus if g is any finitely generated group of exponent n , then g is a homomorphic image of b ( m , n ) , where m is the number of generators of g . burnside problem can now be restated as follows : burnside problem ii . for which positive integers m , n is the free burnside group b ( m , n ) finite ? the full solution to burnside problem in this form is not known . burnside considered some easy cases in his original paper : b ( 1 , n ) is the cyclic group of order n . b ( m , 2 ) is the direct product of m copies of the cyclic group of order 2 and hence finite . the key step is to observe that the identities a 2 b 2 ( ab ) 2 1 together imply that ab ba , so that a free burnside group of exponent two is necessarily abelian . the following additional results are known ( burnside , sanov , m . hall ) : b ( m , 3 ) , b ( m , 4 ) , and b ( m , 6 ) are finite for all m . the particular case of b ( 2 , 5 ) remains open : it was not known whether this group is finite . the breakthrough in solving the burnside problem was achieved by pyotr novikov and sergei adian in 1968 . using a complicated combinatorial argument , they demonstrated that for every odd number n with n > 4381 , there exist infinite , finitely generated groups of exponent n . adian later improved the bound on the odd exponent to 665 . john britton proposed a nearly 300 page alternative proof to the burnside problem in 1973 ; however , adian ultimately pointed out a flaw in that proof . the latest improvement to the bound on odd exponent is 101 obtained by adian himself in 2015 . the case of even exponent turned out to be considerably more difficult . it was only in 1994 that sergei vasilievich ivanov was able to prove an analogue of novikov–adian theorem : for any m > 1 and an even n ≥ 2 48 , n divisible by 2 9 , the group b ( m , n ) is infinite ; together with the novikov–adian theorem , this implies infiniteness for all m > 1 and n ≥ 2 48 . this was improved in 1996 by i . g . lysënok to m > 1 and n ≥ 8000 . novikov–adian , ivanov and lysënok established considerably more precise results on the structure of the free burnside groups . in the case of the odd exponent , all finite subgroups of the free burnside groups were shown to be cyclic groups . in the even exponent case , each finite subgroup is contained in a product of two dihedral groups , and there exist non-cyclic finite subgroups . moreover , the word and conjugacy problems were shown to be effectively solvable in b ( m , n ) both for the cases of odd and even exponents n . a famous class of counterexamples to the burnside problem is formed by finitely generated non-cyclic infinite groups in which every nontrivial proper subgroup is a finite cyclic group , the so-called tarski monsters . first examples of such groups were constructed by a . yu . ol'shanskii in 1979 using geometric methods , thus affirmatively solving o . yu . schmidt 's problem . in 1982 ol'shanskii was able to strengthen his results to establish existence , for any sufficiently large prime number p ( one can take p > 10 75 ) of a finitely generated infinite group in which every nontrivial proper subgroup is a cyclic group of order p . in a paper published in 1996 , ivanov and ol'shanskii solved an analogue of the burnside problem in an arbitrary hyperbolic group for sufficiently large exponents . restricted burnside problem . formulated in the 1930s , it asks another , related , question : restricted burnside problem . if it is known that a group g with m generators and exponent n is finite , can one conclude that the order of g is bounded by some constant depending only on m and n ? equivalently , are there only finitely many finite groups with m generators of exponent n , up to isomorphism ? this variant of the burnside problem can also be stated in terms of certain universal groups with m generators and exponent n . by basic results of group theory , the intersection of two subgroups of finite index in any group is itself a subgroup of finite index . let m be the intersection of all subgroups of the free burnside group b ( m , n ) which have finite index , then m is a normal subgroup of b ( m , n ) ( otherwise , there exists a subgroup g −1 mg with finite index containing elements not in m ) . one can therefore define a group b 0 ( m , n ) to be the factor group b ( m , n ) /m . every finite group of exponent n with m generators is a homomorphic image of b 0 ( m , n ) . the restricted burnside problem then asks whether b 0 ( m , n ) is a finite group . in the case of the prime exponent p , this problem was extensively studied by a . i . kostrikin during the 1950s , prior to the negative solution of the general burnside problem . his solution , establishing the finiteness of b 0 ( m , p ) , used a relation with deep questions about identities in lie algebras in finite characteristic . the case of arbitrary exponent has been completely settled in the affirmative by efim zelmanov , who was awarded the fields medal in 1994 for his work . notes .