Glycogen storage disease type V

signs and symptoms . the onset of this disease is usually noticed in childhood , but often not diagnosed until the third or fourth decade of life . symptoms include exercise intolerance with myalgia , early fatigue , painful cramps , and myoglobinuria ( often provoked by a bout of exercise ) . myoglobinuria may result from the breakdown of skeletal muscle known as rhabdomyolysis , a condition in which muscle cells breakdown , sending their contents into the bloodstream . patients may exhibit a second wind . this is characterized by the patient 's better tolerance for aerobic exercise such as walking and cycling after approximately 10 minutes . this is attributed to the combination of increased blood flow and the ability of the body to find alternative sources of energy , like fatty acids and proteins . in the long term , patients may exhibit kidney failure due to the myoglobinuria , and with age , patients may exhibit progressively increasing weakness and substantial muscle loss . patients may present at emergency rooms with severe fixed contractures of the muscles and often severe pain . these require urgent assessment for rhabdomyolysis as in about 30 % of cases this leads to acute kidney injury . left untreated , this can be life-threatening . in a small number of cases compartment syndrome has developed , requiring prompt surgical referral . genetics . two autosomal recessive forms of this disease occur , childhood-onset and adult-onset . the gene for myophosphorylase , pygm ( the muscle-type of the glycogen phosphorylase gene ) , is located on chromosome 11q13 . according to the most recent publications , 95 different mutations have been reported . the forms of the mutations may vary between ethnic groups . for example , the r50x ( arg50stop ) mutation ( previously referred to as r49x ) is most common in north america and western europe , and the y84x mutation is most common among central europeans . the exact method of protein disruption has been elucidated in certain mutations . for example , r138w is known to disrupt to pyridoxal phosphate binding site . in 2006 , another mutation ( c.13_14delct ) was discovered which may contribute to increased symptoms in addition to the common arg50stop mutation . . myophosphorylase . . structure . the myophosphorylase structure consists of 842 amino acids . its molecular weight of the unprocessed precursor is 97 kda . the three-dimensional structure has been determined for this protein . the interactions of several amino acids in myophosphorylase 's structure are known . ser-14 is modified by phosphorylase kinase during activation of the enzyme . lys-680 is involved in binding the pyridoxal phosphate , which is the active form of vitamin b6 , a cofactor required by myophosphorylase . by similarity , other sites have been estimated : tyr-76 binds amp , cys-109 and cys-143 are involved in subunit association , and tyr-156 may be involved in allosteric control . function . myophosphorylase is the form of the glycogen phosphorylase found in muscle that catalyses the following reaction : ( ( 1→4 ) -alpha-d-glucosyl ) ( n ) + phosphate ( ( 1→4 ) -alpha-d-glucosyl ) ( n-1 ) + alpha-d-glucose 1-phosphate failure of this enzyme ultimately impairs the operation of atpases . this is due to the lack of normal ph fall during exercise , which impairs the creatine kinase equilibrium and exaggerates the rise of adp . pathophysiology . myophosphorylase is involved in the breakdown of glycogen to glucose for use in muscle . the enzyme removes 1,4 glycosyl residues from outer branches of glycogen and adds inorganic phosphate to form glucose-1-phosphate . cells form glucose-1-phosphate instead of glucose during glycogen breakdown because the polar , phosphorylated glucose can not leave the cell membrane and so is marked for intracellular catabolism . myophosphorylase exists in the active form when phosphorylated . the enzyme phosphorylase kinase plays a role in phosphorylating glycogen phosphorylase to activate it and another enzyme , protein phosphatase 1 , inactivates glycogen phosphorylase through dephosphorylation . diagnosis . there are some experiment that may aid in diagnosis of gsd-v . a muscle biopsy will note the absence of myophosphorylase in muscle fibers . in some cases , acid-schiff stained glycogen can be seen with microscopy . dna sequencing of the pygm gene ( which codes for the muscle isoform of glycogen phosphorylase ) may be done to determine the presence of mutation , determining if mcardle 's is present . this type of testing is considerably less invasive than a muscle biopsy . update 2014 the physician can also perform an ischemic forearm exercise test as described above . some findings suggest a nonischemic test could be performed with similar results . the nonischemic version of this test would involve not cutting off the blood flow to the exercising arm . findings consistent with mcardle 's disease would include a failure of lactate in venous blood and exaggerated ammonia levels . these findings would indicate a severe muscle glycolytic block . serum lactate may fail to rise in part because of increased uptake via the monocarboxylate transporter 1 , which is upregulated in skeletal muscle in mcardle disease . lactate may be used as a fuel source once converted to pyruvate . ammonia levels may rise given ammonia is a by-product of the adenylate kinase , an alternative pathway for atp production . in this pathway , two adp molecules combine to make atp ; amp is deaminated in this process , producing inosinic acid and ammonia . physicians may also check resting levels of creatine kinase , which are moderately increased in 90 % of patients . in some , the level is increased by multitudes - a person without gsd-v will have a ck between 60 and 400iu/l , while a person with the syndrome may have a level of 5,000 iu/l at rest , and may increase to 35,000 iu/l or more with muscle exertion . this can help distinguish mcardle 's syndrome from carnitine palmitoyltransferase ii deficiency ( cpt-ii ) , a lipid-based metabolic disorder which prevents fatty acids from being transported into mitochondria for use as an energy source . also , serum electrolytes and endocrine studies ( such as thyroid function , parathyroid function and growth hormone levels ) will also be completed . urine studies are required only if rhabdomyolysis is suspected . urine volume , urine sediment and myoglobin levels would be ascertained . if rhabdomyolysis is suspected , serum myoglobin , creatine kinase , lactate dehydrogenase , electrolytes and renal function will be checked . treatment . supervised exercise programs have been shown in small studies to improve exercise capacity by several measures . oral sucrose treatment ( for example a sports drink with 75 grams of sucrose in 660 ml . ) taken 30 minutes prior to exercise has been shown to help improve exercise tolerance including a lower heart rate and lower perceived level of exertion compared with placebo . . history . the deficiency was the first metabolic myopathy to be recognized , when dr . mcardle described the first case in a 30-year-old man who always experienced pain and weakness after exercise . dr . mcardle noticed this patient 's cramps were electrically silent and his venous lactate levels failed to increase upon ischemic exercise . ( the ischemic exercise consists of the patient squeezing a hand dynamometer at maximal strength for a specific period of time , usually a minute , with a blood pressure cuff , which is placed on the upper arm and set at 250 mmhg , blocking blood flow to the exercising arm . ) notably , this is the same phenomenon that occurs when muscle is poisoned by iodoacetate , a substance that blocks breakdown of glycogen into glucose and prevents the formation of lactate . dr . mcardle accurately concluded that the patient had a disorder of glycogen breakdown that specifically affected skeletal muscle . the associated enzyme deficiency was discovered in 1959 by w . f . h . m . mommaerts et al . . references . external links . genereview/nih/uw entry on glycogen storage disease type v euromac , an eu-funded consortium of medical and research institutes across europe which is building a patient registry and raising standards of care for people with mcardle disease . international association for muscle glycogen storage disease ( iamgsd ) .