Guibert of Nogent

life . guibert was born of parents from the minor nobility at clermont-en-beauvaisis . guibert claims that it took his parents over seven years to conceive , as he writes in his monodiae . according to his memoirs , the labour nearly cost him and his mother their lives , as guibert breech birth . guibert 's family made an offering to a shrine of the virgin mary , and promised that if guibert survived , he would be dedicated to a clerical life . since he survived , he followed this path . his father was violent , unfaithful and prone to excess , and was captured at the battle of mortemer , dying eight months later . frank barlow , william rufus , ( university of california , 1983 ) , 90 . in his memoirs , guibert views his death as a type of blessing , stating that if his father had survived , he likely would have forced guibert to become a knight , thus breaking the oath to the virgin mary to dedicate guibert to the church . his mother was domineering , of great beauty and intelligence , and exceedingly zealous . guibert writes so much about his mother , and in such detail , that some scholars , such as archambault , have suggested that he may have had an oedipus complex . she assumed control of his education , isolated him from his peers and hired him a private tutor , from the ages of six to twelve . guibert remembers the tutor as brutally exacting , and incompetent ; nevertheless guibert and his tutor developed a strong bond . when guibert was around the age of twelve , his mother retired to an abbey near saint-germer-de-fly ( or flay ) , and he soon followed . entering the order at st . germer , he studied with great zeal , devoting himself at first to the secular poets ovid and virgil & mdash ; an experience which left its imprint on his works . he later changed his focus to theology , through the influence of anselm of bec , who later became the archbishop of canterbury . in 1104 , he was chosen abbot of the poor and tiny abbey of nogent-sous-coucy ( founded 1059 ) and henceforth took a more prominent part in ecclesiastical affairs , where he came into contact with bishops and court society . more importantly , it gave him time to engage in his passion for writing . his first major work of this period is his history of the first crusade called dei gesta per francos ( '' god 's deeds through the franks '' ) , finished in 1108 and touched up in 1121 . the history is largely a paraphrase , in ornate style , of the gesta francorum of an anonymous norman author ; crusade historians have traditionally not given it favourable reviews ; the fact that he stays so close to gesta francorum , and the difficulty of his latin , make it seem superfluous . recent editors and translators , however , have called attention to his excellent writing and original material . more importantly , the dei gesta supplies us with invaluable information about the reception of the crusade in france . guibert personally knew crusaders , had grown up with crusaders , and talked with them about their memories and experiences . for the modern reader , his autobiography ( de vita sua sive monodiarum suarum libri tres ) , or monody ( solitary songs , commonly referred to as his memoirs ) , written in 1115 , is considered the most interesting of his works . written towards the close of his life , and based on the model of the confessions of saint augustine , he traces his life from his childhood to adulthood . throughout , he gives picturesque glimpses of his time and the customs of his country . the text is divided into three '' books . '' the first covers his own life , from birth to adulthood ; the second is a brief history of his monastery ; the third is a description of an uprising in nearby laon . he provides invaluable information on daily life in castles and monastery , on the educational methods then in vogue , and gives insights into some of the major and minor personalities of his time . his work is coloured by his passions and prejudices , which add a personal touch to the work . for example , he was quite sceptical about the propriety of catholic relics of jesus christ , the virgin mary and numerous catholic saints , and entertained doubts about their authenticity , noting that some shrines and pilgrimage sites made conflicting claims about which bodily remnants , clothing or other sacred objects were held at which site . charles freeman '' brooding on god '' history today : 62 : 3 : march 2012 : 47-52 charles freeman : holy bones , holy dust : how relics shaped the history of medieval europe : yale university press : 2011 . notes . references . sources the autobiography of guibert . c.c . swinton bland , translator , the autobiography of guibert , abbot of nogent-sous-coucy ( london : george routledge : new york : e.p . dutton , 1925 ) from internet archive memoirs and from the internet medieval sourcebook . excerpts from the english translation by c.c . swinton bland . on the saints and their relics from the internet medieval sourcebook the revolt in laon from the internet medieval sourcebook . on the first crusade , includes guibert 's version of pope urban 's speech and impressions of peter the hermit . the deeds of god through the franks , e-text from project gutenberg . translated by robert levine 1997 . books paul j . archambault ( 1995 ) . a monk 's confession : the memoirs of guibert of nogent . john benton , ed . ( 1970 ) . self and society in medieval france : the memoirs of abbot guibert of nogent . a revised edition of the 1925 c.c . swinton bland edition , includes introduction and latest research . ( 1984 reprint , university of toronto press ) . guibert of nogent , dei gesta per francos , ed . r.b.c . huygens , corpus christianorum , continuatio mediaevalis 127a ( turnhout : brepols , 1996 ) robert levine ( 1997 ) . the deeds of god through the franks : a translation of guibert de nogent 's ` gesta dei per francos ' . joseph mcalhany , jay rubenstein , eds . ( 2011 ) . monodies and on the relics of saints : the autobiography and a manifesto of a french monk from the time of the crusades . translated from the latin , with introduction and notes . penguin classics . jay rubenstein ( 2002 ) . guibert of nogent : portrait of a medieval mind , london . karin fuchs , zeichen und wunder bei guibert de nogent . kommunikation , deutungen und funktionalisierungen von wundererzählungen im 12 . jahrhundert ( münchen : oldenbourg , 2008 ) ( pariser historische studien , 84 ) . laurence terrier ( 2013 ) . '' la doctrine de l'eucharistie de guibert de nogent . de pigneribus livre ii . texte et traduction '' , paris , vrin . articles elizabeth lapina , '' anti-jewish rhetoric in guibert of nogent 's dei gesta per francos , '' journal of medieval history , 35,3 ( 2009 ) , 239-253 . . external links .