1950 in literature

events . january 19 – isaac asimov 's first full-length novel , pebble in the sky , is published in the united states by doubleday . january 26 – for the film noir gun crazy , released on this day in the united states , co-writer dalton trumbo is billed as millard kaufman , due to the former 's inclusion on the hollywood blacklist . this year trumbo serves 11 months in prison for contempt of congress , in the federal penitentiary in ashland , kentucky . february – jack kerouac has his first novel , the town and the city , published in the united states . april 8 – j . d . salinger 's wartime short story '' for esmé — with love and squalor '' is published in the new yorker . may 11 – eugène ionesco 's first play , the bald soprano is first performed , in paris . september 10 – george bernard shaw is taken to hospital after fracturing a hip falling out of a tree he was pruning . he is released from hospital a few weeks later after a successful operation , but suffers kidney failure and dies at his home , shaw 's corner ( ayot st lawrence , hertfordshire , england ) , aged 94 . october – galaxy science fiction magazine launches in the united states . october 2 – the daily comic strip peanuts , by charles m . schulz , makes its debut in nine united states newspapers . october 16 – c . s . lewis 's novel the lion , the witch and the wardrobe , first of the seven-book the chronicles of narnia , is published in the uk . december 20 – poet t . s . eliot expresses concerns about '' the television habit '' in a letter to the times ( london ) . unknown dates aleksandr solzhenitsyn is sent to a '' special camp '' for political prisoners in kazakhstan . the 13th–14th century japanese epic poem the tale of the heike ( 平家物語 ) is retold in modern prose by the historical novelist eiji yoshikawa as shin heike monogatari ( new tale of the heike ) and published in asahi weekly . blackwell 's opens the first specialist children 's bookshop , in broad street , oxford ( england ) . adrian bell begins his countryman 's notebook column in the eastern daily press . . new books . fiction . reginald arkell – old herbaceous ( reissued 2002 ) isaac asimov i , robot ( collected short stories ) pebble in the sky georges bataille – l'abbé c georges bernanos – night is darkest ray bradbury – the martian chronicles gwen bristow – jubilee trail pearl s . buck – the child who never grew victor canning – venetian bird john dickson carr the bride of newgate night at the mocking widow ( as carter dickson ) agatha christie a murder is announced three blind mice and other stories beverly cleary – henry huggins catherine cookson – kate hannigan william cooper – scenes from provincial life a . j . cronin – the spanish gardener l . sprague de camp and p . schuyler miller – genus homo l . sprague de camp and fletcher pratt – the castle of iron daphne du maurier – the parasites marguerite duras – un barrage contre le pacifique ( the sea wall ) friedrich dürrenmatt – the judge and his hangman ( der richter und sein henker ) hans fallada ( died 1947 ) – the drinker ( der trinker ; written 1944 ) ford madox ford ( died 1939 ) – parade 's end ( tetralogy first published together under this title ) james fugaté ( as james barr ) – quatrefoil : a modern novel hugh garner – cabbagetown gaito gazdanov – the buddha 's return ( возвращение будды , vozvrashchenie buddy , serialization completed ) frank gilbreth , jr . and ernestine gilbreth carey – belles on their toes winston graham – night without stars vasily grossman – stalingrad giovanni guareschi – the little world of don camillo frank hardy – power without glory ernest hemingway – across the river and into the trees john hersey – the wall robert hichens – beneath the magic patricia highsmith – strangers on a train elizabeth jane howard – the beautiful visit robert e . howard – conan the conqueror hammond innes – the angry mountain mackinlay kantor – lee and grant at appomattox margaret kennedy – the feast jack kerouac – the town and the city frances parkinson keyes – joy street damon knight – to serve man ( short stories ) manuel mujica láinez – misteriosa buenos aires ( short stories ) doris lessing – the grass is singing audrey erskine lindop – the tall headlines rose macaulay – the world my wilderness roger nimier – the blue hussar juan carlos onetti – la vida breve ( a brief life ) cesare pavese – la luna e i falò mervyn peake – gormenghast pramoedya ananta toer – perburuan ( the fugitive ) kukrit pramoj – four reigns ( สี่แผ่นดิน , si phaen din , serialized ) barbara pym – some tame gazelle ellery queen – double , double conrad richter – the town henry morton robinson – the cardinal cezaro rossetti – kredu min , sinjorino ! budd schulberg – the disenchanted nevil shute – a town like alice josef škvorecký – konec nylonového věku ( the end of the nylon age ) john steinbeck – burning bright rex stout three doors to death in the best families edith templeton – summer in the country tereska torrès – women 's barracks boris vian – the red grass gore vidal – dark green , bright red a . e . van vogt – the voyage of the space beagle mika waltari – the adventurer evelyn waugh – helena denton welch – a voice through a cloud kathleen winsor – star money yasushi inoue 黯い潮 ( kuroi ushio ) その人の名は云えない ( sono hito no na ha ienai ) 闘牛 ( tōgyū , the bullfight ) frank yerby – floodtide . children and young people . mabel esther allan over the sea to school a school in danger leila berg – the adventures of chunky ( first in the chunky series ) joan mary wayne brown as mary gervaise a pony of your own ponies and holidays ( first two in the georgie series of ten books ) anthony buckeridge – jennings goes to school beverly cleary – henry huggins c . s . forester – mr . midshipman hornblower william glynne-jones – pennants on the main c . s . lewis – the lion , the witch and the wardrobe ( first in the chronicles of narnia series ) elinor lyon – the house in hiding ( first novel in ian and sovra series ) katherine milhous – the egg tree anne parrish – the story of appleby capple richard scarry – first book ever dr . seuss if i ran the zoo gerald mcboing boing yertle the turtle and other stories james thurber – the 13 clocks . drama . arthur adamov la parodie l'invasion la grande et la petite manoeuvre bertolt brecht – the tutor ( der hofmeister , adapted from lenz ) emilio carballido – rosalba y los llaveros john dighton – who goes there ! friedrich dürrenmatt – romulus the great ( romulus der große ) christopher fry – venus observed hugh hastings – seagulls over sorrento kermit hunter – unto these hills william inge – come back , little sheba eugène ionesco – the bald soprano ( la cantatrice chauve ) frederick lonsdale – the way things go esther mccracken – cry liberty terence rattigan – who is sylvia ? nelly sachs – eli : ein mysterienspiel vom leiden israels ( verse ) john steinbeck – burning bright vernon sylvaine – will any gentleman ? . poetry . leah bodine drake – a hornbook for witches pablo neruda – canto general stevie smith – not waving but drowning . non-fiction . roland bainton – here i stand : a life of martin luther elizabeth david – a book of mediterranean food victor gollancz ( ed . ) – a year of grace ernst gombrich – the story of art thor heyerdahl – kon-tiki octavio paz – the labyrinth of solitude lionel trilling – the liberal imagination : essays on literature and society raymond williams – reading and criticism cecil woodham-smith – florence nightingale desmond young – rommel : the desert fox . births . january 5 – valentina tăzlăuanu , moldovan essayist , journalist and theatre critic ( died 2020 ) january 17 – luis lópez nieves , puerto rican writer january 20 – edward hirsch , american poet january 22 – paul bew , irish historian and academic january 24 – benjamin urrutia , ecuadorian author and scholar january 25 – gloria naylor , african-american novelist and academic february 11 – mauri kunnas , finnish children ’ s author february 20 – jean-paul dubois , french novelist and journalist february 26 – adam cornford , english poet and essayist march 19 – kirsten boie , german children 's writer march 23 – ahdaf soueif , egyptian novelist april 20 – steve erickson , american novelist may 1 – aldino muianga , mozambican physician and writer june 21 – anne carson , canadian poet and scholar june 25 – barbara gowdy , canadian novelist july 3 – zhang kangkang ( 张抗抗 ) , chinese writer july 22 – s . e . hinton , american novelist august 9 – nicole tourneur , french novelist ( died 2011 ) august 26 – carl deuker , american author september 7 – peggy noonan , american columnist , political writer september 16 – henry louis gates , american literary critic september 20 – james blaylock , american fantasy author september 28 – christina hoff sommers , american author and philosopher october 10 – nora roberts , american novelist october 12 – edward bloor , american novelist october 15 – teresa amy , uruguayan poet and translator ( died 2017 ) october 17 – david adams richards , canadian author october 18 – wendy wasserstein , american playwright ( died 2006 ) october 27 – fran lebowitz , american writer november 3 – massimo mongai , italian author november 4 – charles frazier , american novelist december 18 – leonard maltin , american film critic and historian december 20 – sheenagh pugh , english-born poet and novelist december 30 – timothy mo , hong kong british novelist unknown dates bandi , north korean fiction writer candace robb , american historical novelist . deaths . january 5 – basil williams , english historian ( born 1867 ) january 8 – joseph schumpeter , austrian/american political economist ( born 1883 ) january 21 – george orwell ( eric arthur blair ) , english novelist ( tuberculosis , born 1903 ) february 7 – d . k . broster , english historical novelist ( born 1877 ) february 13 – rafael sabatini , italian-born english-language novelist ( born 1875 ) february 24 – irving bacheller , american journalist and novelist ( born 1859 ) march 5 – edgar lee masters , american poet ( born 1868 ) march 11 – heinrich mann , german novelist ( born 1871 ) march 19 – edgar rice burroughs , american author ( born 1875 ) march 22 – emmanuel mounier , french philosopher , journalist and theologian ( born 1905 ) april 1 – f . o . matthiessen , american historian and literary critic ( born 1902 ) april 4 – cuthbert whitaker , english yearbook editor ( born 1873 ) april 8 – albert ehrenstein , austrian expressionist poet ( born 1886 ) april 27 – h . bonciu , romanian novelist , poet and translator ( cancer , born 1893 ) may 6 – agnes smedley , american journalist and writer ( born 1892 ) may 8 – cezaro rossetti , scottish-born esperanto writer ( born 1901 ) may 10 – belle da costa greene , american librarian ( born 1883 ) may 11 – alfred o . andersson , english-born american journalist and newspaper publisher ( born 1874 ) june 4 – george cecil ives , german-born english poet , writer and reformer ( born 1867 ) june 14 – katharine glasier , english writer and socialist ( born 1867 ) july 7 – guy gilpatric , american short story writer ( suicide , born 1896 ) august 27 – cesare pavese , italian poet and novelist ( born 1908 ) september 6 – olaf stapledon , english philosopher and science fiction writer ( heart attack , born 1886 ) september 18 – henrik rytter , norwegian dramatist , lyricist and translator ( born 1887 ) october 9 – nicolai hartmann , german-latvian philosopher ( born 1882 ) october 19 – edna st . vincent millay , american poet ( heart attack , born 1892 ) october 31 – herbert kelly , english religious writer and cleric ( born 1860 ) november 2 – george bernard shaw , irish dramatist , critic and activist ( born 1856 ) november 25 – johannes v . jensen , danish author ( born 1873 ) december 28 – sigizmund krzhizhanovsky , soviet short-story writer ( born 1887 ) december 31 – xavier villaurrutia , mexican poet and dramatist ( born 1903 ) unknown dates edith escombe , english fiction writer and essayist ( born 1866 ) helen rowland , american journalist and humorist ( born 1875 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : elfrida vipont , the lark on the wing james tait black memorial prize for fiction : robert henriques , through the valley james tait black memorial prize for biography : cecil woodham-smith , florence nightingale mystery writer of japan – kazuo shimada , shakai-bu kisha ( '' city reporter '' ) newbery medal for children 's literature : marguerite de angeli , the door in the wall newdigate prize : john bayley nobel prize for literature : bertrand russell premio nadal : elena quiroga , viento del norte pulitzer prize for drama : richard rodgers , oscar hammerstein ii , joshua logan , south pacific pulitzer prize for fiction : a . b . guthrie , jr . , the way west pulitzer prize for poetry : gwendolyn brooks , annie allen ( first african american winner ) . references .