Fuselage

types of structures . truss structure . this type of structure is still in use in many lightweight aircraft using welded steel tube trusses . a box truss fuselage structure can also be built out of wood—often covered with plywood . simple box structures may be rounded by the addition of supported lightweight stringers , allowing the fabric covering to form a more aerodynamic shape , or one more pleasing to the eye . geodesic construction . geodesic structural elements were used by barnes wallis for british vickers between the wars and into world war ii to form the whole of the fuselage , including its aerodynamic shape . in this type of construction multiple flat strip stringers are wound about the formers in opposite spiral directions , forming a basket-like appearance . this proved to be light , strong , and rigid and had the advantage of being made almost entirely of wood . a similar construction using aluminum alloy was used in the vickers warwick with less materials than would be required for other structural types . the geodesic structure is also redundant and so can survive localized damage without catastrophic failure . a fabric covering over the structure completed the aerodynamic shell ( see the vickers wellington for an example of a large warplane which uses this process ) . the logical evolution of this is the creation of fuselages using molded plywood , in which multiple sheets are laid with the grain in differing directions to give the monocoque type below . monocoque shell . in this method , the exterior surface of the fuselage is also the primary structure . a typical early form of this ( see the lockheed vega ) was built using molded plywood , where the layers of plywood are formed over a '' plug '' or within a mold . a later form of this structure uses fiberglass cloth impregnated with polyester or epoxy resin , instead of plywood , as the skin . a simple form of this used in some amateur-built aircraft uses rigid expanded foam plastic as the core , with a fiberglass covering , eliminating the necessity of fabricating molds , but requiring more effort in finishing ( see the rutan varieze ) . an example of a larger molded plywood aircraft is the de havilland mosquito fighter/light bomber of world war ii . no plywood-skin fuselage is truly monocoque , since stiffening elements are incorporated into the structure to carry concentrated loads that would otherwise buckle the thin skin . the use of molded fiberglass using negative ( '' female '' ) molds ( which give a nearly finished product ) is prevalent in the series production of many modern sailplanes . the use of molded composites for fuselage structures is being extended to large passenger aircraft such as the boeing 787 dreamliner ( using pressure-molding on female molds ) . semi-monocoque . this is the preferred method of constructing an all-aluminum fuselage . first , a series of frames in the shape of the fuselage cross sections are held in position on a rigid fixture . these frames are then joined with lightweight longitudinal elements called longeron . these are in turn covered with a skin of sheet aluminum , attached by riveting or by bonding with special adhesives . the fixture is then disassembled and removed from the completed fuselage shell , which is then fitted out with wiring , controls , and interior equipment such as seats and luggage bins . most modern large aircraft are built using this technique , but use several large sections constructed in this fashion which are then joined with fasteners to form the complete fuselage . as the accuracy of the final product is determined largely by the costly fixture , this form is suitable for series production , where many identical aircraft are to be produced . early examples of this type include the douglas aircraft dc-2 and dc-3 civil aircraft and the boeing b-17 flying fortress . most metal light aircraft are constructed using this process . both monocoque and semi-monocoque are referred to as '' stressed skin '' structures as all or a portion of the external load ( i.e . from wings and empennage , and from discrete masses such as the engine ) is taken by the surface covering . in addition , all the load from internal pressurization is carried ( as skin tension ) by the external skin . the proportioning of loads between the components is a design choice dictated largely by the dimensions , strength , and elasticity of the components available for construction and whether or not a design is intended to be '' self jigging '' , not requiring a complete fixture for alignment . materials . early aircraft were constructed of wood frames covered in fabric . as monoplanes became popular , metal frames improved the strength , which eventually led to all-metal-structure aircraft , with metal covering for all its exterior surfaces - this was first junkers j 1 . some modern aircraft are constructed with composite materials for major control surfaces , wings , or the entire fuselage such as the boeing 787 . on the 787 , it makes possible higher pressurization levels and larger windows for passenger comfort as well as lower weight to reduce operating costs . the boeing 787 weighs less than if it were an all-aluminum assembly . windows . cockpit windshields on the airbus a320 must withstand bird strikes up to 350 kt and are made of chemically strengthened glass . they are usually composed of three layers or plies , of glass or plastic : the inner two are 8 & nbsp ; mm ( 0.3 in . ) thick each and are structural , while the outer ply , about 3 mm thick , is a barrier against foreign object damage and abrasion , with often a hydrophobic coating . it must prevent fogging inside the cabin and de-ice from . this was previously done with thin wires similar to a rear car window but is now accomplished with a transparent , nanometers-thick coating of indium tin oxide sitting between plies , electrically conductive and thus transmitting heat . curved glass improves aerodynamics but sight criteria also needs larger panes . a cockpit windshield is composed of 4–6 panels , 35 & nbsp ; kg ( 77 & nbsp ; lb . ) each on an airbus a320 . in its lifetime , an average aircraft goes through three or four windshields , and the market is shared evenly between oem and higher margins aftermarket . cabin windows , made from much lighter than glass stretched acrylic glass , consists of multiple panes : an outer one built to support four times the maximum cabin pressure , an inner one for redundancy and a scratch pane near the passenger . acrylic is susceptible to crazing : a network of fine cracks appears but can be polished to restore optical transparency , removal and polishing typically undergo every 2–3 years for uncoated windows . . wing integration . '' flying wing '' aircraft , such as the northrop yb-49 and the b-2 spirit have no separate fuselage ; instead what would be the fuselage is a thickened portion of the wing structure . conversely , there have been a small number of aircraft designs which have no separate wing , but use the fuselage to generate lift . examples include nasa 's experimental lifting body designs and the vought flying pancake . a blended wing body can be considered a mixture of the above . it carries the useful load in a fuselage producing lift . a modern example is boeing x-48 . one of the earliest aircraft using this design approach is burnelli cby-3 , which fuselage was airfoil shaped to produce lift . gallery . file : airbus a340 intérieur fuselage arrière.jpg interior rear-end of the main passenger level on an airbus a340 , showing the rear bulkhead as well as a doorway opening file : boeing 747 le bourget fra 002.jpg rough boeing 747 interior airframe file : cubcrafters fuselage.jpg fuselage of a cubcrafters carbon cub file : christen.eagle.2.g-ccyo.arp.jpg the fuselage can be short , and seemingly unaerodynamic , as in this christen eagle file : glider fuselage schematic.jpg glider fuselage schematic