Louis Blériot

early years . born at no.17h rue de l'arbre à poires ( now rue sadi-carnot ) in cambrai , elliott 2000 , p . 11 . louis was the first of five children born to clémence and charles blériot . in 1882 , aged 10 , blériot was sent as a boarder to the institut notre dame in cambrai , where he frequently won class prizes , including one for engineering drawing . when he was 15 , he moved on to the lycée at amiens , where he lived with an aunt . after passing the exams for his baccalaureate in science and german , he determined to try to enter the prestigious école centrale in paris . entrance was by a demanding exam for which special tuition was necessary : consequently blériot spent a year at the collège sainte-barbe in paris . he passed the exam , placing 74th among the 243 successful candidates , and doing especially well in the tests of engineering drawing ability . after three years of demanding study at the école centrale , blériot graduated 113th of 203 in his graduating class . he then embarked on a term of compulsory military service , and spent a year as a sub-lieutenant in the 24th artillery regiment , stationed in tarbes in the pyrenees . he later got a job with baguès , an electrical engineering company in paris . sanger 2008 , p . 5 . he left the company after developing the world 's first practical headlamp for automobiles , using a compact integral acetylene generator . in 1897 , blériot opened a showroom for headlamps at 41 rue de richlieu in paris . the business was successful , and soon he was supplying his lamps to both renault and panhard-levassor , two of the foremost automobile manufacturers of the day . elliot 2000 , pp . 16–18 . in october 1900 blériot was lunching in his usual restaurant near his showroom when his eye was caught by a young woman dining with her parents . that evening , he told his mother '' i saw a young woman today . i will marry her , or i will marry no one . '' elliott 2000 , p . 20 . a bribe to a waiter secured details of her identity ; she was alice védères , the daughter of a retired army officer . blériot set about courting her with the same determination that he would later bring to his aviation experiments , and on 21 february 1901 the couple were married . elliott 2000 , p . 22 . . early aviation experiments . blériot had become interested in aviation while at the ecole centrale , but his serious experimentation was probably sparked by seeing clément ader 's avion iii at the 1900 exposition universelle . by then his headlamp business was doing well enough for blériot to be able to devote both time and money to experimentation . his first experiments were with a series of ornithopters , which were unsuccessful . in april 1905 , blériot met gabriel voisin , then employed by ernest archdeacon to assist with his experimental gliders . blériot was a spectator at voisin 's first trials of the floatplane glider he had built on 8 june 1905 . cine photography was among blériot 's hobbies , and the film footage of this flight was shot by him . the success of these trials prompted him to commission a similar machine from voisin , the blériot ii glider . on 18 july an attempt to fly this aircraft was made , ending in a crash in which voisin nearly drowned , but this did not deter blériot . indeed , he suggested that voisin should stop working for archdeacon and enter into partnership with him . voisin accepted the proposal , and the two men established the ateliers d ' aviation edouard surcouf , blériot et voisin . active between 1905 and 1906 , the company built two unsuccessful powered aircraft , the blériot iii and the blériot iv , largely a rebuild of its predecessor . sanger 2008 , pp . 5–6 . both these aircraft were powered with the lightweight antoinette engines being developed by léon levavasseur . blériot became a shareholder in the company , and in may 1906 , joined the board of directors . elliott 2000 , p . 49 . the blériot iv was damaged in a taxiing accident at bagatelle on 12 november 1906 . the disappointment of the failure of his aircraft was compounded by the success of alberto santos dumont later that day , when he managed to fly his 14-bis a distance of , winning the aéro club de france prize for the first flight of over 100 metres . this also took place at bagatelle , and was witnessed by blériot . the partnership with voisin was dissolved and blériot established his own business , recherches aéronautiques louis blériot , where he started creating his own aircraft , experimenting with various configurations sanger 2008 , pp . 92–93 . and eventually creating the world 's first successful powered monoplane . the first of these , the canard ( aeronautics ) blériot v , was first tried on 21 march 1907 , elliott 2000 , p . 53 . when blériot limited his experiments to ground runs , which resulted in damage to the undercarriage . two further ground trials , also damaging the aircraft , were undertaken , followed by another attempt on 5 april . the flight was only of around 6 & nbsp ; m ( 20 & nbsp ; ft ) , after which he cut his engine and landed , slightly damaging the undercarriage . more trials followed , the last on 19 april when , travelling at a speed of around 50 km/h ( 30 & nbsp ; mph ) , the aircraft left the ground , blériot over-responded when the nose began to rise , and the machine hit the ground nose–first , and somersaulted . the aircraft was largely destroyed , but blériot was , by great good fortune , unhurt . the engine of the aircraft was immediately behind his seat , and he was very lucky not to have been crushed by it . this was followed by the blériot vi , a tandem wing design , first tested on 7 july , when the aircraft failed to lift off . blériot then enlarged the wings slightly , and on 11 july a short successful flight of around 25–30 metres ( 84–100 & nbsp ; ft ) was made , reaching an altitude of around 2 & nbsp ; m ( 7 & nbsp ; ft ) . this was blériot 's first truly successful flight . further successful flights took place that month , and by 25 july he had managed a flight of 150 & nbsp ; m ( 490 & nbsp ; ft ) . on 6 august he managed to reach an altitude of 12 & nbsp ; m ( 39 & nbsp ; ft ) , but one of the blades of the propeller worked loose , resulting in a heavy landing which damaged the aircraft . he then fitted a 50 & nbsp ; hp ( 37 & nbsp ; kw ) v-16 antoinette engine . tests on 17 september showed a startling improvement in performance : the aircraft quickly reached an altitude of 25 & nbsp ; m ( 82 & nbsp ; ft ) , when the engine suddenly cut out and the aircraft went into a spiralling nosedive . in desperation blériot climbed out of his seat and threw himself towards the tail . the aircraft partially pulled out of the dive , and came to earth in a more or less horizontal attitude . his only injuries were some minor cuts on the face , caused by fragments of glass from his broken goggles . after this crash blériot abandoned the aircraft , concentrating on his next machine . this , the blériot vii , was a monoplane with tail surfaces arranged in what has become , apart from its use of differential elevators movement for lateral control , the modern conventional layout . this aircraft , which first flew on 16 november 1907 , has been recognised as the first successful monoplane . sanger 2008 , pp . 6–8 . on 6 december blériot managed two flights of over 500 metres , including a successful u-turn . this was the most impressive achievement to date of any of the french pioneer aviators , causing patrick alexander to write to major baden baden-powell , president of the royal aeronautical society , '' i got back from paris last night . i think blériot with his new machine is leading the way '' . two more successful flights were made on 18 december , but the undercarriage collapsed after the second flight ; the aircraft overturned and was wrecked . blériot 's next aircraft , the blériot viii was shown to the press in february 1908 . although it was the first to use of a successful combination of hand/arm-operated joystick and foot-operated rudder control , this was a failure in its first form . after modifications , it proved successful , and on 31 october 1908 he succeeded in making a cross-country flight , making a round trip from toury to arteny and back , a total distance of . this was not the first cross-country flight by a narrow margin , since henri farman had flown from bouy to rheims the preceding day . four days later , the aircraft was destroyed in a taxiing accident . three of his aircraft were displayed at the first paris aero salon , held at the end of december : the blériot ix monoplane ; the blériot x , a three-seat pusher biplane ; and the blériot xi , which would go on to be his most successful model . the first two of the designs , which used antoinette engines , never flew , possibly because at this time , blériot severed his connection with the antoinette company because the company had begun to design and construct aircraft as well as engines , presenting blériot with a conflict of interests . the type xi was initially powered by a rep engine and was first flown with this engine on 18 january 1909 , sanger 2008 , p . 125 . but although the aircraft flew well , after a very short time in the air , the engine began to overheat , leading blériot to get in touch with alessandro anzani , who had developed a successful motorcycle engine and had subsequently entered the aero-engine market . importantly , anzani was associated with lucien chauvière , who had designed a sophisticated laminated walnut propeller . the combination of a reliable engine and an efficient propeller would contribute greatly to the success of the type xi . this was shortly followed by the blériot xii , a high-wing two-seater monoplane first flown on 21 may , and for a while blériot concentrated on flying this machine , flying it with a passenger on 2 july , and on 12 july making the world 's first flight with two passengers , one of whom was santos dumont . a few days later the crankshaft of the e.n.v . engine broke , and blériot resumed trials of the type xi . on 25 june he made a flight lasting 15 minutes and 30 seconds , his longest to date , and the following day increased this personal record to over 36 minutes . at the end of july he took part in an aviation meet at douai , where he made a flight lasting over 47 minutes in the type xii on 3 july : the following day he flew the type xi for 50 minutes at another meet at juvisy , and on 13 july , he made a cross-country flight of from etampes to orléans . blériot 's determination is shown by the fact that during the flight at douai made on 2 july part of the asbestos insulation worked loose from the exhaust pipe after 15 minutes in the air . after half an hour , one of his shoes had been burnt through and he was in considerable pain , but nevertheless continued his flight until engine failure ended the flight . blériot suffered third-degree burns , and his injuries took over two months to heal . elliott 2000 , p . 96 . on 16 june 1909 , blériot and voisin were jointly awarded the prix osiris , '' prix osiris awarded to aviation . '' flight international , 19 june 1909 . awarded by the institut de france every three years to the frenchman who had made the greatest contribution to science . three days later , on 19 july , he informed the daily mail of his intention to make an attempt to win the thousand-pound prize offered by the paper for a successful crossing of the english channel in a heavier-than-air aircraft . 1909 channel crossing . the daily mail prize was first announced in october 1908 , with a prize of £500 being offered for a flight made before the end of the year . when 1908 passed with no serious attempt being made , the offer was renewed for the year of 1909 , with the prize money doubled to £1,000 like some of the other prizes offered , it was widely seen as nothing more than a way to gain cheap publicity for the paper : the paris newspaper le matin commenting that there was no chance of the prize being won . earlier , the english channel had been crossed by balloon by jean-pierre blanchard and john jeffries in 1785 . gibbs-smith 1953 , pp . 96–97 . '' balloon intelligence . '' daily universal register , issue 8 , january 1785 , p . 2 . blériot , who intended to fly across the channel in his type xi monoplane , had three rivals for the prize , the most serious being hubert latham , a french national of english extraction flying an antoinette iv monoplane . he was favoured by both the united kingdom and france to win . the others were charles de lambert , a russian aristocrat with french ancestry , and one of wilbur wright 's pupils , and arthur seymour , an englishman who reputedly owned a voisin biplane . '' the cross-channel flight . '' the times ( london ) , issue 39001 , 2 july 1909 , p . 5 . de lambert got as far as establishing a base at wissant , near calais , but seymour did nothing beyond submitting his entry to the daily mail . lord northcliffe , who had befriended wilbur wright during his sensational 1908 public demonstrations in france , had offered the prize hoping that wilbur would win . wilbur wanted to make an attempt and cabled brother orville in the usa . orville , then recuperating from serious injuries sustained in a crash , replied telling him not to make the channel attempt until he could come to france and assist . also wilbur had already amassed a fortune in prize money for altitude and duration flights and had secured sales contracts for the wright flyer with the french , italians , british and germans ; his tour in europe was essentially complete by the summer of 1909 . both brothers saw the channel reward of only a thousand pounds as insignificant considering the dangers of the flight . the wright brothers : heirs of prometheus by marvin mcfarland , edited richard p . hallion ; c.1978 by the smithsonian institution latham arrived in calais in early july , and set up his base at sangatte in the semi-derelict buildings which had been constructed for a 1881 attempt to dig a tunnel under the channel . the event was the subject of great public interest ; it was reported that there were 10,000 visitors at calais and a similar crowd at dover . the marconi company set up a special radio link for the occasion , with one station on cap blanc nez at sangatte and the other on the roof of the lord warden hotel in dover . elliott 2000 , p . 86 . the crowds were in for a wait : the weather was windy , and latham did not make an attempt until 19 & nbsp ; july , but from his destination his aircraft developed engine trouble and was forced to make the world 's first water landing in distress . latham was rescued by the french destroyer harpon and taken back to france , walsh 2007 , pp . 93-97 . where he was met by the news that blériot had entered the competition . blériot , accompanied by two mechanics and his friend alfred leblanc , arrived in calais on wednesday 21 july and set up their base at a farm near the beach at les baraques , between calais and sangatte . the following day a replacement aircraft for latham was delivered from the antoinette factory . the wind was too strong for an attempted crossing on friday and saturday , but on saturday evening it began to drop , raising hopes in both camps . leblanc went to bed at around midnight but was too keyed up to sleep well ; at two o'clock , he was up , and judging that the weather was ideal woke blériot who , unusually , was pessimistic and had to be persuaded to eat breakfast . his spirits revived , however , and by half past three , his wife alice had been put on board the destroyer escopette , which was to escort the flight . at 4:15 am , 25 july , watched by an excited crowd , blériot made a short trial flight in his type xi , and then , on a signal that the sun had risen ( the competition rules required a flight between sunrise and sunset ) , he took off at 4:41 to attempt the crossing . elliott 2000 , p . 113 . flying at approximately and an altitude of about 250 & nbsp ; ft ( 76 & nbsp ; m ) , he set off across the channel . not having a compass , blériot took his cours from the escopette , which was heading for dover , but he soon overtook the ship . the visibility deteriorated , and he later said , '' for more than 10 minutes i was alone , isolated , lost in the midst of the immense sea , and i did not see anything on the horizon or a single ship '' . clark , nicola . '' 100 years later , celebrating a historic flight in europe . '' the new york times , 24 july 2009 . retrieved : 25 july 2009 . the grey line of the english coast , however , came into sight on his left ; the wind had increased , and had blown him to the east of his intended course . altering course , he followed the line of the coast about a mile offshore until he spotted charles fontaine , the correspondent from le matin waving a large tricolour as a signal . unlike latham , blériot had not visited dover to find a suitable spot to land , and the choice had been made by fontaine , who had selected a patch of gently sloping land called northfall meadow , close to dover castle , where there was a low point in the cliffs . once over land , blériot circled twice to lose height , and cut his engine at an altitude of about , making a heavy '' pancake '' landing due to the gusty wind conditions ; the undercarriage was damaged and one blade of the propeller was shattered , but blériot was unhurt . the flight had taken 36 minutes and 30 seconds . news of his departure had been sent by radio to dover , but it was generally expected that he would attempt to land on the beach to the west of the town . the daily mail correspondent , realising that blériot had landed near the castle , set off at speed in a motor car and took blériot to the harbour , where he was reunited with his wife . the couple , surrounded by a cheering crowd and photographers , were then taken to the lord warden hotel at the foot of the admiralty pier ; blériot had become a celebrity . the blériot memorial , the outline of the aircraft laid out in sett ( paving ) in the turf ( funded by oil manufacturer alexander duckham ) , marks his landing spot above the cliffs near dover castle . the aircraft which was used in the crossing is now preserved in the musée des arts et métiers in paris . later life . blériot 's success brought about an immediate transformation of the status of recherches aéronautiques louis blériot . by the time of the channel flight , he had spent at least 780,000 francs on his aviation experiments . elliott 2000 , p . 140 . ( to put this figure into context , one of blériot 's skilled mechanics was paid 250 francs a month . ) now this investment began to pay off : orders for copies of the type xi quickly came , and by the end of the year , orders for over 100 aircraft had been received , each selling for 10,000 francs . at the end of august , blériot was one of the flyers at the grande semaine d'aviation held at reims , where he was narrowly beaten by glenn curtiss in the first gordon bennett trophy . blériot did , however , succeed in winning the prize for the fastest lap of the circuit , establishing a new world speed record for aircraft . blériot followed his flights at reims with appearances at other aviation meetings in brescia , budapest , bucharest in 1909 ( making the first airplane flights in both hungary and romania ) . up to this time he had had great good luck in walking away from accidents that had destroyed the aircraft , but his luck deserted him in december 1910 at an aviation meeting in istanbul . flying in gusty conditions to placate an impatient and restive crowd , he crashed on top of a house , breaking several ribs and suffering internal injuries : he was hospitalized for three weeks . elliott 2000 , p . 165 . between 1909 and the outbreak of world war i in 1914 , blériot produced about 900 aircraft , most of them variations of the type xi model . elliott 2000 , p . 173 . blériot monoplanes and voisin-type biplanes , with the latter 's farman derivatives dominated the pre-war aviation market . gibbs-smith 1953 , p . 255 . there were concerns about the safety of monoplanes in general , both in france and the uk . the french government grounded all monoplanes in the french army from february 1912 after accidents to four blériots , but lifted it after trials in may supported blériot 's analysis of the problem and led to a strengthening of the landing wires . the brief but influential ban on the use of monoplanes by the military wing ( though not the naval wing ) in the uk was triggered by accidents to other manufacturer 's aircraft ; blériots were not involved . along with five other european aircraft builders , from 1910 , blériot was involved in a five-year legal struggle with the wright brothers over the latter 's wing warping patents . the wrights ' claim was dismissed in the french and the german courts . mackersey 2003 , p . 440 . from 1913 or earlier , janes 1913 blériot 's aviation activities were handled by blériot aéronautique , based at suresnes , which continued to design and produce aircraft up to the nationalisation of most of the french aircraft industry in 1937 , when it was absorbed into sncaso . jane 's all the world 's aircraft 1938 taylor 1989 , pp . 161–165 . in 1913 , a consortium led by blériot bought the société pour l'aviation et ses dérivés aircraft manufacturer and he became the president of the company in 1914 . he renamed it the société pour l'aviation et ses dérivés ( spad ) ; this company produced world war i fighter aircraft such as the spad s.xiii . before world war i , blériot had opened british flying schools at brooklands , in surrey and at hendon aerodrome . sanger 2008 , p . 16 . realising that a british company would have more chance to sell his models to the british government , in 1915 , he set up the blériot manufacturing aircraft company ltd . the hoped for orders did not follow , as the blériot design was seen as outdated . following an unresolved conflict over control of the company , it was wound up on 24 july 1916 . sanger 2008 , pp . 22–25 . even before the closure of this company blériot was planning a new venture in the uk . initially named blériot and spad ltd and based in addlestone , it became the air navigation and engineering company ( anec ) in may 1918 . anec survived in a difficult aviation climate until late 1926 , producing blériot-whippet cars , the blériot 500cc motorcycle , motor cycle design in france , the motor cycle , 29th july 1920 , pp122-125 as well as several light aircraft . sanger 2008 , pp . 27–31 . in 1927 , blériot , long retired from flying , was present to welcome charles lindbergh when he landed at le bourget field completing his transatlantic flight . the two men , separated in age by 30 years , had each made history by crossing significant bodies of water , and shared a photo opportunity in paris . in 1934 , blériot visited newark airport in new jersey and predicted commercial overseas flights by 1938 . '' inspects newark airport : louis blériot predicts oversea service within four years . '' the new york times , 17 october 1934 . retrieved : 26 july 2009 . . death . blériot remained active in the aviation business until his death on 1 august 1936 in paris due to a heart attack . after a funeral with full military honours at les invalides he was buried in the cimetière des gonards in versailles . elliott 2000 pp . 238–239 . . legacy . in 1930 , blériot himself instituted the blériot trophy , a one-time award which would be awarded to the first aircrew to sustain an average speed of over 2,000 kilometers per hour ( 1,242.742 miles per hour ) over one half of an hour , an extremely ambitious and prophetic target in an era when the fastest aircraft were just breaking the 200 mph mark . the award was finally presented slightly more than three decades later by alice védères blériot , widow of louis blériot , at paris , france , 27 may 1961 , to the crew of the united states air force convair b-58a jet bomber , af serial number 59-2451 , the firefly , crewed by aircraft commander major elmer e . murphy , navigator major eugene moses , and weapons systems officer first lieutenant david f . dickerson who on 10 may , 1961 , sustained an average speed of 2,095 kmph ( 1,302.07 mph ) over 30 minutes and 43 seconds , covering a ground track of 1,077.3 kilometers ( 669.4 miles ) . this same crew and aircraft went on to set a number of other speed records before being lost in an accident shortly after takeoff from paris , not long after setting yet another speed record , winning the harmon trophy for a record-setting flight between new york city and paris , france . this flight was 3,626.46 miles in 3 hours , 19 minutes , 58 seconds , for an average of 1,089.36 mph . the blériot trophy winning crew took over the aircraft for the return flight , but were all killed when the pilot lost control shortly after takeoff from the paris air show when he lost control during some attempted impromptu aerobatics . the blériot trophy is a statuette in the classical art sculpted of polished white and black marble stone , depicting a nude male figure of black marble emerging from stylized white marble clouds resembling female forms . it is now on permanent display at the mcdermott library of the united states air force academy , colorado springs , colorado , usa . '' this day in aviation history/tag : bleriot trophy . '' brian r . swopes , 2018 . retrieved : 16 december , 2020 . in 1936 the fédération aéronautique internationale established the '' louis blériot medal '' in his honor . the medal may be awarded up to three times a year to record setters in speed , altitude and distance categories in light aircraft , and is still being awarded . '' louis blériot medal winner listing . '' fai . in 1967 blériot was inducted into the international air & space hall of fame . sprekelmeyer , linda , editor . these we honor : the international aerospace hall of fame . donning co . publishers , 2006 . on 25 july 2009 , the centenary of the original channel crossing , frenchman edmond salis took off from sangatte in a replica of bleriot 's aircraft . he landed successfully in kent at the duke of york 's royal military school . '' pilot recreates channel crossing . '' bbc , 25 july 2009 . retrieved : 24 april 2012 . . in popular culture . in 2002 british train company virgin crosscountry named class 221 221101 louis blériot . super voyager ’ s french connection virgin trains 1 february 2002 vive la voyager ! 221 tames notorius french curves rail issue 429 29 february 2002 page 10 in 2006 rivendell bicycle works introduced a bicycle model named the '' blériot 650b '' as a tribute to blériot . it features his portrait on the seat tube . edgar , jim . '' rivendell blériot . '' cyclofiend.com , 2009 . retrieved : 24 april 2012 . a propeller moonlet in the rings of saturn was nicknamed bleriot by imaging scientists . . see also . blériot aéronautique early flying machines list of firsts in aviation . references . notes . . citations . . bibliography . elliot , b.a . blériot : herald of an age . stroud < uk : tempus , 2000 . gibbs-smith , c.h . a history of flying . london : batsford , 1953 . grey , c.g . jane 's all the world 's aircraft 1938 . london : david & charles , 1972 . jane , f . t . jane 's all the world 's aircraft 1913 . newton abbot , uk : david & charles , 1969 . mackersey , ian . the wright brothers : the remarkable story of the aviation pioneers who changed the world . london : little , brown , 2003 . sanger , r . blériot in britain . tonbridge , kent , uk : air britain ( historians ) ltd . , 2008 . taylor , m . j . jane 's encyclopedia of aviation . new york : portland house , 1989 . walsh , barbara . forgotten aviator , hubert latham : a high-flying gentleman . stroud , uk : the history press , 2007 . external links . us centennial of flight commission : louis blériot louis charles-joseph blériot flight and plane information ( photos and videos ) '' a daring flight '' - homepage of the nova tv episode louis blériot memorial behind dover castle uk louis blériot and wife at house of commons , after channel crossing ( by john benjamin stone ) view footage of blériot 's flight in 1909 '' seadromes ! says blériot , '' popular mechanics , october 1935 , one of the last interviews given by blériot before his death . bleriot ( center ) , in 1927 , with charles lindbergh and myron t . herrick