Foundations of mathematics

historical context . ancient greek mathematics . while the practice of mathematics had previously developed in other civilizations , special interest in its theoretical and foundational aspects was clearly evident in the work of the ancient greeks . early greek philosophers disputed as to which is more basic , arithmetic or geometry . zeno of elea ( 490 c . 430 & nbsp ; bc ) produced four paradoxes that seem to show the impossibility of change . the pythagoreanism originally insisted that only natural and rational numbers exist . the discovery of the irrationality of , the ratio of the diagonal of a square to its side ( around 5th century & nbsp ; bc ) , was a shock to them which they only reluctantly accepted . the discrepancy between rationals and reals was finally resolved by eudoxus of cnidus ( 408–355 & nbsp ; bc ) , a student of plato , who reduced the comparison of irrational ratios to comparisons of multiples ( rational ratios ) , thus anticipating the definition of real numbers by richard dedekind ( 1831 & ndash ; 1916 ) . in the posterior analytics , aristotle ( 384–322 & nbsp ; bc ) laid down the axiomatic method for organizing a field of knowledge logically by means of primitive concepts , axioms , postulates , definitions , and theorems . aristotle took a majority of his examples for this from arithmetic and from geometry . this method reached its high point with euclid 's elements ( 300 & nbsp ; bc ) , a treatise on mathematics structured with very high standards of rigor : euclid justifies each proposition by a demonstration in the form of chains of syllogisms ( though they do not always conform strictly to aristotelian templates ) . aristotle 's syllogistic logic , together with the axiomatic method exemplified by euclid 's elements , are recognized as scientific achievements of ancient greece . platonism as a traditional philosophy of mathematics . starting from the end of the 19th century , a platonist view of mathematics became common among practicing mathematicians . the concepts or , as platonists would have it , the objects of mathematics are abstract and remote from everyday perceptual experience : geometrical figures are conceived as idealities to be distinguished from effective drawings and shapes of objects , and numbers are not confused with the counting of concrete objects . their existence and nature present special philosophical challenges : how do mathematical objects differ from their concrete representation ? are they located in their representation , or in our minds , or somewhere else ? how can we know them ? the ancient greek philosophers took such questions very seriously . indeed , many of their general philosophical discussions were carried on with extensive reference to geometry and arithmetic . plato ( 424/423 & nbsp ; bc 348/347 & nbsp ; bc ) insisted that mathematical objects , like other platonic ideas ( forms or essences ) , must be perfectly abstract and have a separate , non-material kind of existence , in a world of mathematical objects independent of humans . he believed that the truths about these objects also exist independently of the human mind , but is discovered by humans . in the meno plato 's teacher socrates asserts that it is possible to come to know this truth by a process akin to memory retrieval . above the gateway to plato 's academy appeared a famous inscription : '' let no one who is ignorant of geometry enter here '' . in this way plato indicated his high opinion of geometry . he regarded geometry as '' the first essential in the training of philosophers '' , because of its abstract character . this philosophy of platonism ( mathematics ) is shared by many mathematicians . it can be argued that platonism somehow comes as a necessary assumption underlying any mathematical work . karlis podnieks , platonism , intuition and the nature of mathematics : 1 . platonism - the philosophy of working mathematicians in this view , the laws of nature and the laws of mathematics have a similar status , and the effectiveness ceases to be unreasonable . not our axioms , but the very real world of mathematical objects forms the foundation . aristotle dissected and rejected this view in his metaphysics . these questions provide much fuel for philosophical analysis and debate . middle ages and renaissance . for over 2,000 years , euclid 's elements stood as a perfectly solid foundation for mathematics , as its methodology of rational exploration guided mathematicians , philosophers , and scientists well into the 19th century . the middle ages saw a dispute over the ontological status of the universals ( platonic ideas ) : realism asserted their existence independently of perception ; conceptualism asserted their existence within the mind only ; nominalism denied either , only seeing universals as names of collections of individual objects ( following older speculations that they are words , '' logoi '' ) . rené descartes published la géométrie ( 1637 ) , aimed at reducing geometry to algebra by means of coordinate systems , giving algebra a more foundational role ( while the greeks embedded arithmetic into geometry by identifying whole numbers with evenly spaced points on a line ) . descartes ' book became famous after 1649 and paved the way to infinitesimal calculus . isaac newton ( 1642–1727 ) in england and leibniz ( 1646–1716 ) in germany independently developed the infinitesimal calculus based on heuristic methods greatly efficient , but direly lacking rigorous justifications . leibniz even went on to explicitly describe infinitesimals as actual infinitely small numbers ( close to zero ) . leibniz also worked on formal logic but most of his writings on it remained unpublished until 1903 . the protestant philosopher george berkeley ( 1685–1753 ) , in his campaign against the religious implications of newtonian mechanics , wrote a pamphlet on the lack of rational justifications of infinitesimal calculus : the analyst , a discourse addressed to an infidel mathematician '' they are neither finite quantities , nor quantities infinitely small , nor yet nothing . may we not call them the ghosts of departed quantities ? '' then mathematics developed very rapidly and successfully in physical applications , but with little attention to logical foundations . 19th century . in the 19th century , mathematics became increasingly abstract . concerns about logical gaps and inconsistencies in different fields led to the development of axiomatic systems . real analysis . cauchy ( 1789–1857 ) started the project of formulating and proving the theorems of infinitesimal calculus in a rigorous manner , rejecting the heuristic principle of the generality of algebra exploited by earlier authors . in his 1821 work cours d'analyse he defines infinitesimal in terms of decreasing sequences that converge to 0 , which he then used to define continuity . but he did not formalize his notion of convergence . the modern ( ε , δ ) -definition of limit and continuous functions was first developed by bolzano in 1817 , but remained relatively unknown . it gives a rigorous foundation of infinitesimal calculus based on the set of real numbers , arguably resolving the zeno paradoxes and berkeley 's arguments . mathematicians such as karl weierstrass ( 1815–1897 ) discovered pathological functions such as weierstrass function . previous conceptions of a function as a rule for computation , or a smooth graph , were no longer adequate . weierstrass began to advocate the arithmetization of analysis , to axiomatize analysis using properties of the natural numbers . in 1858 , dedekind proposed a definition of the real numbers as cuts of rational numbers . this reduction of real numbers and continuous functions in terms of rational numbers , and thus of natural numbers , was later integrated by cantor in his set theory , and axiomatized in terms of second order arithmetic by hilbert and bernays . group theory . for the first time , the limits of mathematics were explored . niels henrik abel ( 1802–1829 ) , a norwegian , and évariste galois , ( 1811–1832 ) a frenchman , investigated the solutions of various polynomial equations , and proved that there is no general algebraic solution to equations of degree greater than four ( abel–ruffini theorem ) . with these concepts , pierre wantzel ( 1837 ) proved that straightedge and compass alone can not trisect an arbitrary angle nor double a cube . in 1882 , lindemann building on the work of hermite showed that a straightedge and compass quadrature of the circle ( construction of a square equal in area to a given circle ) was also impossible by proving that is a transcendental number . mathematicians had attempted to solve all of these problems in vain since the time of the ancient greeks . abel and galois 's works opened the way for the developments of group theory ( which would later be used to study symmetry in physics and other fields ) , and abstract algebra . concepts of vector spaces emerged from the conception of barycentric coordinates by möbius in 1827 , to the modern definition of vector spaces and linear maps by peano in 1888 . geometry was no more limited to three dimensions . these concepts did not generalize numbers but combined notions of functions and sets which were not yet formalized , breaking away from familiar mathematical objects . non-euclidean geometries . after many failed attempts to derive the parallel postulate from other axioms , the study of the still hypothetical hyperbolic geometry by johann heinrich lambert ( 1728–1777 ) led him to introduce the hyperbolic functions and compute the area of a hyperbolic triangle ( where the sum of angles is less than 180° ) . then the russian mathematician nikolai lobachevsky ( 1792–1856 ) established in 1826 ( and published in 1829 ) the coherence of this geometry ( thus the independence of the parallel postulate ) , in parallel with the hungarian mathematician jános bolyai ( 1802–1860 ) in 1832 , and with gauss . later in the 19th century , the german mathematician bernhard riemann developed elliptic geometry , another non-euclidean geometry where no parallel can be found and the sum of angles in a triangle is more than 180° . it was proved consistent by defining point to mean a pair of antipodal points on a fixed sphere and line to mean a great circle on the sphere . at that time , the main method for proving the consistency of a set of axioms was to provide a model for it . projective geometry . one of the traps in a deductive system is circular reasoning , a problem that seemed to befall projective geometry until it was resolved by karl von staudt . as explained by russian historians : laptev , b.l . & b.a . rozenfel 'd ( 1996 ) mathematics of the 19th century : geometry , page 40 , birkhäuser the purely geometric approach of von staudt was based on the complete quadrilateral to express the relation of projective harmonic conjugates . then he created a means of expressing the familiar numeric properties with his algebra of throws . english language versions of this process of deducing the properties of a field can be found in either the book by oswald veblen and john young , projective geometry ( 1938 ) , or more recently in john stillwell 's four pillars of geometry ( 2005 ) . stillwell writes on page 120 the algebra of throws is commonly seen as a feature of cross-ratios since students ordinarily rely upon numbers without worry about their basis . however , cross-ratio calculations use metric features of geometry , features not admitted by purists . for instance , in 1961 coxeter wrote introduction to geometry without mention of cross-ratio . boolean algebra and logic . attempts of formal treatment of mathematics had started with leibniz and lambert ( 1728–1777 ) , and continued with works by algebraists such as george peacock ( 1791–1858 ) . systematic mathematical treatments of logic came with the british mathematician george boole ( 1847 ) who devised an algebra that soon evolved into what is now called boolean algebra , in which the only numbers were 0 and 1 and logical combinations ( conjunction , disjunction , implication and negation ) are operations similar to the addition and multiplication of integers . additionally , de morgan published his laws in 1847 . logic thus became a branch of mathematics . boolean algebra is the starting point of mathematical logic and has important applications in computer science . charles sanders peirce built upon the work of boole to develop a logical system for relations and quantifiers , which he published in several papers from 1870 to 1885 . the german mathematician gottlob frege ( 1848–1925 ) presented an independent development of logic with quantifiers in his begriffsschrift ( formula language ) published in 1879 , a work generally considered as marking a turning point in the history of logic . he exposed deficiencies in aristotle 's logic , and pointed out the three expected properties of a mathematical theory consistency : impossibility of proving contradictory statements . completeness : any statement is either provable or refutable ( i.e . its negation is provable ) . decidability : there is a decision procedure to test any statement in the theory . he then showed in grundgesetze der arithmetik ( basic laws of arithmetic ) how arithmetic could be formalised in his new logic . frege 's work was popularized by bertrand russell near the turn of the century . but frege 's two-dimensional notation had no success . popular notations were ( x ) for universal and ( ∃x ) for existential quantifiers , coming from giuseppe peano and william ernest johnson until the ∀ symbol was introduced by gerhard gentzen in 1935 and became canonical in the 1960s . from 1890 to 1905 , ernst schröder published vorlesungen über die algebra der logik in three volumes . this work summarized and extended the work of boole , de morgan , and peirce , and was a comprehensive reference to symbolic logic as it was understood at the end of the 19th century . peano arithmetic . the formalization of arithmetic ( the theory of natural numbers ) as an axiomatic theory started with peirce in 1881 and continued with richard dedekind and giuseppe peano in 1888 . this was still a second-order axiomatization ( expressing induction in terms of arbitrary subsets , thus with an implicit use of set theory ) as concerns for expressing theories in first-order logic were not yet understood . in dedekind 's work , this approach appears as completely characterizing natural numbers and providing recursive definitions of addition and multiplication from the successor function and mathematical induction . foundational crisis . the foundational crisis of mathematics ( in german grundlagenkrise der mathematik ) was the early 20th century 's term for the search for proper foundations of mathematics . several schools of the philosophy of mathematics ran into difficulties one after the other in the 20th century , as the assumption that mathematics had any foundation that could be consistently stated within mathematics itself was heavily challenged by the discovery of various paradoxes ( such as russell 's paradox ) . the name '' paradox '' should not be confused with contradiction . a contradiction in a formal theory is a formal proof of an absurdity inside the theory ( such as , showing that this theory is inconsistent and must be rejected . but a paradox may be either a surprising but true result in a given formal theory , or an informal argument leading to a contradiction , so that a candidate theory , if it is to be formalized , must disallow at least one of its steps ; in this case the problem is to find a satisfying theory without contradiction . both meanings may apply if the formalized version of the argument forms the proof of a surprising truth . for instance , russell 's paradox may be expressed as '' there is no set of all sets '' ( except in some marginal axiomatic set theories ) . various schools of thought opposed each other . the leading school was that of the formalist approach , of which david hilbert was the foremost proponent , culminating in what is known as hilbert 's program , which thought to ground mathematics on a small basis of a logical system proved sound by metamathematics finitism means . the main opponent was the intuitionism school , led by l . e . j . brouwer , which resolutely discarded formalism as a meaningless game with symbols . van dalen d . ( 2008 ) , '' brouwer , luitzen egbertus jan ( 1881–1966 ) '' , in biografisch woordenboek van nederland . url : 2008-03-13 the fight was acrimonious . in 1920 hilbert succeeded in having brouwer , whom he considered a threat to mathematics , removed from the editorial board of mathematische annalen , the leading mathematical journal of the time . philosophical views . at the beginning of the 20th century , three schools of philosophy of mathematics opposed each other : formalism , intuitionism and logicism . the second conference on the epistemology of the exact sciences held in königsberg in 1930 gave space to these three schools . formalism . it has been claimed that formalists , such as david hilbert ( 1862 & ndash ; 1943 ) , hold that mathematics is only a language and a series of games . indeed , he used the words '' formula game '' in his 1927 response to l . e . j . brouwer 's criticisms : thus hilbert is insisting that mathematics is not an arbitrary game with arbitrary rules ; rather it must agree with how our thinking , and then our speaking and writing , proceeds . the foundational philosophy of formalism , as exemplified by david hilbert , is a response to the paradoxes of set theory , and is based on formal logic . virtually all mathematical theorems today can be formulated as theorems of set theory . the truth of a mathematical statement , in this view , is represented by the fact that the statement can be derived from the axioms of set theory using the rules of formal logic . merely the use of formalism alone does not explain several issues : why we should use the axioms we do and not some others , why we should employ the logical rules we do and not some others , why do '' true '' mathematical statements ( e.g . , the peano axioms ) appear to be true , and so on . hermann weyl would ask these very questions of hilbert : in some cases these questions may be sufficiently answered through the study of formal theories , in disciplines such as reverse mathematics and computational complexity theory . as noted by weyl , formal logical systems also run the risk of inconsistency ; in peano axioms , this arguably has already been settled with several proofs of consistency , but there is debate over whether or not they are sufficiently finitism to be meaningful . gödel 's incompleteness theorem establishes that logical systems of arithmetic can never contain a valid proof of their own consistency . what hilbert wanted to do was prove a logical system s was consistent , based on principles p that only made up a small part of s . but gödel proved that the principles p could not even prove p to be consistent , let alone s . intuitionism . intuitionists , such as l . e . j . brouwer ( 1882–1966 ) , hold that mathematics is a creation of the human mind . numbers , like fairy tale characters , are merely mental entities , which would not exist if there were never any human minds to think about them . the foundational philosophy of intuitionism or constructivism , as exemplified in the extreme by brouwer and stephen kleene , requires proofs to be '' constructive '' in nature the existence of an object must be demonstrated rather than inferred from a demonstration of the impossibility of its non-existence . for example , as a consequence of this the form of proof known as reductio ad absurdum is suspect . some modern theory in the philosophy of mathematics deny the existence of foundations in the original sense . some theories tend to focus on mathematical practice , and aim to describe and analyze the actual working of mathematicians as a social group . others try to create a cognitive science of mathematics , focusing on human cognition as the origin of the reliability of mathematics when applied to the real world . these theories would propose to find foundations only in human thought , not in any objective outside construct . the matter remains controversial . logicism . logicism is a school of thought , and research programme , in the philosophy of mathematics , based on the thesis that mathematics is an extension of a logic or that some or all mathematics may be derived in a suitable formal system whose axioms and rules of inference are 'logical ' in nature . bertrand russell and alfred north whitehead championed this theory initiated by gottlob frege and influenced by richard dedekind . set-theoretic platonism . many researchers in axiomatic set theory have subscribed to what is known as set-theoretic platonism , exemplified by kurt gödel . several set theorists followed this approach and actively searched for axioms that may be considered as true for heuristic reasons and that would decide the continuum hypothesis . many large cardinal axioms were studied , but the hypothesis always remained independent from them and it is now considered unlikely that ch can be resolved by a new large cardinal axiom . other types of axioms were considered , but none of them has reached consensus on the continuum hypothesis yet . recent work by hamkins proposes a more flexible alternative : a set-theoretic multiverse allowing free passage between set-theoretic universes that satisfy the continuum hypothesis and other universes that do not . indispensability argument for realism . this argument by willard quine and hilary putnam says ( in putnam 's shorter words ) , however , putnam was not a platonist . rough-and-ready realism . few mathematicians are typically concerned on a daily , working basis over logicism , formalism or any other philosophical position . instead , their primary concern is that the mathematical enterprise as a whole always remains productive . typically , they see this as ensured by remaining open-minded , practical and busy ; as potentially threatened by becoming overly-ideological , fanatically reductionistic or lazy . such a view has also been expressed by some well-known physicists . for example , the physics nobel prize laureate richard feynman said and steven weinberg : steven weinberg , chapter against philosophy wrote , in dreams of a final theory weinberg believed that any undecidability in mathematics , such as the continuum hypothesis , could be potentially resolved despite the incompleteness theorem , by finding suitable further axioms to add to set theory . philosophical consequences of gödel 's completeness theorem . gödel 's completeness theorem establishes an equivalence in first-order logic between the formal provability of a formula and its truth in all possible models . precisely , for any consistent first-order theory it gives an '' explicit construction '' of a model described by the theory ; this model will be countable if the language of the theory is countable . however this '' explicit construction '' is not algorithmic . it is based on an iterative process of completion of the theory , where each step of the iteration consists in adding a formula to the axioms if it keeps the theory consistent ; but this consistency question is only semi-decidable ( an algorithm is available to find any contradiction but if there is none this consistency fact can remain unprovable ) . this can be seen as a giving a sort of justification to the platonist view that the objects of our mathematical theories are real . more precisely , it shows that the mere assumption of the existence of the set of natural numbers as a totality ( an actual infinity ) suffices to imply the existence of a model ( a world of objects ) of any consistent theory . however several difficulties remain : for any consistent theory this usually does not give just one world of objects , but an infinity of possible worlds that the theory might equally describe , with a possible diversity of truths between them . in the case of set theory , none of the models obtained by this construction resemble the intended model , as they are countable while set theory intends to describe uncountable infinities . similar remarks can be made in many other cases . for example , with theories that include arithmetic , such constructions generally give models that include non-standard numbers , unless the construction method was specifically designed to avoid them . as it gives models to all consistent theories without distinction , it gives no reason to accept or reject any axiom as long as the theory remains consistent , but regards all consistent axiomatic theories as referring to equally existing worlds . it gives no indication on which axiomatic system should be preferred as a foundation of mathematics . as claims of consistency are usually unprovable , they remain a matter of belief or non-rigorous kinds of justifications . hence the existence of models as given by the completeness theorem needs in fact two philosophical assumptions : the actual infinity of natural numbers and the consistency of the theory . another consequence of the completeness theorem is that it justifies the conception of infinitesimals as actual infinitely small nonzero quantities , based on the existence of non-standard models as equally legitimate to standard ones . this idea was formalized by abraham robinson into the theory of nonstandard analysis . more paradoxes . 1920 : thoralf skolem corrected leopold löwenheim 's proof of what is now called the downward löwenheim–skolem theorem , leading to skolem 's paradox discussed in 1922 , namely the existence of countable models of zf , making infinite cardinalities a relative property . 1922 : proof by abraham fraenkel that the axiom of choice can not be proved from the axioms of zermelo set theory with urelements . 1931 : publication of gödel 's incompleteness theorems , showing that essential aspects of hilbert 's program could not be attained . it showed how to construct , for any sufficiently powerful and consistent recursively axiomatizable system such as necessary to axiomatize the elementary theory of arithmetic on the ( infinite ) set of natural numbers a statement that formally expresses its own unprovability , which he then proved equivalent to the claim of consistency of the theory ; so that ( assuming the consistency as true ) , the system is not powerful enough for proving its own consistency , let alone that a simpler system could do the job . it thus became clear that the notion of mathematical truth can not be completely determined and reduced to a purely formal system as envisaged in hilbert 's program . this dealt a final blow to the heart of hilbert 's program , the hope that consistency could be established by finitistic means ( it was never made clear exactly what axioms were the '' finitistic '' ones , but whatever axiomatic system was being referred to , it was a 'weaker ' system than the system whose consistency it was supposed to prove ) . 1936 : alfred tarski proved his truth undefinability theorem . 1936 : alan turing proved that a general algorithm to solve the halting problem for all possible program-input pairs can not exist . 1938 : gödel proved the constructible universe . 1936–1937 : alonzo church and alan turing , respectively , published independent papers showing that a general solution to the entscheidungsproblem is impossible : the universal validity of statements in first-order logic is not decidable ( it is only semi-decidable as given by the completeness theorem ) . 1955 : pyotr novikov showed that there exists a finitely presented group g such that the word problem for g is undecidable . 1963 : paul cohen showed that the continuum hypothesis is unprovable from zfc . cohen 's proof developed the method of forcing , which is now an important tool for establishing independence results in set theory . 1964 : inspired by the fundamental randomness in physics , gregory chaitin starts publishing results on algorithmic information theory ( measuring incompleteness and randomness in mathematics ) . 1966 : paul cohen showed that the axiom of choice is unprovable in zf even without urelements . 1970 : hilbert 's tenth problem is proven unsolvable : there is no recursive solution to decide whether a diophantine equation ( multivariable polynomial equation ) has a solution in integers . 1971 : suslin 's problem is proven to be independent from zfc . toward resolution of the crisis . starting in 1935 , the bourbaki group of french mathematicians started publishing a series of books to formalize many areas of mathematics on the new foundation of set theory . the intuitionistic school did not attract many adherents , and it was not until bishop 's work in 1967 that constructive mathematics was placed on a sounder footing . one may consider that hilbert 's program has been partially completed , so that the crisis is essentially resolved , satisfying ourselves with lower requirements than hilbert 's original ambitions . his ambitions were expressed in a time when nothing was clear : it was not clear whether mathematics could have a rigorous foundation at all . there are many possible variants of set theory , which differ in consistency strength , where stronger versions ( postulating higher types of infinities ) contain formal proofs of the consistency of weaker versions , but none contains a formal proof of its own consistency . thus the only thing we do n't have is a formal proof of consistency of whatever version of set theory we may prefer , such as zf . in practice , most mathematicians either do not work from axiomatic systems , or if they do , do not doubt the consistency of zfc , generally their preferred axiomatic system . in most of mathematics as it is practiced , the incompleteness and paradoxes of the underlying formal theories never played a role anyway , and in those branches in which they do or whose formalization attempts would run the risk of forming inconsistent theories ( such as logic and category theory ) , they may be treated carefully . the development of category theory in the middle of the 20th century showed the usefulness of set theories guaranteeing the existence of larger classes than does zfc , such as von neumann–bernays–gödel set theory or tarski–grothendieck set theory , albeit that in very many cases the use of large cardinal axioms or grothendieck universes is formally eliminable . one goal of the reverse mathematics program is to identify whether there are areas of '' core mathematics '' in which foundational issues may again provoke a crisis .