Kuniaki Koiso

early life . koiso was born in utsunomiya , tochigi prefecture on march 22 , 1880 , into a shizoku ( former samurai ) family from yamagata prefecture . his father was a policeman . he attended eight different schools , graduating from yamagata middle school ( today yamagata prefectural yamagata east high school ) . he was accepted as an officer candidate in 1898 . military career . koiso graduated from the imperial japanese army academy in 1900 and went on to attend the army staff college . commissioned a 2nd lieutenant in the 30th infantry regiment in june 1901 , he was promoted to lieutenant in november 1903 . during the russo-japanese war , he served as battalion adjutant in september 1904 , company commander in march 1905 and was promoted to captain in june 1905 . in november 1910 , koiso graduated from the army staff college , 33rd in a class of 55 , and returned to the imperial japanese army academy as an instructor in december 1910 . reassigned to the kwantung army general staff in september 1912 , koiso was promoted to major and battalion commander of the 2d infantry regiment in august 1914 . he returned to the imperial japanese army general staff headquarters in june 1915 , was promoted to lieutenant colonel in july 1918 , and seconded to the imperial japanese army air service in july 1921 . after his promotion to colonel in february 1922 , he was sent as a military attaché to europe in june 1922 , returning to assume command of the ija 51st division in august 1923 . returning to the army general staff in may 1925 , he was promoted to major general in december 1926 and lieutenant general in august 1931 . during the 1920s koiso joined the relatively moderate tōseiha ( control faction ) led by general kazushige ugaki , along with gen sugiyama , yoshijirō umezu , tetsuzan nagata , and hideki tōjō as opposed to the more radical kōdōha ( action faction ) under sadao araki . in february 1932 , koiso became vice-minister of war and in august 1932 , concurrently chief of staff of the kwantung army . in march 1934 , he was transferred to command the ija 5th division ( hiroshima ) . he then assumed command of the chosen army in korea from december 1935 . promoted to full general in november 1937 , he joined the army general staff in july 1938 . colonial affairs and korea . koiso left active duty in july 1938 . from april to august 1939 , he served in the cabinet of prime minister hiranuma kiichirō as minister of colonial affairs . he returned to the same post again from january to july 1940 under the mitsumasa yonai . koiso was appointed governor-general of korea from may 1942 to 1944 , during which time he gained the nickname '' the tiger of korea '' for his looks rather than his military prowess . toland , john : the rising sun : the decline and fall of the japanese empire , 1936–1945 , page 529 koiso continued the integrationist policy ( naisen ittai ) of his predecessor jirō minami , promoting korean officials within the administration , promoting korean businesses , and making his govern more responsive to koreans in general . on august 1 , 1943 he imposed by the highly unpopular universal military conscription of koreans into the japanese military . pratt , everlasting flower when news of korean independence reached him after the war , koiso scoffed '' the dream of korean independence is as foolish as trying to plot the independence of kyushu or hokkaido . '' . prime minister . after the operation overlord ( june 6 ) and the successful battle of saipan ( 9 july ) , the government of hideki tojo lost its credibility and a new cabinet was formed . in selecting a new prime minister , the elder statesmen narrowed the candidates down to three : hisaichi terauchi ( commander of the southern expeditionary army group ) , shunroku hata ( commander of the china expeditionary army ) , and koiso . the army strongly favored general hisaichi terauchi ; however , they could not afford to recall him to japan from his role as commander-in-chief of all southern expeditionary army group . the civilian government , especially kōichi kido and fumimaro konoe , also did not favor koiso , due to koiso 's previous involvement with the ultranationalist sakura kai and its attempted coup d'état against the government in 1931 ( i.e . the '' march incident '' ) . these reservations were shared by the emperor in his privy council meetings . koiso was supported by mitsumasa yonai and hiranuma kiichirō , and as no consensus could be reached on a more suitable alternative , their arguments prevailed . moreover , mitsumasa yonai was appointed vice-prime minister as a way of dealing with strong objections to koiso . left koiso attempted to end army-navy rivalry by creating a supreme chief of staff ( 最高幕僚長 ) , but this was structured to favor the army , thus bitter opposition from the navy doomed the plan . instead , a supreme war guidance council ( 最高戦争指導会議 ) was created ( august 4 1944–august 22 1945 ) . koiso was not taken seriously at council meetings , where he was openly contradicted by hata hikosaburo . within the top levels of the imperial army , rumors circulated that the koiso cabinet would only last two months ( it lasted nine months ) . koiso 's strategy for ending the war was to strike a hard blow against the american army in the philippines , forcing negotiations . however , the general entrusted with the defense of the philippines , tomoyuki yamashita , disagreed with the planners in the southern expeditionary army . as such , the army and navy could not agree on a coordinated plan . 『昭和天皇独白録』p.117 nevertheless , the defenders were prepared to make considerable sacrifices when douglas macarthur invaded leyte on october 17 , with the first kamikaze attack carried out on october 21 , and the japanese navy losing four aircraft carriers and three battleships during the battle of leyte gulf . although the strategy had failed , koiso did not change his way of thinking . late in 1944 , koiso still planned to send prince konoe on a peace mission to switzerland and sweden , but it came to nothing . during the remainder of koiso 's term in office , japanese forces continued to suffer a string of defeats on all fronts at the hands of the allies . also during his tenure , on november 10 , 1944 , wang jingwei died of pneumonia in a japanese hospital in nagoya , which effectively was the end of the reorganized national government of china in northern china . for a time , koiso considered making peace , but he could not find a solution that would appease both the japanese military and the allies . left with little choice but to continue the war effort , koiso tried to extend his power over the army by attempting to assume the position of war minister concurrently with that of prime minister , but was unable to legally do so as he was on the reserve list . koiso resigned in april 1945 when american forces invaded okinawa and his demands to be included in military decisions were rejected , the same date the imperial japanese navy flagship was sunk by american aircraft during operation ten-go . frank , downfall : the end of the imperial japanese empire . later career . koiso was an ardent supporter of state shintoism along with heisuke yanagawa , who directed the government imperial aid association . he restored the ancient sacred rites in the sukumo river , near hakone , the '' preliminary misogi rite '' . after the end of world war ii , koiso was arrested by the allied occupation powers and tried by the international military tribunal for the far east for war crimes . upon conviction as a class-a war criminal on counts 1 , 27 , 29 , 31 , 32 and 55 , he was given a sentence of life imprisonment . maga , judgement at tokyo the tribunal specifically cited koiso 's decisive role in starting the wars against china and the allies . '' furthermore , despite the fact that kuniaki koiso was not directly responsible for the war crimes committed by the japanese army , he took no measures to prevent them or to punish the perpetrators when , as prime minister , it was within his power to do so . '' bedat koiso died of esophageal cancer in sugamo prison in 1950 . his grave is at the aoyama cemetery in downtown tokyo . honors . from the corresponding article in the japanese wikipedia grand cordon of the order of the rising sun ( april 5 , 1934 ) grand cordon of the order of the sacred treasure ( april 29 , 1934 ) order of the golden kite , 2nd class ( april 29 , 1934 ) . references . books . . sources . . external links . - - -