Stratigraphy

historical development . left catholic priest nicholas steno established the theoretical basis for stratigraphy when he introduced the law of superposition , the principle of original horizontality and the principle of lateral continuity in a 1669 work on the fossilization of organic remains in layers of sediment . the first practical large-scale application of stratigraphy was by william smith in the 1790s and early 19th century . known as the '' father of english geology '' , smith recognized the significance of strata or rock layering and the importance of fossil markers for correlating strata ; he created the first geologic map of england . other influential applications of stratigraphy in the early 19th century were by georges cuvier and alexandre brongniart , who studied the geology of the region around paris . image : quebrada de cafayate , salta ( argentina ) . jpg thumb strata in cafayate ( argentina ) . lithostratigraphy . image : geology of cyprus-chalk.jpg thumb chalk layers in cyprus , showing sedimentary layering variation in rock units , most obviously displayed as visible layering , is due to physical contrasts in rock type ( lithology ) . this variation can occur vertically as layering ( bedding ) , or laterally , and reflects changes in environments of deposition ( known as facies change ) . these variations provide a lithostratigraphy or lithologic stratigraphy of the rock unit . key concepts in stratigraphy involve understanding how certain geometric relationships between rock layers arise and what these geometries imply about their original depositional environment . the basic concept in stratigraphy , called the law of superposition , states : in an undeformed stratigraphic sequence , the oldest strata occur at the base of the sequence . chemostratigraphy studies the changes in the relative proportions of trace elements and isotopes within and between lithologic units . carbon and oxygen isotope ratios vary with time , and researchers can use those to map subtle changes that occurred in the paleoenvironment . this has led to the specialized field of isotopic stratigraphy . cyclostratigraphy documents the often cyclic changes in the relative proportions of minerals ( particularly carbonates ) , grain size , thickness of sediment layers ( varves ) and fossil diversity with time , related to seasonal or longer term changes in palaeoclimates . biostratigraphy . biostratigraphy or paleontology stratigraphy is based on fossil evidence in the rock layers . strata from widespread locations containing the same fossil fauna and flora are said to be correlatable in time . biologic stratigraphy was based on william smith 's principle of faunal succession , which predated , and was one of the first and most powerful lines of evidence for , biological evolution . it provides strong evidence for the formation ( speciation ) and extinction of species . the geologic time scale was developed during the 19th century , based on the evidence of biologic stratigraphy and faunal succession . this timescale remained a relative scale until the development of radiometric dating , which was based on an absolute time framework , leading to the development of chronostratigraphy . one important development is the vail curve , which attempts to define a global historical sea-level curve according to inferences from worldwide stratigraphic patterns . stratigraphy is also commonly used to delineate the nature and extent of hydrocarbon-bearing reservoir rocks , seals , and traps of petroleum geology . chronostratigraphy . chronostratigraphy is the branch of stratigraphy that places an absolute age , rather than a relative age on rock strata . the branch is concerned with deriving geochronology data for rock units , both directly and inferentially , so that a sequence of time-relative events that created the rocks formation can be derived . the ultimate aim of chronostratigraphy is to place dates on the sequence of deposition of all rocks within a geological region , and then to every region , and by extension to provide an entire geologic record of the earth . a gap or missing strata in the geological record of an area is called a stratigraphic hiatus . this may be the result of a halt in the deposition of sediment . alternatively , the gap may be due to removal by erosion , in which case it may be called a stratigraphic vacuity . martinsen , o . j . et al . ( 1999 ) '' cenozoic development of the norwegian margin 60 & ndash ; 64n : sequences and sedimentary response to variable basin physiography and tectonic setting '' pp . 293 & ndash ; 304 in fleet , a . j . and boldy , s . a . r . ( editors ) ( 1999 ) petroleum geology of northwest europe geological society , london , page 295 , it is called a hiatus because deposition was on hold for a period of time . kearey , philip ( 2001 ) . dictionary of geology ( 2nd ed . ) london , new york , etc . : penguin reference , london , p . 123 . a physical gap may represent both a period of non-deposition and a period of erosion . a geologic fault may cause the appearance of a hiatus . chapman , richard e . ( 1983 ) petroleum geology elsevier scientific , amsterdam , page 33 , . magnetostratigraphy . magnetostratigraphy is a chronostratigraphic technique used to date sedimentary and volcanic sequences . the method works by collecting oriented samples at measured intervals throughout a section . the samples are analyzed to determine their detrital remanent magnetism ( drm ) , that is , the polarity of earth 's magnetic field at the time a stratum was deposited . for sedimentary rocks this is possible because , as they fall through the water column , very fine-grained magnetic minerals ( < & nbsp ; 17 & nbsp ; μm ) behave like tiny compasses , orienting themselves with earth 's magnetic field . upon burial , that orientation is preserved . for volcanic rocks , magnetic minerals , which form in the melt , orient themselves with the ambient magnetic field , and are fixed in place upon crystallization of the lava . oriented paleomagnetic core samples are collected in the field ; mudstones , siltstones , and very fine-grained sandstones are the preferred lithologies because the magnetic grains are finer and more likely to orient with the ambient field during deposition . if the ancient magnetic field were oriented similar to today 's field ( north magnetic pole near the north pole ) , the strata would retain a normal polarity . if the data indicate that the north magnetic pole were near the south pole , the strata would exhibit reversed polarity . results of the individual samples are analyzed by removing the natural remanent magnetization ( nrm ) to reveal the drm . following statistical analysis , the results are used to generate a local magnetostratigraphic column that can then be compared against the global magnetic polarity time scale . this technique is used to date sequences that generally lack fossils or interbedded igneous rocks . the continuous nature of the sampling means that it is also a powerful technique for the estimation of sediment-accumulation rates . see also . assise bed ( geology ) conodont biostratigraphy erygmascope ( old instrument for studying strata ) harris matrix important publications in stratigraphy international commission on stratigraphy key bed sedimentary basin analysis sequence stratigraphy sadler effect tectonostratigraphy . references . further reading . christopherson , r . w . , 2008 . geosystems : an introduction to physical geography , 7th ed . , new york : pearson prentice-hall . montenari , m . , 2016 . stratigraphy and timescales , 1st ed . , amsterdam : academic press ( elsevier ) . external links . ics subcommission for stratigraphic information university of south carolina sequence stratigraphy web front range stratigraphy international commission on stratigraphy university of georgia ( usa ) stratigraphy lab stratigraphy.net a stratigraphic data provider . agenames.org a global index of stratigraphic terms