Cornelius Jansen

biography . he was born of humble catholic parentage at acquoy ( then in the province of holland , now in gelderland ) , the netherlands . in 1602 he entered the university of leuven , then in the throes of an ideological conflict between the jesuit – or scholastic – party and the followers of michael baius , who swore by st . augustine . jansen ended by attaching himself strongly to the latter '' augustinian '' party , and presently made a momentous friendship with a like-minded fellow-student , jean du vergier de hauranne , afterwards abbé de saint-cyran . after taking his degree he went to paris , partly to improve his health by a change of scene , partly to study greek . eventually he joined du vergier at his country home near bayonne , and spent some years teaching at the bishop 's college . all his spare time was spent in studying the early fathers with du vergier , and laying plans for a reform of the church . in 1616 he returned to leuven , to take charge of the college of st pulcheria , a hostel for dutch students of theology . pupils found him a somewhat choleric and exacting master and a great recluse from academic society . however , he took an active part in the university 's resistance to the jesuits , for they had established a theological school of their own in leuven , which was proving itself a formidable rival to the official university faculty of divinity . in the hope of suppressing their encroachments , jansen was sent twice to madrid , in 1624 and 1626 ; the second time he narrowly escaped the inquisition . he warmly supported the catholic missionary archbishop ( apostolic vicar ) of the catholic holland mission in the dutch republic , philippus rovenius , in his contests with the jesuits , who were trying to evangelize that country without regard to the archbishop 's wishes . he also crossed more than once the dutch calvinist–presbyterian champion , gisbertus voetius , still remembered for his attacks on rené descartes . antipathy to the jesuits brought jansen no nearer to protestantism ; on the contrary , he yearned to beat them with their own weapons , chiefly by showing them that roman catholics could interpret the bible in just as mystical and pietistic a manner . this became the great object of his lectures , when he was appointed regius professor of scriptural interpretation at leuven in 1630 . still more was it the object of his augustinus , a bulky treatise on the theology of st . augustine , barely finished at the time of his death . its preparation was his chief occupation since his return to leuven . he had introduced in this treaty a long development favourable to contrition ( iiird part , de gratia christi salvatoris , book v , chap.xxi–xxv ) . in its appendice , titled erroris massiliensium , et opinionis quorumdam recentiorum parallelon et statera , he harshly condemned the jesuits , in particular luis de molina , gabriel vasquez and leonardus lessius . but jansen , as he said , did not mean to be a school-pedant all his life ; and there were moments when he entertained political ambitions . he looked forward to a time when flanders would throw off the spanish yoke and become an independent catholic republic , possibly even flemish-ruled , according to the model of the protestant dutch republic . these ideas became known to his spanish rulers , and to assuage them he wrote a philippic called the mars gallicus ( 1635 ) , a violent attack on french ambitions generally , and on cardinal richelieu 's indifference to international catholic interests in particular . the mars gallicus did little to help jansen 's rather persecuted theological friends in france , but it reversed madrid 's wrath with jansen ; in 1636 he was appointed bishop of ypres in west flanders by the pope and the spanish court . within two years he was however cut down by a sudden illness ; the augustinus , the book of his life , was published posthumously in 1640 . opposed to jansenism , a little group of theological doctors from the sorbonne extracted 8 propositions of jansenius 's augustinus , later reduced to 5 , treating of the problems concerning the relation between nature and grace . they accused jansenius of having misinterpreted st . augustine , conflating jansenists with lutherans . this led pope innocent x to condemn in 1653 these 5 propositions in the papal bull cum occasione , without attributing them to jansenius in particular . the 5 propositions were condemned again by pope alexander vii three years later in the apostolic constitution ad sanctam beati petri sedem . the jesuits , who then enjoyed predominant political and theological power ( including a personal confessor to the king of france ) , then persuaded the pope to force all jansenists to sign a formulary leading them to admit the papal bull and to confess to their errors . the formulary controversy led pascal to write the famous lettres provinciales ( 1657 ) in which he harshly attacked the jesuits and their moral , in particular their casuistry . following this anonymous publication , the king sent spies everywhere , condemned the librarians and successfully attempted to discover the author of the lettres provinciales . the jansenists of port-royal , antoine arnauld , pierre nicole , la mère angélique , soeur agnès , etc . , were forced to sign the formulary . although ostensibly obeying papal authority , they added that the condemnation would only be sensible if the 5 allegedly heretical propositions were in fact found in jansenius ' augustinus , and claimed that they did not figure there . the jansenists ' reasoning was that the pope had of course the power to condemn heretical propositions , but not to cause that which did not figure in jansenius ' augustinus to actually be there . this strategy would impose decades of theological disputes and debate . on the other hand , pascal and some other jansenists adopted a radical strategy , alleging that condemning jansenius was equivalent to condemning the father of the church , st . augustine himself , and adamantly refused to sign the formulary , with or without reserve . this in turn led to the further radicalization of the king and of the jesuits , and in 1661 the convent of port-royal was closed and the jansenist community dissolved – it would be ultimately razed in 1710 on orders of louis xiv . the controversy did not involve only papal authority , but rather his authority concerning biblical exegesis . further controversy led to the bull unigenitus , issued by clement xi in 1713 , which marked the end of catholic toleration of jansenist doctrine . the bull unigenitus , dated 8 september 1713 , was produced with the contribution of , a lector at the college of saint thomas , the future pontifical university of saint thomas aquinas , the cardinals of the holy roman church . retrieved 2 may 2012 fostered the condemnation of jansenism by condemning 101 propositions from the réflexions morales of quesnel as heresy , and as identical with propositions already condemned in the writings of jansen . up until the french revolution , jansenism would live on as a political force in france , supported by some chairs in the parlements of paris . anonymous jansenists published a magazine called nouvelles ecclésiastiques , which frequently featured anti-jesuit propaganda . eventually , jansenists would collaborate with independent-minded gallicanists in promoting the jesuits ' expulsion from france in 1764 . dale van kley , the jansenists and the expulsion of the jesuits from france 1757–1765 . see also . ultrajectine jansenism gallicanism old catholic church of the netherlands . notes . references . sainte-beuve , charles augustin : port-royal ( 5 vols . , 1840–1859 ) . external links .