Anna Christie

plot summary . anna christie is the story of a former prostitute who falls in love , but runs into difficulty in turning her life around . ; characters johnny the priest two longshoremen a postman larry — bartender chris c . christopherson — captain of the barge simeon winthrop marthy owen anna christopherson — chris 's daughter mat burke — a stoker johnson — deckhand on barge . act i . the first act takes place in a bar owned by johnny the priest and tended by larry . coal-barge captain old chris receives a letter from his daughter , a young woman he has not seen since he lived in sweden with his family and she was five years old . they meet at the bar and she agrees to go to the coal barge with him . act ii . the barge crew rescues mat burke and four other men who survived a shipwreck in an open boat . anna and mat do n't get along at first , but quickly fall in love . act iii . a confrontation on the barge among anna , chris and mat . mat wants to marry anna , chris does not want her to marry a sailor , and anna does n't want either of them to think they can control her . she tells them the truth about her past : she was raped while living with her mother 's relatives on a minnesota farm , worked briefly as a nurse 's aide , then became a prostitute . mat reacts angrily , and he and chris leave . act iv . mat and chris return . anna forgives chris for not being part of her childhood . after a dramatic confrontation , anna promises to abandon prostitution and mat forgives her . chris agrees to their marriage . chris and mat have both signed to work aboard a ship that is leaving for south africa the next day . they promise to return to anna after the voyage . productions . o'neill 's first version of this play , begun in january 1919 , was titled chris christopherson and performed as chris in out-of-town tryouts . o'neill revised it radically , changing the barge captain 's daughter anna from a pure woman needing to be protected into a prostitute who finds reformation and love from life on the sea . the new version , play , now titled anna christie , had its premiere on broadway at the vanderbilt theatre on november 2 , 1921 , and ran for 177 performances before closing in april 1923 . the production was staged by arthur hopkins and starred pauline lord . the desk on which o'neill wrote the play is preserved and on display at his family 's former home , monte cristo cottage in connecticut . schmidt , shannon mckenna and joni rendon . novel destinations : literary landmarks from jane austen 's bath to ernest heminway 's key west . washington , d.c . : national geographic , 2008 : 13 . alexander woollcott in the new york times called it '' a singularly engrossing play '' , and advised that '' all grown-up playgoers should jot down in their notebooks the name of anna christie as that of a play they really ought to see . '' the london west end premiere was staged at the strand theatre ( now the novello ) in 1923 . this was the first time an o'neill play was seen in the west end . the play starred pauline lord , who had been the original anna christie on broadway . the play had a great reception . time magazine wrote , '' in london , the first night of eugene o'neill 's anna christie , with pauline lord in the title role , received a tremendous ovation . after the first act the curtain was rung up a dozen times during the applause . . revivals . 1952 : the play was revived at the lyceum theatre on january 23 , 1952 , staged by michael gordon and designed by emeline c . roche with celeste holm as anna , kevin mccarthy , and arthur o'connell . it ran for 8 performances . 1955 : the play was revived at the teatro 5 de diciembre of mexico city , directed by tulio demicheli . it starred silvia pinal as anna and wolf ruvinskis . 1977 : the play was revived at the imperial theatre on april 14 , 1977 , directed by josé quintero and designed by ben edwards . it starred liv ullmann as anna , robert donley , john lithgow and mary mccarty . it received tony award nominations for liv ullmann as best actress and for mary mccarty as best featured actress . it ran for 124 performances . 1990 : the play was staged at the young vic theatre in london and starred natasha richardson . 1993 : the play was revived on broadway on january 14 , 1993 by roundabout theatre company at the criterion center stage right . it was directed by david leveaux and designed by john lee beatty . it starred natasha richardson , liam neeson , anne meara , and rip torn . it received tony award nominations for best actress ( natasha richardson ) , best actor ( liam neeson ) , best featured actress ( anne meara ) , best direction ( david leveaux ) , and won the award for best revival . neeson and richardson both received the theatre world award . the production won the drama desk award for outstanding revival and the drama desk award for outstanding actress in a play for richardson . it ran for 54 performances . 2002 : the play was directed by gar campbell at the pacific resident theatre , rerunning from january 5 , 2002 to may 5 , 2002 , starring lesley fera . 2011 : the play was produced at the donmar warehouse , london , running from august 4 , 2011 to october 8 , 2011 , with ruth wilson as anna , jude law as mat , and david hayman as chris . it was positively received by critics , with mostly 4 and 5 star reviews , and it won the 2012 olivier award for '' best revival '' . . adaptations . the play was adapted by bradley king for a anna christie ( 1923 film ) directed by john griffith wray and thomas h . ince , with stars blanche sweet , william russell , george f . marion , and eugenie besserer . a 1930 film adaptation by frances marion was directed by clarence brown and starred greta garbo , charles bickford , george f . marion and marie dressler . this pre-code film used the marketing slogan '' garbo talks ! '' , as it was her first talkie . her first spoken line has become her most famous : '' give me a whiskey with ginger ale on the side , and do n't be stingy , baby . '' george f . marion , who had performed the role of anna 's father in the original broadway production , reprised the role in both the 1923 and 1930 film adaptations . a german-language adaptation , also starring garbo , was filmed in 1930 and released the same year , using the same production as the english language film that had concluded filming in 1929 . this version was adapted by frances marion , translated by walter hasenclever and directed by jacques feyder . in addition to garbo , the cast included theo shall , hans junkermann , and salka viertel . in 1957 , a thoroughly reworked adaptation by george abbott with music and lyrics by bob merrill , called new girl in town , opened on broadway . it ran for 431 performances . in 2018 , encompass new opera theatre presented an opera adaptation composed by edward thomas with a libretto by joe masteroff at the baruch college performing arts center in new york city . directed by nancy rhodes and conducted by julian wachner , it featured melanie long in the title role , frank basile as chris , jonathan estabrooks as mat , joe hermlayn as marthy and mike pirozzi as larry . it ran for 12 performances . a recording with the original cast , produced by thomas z . shepard and conducted by julian wachner , with the orchestra novus new york , will be released by broadway records on august 16 , 2019 . it is a collaboration of trinity church and encompass new opera theatre . . trivia . according to actress ellen burstyn in the 2012 film marilyn in manhattan , marilyn monroe performed a scene from anna christie at the actors studio with maureen stapleton . calling the story '' legendary , '' burstyn said , '' everybody who saw that says that it was not only the best work marilyn ever did , it was some of the best work ever seen at studio , and certainly the best interpretation of anna christie anybody ever saw . she.achieved real greatness in that scene . '' ( according to some biographers , monroe was molested by foster parents and worked as a prostitute . awards and nominations . ; awards 1922 pulitzer prize for drama 1993 drama desk award for best revival of a play 1993 tony award for best revival of a play 2011 olivier award for best revival of a play . references . further reading . . external links .