OpenDoc

early efforts . opendoc was initially created by apple in 1992 , after microsoft approached apple asking for input on a proposed ole ii project . apple had been experimenting with software components internally for some time , based on the initial work done on its publish and subscribe linking model and the applescript scripting language , which in turn was based on the hypercard programming environment . apple reviewed the microsoft prototype and document and returned a list of problems they saw with the design . microsoft and apple , who were very competitive at the time , were unable to agree on common goals and did not work together . at about the same time , a group of third-party developers had met at the apple worldwide developers conference ( wwdc '91 ) and tried to establish a standardized document format , based conceptually on the electronic arts interchange file format ( iff ) . apple became interested in this work , and soon dedicated some engineers to the task of building , or at least documenting , such a system . initial work was published on the wwdc cds , as well as a number of follow-up versions on later developer cds . a component document system would only work with a known document format that all the components could use , and so soon the standardized document format was pulled into the component software effort . the format quickly changed from a simple one using tags to a very complex object oriented persistence layer called bento . initially the effort was codenamed '' exemplar '' , then '' jedi '' , '' amber '' , and eventually '' opendoc '' . competing visions . with opendoc entering the historic aim alliance between apple , ibm , and motorola , apple was also involved in taligent during some of this period , which promised somewhat similar functionality although based on very different underlying mechanisms . while opendoc was still being developed , apple confused things greatly by suggesting that it should be used by people porting existing software only , and new projects should instead be based on taligent since that would be the next os . in 1993 , john sculley called project amber ( a codename for what would become opendoc ) a path toward taligent . taligent was considered the future of the mac platform , and work on other tools like macapp was considerably deprioritized . through opendoc 's entire lifespan , analysts and users each reportedly '' had very different views '' of the opendoc initiative . they were confused about their role , regarding how much of opendoc-based development would be their responsibility versus ibm 's and apple 's responsibility . there were never many released opendoc components compared to microsoft 's activex components . therefore , reception was very mixed . starting in 1992 , apple had also been involved in an effort to replace macapp development framework with a cross-platform solution known as bedrock , from symantec . symantec 's think c was rapidly becoming the tool of choice for development on the mac . apple had been working with them to port their tools to the powerpc when they learned of symantec 's internal porting tools . apple proposed merging existing macapp concepts and code with symantec 's to produce an advanced cross-platform system . bedrock began to compete with opendoc as the solution for future development . as opendoc gained currency within apple , the company started to push symantec into including opendoc functionality in bedrock . symantec was uninterested in this , and eventually gave up on the effort , passing the code to apple . bedrock was in a very early state of development at this point , even after 18 months of work , as the development team at symantec suffered continual turnover . apple proposed that the code would be used for opendoc programming , but nothing was ever heard of this again , and bedrock disappeared . as a result of taligent and bedrock both being apple 's officially promised future platforms , little effort had been expended on updating macapp . because bedrock was discontinued in 1993 and taligent was discontinued in 1996 without any macos release , this left apple with only opendoc as a modern oo-based programming system . partnerships . the development team realized in mid-1992 that an industry coalition was needed to promote the system , and created the component integration laboratories ( ci labs ) with ibm and wordperfect . ibm introduced the system object model ( som ) shared library system to the project , which became a major part of apple 's future efforts , in and out of opendoc . in 1996 the project was adopted by the object management group , in part due to som 's use of common object request broker architecture ( corba ) , maintained by the omg . as part of the aim alliance between apple , ibm , and motorola , opendoc is one of apple 's earliest experiments with open standards and collaborative development methods with other companies . apple and its partners never publicly released the source code , but did make the complete source available to developers for feedback , testing , and debugging purposes . release . the opendoc subsystem was initially released on system 7.5 , and later on os/2 warp 4 . products . after three years of development on opendoc itself , the first opendoc-based product release is apple 's cyberdog web browser in may 1996 . the second was on august 1 , 1996 , of ibm 's two packages of opendoc components for os/2 , available on the club opendoc website for a 30 day free trial : the person pak is '' components aimed at organizing names , addresses , and other personal information '' , for use with personal information management ( pim ) applications , at 229 ; and the table pak '' to store rows and columns in a database file '' at 269 . ibm then anticipated the release of 50 more components by the end of 1996 . the wav word processor is a semi-successful opendoc word processor from digital harbor llc . the numbers & charts package is a spreadsheet and 3d real-time charting solution from adrenaline software . lexi from soft-linc , inc . is a linguistic package containing a spell checker , thesaurus , and a simple translation tool which wav and other components use . the nisus writer software by nisus incorporated opendoc , but its implementation was hopelessly buggy . bare bones software tested the market by making its bbedit lite freeware text editor available as an opendoc editor component . ragtime , a completely integrated office package with spreadsheet , publishing , and image editing was ported to opendoc shortly before opendoc was cancelled . apple 's 1996 release of clarisworks 5.0 ( the predecessor of appleworks ) was planned to support opendoc components , but this was dropped . educational . another opendoc container application , called dock'em , was written by metamind software under a grant from the national science foundation and commissioned by the center for research in math and science education , headquartered at san diego state university . the goal was to allow multimedia content to be included in documents describing curriculum . a number of physics simulations were written by metamind software and by russian software firm physicon ( openteach ) as opendoc parts . physics curricula for high school and middle school used them as their focus . with the discontinuation of opendoc , the simulations were rewritten as java applets and made available from the center as the constructing physics understanding ( cpu ) project by dr . fred goldberg . components of the e-slate educational microworlds platform were originally implemented as opendoc parts in c++ on both macos and windows , reimplemented later ( after the discontinuation of opendoc ) as java applets and eventually as javabeans . problems . opendoc 's flexibility came at a cost . opendoc components were invariably large and slow . for instance , opening a simple text editor part would often require 2 megabytes of ram or more , whereas the same editor written as a standalone application could be as small as 32 kb . this initial overhead became less important as the number of documents open increased , since the basic cost was for shared libraries which implemented the system , but it was large compared to entry level machines of the day . many developers felt that the extra overhead was too large , and since the operating system did not include opendoc capability , the memory footprint of their opendoc based applications appeared unacceptably large . in absolute terms , the one-time library overhead was approximately 1 megabyte of ram , which at the time was nearly half of a low-end desktop computer 's entire ram complement . another issue was that opendoc had little in common with most '' real world '' document formats , and so opendoc documents could really only be used by other opendoc machines . although one would expect some effort to allow the system to export to other formats , this was often impractical because each component held its own data . for instance , it took significant effort for the system to be able to turn a text file with some pictures into a microsoft word document , both because the text editor had no idea what was in the embedded objects , and because the proprietary microsoft format was undocumented and required reverse engineering . another problem was the fact that each part saved its data within bento ( the former name of an opendoc compound document file format ) in its own internal binary format , and it was very common to find one component could not open a document created by another , even though the internal data represented similar objects ( spreadsheet data for instance ) . opendoc attempted to solve this problem by allowing developers to store multiple formats to represent the same document object . for instance , it was both possible and encouraged to store a common format like jpeg along with editable binary format , but in practice few developers followed this recommendation . this problem was not unique to opendoc , and in fact was also experienced by the microsoft equivalent , object linking and embedding ( ole ) . indeed , many years later , xml documents which attempt to perform embedding of other xml formats also encounter similar issues . it also appears that opendoc was a victim of an oversold concept , that of compound documents . only a few specific examples are common , for instance most word processors and page layout programs include the ability to include graphics , and spreadsheets are expected to handle charts . the biggest problem with the project was that it was part of a very acrimonious competition between opendoc consortium members and microsoft . the members of the opendoc alliance were all trying to obtain traction in a market rapidly being dominated by microsoft office . as the various partners all piled in their own pet technologies in hopes of making it an industry standard , opendoc grew increasingly unwieldy . at the same time , microsoft used the synergy between the os and applications divisions of the company to make it effectively mandatory that developers adopt the competing ole technology . in order to obtain a windows 95 compliance logo from microsoft , one had to meet certain interoperability tests which were quite difficult to meet without adoption of ole technology , even though the technology was largely only useful in integrating with microsoft office . opendoc was forced to create an interoperability layer in order to allow developers to even consider adoption , and this added a great technical burden to the project . cancellation . opendoc had several hundred developers signed up but the timing was poor . apple was rapidly losing money at the time and many in the industry press expected the company to fail . opendoc was soon discontinued , with steve jobs ( who had been at next during this development ) noting that they '' put a bullet through opendoc 's head '' , and most of the apple advanced technology group was laid off in a big reduction in force in march 1997 . other sources noted that microsoft hired away three clarisworks developers who were responsible for opendoc integration into clarisworks . appleshare from versions 5.0 to 6.2 relied on opendoc , but appleshare ip 6.3 , the first mac os 9 compatible version ( released in 1999 ) , eliminated the reliance on opendoc . apple officially relinquished the last trademark on the name '' opendoc '' on june 11 , 2005 .