Five-pin bowling

gameplay . the balls in five pin bowling are small enough to fit in the hand and therefore typically have no fingerholes , although the canadian 5 pin bowlers association ( c5pba ) have approved balls with thumb holes made by one manufacturer ( the e . parrella co . , known as epco ) . at the end of the lane there are five pins arranged in a v . in size they are midway between duckpins and ten pins , and they have a heavy rubber band around their middles , similar to the pins used in the rarely seen '' rubberband duckpin '' form of duckpin bowling , to make them move farther when struck . unlike any other form of bowling popular in north america , the pins in five-pin bowling are worth different scoring point values , depending on their location in the v-formation . the centre pin is worth five points if knocked down , those on either side , three each , and the outermost pins , two each , giving a total of 15 in each frame . in each frame , each player gets three attempts to knock all five pins over . knocking all five pins down with the first ball is a strike , worth 15 points , which means the score achieved by the player 's first two balls of the next frame or frames are added to his or her score for the strike . they are also , of course , counted in their own frames , so in effect they count double . a player who takes two balls to knock all the pins down gets a spare , which means the first ball of the next frame counts double . when a bowler bowls two strikes in succession , within a game , the bowler has scored a '' double '' . the count in the frame where the first strike was bowled is left blank until the bowler makes his or her first delivery of the next frame . when a double has been bowled , the count for the first strike is 30 points plus the value of the pins bowled down with the first ball of the frame following the second strike . when a bowler bowls three strikes in succession , within a game , the bowler has scored a '' triple '' ( also called a '' turkey '' ) . in scoring three successive strikes , the bowler is credited with 45 points in the frame where the first strike was bowled . garside , bert : official rules and regulations governing the sport of 5 pin bowling , 5th edition , page 24 , canadian 5 pin bowlers ' association , 1999 as in ten-pin , if either of these happen in the last frame , the player gets to take one or two shots at a re-racked set of pins immediately . a perfect score is 450 , requiring 12 consecutive strikes bowled in the same game without fouling . it does not happen as frequently as in tenpin bowling . the c5pba sanctions from 15 to 30 perfect games annually . facts and figures . at first , bowling pins used in five-pin were made of plastic-coated maple . today 's pins are made of a hard plastic and often feature uv-glow capability for black light glow bowling operations . the pin makes a '' clack '' sound when hit by the ball . the base of the plastic pin can be separated from the rest of the pin . the neck stripes on plastic pins are actually a red plastic tape that wears off with use and can be replaced . in 2011 , the c5pba approved a new pin base . the new base adds 1/8 inch of height to the pin , raises the pin 's center of gravity , and lowers the contact area with the lane . this new base has a dark color , so pins with the new base may appear to the bowler as floating above the lane . in 1990 , the canadian 5 pin bowlers association sanctioned the use of personalized bowling balls . before then , only bowling balls supplied by the bowling centre were allowed to be used . many five pin tournaments scored by handicap usually use a scoring basis of '' pins over average '' , which is the difference between the outcome of a game and the bowler 's established average . it accumulates over the number of games bowled . this statistic can be negative . several popular automatic scoring systems have five pin versions . on most string type pinsetters , automatic scoring equipment is connected directly to the pinsetter circuitry . scoring cameras can be used on both types of pinsetting installations . most systems mount the camera mounted between lanes as in tenpin ; however the proscore system—when installed on free-fall—reads scores using a set of five electronic eyes mounted above the pindeck . bowling centres with convertible pinsetters usually will set specific hours as to when their convertible lanes will support five-pin or ten-pin . convertible machines may support duckpin bowling instead of ten-pin when in ten-pin mode . string pinsetters are not sanctioned by the usbc for ten-pin play , partially because a '' stringsetter '' can not handle an '' off-spot '' pin situation . some five-pin centres have installed lane protection devices . the device is a sheet of plexiglas mounted vertically about six inches ( 15 & nbsp ; cm ) above the lane and is located just past the target arrows on the lane . this device discourages bowlers from lofting the ball and damaging the lane—which is more prevalent in small ball bowling . a ball that knocks the plexiglas loose or flies over the plexiglas guard is worth zero points under c5pba rules . a foul line violation in five-pin results in a 15-point penalty . pins knocked over during a violating delivery count . the penalty is assessed at the end of the game . this compares to a zero score for the ball in other bowling disciplines . some believe that the hockey term '' five-hole '' ( the space between the goaltender 's legs ) is taken from five-pin bowling . knocking out the headpin ( worth 5 points ) by itself leaves a large hole through which it is easy to put the next one or two balls without hitting anything . five-pin bowling is played in all canadian provinces and territories . however , in quebec , new brunswick and nova scotia , unlike in the rest of the country , five-pin is not the dominant form of bowling . in quebec , five-pin is known as '' cinq quilles '' ( five pins ) in french , while '' petite quilles '' refers to the duckpin game . there is only one five-pin bowling alley in all of new brunswick , whereas in nova scotia , the worcester , massachusetts–originated sport of candlepin bowling is more popular given that five-pin bowling alleys are located primarily on army bases . nunavut has only one five-pin bowling alley . it is a two-lane facility located at cfs alert and also happens to be the world 's most northerly bowling lanes . as a result , this alley is only accessible to military personnel and visitors to the base . five-pin bowling was one of four sports featured on the canadian inventions : sports series issued by canada post stamps on august 10 , 2009 . canada post stamp details , july to september 2009 , volume xviii , no . 3 , p . 10 in 2007 , five-pin bowling was ranked 4 during the cbc miniseries the greatest canadian invention .