1963 in music

specific locations . 1963 in british music 1963 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1963 in country music 1963 in jazz . events . january 3 – the beatles begin their first tour of 1963 with a five-day tour in scotland to support the release of their new single , '' love me do '' , beginning with a performance in elgin . live : two red shoes ballroom , elgin , scotland www.beatlesbible.com , accessed 310 march 2013 . january 4 – at cortina d'ampezzo in italy , dalida receives a juke box global oscar for the year 's most-played artist on jukeboxes . january 7 – gary u.s . bonds files a 100,000 lawsuit against chubby checker , claiming that checker stole '' quarter to three '' and turned it into '' dancin ' party . '' the lawsuit is later settled out of court . january 11 – '' please please me '' is released in the united kingdom by the beatles , with '' ask me why '' as the b-side . january 12 – bob dylan portrays a folk singer in the madhouse of castle street , a radio play for the bbc in london . february 16 the beatles achieve their first no . 1 hit single , when '' please please me '' tops the charts in the uk . paul anka marries marie-ann dezogheb . february 22 – the beatles form northern songs publishing company . march 5 – 1963 camden pa-24 crash : patsy cline is killed in small plane crash near camden , tennessee , while on her way to nashville , tennessee , from kansas city , missouri , at the height of her career , together with cowboy copas and hawkshaw hawkins . march 22 – the beatles release their first album , please please me , in the uk . march 23 – the 8th eurovision song contest is held in two studios at the bbc television centre , london . after much confusion regarding the results of the norwegian jury , denmark snatches victory from switzerland after a close run . the danish husband-and-wife duo grethe and jørgen ingmann take the prize with '' dansevise '' . april 29 – 19-year-old andrew loog oldham signs a contract with the rolling stones , becoming their manager . oldham had seen the band in concert the previous day at the crawdaddy club in london . may 2 – the beatles reach number one in the uk singles chart for the second time with '' from me to you '' . may 11 – the beatles album please please me goes to the top of the uk albums chart . may 15 – opening of the national academic theatre of opera and ballet of mongolia . the 5th annual grammy awards are held in chicago , los angeles and new york , hosted by frank sinatra . tony bennett and igor stravinsky each win the most awards with three , with the former winning record of the year for his song '' i left my heart in san francisco '' . vaughn meader 's the first family wins album of the year and anthony newley and leslie bricusse 's '' what kind of fool am i ? '' wins song of the year . robert goulet wins best new artist . may 27 – the freewheelin ' bob dylan , singer-songwriter bob dylan 's second and most influential studio album , is released by columbia records . the lead song , '' blowin ' in the wind '' , is released as a single by peter , paul and mary in june and by dylan himself in august . may 29 – on the 50th anniversary of its stormy première , gustav linor in comoedia , may 30 , 1913 , at the théâtre des champs-elysées : le sacre du printemps 88-year-old pierre monteux conducts the london symphony orchestra in the rite of spring at the royal albert hall , with the composer stravinsky ( 81 ) in the audience . june 7 – the rolling stones ' first single , a cover version of the chuck berry song '' come on '' , is released in the uk and reaches no . 21 . august 3 – the beatles perform at the cavern club in liverpool for the final time . august 28 – march on washington for jobs and freedom . musical performers include mahalia jackson , bob dylan , joan baez , peter , paul and mary and marian anderson . august 30 – philips introduces the musicassette at the ifa berlin . september 6 – nippon crown record label is established as crown records , a subsidiary of columbia music entertainment . september 12 – the beatles reach the uk number one for the third time with the single '' she loves you '' ( released on 23 august ) . october 13 – lesley gore performs on the ed sullivan show for the first time . she performs a medley of her smash hits '' it 's my party '' and '' she 's a fool , '' which charted at 1 and 5 , respectively . october 15 british newspaper the daily mirror uses the term '' beatlemania '' in a news story about the group 's concert the previous day in cheltenham ; a scottish music promoter later claims to have originated the term a week earlier . radio interview , radio tay am . accessed 26 may 2007 berliner philharmonie concert hall opens . november 30 – after an unbroken 30-week spell at the top of the uk albums chart , the beatles album please please me is knocked off the top of the charts by the group 's latest album with the beatles ( released on 22 november ) . december 12 – the beatles reach number one in the uk for the fourth time with '' i want to hold your hand '' ( released on 29 november ) . date unknown dalida is rejected by decca in the uk again . don buchla begins to design an electronic music synthesizer in berkeley , california . coxsone dodd opens the first black-owned recording studio in jamaica , named studio one . lord shorty 's '' clock and dagger '' is widely considered the first soca recording . i nyoman rembang leaves the surakarta conservatorium to teach at the college of music smki in bali . bands formed . aeolian singers all-ohio state fair youth choir ambassadors of harmony anaheim kingsmen drum and bugle corps the angels ( american group ) the artwoods baby huey & the babysitters the back porch majority bats ( south african band ) billy thorpe & the aztecs bloomington symphony orchestra ( minnesota ) bobby taylor & the vancouvers bombay sisters the brothers-in-law bryn mawr mainliners butch engle & the styx camerata bern carlton showband chicago brass quintet the clefs the clique ( 1960s uk band ) colts drum and bugle corps crni biseri the cryin ' shames daltoni david and the giants the deakins downliners sect edmonton strutters drum and bugle corps el camino youth symphony the enthusiasts the escorts ( liverpool band ) europa cantat exile ( american band ) fairies ( british band ) the flames the fortunes the fourmost inez and charlie foxx framus five franz liszt chamber orchestra freddie and the dreamers the fugs the gants the geezinslaw brothers the gentrys gilbert and sullivan for all hedgehoppers anonymous hep stars the hideaways hiroshima symphony orchestra the honeycombs irish chamber orchestra the irish rovers the kinks kyiv chamber orchestra the leaves the liverbirds livermore-amador symphony liverpool five mandarins drum and bugle corps manfred mann marek i wacek the marionettes chorale bob marley and the wailers the master singers the mindbenders the moments ( english band ) johnny and jonie mosby mountain city four neighb'rhood childr ' n new birth ( band ) new york youth symphony orchestra ethiopia the outcasts ( texas band ) piccolo coro dell'antoniano the poets the pretty things the pussycats the rockin ' vickers the rokes samonikli the scorpions ( manchester band ) sfinx the shanes the shangri-las slam creepers the sorrows south carolina philharmonic the spencer davis group the squires stanford band stanford mendicants the syndicats tages teddy and the pandas the three degrees tpao batman trendsetters limited tulsa youth symphony unbelievable uglies unit 4 + 2 university of the philippines madrigal singers the v.i.p . 's valley concert chorale velvet knights drum and bugle corps the wilde flowers the wolfe tones the yardbirds . bands disbanded . the springfields . albums released . compositions . benjamin britten – nocturnal after john dowland , op . 70 , for guitar nikolai karetnikov – symphony no . 4 wojciech kilar – générique , for orchestra witold lutosławski – trois poèmes d'henri michaux for choir and orchestra francis poulenc – sept répons des ténèbres giacinto scelsi – string quartet no . 3 john serry sr . – american rhapsody , transcribed for free-bass accordion . karlheinz stockhausen – plus-minus igor stravinsky – abraham and isaac william walton – variations on a theme by hindemith , for orchestra wang xilin – yunnan tone poem iannis xenakis – eonta . opera . richard rodney bennett – the mines of sulphur carlisle floyd – the sojourner and molly sinclair gian carlo menotti – the last savage ( 22 october , paris , opéra-comique ) malcolm williamson – our man in havana aarre merikanto – juha ( composed 1922 ) . jazz . musical theatre . oliver ! ( music , lyrics and book : lionel bart ) broadway production opened at the imperial theatre on january 6 and ran for 744 performances she loves me ( music : jerry bock lyrics : sheldon harnick book : joe masteroff ) broadway production opened at the eugene o'neill theatre on april 23 and ran for 302 performances here 's love ( music , lyrics and book : meredith willson ) . broadway production opened at the shubert theatre on october 3 and ran for 334 performances 110 in the shade ( music : harvey schmidt lyrics : tom jones book : n . richard nash ) . broadway production opened at the broadhurst theatre on october 24 and ran for 331 performances the girl who came to supper ( music and lyrics : noël coward ) . broadway production opened at the broadway theatre on december 8 and ran for 112 performances carnival ! ( music and lyrics : bob merrill book : michael stewart ) . london production opened at the lyric theatre on february 8 and ran for 34 performances oh , what a lovely war ! ( music and lyrics : various book : charles chilton ) . opened at the theatre royal stratford east on march 19 and transferred to wyndham 's theatre , london on june 20 for a total run of 501 performances . half a sixpence ( music and lyrics : david heneker book : douglas cross ) . london production opened at the cambridge theatre on march 21 and ran for 677 performances how to succeed in business without really trying ( music and lyrics : frank loesser book : abe burrows , jack weinstein and willie gilbert ) . london production opened at the shaftesbury theatre on march 28 and ran for 520 performances . on the town ( music : leonard bernstein lyrics and book : betty comden and adolph green ) . london production opened at the prince of wales theatre on may 30 and ran for 53 performances pickwick ( music : cyril ornadel lyrics : leslie bricusse book : wolf mankowitz ) . london production opened at the saville theatre on july 4 and ran for 694 performances at the drop of another hat ( music and lyrics : michael flanders and donald swann ) . london revue opened at the haymarket theatre on october 2 a funny thing happened on the way to the forum ( music and lyrics : stephen sondheim book : burt shevelove and larry gelbart ) . london production opened at the strand theatre on october 3 and ran for 762 performances the boys from syracuse ( music : richard rodgers lyrics : lorenz hart book : george abbott ) . london production opened at the drury lane theatre on november 7 and ran for 100 performances . musical films . bye bye birdie , starring dick van dyke and ann-margret fun in acapulco , starring elvis presley and ursula andress summer holiday , british musical featuring cliff richard summer magic starring hayley mills , burl ives , dorothy mcguire and eddie hodges . births . january 4 – till lindemann , german rock musician ( rammstein ) january 13 – tim kelly , american rock musician ( slaughter ) ( d . 1998 ) january 15 – conrad lant , english singer-songwriter and bass player ( venom and cronos ) january 26 jazzie b , english dj and music producer ( soul ii soul ) andrew ridgeley , english singer-songwriter ( wham ! ) january 28 – dan spitz , american thrash metal guitarist ( anthrax ) and watchmaker january 29 – octave octavian teodorescu , romanian guitarist , songwriter and producer february 2 – eva cassidy , american singer and guitarist ( d . 1996 ) february 4 – noodles , american guitarist ( the offspring ) february 8 – joshua kadison , american singer-songwriter and pianist february 9 – travis tritt , american country singer february 10 – tony reno , swedish rock drummer ( europe ) february 19 – seal , british singer march 1 – dan michaels , producer , saxophonist , member of the rock band the choir and the swirling eddies , owner of galaxy21 music . march 4 janey lee grace , british singer , author , television presenter and radio disc jockey jason newsted , american rock bassist metallica march 10 – jeff ament ( pearl jam , green river ) march 11 stacy earl , american dance/pop singer david lachapelle , music video director , photographer and movie director march 15 – bret michaels , rock singer ( poison ) march 17 michael ivins , american rock bassist ( the flaming lips ) nick peros , canadian composer march 18 – vanessa williams , american singer and actress march 21 – shawn lane , american guitar virtuoso ( d . 2003 ) march 27 – dave koz , saxophonist march 30 – eli-eri moura , brazilian composer , conductor and music theory april 6 – andrew weatherall , english disc jockey and remixer ( d . 2020 ) april 8 – julian lennon , singer-songwriter , son of john lennon april 10 – warren demartini , american rock guitarist ( ratt ) april 16 – jimmy osmond , american singer may 5 – prince ital joe , reggae singer ( d . 2001 ) may 8 sylvain cossette , canadian singer-songwriter ( paradox ) anthony field , australian musician and actor may 9 – barry douglas lamb , english musician , author and preacher may 12 – charles pettigrew , american soul singer ( charles & eddie ) ( d . 2001 ) may 19 – yazz , english singer may 21 – gilles apap , violinist june 4 – sandeep bhagwati , indian classical musician and composer june 5 – joe rudán , hungarian heavy metal singer june 7 – roberto alagna , operatic tenor june 18 – dizzy reed , american keyboard player , songwriter and actor ( guns n ' roses , johnny crash ) june 20 amir derakh , rock musician ( orgy ) julien-k june 25 – george michael , english singer and songwriter ( d . 2016 ) june 28 – tierney sutton , american singer june 29 – anne-sophie mutter , german violinist june 30 – yngwie j . malmsteen , guitar performer july 7 – vonda shepard , singer and musician july 16 – norman cook ( fatboy slim ) , english big-beat musician july 17 – regina belle , american singer-songwriter and producer july 22 – emily saliers , american singer-songwriter musician ( indigo girls ) july 23 – renato borghetti , folk musician and composer july 24 – larry rudolph , britney spears collaborator and pop music manager/agent july 26 – andy timmons , american guitarist ( danger danger ) july 28 – shaunna hall , american composer and musician ( 4 non blondes and parliament-funkadelic ) august 1 – coolio , african american rapper august 3 tasmin archer , english singer james hetfield , american rock singer ( metallica ) august 9 – whitney houston , african american singer and actress ( d . 2012 ) august 12 karen briggs , african american jazz violinist sir mix-a-lot ( anthony ray ) , african american mc and producer august 19 – joey tempest , swedish rock singer ( europe ) august 22 tori amos , american singer-songwriter , pianist and composer james debarge ( debarge ) august 26 – liu huan , chinese singer august 30 – paul oakenfold , british disc jockey august 31 reb beach , american rock guitarist ( winger , whitesnake ) beverly crawford , american gospel singer september 1 – carola smit , dutch musician september 6 – mark chesnutt , american country musician september 7 – eazy-e , american west coast rapper and record producer ( d . 1995 ) september 19 – jarvis cocker , british musician and singer ( pulp ) september 28 – dan forden , video game music composer ( mortal kombat ) september 29 les claypool , american rock bassist and singer ( primus ) o'landa draper ( o'landa draper and the associates gospel choir ) ( d . 1998 ) october 13 – kemistry , english drum-and-bass musician ( kemistry & storm ) ( d . 1999 ) october 14 – alessandro safina , operatic tenor october 26 – natalie merchant , american indie singer-songwriter october 27 – marla maples , american actress , musician and television personality . october 30 – jerry deborg ( jesus jones ) november 1 – rick allen , british drummer ( def leppard ) november 12 – sam lloyd , american actor and singer ( the blanks ) december 9 – kat bjelland , american singer , songwriter , musician and guitarist . december 10 – ole amund gjersvik , norwegian bassist and composer december 15 – helen slater , american singer , actress and songwriter december 24 – mary ramsey , american musician , singer/songwriter ( 10,000 maniacs , john & mary ) december 26 – lars ulrich , danish-born heavy metal drummer ( metallica ) december 31 – scott ian , american thrash metal guitarist ( anthrax ) unknown – naseer shamma , iraqi musician and oud player . deaths . january 2 – dick powell , actor and singer , 58 ( lung cancer ) january 6 – lina abarbanell , german-american soprano , 84 january 24 – otto harbach , lyricist , 89 january 30 – francis poulenc , french composer , 64 february 19 – benny moré , cuban singer , 43 ( cirrhosis of the liver ) february 20 – ferenc fricsay , conductor , 48 ( cancer ) march 5 – patsy cline , american country/pop singer , 30 ( plane crash ) march 17 – lizzie miles , singer , 67 march 28 – alec templeton , welsh composer , 52 march 30 – aleksandr gauk , russian conductor and composer , 69 march 31 – harry akst , us composer and pianist , 68 april 9 eddie edwards , american jazz trombonist , 71 benno moiseiwitsch , jewish-ukrainian pianist , 73 april 11 – arvid gram paulsen , norwegian jazz saxophonist and trumpeter , 41 april 12 – herbie nichols , jazz musician , 44 ( leukemia ) may 6 – ted weems , us bandleader , 61 may 10 – irving aaronson , bandleader and composer , 68 may 24 – elmore james , american blues guitarist , 45 ( heart attack ) june 24 – sybil evers , mezzo-soprano and actress , 59 august 15 – john powell , pianist , composer and ethnomusicologist , 80 august 23 – glen gray , american saxophonist and conductor , 63 september 3 – frico kafenda , slovak composer , 79 september 12 – modest altschuler , cellist , conductor and composer , 90 september 25 – alexander sakharoff , russian dancer and choreographer , 77 october 11 – édith piaf , french singing superstar , 47 ( liver cancer ) october 25 – roger désormière , french conductor , 65 november 1 – elsa maxwell , songwriter , '' the hostess with the mostest '' , 80 november 15 – fritz reiner , hungarian conductor , 74 november 19 – carmen amaya , flamenco dancer and singer , 50 november 26 – amelita galli-curci , operatic soprano , 81 november 29 – ernesto lecuona , cuban composer , pianist and bandleader , 68 december 5 – karl amadeus hartmann , composer , 58 ( stomach cancer ) december 14 – dinah washington , singer , 39 december 28 – paul hindemith , composer , 68 date unknown – naftule brandwein , clarinettist . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1963 . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1963 . leeds international piano competition . michael roll