Chemical weapons in World War I

history of poison gas in world war i . 1914 : tear gas . the most frequently used chemicals during world war i were tear gas rather than fatal or disabling poisons . during world war i , the french army was the first to employ tear gas , using 26 & nbsp ; mm grenades filled with ethyl bromoacetate in august 1914 . the small quantities of gas delivered , roughly 19 & nbsp ; cm³ per cartridge , were not even detected by the germans . the stocks were rapidly consumed and by november a new order was placed by the french military . as bromine was scarce among the entente allies , the active ingredient was changed to chloroacetone . in october 1914 , german troops fired fragmentation shells filled with a chemical irritant against british positions at neuve chapelle ; the concentration achieved was so small that it too was barely noticed . none of the combatants considered the use of tear gas to be in conflict with the hague treaty of 1899 , which specifically prohibited the launching of projectiles containing asphyxiating or poisonous gas . . 1915 : large-scale use and lethal gases . the first instance of large-scale use of gas as a weapon was on 31 january 1915 , when germany fired 18,000 artillery shells containing liquid xylyl bromide tear gas on russian positions on the rawka river , west of warsaw during the battle of bolimov . instead of vaporizing , the chemical froze and failed to have the desired effect . the first killing agent was chlorine , used by the german military . chlorine is a powerful irritant that can inflict damage to the eyes , nose , throat and lungs . at high concentrations and prolonged exposure it can cause death by asphyxiation . german chemical companies basf , hoechst and bayer ( which formed the ig farben conglomerate in 1925 ) had been making chlorine as a by-product of their dye manufacturing . in cooperation with fritz haber of the kaiser wilhelm institute for chemistry in berlin , they began developing methods of discharging chlorine gas against enemy trenches . it may appear from a feldpost letter of major karl von zingler that the first chlorine gas attack by german forces took place before 2 january 1915 : '' in other war theatres it does not go better and it has been said that our chlorine is very effective . 140 english officers have been killed . this is a horrible weapon & nbsp ; . '' . this letter must be discounted as evidence for early german use of chlorine , however , because the date '' 2 january 1915 '' may have been hastily scribbled instead of the intended '' 2 january 1916 , '' the sort of common typographical error that is often made at the beginning of a new year . the deaths of so many english officers from gas at this time would certainly have been met with outrage , but a recent , extensive study of british reactions to chemical warfare says nothing of this supposed attack . perhaps this letter was referring to the chlorine-phosgene attack on british troops at wieltje near ypres , on 19 december 1915 ( see below ) . by 22 april 1915 , the german army had 168 tons of chlorine deployed in 5,730 cylinders from langemark-poelkapelle , north of ypres . at 17:30 , in a slight easterly breeze , the liquid chlorine was siphoned from the tanks , producing gas which formed a grey-green cloud that drifted across positions held by french colonial troops from martinique , as well as the 1st tirailleurs and the 2nd zouaves from algeria . general r . hure , l'armee d'afrique 1830–1962 , charles-lavauzelle , 1972 , p . 283 . faced with an unfamiliar threat these troops broke ranks , abandoning their trenches and creating an 8,000-yard ( 7 & nbsp ; km ) gap in the allied line . the german infantry were also wary of the gas and , lacking reinforcements , failed to exploit the break before the 1st canadian division and assorted french troops reformed the line in scattered , hastily prepared positions apart . the entente governments claimed the attack was a flagrant violation of international law but germany argued that the hague treaty had only banned chemical shells , rather than the use of gas projectors . in what became the second battle of ypres , the germans used gas on three more occasions ; on 24 april against the 1st canadian division , on 2 may near mouse trap farm and on 5 may against the british at hill 60 . the british official history stated that at hill 60 , '' 90 men died from gas poisoning in the trenches or before they could be got to a dressing station ; of the 207 brought to the nearest dressing stations , 46 died almost immediately and 12 after long suffering . '' edmonds and wynne ( 1927 ) : p . 289 . on 6 august , german troops used chlorine gas against russian troops defending osowiec fortress . surviving defenders drove back the attack and retained the fortress . the event would later be called the attack of the dead men . germany used chemical weapons on the eastern front in an attack at rawka , south of warsaw . the russian army took 9,000 casualties , with more than 1,000 fatalities . in response , the artillery branch of the russian army organised a commission to study the delivery of poison gas in shells . . effectiveness and countermeasures . it quickly became evident that the men who stayed in their places suffered less than those who ran away , as any movement worsened the effects of the gas , and that those who stood up on the fire step suffered less—indeed they often escaped any serious effects—than those who lay down or sat at the bottom of a trench . men who stood on the parapet suffered least , as the gas was denser near the ground . the worst sufferers were the wounded lying on the ground , or on stretchers , and the men who moved back with the cloud . edmonds and wynne ( 1927 ) : pp . & nbsp ; 177–78 . chlorine was less effective as a weapon than the germans had hoped , particularly as soon as simple countermeasures were introduced . the gas produced a visible greenish cloud and strong odour , making it easy to detect . it was water-soluble , so the simple expedient of covering the mouth and nose with a damp cloth was effective at reducing the effect of the gas . it was thought to be even more effective to use urine rather than water , as it was known at the time that chlorine reacted with urea ( present in urine ) to form dichloro urea . for example , see : chlorine required a concentration of 1,000 parts per million to be fatal , destroying tissue in the lungs , likely through the formation of hypochlorous and hydrochloric acids when dissolved in the water in the lungs . despite its limitations , chlorine was an effective psychological weapon—the sight of an oncoming cloud of the gas was a continual source of dread for the infantry . countermeasures were quickly introduced in response to the use of chlorine . the germans issued their troops with small gauze pads filled with cotton waste , and bottles of a bicarbonate solution with which to dampen the pads . immediately following the use of chlorine gas by the germans , instructions were sent to british and french troops to hold wet handkerchiefs or cloths over their mouths . simple pad respirators similar to those issued to german troops were soon proposed by lieutenant-colonel n . c . ferguson , the assistant director medical services of the 28th division . these pads were intended to be used damp , preferably dipped into a solution of bicarbonate kept in buckets for that purpose ; other liquids were also used . because such pads could not be expected to arrive at the front for several days , army divisions set about making them for themselves . locally available muslin , flannel and gauze were used , officers were sent to paris to buy more and local french women were employed making up rudimentary pads with string ties . other units used lint bandages manufactured in the convent at poperinge . pad respirators were sent up with rations to british troops in the line as early as the evening of 24 april . in britain the daily mail newspaper encouraged women to manufacture cotton pads , and within one month a variety of pad respirators were available to british and french troops , along with motoring goggles to protect the eyes . the response was enormous and a million gas masks were produced in a day . the mails design was useless when dry and caused suffocation when wet—the respirator was responsible for the deaths of scores of men . by 6 july 1915 , the entire british army was equipped with the more effective '' hypo helmet '' designed by major cluny macpherson , newfoundland regiment , which was a flannel bag with a celluloid window , which entirely covered the head . the race was then on between the introduction of new and more effective poison gases and the production of effective countermeasures , which marked gas warfare until the armistice in november 1918 . edmonds and wynne ( 1927 ) : p . 217 . . british gas attacks . the british expressed outrage at germany 's use of poison gas at ypres and responded by developing their own gas warfare capability . the commander of ii corps , sir charles fergusson , 7th baronet , said of gas : . long-term health effects . soldiers who claimed to have been exposed to chemical warfare have often presented unusual medical conditions which has led to much controversy . the lack of information has left doctors , patients , and their families in the dark in terms of prognosis and treatment . nerve agents such as sarin , tabun , and soman are believed to have the most significant long-term health effects . glyn volans , '' long-term effects of chemical weapons , '' the lancet , 360 , ( december 2002 ) : 36 . chronic fatigue and memory loss have been reported to last up to three years after exposure . in the years following world war one , there were many conferences held in attempts to abolish the use of chemical weapons all together , such as the washington naval conference ( 1921–22 ) , geneva conference ( 1923–25 ) and the world disarmament conference ( 1933 ) . the united states was an original signatory of the geneva protocol in 1925 , but the us senate did not ratify it until 1975 . although the health effects are generally chronic in nature , the exposures were generally acute . a positive correlation has been proven between exposure to mustard agents and skin cancers , other respiratory and skin conditions , leukemia , several eye conditions , bone marrow depression and subsequent immunosuppression , psychological disorders and sexual dysfunction . mary fox , frank curriero , kathryn kulbicki , beth resnick , thomas burke , '' evaluating the community health legacy of wwi chemical weapons testing , '' journal of community health , 35 , ( 18 november 2009 ) : 96 . chemicals used in the production of chemical weapons have also left residues in the soil where the weapons were used . the chemicals that have been detected can cause cancer and can affect the brain , blood , liver , kidneys and skin . mary fox , frank curriero , kathryn kulbicki , beth resnick , thomas burke , '' evaluating the community health legacy of wwi chemical weapons testing , '' journal of community health , 35 , ( 18 november 2009 ) : 96–97 . despite the evidence in support of long-term health effects , there are studies that show just the opposite . some us veterans who were closely affected by chemical weapons showed no neurological evidence in the following years . these same studies showed that one single contact with chemical weapons would be enough to cause long-term health effects . james r . riddle , '' chemical warfare and the gulf war : a review of the impact on gulf veterans ' health , '' military medicine , 168 , ( august 2003 ) : 607 . . explanatory notes . references . further reading . . external links . faith , thomas i . : gas warfare , in : 1914-1918-online . international encyclopedia of the first world war . chemical weapons in world war i gas warfare gas-poisoning , by arthur hurst , m.a . , md ( oxon ) , frcp 1917 effects of chlorine gas poisoning understanding chemical weapons in the first world war