Speakeasy

etymology . the phrase '' speak softly shop '' , meaning a '' smuggler 's house '' , appeared in a british slang dictionary published in 1823 . the similar phrase '' speak easy shop '' , denoting a place where unlicensed liquor sales were made , appeared in a british naval memoir written in 1844 . the precise term '' speakeasy '' dates from no later than 1837 when an article in the sydney herald newspaper in australia referred to 'sly grog shops , called in slang terms '' speakeasy 's '' sic in this part – boro creek . ' in the united states , the word emerged in the 1880s . a newspaper article from march 21 , 1889 , refers to '' speak easy '' as the name used in the pittsburgh-area town of mckeesport , pennsylvania for '' a saloon that sells without a license '' . speakeasies were '' so called because of the practice of speaking quietly about such a place in public , or when inside it , so as not to alert the police or neighbors '' . although failing to account for earlier usage outside the u.s . , a common american anecdote traces the term to bar owner kate hester , who ran an unlicensed bar in the 1880s in mckeesport , supposedly telling her rowdy customers to '' speak easy '' to avoid attention from authorities . many years later , in prohibition-era america , the '' speakeasy '' became a common name to describe a place to get an illicit drink . okrent , daniel . last call : the rise and fall of prohibition . new york : scribner , 2010 . p . 207 different names for speakeasies were created . the terms '' blind pig '' and '' blind tiger '' originated in the united states in the 19th century . these terms were applied to establishments that sold alcoholic beverages illegally , and they are still in use today . the operator of an establishment ( such as a saloon or bar ) would charge customers to see an attraction ( such as an animal ) and then serve a '' complimentary '' alcoholic beverage , thus circumventing the law . in desperate cases it has to betake itself to the exhibition of greenland pigs and other curious animals , charging 25 cents for a sight of the pig and throwing in a gin cocktail gratuitously . they are in a mysterious place called a blind tiger , drinking the very bad whiskey for which prohibition is indirectly responsible . '' blind tiger '' also referred to illegal drinking establishments in which the seller 's identity was concealed . a drawer runs into a wall of what appears to be a billiard saloon . you pull out the drawer , drop in your change , shove the drawer back , call for what you want and then pull out the drawer again and there it is , '' straight '' or '' spiked '' just as you 'd have it . nobody is heard or seen , and the blind tiger , apparently without any keeper , works like a charm . . history . speakeasies , though illegal , were numerous and popular during the prohibition years . some were operated by people who were part of organized crime . even though police and agents of the bureau of prohibition would often raid them and arrest their owners and patrons , they were so profitable that they continued to flourish . the speakeasy soon became one of the biggest parts of american culture during this time . several changes happened as speakeasies formed ; one was with integration . people of all races , black or white , would gather together and even mingle . people would mix together and have few or no problems . okrent , daniel . last call : the rise and fall of prohibition . new york : scribner , 2010 . p . 212 another change that occurred was more participation from women . many businesses would set up their speakeasies to attract women to get more profits . okrent , daniel . last call : the rise and fall of prohibition . new york : scribner , 2010 . p . 211 women also began to insert themselves into the business of speakeasies . texas guinan , a former screen and stage actress , opened many speakeasies during prohibition such as the 300 club and the el fey . guinan greeted customers with '' hey suckers '' and admitted she 'd be nothing without prohibition . her two biggest competitors were helen morgan and belle livingston . sismodo , christine . america walks into a bar . new york : oxford university press , 2011 . p . 220 culture was also affected by speakeasies during prohibition and the speakeasy became a focal point . an example to show this was in the movie theaters . companies were restricted from depicting alcohol on screen , but some still continued to do so because they felt it showed the way americans lived , such as the scene in our dancing daughters in which joan crawford dances on a table in a speakeasy . okrent , daniel . last call : the rise and fall of prohibition . new york : scribner , 2010 . p . 213 the poor quality bootleg liquor sold in some speakeasies was responsible for a shift away from 19th-century '' classic '' cocktails , that celebrated the raw taste of the liquor ( such as the gin cocktail , made with genever ( sweet ) gin ) , to new cocktails aimed at masking the taste of rough moonshine . these masking drinks were termed '' pansies '' at the time shay , '' ten best cocktails of 1934 '' , esquire vol . 2 , december 1934 , p . 40 . grimes , '' bar , what bar ? '' , the new york times , june 2 , 2009 . ( although some , such as the brandy alexander , would now be termed '' classic '' ) . the quality of the alcohol sold in speakeasies ranged from very poor to very good , depending on the owner 's source . cheap liquor was generally used because it was more profitable . in other cases , brand names were used to specify the liquor customers wanted . however , sometimes when brand names were used , some speakeasies cheated ; they lied to their customers by giving them poor quality liquor instead of the higher-quality liquor the customer ordered . prices were four to five dollars a bottle . okrent , daniel . last call : the rise and fall of prohibition . new york : scribner , 2010 . p . 210 . . varieties . from the beginning the speakeasy was relatively small with little or no entertainment involved , but through gradual growth it popularized and expanded to many different areas with new additions of entertainment and eventually made the speakeasy one of the biggest businesses during prohibition . in many rural towns , small speakeasies and blind pigs were operated by local business owners . these family secrets were often kept even after prohibition ended . in 2007 secret underground rooms thought to have been a speakeasy were found by renovators on the grounds of the cyber cafe west in binghamton , new york . sweeny , caitlin . '' remains of speakeasy found in cyber cafe parking lot '' april 17 , 2007 . pipe dream : binghamton university . june 2 , 2012 . speakeasies did not need to be big to operate . '' it did n't take much more than a bottle and two chairs to make a speakeasy . '' okrent , daniel . last call : the rise and fall of prohibition . new york : scribner , 2010 . p . 208 . one example for a speakeasy location was the '' 21 '' club in new york . this is one of the more famous of the speakeasies and still stands today . the '' 21 '' club was only part of a series of businesses owned by charlie berns and jack kriendler . they started the business in greenwich with a place called '' the redhead '' and later moved onto the next operation '' the puncheon club '' . the '' 21 '' club was special because of its system to remain under the radar . it was a unique system that used a doorkeeper to send a warning to the bar that it was in danger and the bar would transform into an ordinary place through a mechanism . okrent , daniel . last call : the rise and fall of prohibition . new york : scribner , 2010 . pp . 208–209 . the speakeasy spread all over new york with businesses such as the '' bath club '' and '' o'leary 's on the bowery '' . '' the bath club '' had musicians perform in their place to keep it unique . this idea of musicians spread throughout the speakeasy business and soon enough many of them had musicians . okrent , daniel . last call : the rise and fall of prohibition . new york : scribner , 2010 . p . 209 . see also . list of bars speakeasies index of drinking establishment-related articles . references . bibliography . britten , loretta & math , paul , eds . our american century jazz age : the 20s . new york : time-life books , 1998 . new york : bishop books inc . , 1969 . kahn , gordon & hirschfeld , al . the speakeasies of 1932 . new york : glenn young books , ( 1932 , rev . 2003 ) . streissguth , thomas . the dry years : the roaring twenties . encyclopedia . 2007 ed . washington , dc : facts on file , inc . external links . galperina , marina . '' the museum of the american gangster opens doors of former speakeasy in march '' . february 19 , 2010 . animal new york . 25 march 2010 .