Spurius Cassius Viscellinus

background . according to one tradition , cassius ' father was still living and hale at the time of his death . if this were the case , it would be difficult to place cassius ' birth much earlier than 540 or 535 bc . cassius also left behind him three sons , whose names have not been preserved . it is believed that the cassii viscellini were patricians , although the later members of the gens occurring in history were all plebs . the historian niebuhr suggests that cassius ' sons may have been expelled by the patricians from their order , or that they or their descendants may have voluntarily passed over to the plebeians , because the patricians had shed the blood of their father . realencyclopädie der classischen altertumswissenschaft . dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology , william smith , editor . barthold georg niebuhr , history of rome , vol . ii , pp . & nbsp ; 166ff ; lectures on the history of rome , pp . & nbsp ; 89ff , ed . schmitz ( 1848 ) . . magistracies . cassius ' first consulship was in 502 bc , the eighth year of the republic . his colleague was opiter verginius tricostus . dionysius reports that cassius carried on war against the sabines , whom he defeated with great loss near cures . the sabines sued for peace , and surrendered a large portion of their land . on his return to rome , cassius celebrated his first triumph , which is confirmed by the fasti triumphales . livy , however , states that the two consuls carried on war against the aurunci , and took the town of suessa pometia . the same events he reports under 495 bc , which is in agreement with dionysius . thus , dionysius probably preserves the correct account . dionysius of halicarnassus , romaike archaiologia , v . 49 , vi . 29 . fasti capitolini . livy , ab urbe condita , ii . 17 , 22 , 25 , 26 . in the following year , titus lartius was appointed the first dictator , and as his magister equitum he nominated cassius . the reason for the institution of these offices was the fear of impending war with both the sabines and the latins . after a failed round of negotiations , war was declared against the sabines , but as both sides were reluctant to come to blows , no hostilities ensued . war with the latins came in 498 bc , with the battle of lake regillus . following the roman victory , cassius is said to have urged the senate to destroy the latin towns . livy , ab urbe condita , ii . 18 . dionysius of halicarnassus , romaike archaiologia , v . 75 , vi . 20 . cassius was consul for the second time in 493 bc , with postumus cominius auruncus . the consuls entered upon their office during the secession of the plebs to the mons sacer . the strife between the patricians and plebeians was a recurring theme throughout the early history of the republic , and in time cost cassius his life . in contrast with his former position , cassius ratified a treaty with the latins on rome 's behalf , thereby removing one source of danger to the fledgling republic . livy , ab urbe condita , ii . 33 . the treaty became known as the foedus cassianum , bearing the consul 's name . cicero related that a copy of the treaty was still extant in his day , and its terms are summarized by dionysius . later the same year , cassius consecrated the temple of ceres , bacchus , and proserpina . cicero , de republica , ii . 33 , pro balbo , 23 . dionysius of halicarnassus , romaike archaiologia , vi . 49 , 94 , 95 . barthold georg niebuhr , history of rome , vol . ii , pp . & nbsp ; 38ff . in 486 bc , cassius was consul for the third time , with proculus verginius tricostus rutilus . cassius marched against the volsci and hernici , but they sued for peace , and once again showing his talent for diplomacy , cassius formed a league with the hernici . the alliances secured by cassius with both the latins and hernici placed the republic in the same position it had enjoyed under the kings . livius states that the hernici agreed to surrender two thirds of their land , but a more likely explanation is that the romans , latins , and hernici agreed to share their acquired land evenly , with each receiving one third of the lands conquered by their mutual arms . this treaty held for over a hundred years . on his return , cassius celebrated his second triumph . livy , ab urbe condita , ii . 41 . oxford classical dictionary , 2nd ed . ( 1970 ) . fasti triumphales . trial and execution . after concluding the treaty with the hernici , cassius proposed the first agrarian law at rome , arguing for the land to be distributed amongst the plebs and the latin allies . cassius ' colleague , verginius , and the patricians strongly opposed the law . debate and discord ensued , and the plebs turned against cassius , suspecting him of aiming at regal power . in 485 bc once cassius had left office he was condemned and executed . livy says that the method of his trial is uncertain . livy 's preferred version is that a public trial on the charge of perduellio was held on the orders of the quaestores parricidii caeso fabius and lucius valerius , at which cassius was condemned by the people , and subsequently by public decree his house was demolished ( being near the temple of tellus ) . the alternative version is that cassius ' own father conducted a private trial ( presumably exercising authority as pater familias ) and put his son to death , and subsequently dedicated his son 's assets to the goddess ceres , including by dedicating a statue to her with the inscription '' given from the cassian family '' . cicero , de republica , ii . 27 , 35 , philippicae , ii . 44 , laelius de amicitia , 8 , 11 , pro domo sua , 38 . valerius maximus , factorum ac dictorum memorabilium libri ix , vi . 3 . § 1 . pliny the elder , historia naturalis , xxxiv . 6 . s . 14 . dionysius states that he was hurled from the tarpeian rock . dionysius of halicarnassus , romaike archaiologia , viii . 68-80 . niebuhr argues that it was impossible that a man who had been thrice consul and twice triumphed should still be in his father 's power . cassius dio expressed his belief in the consul 's innocence . cassius dio , exc . de . sentent . , 19 , p . 150 . in 159 bc the statue of cassius erected on the spot of his house was melted down by the censors . some seem to have called for the execution of cassius ' sons also , but according to dionysius , they were spared by the senate . dionysius of halicarnassus , romaike archaiologia , viii . 80 . dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology , william smith , editor . . chronological uncertainty . e.j . bickerman has suggested that cassius ' third consulship occurred in 480 bc , the same year as the battle of salamis . however , this assertion rests on the accuracy of diodorus siculus , who stated that his consulship coincided with the archonship of calliades in athens . calliades was archon in 480 bc . herodotus confirms the possibility that the battles of thermopylae and salamis were fought shortly after the olympic games of that year , and only a few months after these events : '' on approach of spring , the sun suddenly quit his seat in the heavens , and disappeared '' when xerxes left sardis , a few weeks or months before crossing over to greece . this eclipse occurred on february 17 , 478 bc , providing a valuable chronological reference . bickerman , e . j . chronology of the ancient world . cornell university press , ithaca , new york ( 1980 ) , p . & nbsp ; 138 . diodorus siculus , bibliotheca historica , xi . 1 . § 2 . herodotus , vii . 37 , 166 , 206 , viii . 51 . . see also . cassia gens