FAO Schwarz

history . early history . fao schwarz was founded in 1862 in baltimore under the name '' toy bazaar '' by german immigrant frederick august otto schwarz . in 1870 , schwarz opened a new york city location known as the '' schwarz toy bazaar '' at 765 broadway , which moved to 42 e . 14th street in union square in 1880 and operated at that location until april 28 , 1897 , when it took over two vacant store locations at 39 and 41 w . 23rd street . that year , the new york times described schwarz as '' the largest dealer in toys in this city . '' beginning in november 1869 , the schwarz toy bazaar held an exhibition of toys that would be available for the christmas season . in 1896 , schwarz proclaimed the store as the '' original santa claus headquarters '' in new york . the fao schwarz holiday catalog has been published annually since 1876 . in 1931 , the new york city location moved to 745 fifth avenue , where it operated for 55 years . in 1963 , fao schwarz was purchased by parents ( magazine ) . the terms of the deal read that it would license the name fao schwarz and continue using it for a maximum of five years before dropping the name , while still paying the schwarz family a royalty on sales . however , the lease was renewed as the owners felt the name was too significant to lose . part of the price of keeping the name was to keep the royalty agreement , and the schwarz family set up a foundation to fund opportunities for young people to work in nonprofit with the income the royalties were making . nine percent of the company remained in the hands of the schwarz family . the company subsequently sold to w.r . grace in 1970 , and then to toy retailer franz carl weber of zurich , switzerland , in 1974 . in 1985 , christiana companies , a company based in san diego , california , owned fao schwarz for one year . in 1986 , peter harris , with the help of philadelphian investment banker peter morse , bought the company under morse partners ltd . and moved the toy store across 58th street to the general motors building at 767 fifth avenue at 58th street . fao schwarz was sold to netherlands-based nv koninklijke bijenkorf beheer ( later renamed royal vendex/kbb nv ) in 1990 . throughout the 1990s , new fao schwarz stores opened across the united states ; by 2000 , the company had 40 locations . right start , fao inc . and bankruptcy . in 2001 , the calabasas-based toy retailer right start , inc . purchased 23 of the 40 stores , including the fifth avenue flagship store , from royal vendex for somewhere between 50 to 60 million . in 2002 , right start inc . changed its corporate name to fao inc . operating stores under the right start , zany brainy and fao schwarz names . on december 17 , the company projected they would find bankruptcy if its bank did not relax borrowing restrictions . on january 13 , 2003 , fao inc . filed for bankruptcy , but emerged from it three months later in april . the company filed for bankruptcy a second time in december 2003 . all 13 remaining fao schwarz locations closed in january 2004 as a result of the bankruptcy , with the flagship fifth avenue store expected to reopen in july of that year but the others closing permanently . the fifth avenue store reopened several months later than planned on thanksgiving day 2004 , redesigned and renovated to accommodate a growing number of tourists , and the las vegas location at the forum shops at caesars ultimately remained open until 2010 . . d . e . shaw & co . in february 2004 , investment firm d . e . shaw & co . , l.p . , acquired the fao schwarz stores in new york and las vegas , as well as fao schwarz 's catalog and internet business . the new york and las vegas stores were reopened on thanksgiving day 2004 . in november 2007 , fao schwarz acquired premium children 's clothing company best & co . , which had plans to expand , but the company ceased business in 2009 . toys '' r '' us , inc . in may 2009 , toys '' r '' us acquired fao schwarz . in 2009 , toys '' r '' us subsequently put temporary fao schwarz boutiques in its u.s . toys '' r '' us stores for the holidays , and in october 2010 , the concept was expanded into permanent boutiques in toys '' r '' us stores . in addition , fao schwarz-branded infant and toddler items are available in all of its babies '' r '' us stores nationwide . the company closed the las vegas location in january 2010 , followed by its previous flagship new york store . threesixty group . in october 2016 , threesixty group , inc . acquired fao schwarz from toys ‘ r ’ us , inc . the fao schwarz brand is currently the property of the descendants of the founder through the fao schwarz family foundation but is exclusively operated by threesixty group . in august 2018 , threesixty group announced plans to open two new fao schwarz stores in new york . the one at 30 rockefeller plaza in rockefeller center opened on november 16 , 2018 . public transit access is available at 47-50 streets rockefeller center station . the second opened at laguardia airport in december 2018 . in october 2018 , fao schwarz pop-up stores opened at 90 hudson 's bay company stores across canada , just ahead of the christmas holiday season , to remain open through the holidays . in march 2019 a store opened at chicago midway airport . . brand . fao schwarz is known for its large assortment of plush animals and the piano dance mat , a smaller replica of the walking piano featured in the tom hanks film big . fao schwarz also features limited-quantity luxury items including a drivable , child-size automobile encrusted with over 40,000 crystals and valued at us 25,000 . in addition to its own line of products , fao schwarz carries brands including steiff , the world 's oldest german designer of stuffed animals ; melissa & doug , a leading designer and manufacturer of educational toys ; and build-a-bear workshop , a make-your-own experience featuring a selection of exclusive fao schwarz furry friends and accessories , among other in-store retail partners . logo . through the years , the fao schwarz logo has had versions that included a teddy bear , alphabet blocks , a toy soldier , rocking horse and animated clock tower . in 2010 , the fao schwarz logo was redesigned in colors of red and silver . the new logo emphasized the initials of company founder , frederick august otto schwarz . it also debuted a company mascot , wit . in 2017 , fao schwarz hired design studio , mattson creative , to rebrand the fao schwarz logo and packaging . mattson creative also created the store 's reopening tagline and hashtag , '' return to wonder '' . in popular culture . the new york store was featured in the 1988 tom hanks film big , in which hanks and robert loggia danced '' heart & soul '' and '' chopsticks '' on the store 's large dance-on piano . the store 's interior was the inspiration for the fictional '' duncan 's toy chest '' featured in the 1992 film home alone 2 : lost in new york . in 1995 , the store was featured in woody allen 's mighty aphrodite in the final scene where main characters lenny and linda have a chance encounter . it is also featured in baby boom ( 1987 ) and big business ( 1988 ) , among others . in 2011 , the store was featured in the smurfs during a chase scene . scenes from the movie were shot over five nights in may 2011 . in the 2010 film toy story 3 , when buzz is captured , rescuer lotso unties him and indirectly references fao schwarz in a euphemism : '' f-a-o my schwarz '' . in the 2019 episode of the simpsons , '' crystal blue-haired persuasion '' , a healing crystal shop is named '' fao quartz '' . in the 1999 remake of the musical film annie during the song '' nyc '' , the characters oliver warbucks , grace , and annie join a crowd of people all admiring an impressive christmas themed window display containing a sign that reads '' f.a.o . schwarz '' . references . external links . fao schwarz website history of fao schwarz from inception to 2001 . article on right start 's acquisition of fao schwarz . article on fao schwarz bankruptcy filings . another article on bankruptcy filing and store closures . legendary toy store fao schwarz to get new home at rockefeller center : reports .