Ulithi

history . the portugal navigator diogo da rocha is credited as the first european to find ulithi in 1525 . its visit was recorded by spanish navigator álvaro de saavedra on board the ship florida on 1 january 1528 . he named them islas de los reyes ( islands of the three wise kings in spanish ) because of the sighting happening on the eve of epiphany . it was later charted by the spaniards as islas de los garbanzos ( chickpeas islands in spanish ) . it was also visited by the spanish expedition of ruy lópez de villalobos on 26 january 1543 . sharp , andrew the discovery of the pacific islands oxford , 1960 , p.32 . it remained isolated until visited and explored in detail by captain don bernardo de egoy in 1712 , and later visited by spanish jesuit missionaries led by juan antonio cantova together with a group of 12 spanish soldiers in 1731 . its commanding officer , commodore worrall r . carter , devised the mobile service force that made it possible for the navy to convert ulithi to the secret distant pacific base used during the major naval operations undertaken late in the war , including leyte gulf and the invasion of okinawa . service squadron 10 converted the lagoon into a serviceable naval station , creating repair facilities and re-supply facilities thousands of miles away from an actual naval port . pontoon piers of a new design were built at ulithi , each consisting of the 4-by-12-pontoon sections , filled with sand and gravel , and then sunk . the pontoons were anchored in place by guy ropes to deadmen on shore , and by iron rods driven into the coral . connecting tie pieces ran across the tops of the pontoons to hold them together into a pier . despite extremely heavy weather on several occasions these pontoon piers stood up remarkably well . they gave extensive service , with little requirement for repairs . piers of this type were also installed by the 51st battalion to be used as aviation-gasoline mooring piers near the main airfield on falalop . within a month of the occupation of ulithi , a complete floating base was in operation . six thousand ship fitters , artificers , welders , carpenters and electricians arrived aboard repair ships , destroyer tenders , and floating dry docks . had an air-conditioned optical shop and a metal fabrication shop with a supply of base metals from which she could make any alloy to form any part needed . , which looked like a big tanker , distilled fresh water and baked bread and pies . the ice cream barge made a shift . the dry docks towed to ulithi were large enough to lift dry a 45,000-ton battleship . the small island of mog mog became a rest and recreation site for sailors . fleet oilers sortied from ulithi to meet the task forces at sea , refueling the warships a short distance from their combat operational areas . the result was something never seen before : a vast floating service station enabling the entire pacific fleet to operate indefinitely at unprecedented distances from its mainland bases . ulithi was as far away from the us naval base at san francisco as san francisco was from london , england . the japanese had considered that the vastness of the pacific ocean would make it very difficult for the us to sustain operations in the western pacific . with the ulithi naval base to refit , repair and resupply , many ships were able to deploy and operate in the western pacific for a year or more without returning to the naval base at pearl harbor . the japanese had built an falalop airfield . it was expanded and resurfaced , the runway running the full width of the island . the east end of the strip was extended approximately past the natural shoreline . a number of small strips for light aircraft were built on several of the smaller islands . the seabees completed a fleet recreation center at mog mog island that could accommodate 8,000 men and 1,000 officers daily . a 1,200-seat theatre , including a stage with a quonset hut roof was completed in 20 days . at the same time , a 500-seat chapel was built . a number of the larger islands were used both as bases to support naval vessels and facilities within the lagoon . the japanese still held yap . early after the us occupation they mounted a number of attacks but caused no damage to the seabees working on the islands . on 20 november 1944 the ulithi harbor was attacked by japanese kaiten manned torpedoes launched from two nearby submarines . the destroyer rammed one in the early morning hours . at 5:47 the fleet oiler , at anchor in the harbor , was struck and sunk . destroyers began dropping depth charges throughout the anchorage . after the war japanese naval officers said that two tender submarines , each carrying four manned torpedoes , had been sent to attack the fleet at ulithi . three of the kaiten were unable to launch due to mechanical problems and another ran aground on the reef . two did make it into the lagoon , one of which sank uss mississinewa . a second kaiten attack in january 1945 was foiled when i-48 was sunk by the destroyer escort . none of the 122 men aboard the japanese submarine survived . on 11 march 1945 , in a mission known as operation tan no . 2 , several long range aircraft flying from southern japan attempted a nighttime kamikaze attack on the naval base . one struck the , which had left a cargo light on despite the black out . the plane struck over the stern starboard quarter , damaging the flight deck and killing a number of crewmen . p . 241 another crashed on sorlen island , having perhaps mistaken a signal tower there for the superstructure of an aircraft carrier . by 13 march there were 647 ships at anchor at ulithi , and with the arrival of amphibious forces staging for the invasion of okinawa the number of ships at anchor peaked at 722 . in late june 1945 , the japanese aircraft-launching i-400-class submarine were diverted from their planned attack on the panama canal to attack ulithi atoll . however , their mission was interrupted by the destruction of nagasaki and hiroshima , followed by the surrender of japan . after the battle of leyte gulf , the pacific fleet moved its forward staging area to leyte , and ulithi was all but abandoned . in the end , few us civilians ever heard of ulithi . by the time naval security cleared release of the name , there were no longer reasons to print stories about it . the war had moved on , but for seven months in late 1944 and early 1945 , the large lagoon of the ulithi atoll was the largest and most active anchorage in the world . file : japanese submarine i-361.jpg a japanese submarine carrying kaiten to their deployment . file : uss mississinewa ( ao-59 ) 20 november 1944b.jpg uss mississinewa burns while sinking following an attack by japanese kaiten . file : uss randolph ( cv-15 ) under repair.jpg uss randolph undergoing repairs following a kamikaze attack at ulithi . language . in an annual report released in early 2010 , the habele charity announced plans to develop and distribute native-language materials for educators and students in the outer islands of yap state , micronesia . the first project was a ulithian-to-english dictionary . '' former micronesia peace corps group funds scholarships '' . pacific island report , east-west center , january 28 , 2010 . this was the first rigorous documentation of the ulithian language , and copies were provided to educators and students throughout ulithi and fais . '' charity publishes dictionary for remote micronesian islanders '' com-fsm , may 10 , 2010 . the authors ' stated aim was to create a consistent and intuitive latin script useful for both native ulithian and native english speakers . education . public schools : '' higher education in the federated states of micronesia . '' embassy of the federated states of micronesia washington dc . retrieved on february 23 , 2018 . yap outer islands high school . climate . ulithi has a tropical rainforest climate ( af ) with heavy rainfall year-round .