Shugborough Hall

history . thumb the shugborough estate was owned by the bishops of lichfield until the dissolution of the monasteries around 1540 , and thereafter passed through several hands , until it was purchased in 1624 by william anson ( c.1580–1644 ) , a lawyer , of dunston , staffordshire for £1,000 . jackson-stops , p . 7 in 1693 , william anson 's grandson , also called william ( 1656–1720 ) , demolished the existing manor house and constructed a three-story building which still forms the central part of the hall . a brief history of shugborough william 's elder son , thomas anson mp ( 1695-1773 ) , would further extend the house in the 1740s , adding two pavilions flanking either side of the central block . it was thomas 's younger brother , however , who would fund these changes ; admiral george anson , created lord anson in 1747 and first lord of the admiralty in 1751 , amassed a great fortune during his naval career , and when he died without issue he left the majority to his elder brother . thomas also died childless and the estate passed to his sister 's son , george adams , who adopted the surname anson by royal licence . in 1806 , george 's son thomas ( 1767–1818 ) was created 1st viscount anson . his son , the 2nd viscount , would be created 1st earl of lichfield in the coronation honours of william iv . the earl led an extravagant lifestyle and amassed several large debts , which , in 1842 , forced him to sell the entire contents of the house in a two-week-long sale . while the 2nd earl did much to restore the house and contents to its former glory , by the time his son inherited the estate it was heavily mortgaged . in 1831 , princess alexandrina victoria of kent , the future queen victoria , then 13 , visited shugborough with her mother , the duchess of kent , as part of an extensive tour of the country . the young princess stayed with many local landowners at the time , including the earl of shrewsbury . mcgilchrist , p . 48 passing from east to west through the southern part of the park is the trent valley line , planned in 1845 . the railway is carried under the landscaped grounds in the shugborough tunnel and is thus largely invisible . the tunnel entrances , which are listed building , are notably ornamental , particularly the 1847 western entrance . an elegant stone bridge , also from 1847 and also listed grade ii , about north-west of the lichfield lodge , carries the drive to the hall over the railway . the double-track line is part of the west coast main line , running north-west between colwich junction and stafford . . late 20th century and today . following the death of the 4th earl in 1960 , an agreement was reached whereby the estate would pass to the national trust in lieu of death duties . the deal was finalized and the house opened to the public in 1966 . the estate was immediately leased to staffordshire county council , who managed and maintained it on behalf of the national trust , with lord lichfield retaining an apartment in the hall until his death in 2005 , paying a nominal rent to the new owners . his successor , the 6th earl , decided to relinquish the lease of the apartments , thus severing the family 's direct links with the estate . in 2016 staffordshire county council handed the estate back to the national trust , with 49 years remaining on its lease . the move is expect to save the council £35 million , with the trust intending to renew investment in the property . the grounds and mansion house are open to the public . the attraction is marketed as '' the complete working historic estate '' , which includes a working model farm museum dating from 1805 complete with a working watermill , kitchens , a dairy , a tea room , and rare breeds of farm animals . originally restored in 1990 , the estate 's brewery is england 's only log-fired brewery that still produces beer commercially . previously used only on special occasions , the brewhouse has been a working exhibit since 2007 , operated by titanic brewery . since 2011 the private apartments have housed an exhibition of the work of patrick lichfield . his cameras and lighting gear have been set up in a recreation of his studio , and there is a gallery of some of his most famous photographic subjects . . architecture . interior . . the state rooms . the state rooms at shugborough hall include the state dining room , the red drawing room , the library , the saloon , the verandah room , the anson room and the state bedroom . these contain some of the most opulent and highly decorated interiors in the hall . the mansion house the verandah room contains a 208-piece porcelain dinner service commissioned to commemorate admiral anson 's circumnavigation of the globe in hms centurion . the dinner service was offered to admiral anson in gratitude for assisting in fighting the huge fires that were destroying the merchant district in canton . ( story narrated by shugborough guide october 2015 ) . the state bedroom overlooks the terrace and was occupied by queen victoria during her childhood visit . file : shugborough interior 1 ( 4824600016 ) . jpg the state dining room file : shugborough interior 2 ( 4824607792 ) . jpg the red drawing room file : shugborough hall library.jpg the library . private apartments . the private apartments were the living quarters of 5th earl and his family until 2010 . the boudoir , with its silver gilt wallpaper , is the only room in the hall with hand-painted ceilings with gold detailing . other rooms include the lilac and yellow bedrooms , the sitting room and the completely circular breakfast room . shugborough revisited file : shugborough interior ceiling 2 ( 4824614020 ) . jpg the hand-painted ceiling of the boudoir file : shugborough guests ' bathroom.jpg guests ' bathroom file : shugborough green sitting room.jpg green sitting room , detail file : shugborough bedroom.jpg bedroom . exterior . in about 1693 , william anson ( 1656–1720 ) demolished the old house and created a new mansion . the entrance front , then facing to the west , comprised a balustraded , three-storey , seven-bayed central block . in about 1748 his great grandson thomas anson ( 1767–1818 ) commissioned architect thomas wright to remodel the house , which was extended with flanking two-storey , three-bayed pavilions linked to the central block by pedimented passages . at the turn of the 19th century , the house was further altered and extended by architect samuel wyatt . the pavilions and passages were incorporated into the main building , and a new porticoed entrance front with ten ionic pillars was created at the east . this was done for thomas anson , 1st viscount anson and his wife anne margaret coke , daughter of thomas coke , the 1st earl of leicester , whom he married in 1794 . the hall , as it is seen today , is built in a neo-classical style and encased in slate , sanded to resemble stone . file : shugborough hall jones ' views 1829.jpg shugborough hall in the 1820s file : shugborough hall - geograph.org.uk - 1350373.jpg the 18th century ionic portico file : shugborough rear 1.jpg the rear façade of the hall file : shugborough garden view.jpg the garden from the house file : stable block , shugborough hall - geograph.org.uk - 1350369.jpg the stable block in 2009 file : shugborough hall 01.jpg the hall seen from a hot air balloon file : river sow at shugborough hall , . jpg river sow at the rear of the hall file : shugborough hall farmhouse.jpg the farmhouse . the park and follies . like many landowners of his time , thomas anson ( 1695–1773 ) took a keen interest in the landscaping of his parkland . the land around shugborough was largely flat , which ensured that trees , follies and water would play an important role in shaping the landscape . black , p . 68 the grounds contain a number of folly , many of which , such as the chinese house and two chinese-style bridges , have a chinoiserie , in honour of admiral george anson . admiral anson , who had visited canton , left a considerable sum of money to his brother thomas anson when he died , which was used to develop the hall and estate . the chinese house and the red iron footbridge are both grade i listed . in 1760 , classical architect james stuart was employed to design a number of monuments . stuart had visited athens in the early 1750s , and ancient greek influences are obvious at shugborough . staurt designed for anson a copy of the choragic monument of lysicrates and a grade i listed triumphal arch based on the arch of hadrian in athens . black , p . 69 . the shepherd 's monument . image : shugborough inscription.jpg thumb 250px right the shugborough inscription the shepherd 's monument is a stone and marble folly within the grounds of shugborough hall , engraved with the inscriptions '' o.u.o.s.v.a.v.v '' and '' d.m . '' . the monument has been internationally well-known since 1982 , when the book the holy blood and the holy grail drew attention to the mysterious shugborough inscription . carved by peter scheemakers , theories have abounded , including some which suggest it may indicate the whereabouts of the holy grail . belfield , p . 112 file : red bridge and the chinese house , shugborough ( geograph 3081592 ) . jpg the chinese house file : doric temple , shugborough hall.jpg the doric temple file : shugborough shepherds monument.jpg the shepherd 's monument file : tower of the winds ( 4824631378 ) . jpg the tower of the winds file : triumphal arch at shugborough ( geograph 3625020 ) . jpg arch of hadrian . see also . grade i listed buildings in staffordshire listed buildings in colwich , staffordshire . references and sources . references . . sources . . external links . shugborough estate - official site list of paintings on show