Lamanites

book of mormon narrative . according to the book of mormon , the family of lehi , described as a wealthy hebrew prophet ; the family of ishmael ; and zoram traveled from the middle east to the americas by boat in around 600 & nbsp ; bc . some time after the death of lehi in the americas , nephi , a son of lehi , was concerned that his brothers , laman and lemuel , were plotting to kill him and so he , his family , and his followers left and went into the wilderness . the followers of nephi called themselves '' nephites '' and referred to others as '' lamanites , '' after laman , nephi 's eldest brother . after the two groups separated from each other , the rebellious lamanites were cursed and '' cut off from the presence of the lord . '' they received a '' skin of blackness '' so they would '' not be enticing '' to the nephites . hugh nibley , lehi in the desert ( 1950 ) : 73–74 . the book of mormon describes the animosity that the lamanites held : believing that they were driven out of the land of jerusalem because of the iniquities of their fathers , and that they were wronged in the wilderness by their brethren , and they were also wronged while crossing the sea ; and again , that they were wronged while in the land of their first inheritance , after they had crossed the sea . ( mosiah 10:12–13 ) the book of mormon also recounts that the lamanites felt that they were wronged specifically by nephi and so swore vengeance against his descendants : the lamanites were wroth with him nephi because he departed into the wilderness as the lord had commanded him , and took the records which were engraven on the plates of brass , for they said that he robbed them . and thus they have taught their children that they should hate them , and that they should murder them , and that they should rob and plunder them , and do all they could to destroy them ; therefore they have an eternal hatred towards the children of nephi . ( mosiah 10:16–17 ) after the two groups warred for centuries , the narrative states that jesus christ appeared to the more righteous nephites and the lamanites , who , by then , had converted in large numbers to righteousness before god . soon after his visit , the lamanites and nephites merged into one nation and co-existed for two centuries in peace . the book of mormon further recounts , '' there were no robbers , nor murderers , neither were there lamanites , nor any manner of -ites ; but they were in one , the children of christ , and heirs to the kingdom of god . '' however , 84 & nbsp ; years after the coming of christ , '' a small part of the people who had revolted from the church '' started calling themselves lamanites again . those who remained were again identified as nephites , but both groups were reported to have fallen into apostasy . the book of mormon recounts a series of large battles over two centuries , ending with the extermination of the nephites by the lamanites . . doctrine and covenants . the doctrine and covenants is composed of writings that adherents in the latter day saint movement believe to be revelations from god . it is considered scripture in the sacred text of the latter day saint movement and says that god called oliver cowdery ( d & c 28:8 ) and later peter whitmer and parley p . pratt ( d & c 32:1–2 ) to teach the gospel to the lamanites . cowdery is given the power to build up god 's church among them ( d & c 30:6 ) . the men believed that god was referring to the native americans and began teaching among the lenape . the doctrine and covenants also contains a prophecy that the lamanites will '' blossom as a rose '' ( d & c 49:24 ) and that the city of zion would be built on the borders by the lamanites ( d & c 28:9 ) , which was later identified as missouri ( d & c 54:8 ) . . proposed modern descendants . historically , mormons have identified the lamanites as the primary ancestors of the indigenous peoples of the americas . some publications of the largest denomination in the latter day saint movement , the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( lds church ) have accepted that position . lane johnson , '' who and where are the lamanites ? '' , ensign , december 1975 , p . 15 . book of mormon ( lds church edition ) , '' introduction '' in the 21st & nbsp ; century , mormon scholars who favor a limited geography model have disclaimed a primary genetic connection between the lamanites and indigenous american peoples . however , the matter remains unsettled while the field of dna ancestry continues to develop , and many latter day saints believe that the lamanites comprise some part , if not the primary origin , of native americans by stating that the lamanites '' are among the ancestors of the american indians . '' prior to 2007 , the non-canonical introduction to the book of mormon stated that the lamanites were the '' principal ancestors of the american indians . '' however , the church has stated , '' nothing in the book of mormon precludes migration into the americas by peoples of asiatic origin . '' the non-canonical introduction to the 1981 lds church edition of the book of mormon states that '' the lamanites are the principal ancestors of the american indians . '' '' introduction , '' book of mormon ( lds church edition ) , 1981 . the wording was changed in the 2006 doubleday edition and the subsequent editions published by the lds church , to state only that the lamanites '' are among the ancestors of the american indians . '' '' introduction '' , book of mormon ( lds church edition ) , online version . many latter day saints also consider polynesian peoples and the other indigenous peoples of the americas to be lamanites . spencer w . kimball , '' of royal blood , '' ensign , july 1971 , p . 7 . '' the church in the lamanite world : scanning the special programs created to meet lamanite needs , '' ensign , december 1975 , pp . 16 , 20–24 . a 1971 church magazine article claimed that lamanites '' consist of the indians of all the americas as well as the islanders of the pacific . '' '' the lamanites ( introduction ) , '' ensign , july 1971 , p . 5 . the existence of a lamanite nation has received no support in mainstream science or archaeology . genetic studies indicate that the indigenous americans are related to the present populations in mongolia , siberia , and the vicinity , m . raghavan et al . , '' upper palaeolithic siberian genome reveals dual ancestry of native americans , '' nature , ( july 2013 ) and polynesians to those in southeast asia . some mormon scholars now view lamanites as either & nbsp ; one small tribe among many in the ancient americas , the remainder of which are not discussed in the book of mormon ; & nbsp ; a & nbsp ; tribe that intermarried with indigenous native americans ; or & nbsp ; a & nbsp ; tribe that descended with modern asians from common nomadic ancestry but diverged before lehi 's departure from jerusalem . . impact on views on race . in the book of mormon , lamanites are described as having received a '' skin of blackness '' to distinguish them from the nephites . the '' change '' in skin color is often mentioned in conjunction with god 's curse on the descendants of laman for their wickedness and corruption : '' and he had caused the cursing to come upon the lamanites , yea , even a sore cursing , because of their iniquity . for behold , they had hardened their hearts against him , and they had become like unto a flint ; wherefore , as they were white , and exceedingly fair and delightsome , that they might not be enticing unto my people the lord god did cause a skin of blackness to come upon them '' ( 2 & nbsp ; nephi 5:21 ) . on the other hand , the book of mormon teaches that skin color is not a bar to salvation and that god '' denieth none that come unto him , black and white , bond and free , male and female ; and he remembereth the heathen ; and all are alike unto god , both jew and gentile . '' elsewhere , the book condemns prejudice against people of dark skin : '' o my brethren , i fear that unless ye shall repent of your sins that their skins will be whiter than yours , when ye shall be brought with them before the throne of god . wherefore , a commandment i give unto you , which is the word of god , that ye revile no more against them because of the darkness of their skins ; neither shall ye revile against them because of their filthiness . '' the non-canonical 1981 footnote text of the book of mormon closely linked the concept of '' skin of blackness '' with that of '' scales of darkness falling from their eyes , '' which suggests that the lds church has now interpreted both cases as being examples of figurative language . marvin perkins , '' how to reach african-americans '' , ldsgenesisgroup.org . several book of mormon passages have been interpreted by some latter day saints as indicating that lamanites would revert to a lighter skin tone upon accepting the gospel . for example , at a 1960 lds church general conference , apostle spencer w . kimball suggested that the skin of latter-day saint native american was gradually turning lighter : that view was buoyed by passages such as 2 & nbsp ; nephi 30:6 , which in early editions of the book of mormon , read : '' their scales of darkness shall begin to fall from their eyes ; and many generations shall not pass away among them , save they shall be a white and a delightsome people . '' in 1840 , with the third edition of the book of mormon , the founder of the latter day saint movement , joseph smith , who adherents believe translated the writings of ancient prophets to become the book of mormon , changed the wording to '' a pure and a delightsome people , '' consistent with contemporary interpretation of the term '' white '' as used in scripture . '' white , '' def . & nbsp ; 6 , webster 's american dictionary of the english language ( 1828 ) : '' in a scriptural sense , purified from sin ; sanctified . psalm & nbsp ; 51 . '' however , all future lds church printings of the book of mormon until 1981 continued from the second edition , saying the lamanites would become '' a white and delightsome people . '' the 1841 and 1849 european editions ( printed by the twelve apostles ) were the kirtland second edition with british spellings . future lds editions continued from the european editions until a major reworking in 1981 , which adopted smith 's 1840 edit . see eventually in the book of mormon narrative , the labels '' nephite '' and '' lamanite '' became terms of political convenience , and membership was both varied and fluid and not based on skin color . within the first 200 & nbsp ; years of the nephites ' 1,000 & nbsp ; year chronology , the prophet jacob stated that any who were enemies of his people were called lamanites and that any who were friends were called nephites : '' but i , jacob , shall not hereafter distinguish them by these names , but i shall call them lamanites that seek to destroy the people of nephi , and those who are friendly to nephi i shall call nephites , or the people of nephi , according to the reigns of the kings . '' . book of mormon chapter summaries . in december & nbsp ; 2010 , the lds church made changes to the non-canonical chapter summaries and to some of the footnotes in its online version of the book of mormon . in second nephi 5 , the original wording was the following : '' because of their unbelief , the lamanites are cursed , receive a skin of blackness , and become a scourge unto the nephites . '' the phrase '' skin of blackness '' and the passage was changed to '' because of their unbelief , the lamanites are cut off from the presence of the lord , are cursed , and become a scourge unto the nephites . '' fletcher stack , peggy . '' church removes racial references in book of mormon headings '' , salt lake tribune 2010-12-16 . the second change appears in the summary of mormon 5 . formerly , it included the phrase that '' the lamanites shall be a dark , filthy , and loathsome people . '' the new version deleted the phrase '' dark , loathsome , and filthy '' and now reads '' the lamanites will be scattered , and the spirit will cease to strive with them . '' the changes are seen by some critics to be another step in the evolution of the text of the book of mormon to delete racist language from it . on the other hand , some believers in the book of mormon , such as marvin perkins , see the changes as better conforming the chapter headers and footnotes to the meaning of the text in light of the lds church 's 1978 revelation on priesthood . marvin perkins , '' changes to lds scripture headings & footnotes '' , blacklds.org , 2011-02-07 . in an interview , a former brigham young university graduate student suggested that the changes were made for '' clarity , a change in emphasis and to stick closer to the scriptural language '' .