Acer platanoides

description . acer platanoides is a deciduous tree , growing to tall with a trunk up to in diameter , and a broad , rounded crown . the bark is grey-brown and shallowly grooved . unlike many other maples , mature trees do not tend to develop a shaggy bark . the shoots are green at first , soon becoming pale brown . the winter buds are shiny red-brown . the leaf are opposite , palmately lobed with five lobes , long and ( rarely across ; the lobes each bear one to three side teeth , and an otherwise smooth margin . the leaf petiole is long , and secretes a milky juice when broken . the autumn colour is usually yellow , occasionally orange-red . the flowers are in corymbs of 15–30 together , yellow to yellow-green with five sepals and five petals long ; flowering occurs in early spring before the new leaves emerge . the fruit is a double samara s . the seeds are disc-shaped , strongly flattened , across and thick . the wings are long , widely spread , approaching a 180° angle . it typically produces a large quantity of viable seeds . under ideal conditions in its native range , norway maple may live up to 250 years , but often has a much shorter life expectancy ; in north america , for example , sometimes only 60 years . especially when used on streets , it can have insufficient space for its root network and is prone to the roots wrapping around themselves , girdling and killing the tree . in addition , their roots tend to be quite shallow and thereby they easily out-compete nearby plants for nutrient uptake . norway maples often cause significant damage and cleanup costs for municipalities and homeowners when branches break off in storms as it does not have strong wood . . classification and identification . the norway maple is a member ( and is the type species ) of the section platanoidea pax , characterised by flattened , disc-shaped seeds and the shoots and leaves containing milky sap . other related species in this section include acer campestre ( field maple ) , acer cappadocicum ( cappadocian maple ) , acer lobelii ( lobel 's maple ) , and acer truncatum ( shandong maple ) . from the field maple , the norway maple is distinguished by its larger leaves with pointed , not blunt , lobes , and from the other species by the presence of one or more teeth on all of the lobes . it is also frequently confused with the more distantly related acer saccharum ( sugar maple ) . the sugar maple is easy to differentiate by clear sap in the petiole ( leaf stem ) ; norway maple petioles have white sap . the tips of the points on norway maple leaves reduce to a fine '' hair '' , while the tips of the points on sugar maple leaves are , on close inspection , rounded . on mature trees , sugar maple bark is more shaggy , while norway maple bark has small , often criss-crossing grooves . while the shape and angle of leaf lobes vary somewhat within all maple species , the leaf lobes of norway maple tend to have a more triangular shape , in contrast to the more squarish lobes often seen on sugar maples . flowering and seed production begins at ten years of age , however large quantities of seeds are not produced until the tree is 20 . as with most maples , norway maple is normally dioecious ( separate male and female trees ) , occasionally monoecious , and trees may change gender from year to year . the fruits of norway maple are paired samaras with widely diverging wings , distinguishing them from those of sycamore , acer pseudoplatanus which are at 90 degrees to each other . norway maple seeds are flattened , while those of sugar maple are globose . the sugar maple usually has a brighter orange autumn color , where the norway maple is usually yellow , although some of the red-leaved cultivars appear more orange . the flowers emerge in spring before the leaves and last 2-3 weeks . leafout of norway maple is tied to photoperiod and initiated when day lengths reach approximately 13 hours , which is generally in april . leaf drop in autumn is initiated when day lengths fall to approximately 10 hours . depending on the latitude , leaf drop may vary by as much as three weeks , beginning in the second week of october in scandinavia and the first week of november in southern europe . unlike some other maples that wait for the soil to warm up , a . platanoides seeds require only three months of exposure to temperatures lower than and will sprout in early spring , around the same time that leafout begins . norway maple does not require freezing temperatures for proper growth , however it is adapted to higher latitudes with long summer days and does not perform well when planted south of the 37th parallel , the approximate southern limit of its range in europe . the heavy seed crop and high germination rate contributes to its invasiveness in north america , where it forms dense monotypic stands that choke out native vegetation . since norway maple 's leafout in spring is also tied to photoperiod unlike most north american trees which leaf out based on air temperature , the tree has a competitive advantage in that it may leaf out well before native trees and shrubs since the latter may be delayed by the weather conditions . it is one of the few introduced species that can successfully invade and colonize a virgin forest . by comparison , in its native range , norway maple is rarely a dominant species and instead occurs mostly as a scattered understory tree . . cultivation and uses . the wood is hard , yellowish-white to pale reddish , with the heartwood not distinct ; it is used for furniture and turnery . norway maple sits ambiguously between hard and soft maple with a janka hardness of . the wood is rated as non-durable to perishable in regard to decay resistance . in europe , it is used for furniture , flooring and musical instruments . this species as grown in the former yugoslavia is also called bosnian maple , and is probably the maple used by the famous italian violin makers , stradivari and guarneri . norway maple has been widely taken into cultivation in other areas , including western europe northwest of its native range . it grows north of the arctic circle at tromsø , norway . in north america , it is planted as a street and shade tree as far north as anchorage , alaska . it is most recommended in usda hardiness zones 4 to 7 but will grow in warmer zones ( at least up to zone 10 ) where summer heat is moderate , as along the pacific coast south to the los angeles basin . history and range of norway maple during the 1950s–60s it became popular as a street tree due to the large-scale loss of american elms from dutch elm disease . it is favored due to its tall trunk and tolerance of poor , compacted soils and urban pollution , conditions in which sugar maple has difficulty . it has become a popular species for bonsai in europe and is used for medium to large bonsai sizes and a multitude of styles . norway maples are not typically cultivated for maple syrup production due to the lower sugar content of the sap compared to sugar maple . . cultivars . many cultivars have been selected for distinctive leaf shapes or colorations , such as the dark purple of 'crimson king ' and 'schwedleri ' , the variegated leaves of 'drummondii ' , the light green of 'emerald queen ' , and the deeply divided , feathery leaves of 'dissectum ' and 'lorbergii ' . the purple-foliage cultivars have orange to red autumn colour . 'columnare ' is selected for its narrow upright growth . the cultivars 'crimson king ' and 'prigold ' have gained the royal horticultural society 's award of garden merit . as an invasive species in north america . the norway maple was introduced to northeastern north america between 1750 and 1760 as an ornamental shade tree . it was brought to the pacific northwest in the 1870s . the roots of norway maples grow very close to the ground surface , starving other plants of moisture . for example , lawn grass ( and even weeds ) will usually not grow well beneath a norway maple , but english ivy , with its minimal rooting needs , may thrive . in addition , the dense canopy of norway maples can inhibit understory growth . some have suggested norway maples may also release chemicals to discourage undergrowth , although this claim is controversial . a . platanoides has been shown to inhibit the growth of native saplings as a canopy tree or as a sapling . the norway maple also suffers less herbivory than the sugar maple , allowing it to gain a competitive advantage against the latter species . as a result of these characteristics , it is considered invasive in some states , and has been banned for sale in new hampshire and massachusetts . the state of new york has classified it as an invasive plant species . despite these steps , the species is still available and widely used for urban plantings in many areas . file : acer platanoides fruit kz.jpg fruit ( samara ) : note the flat seed capsule and the angle of the '' wings '' file:2014-10-30 10 39 54 norway maple foliage during autumn on durham avenue in ewing , new jersey.jpg typical yellow fall foliage file:2014-10-30 09 32 43 norway maple foliage during autumn in ewing , new jersey.jpg atypical orange-red fall colour file : acer platanoides 'schwedleri ' leaf.jpg purple leaves of cultivar 'schwedleri' file : acer platanoides twig and buds.jpg acer platanoides twig and buds . . natural enemies . the larvae of a number of species of lepidoptera feed on norway maple foliage . ectoedemia sericopeza , the norway maple seedminer , is a moth of the family nepticulidae . the larvae emerge from eggs laid on the samara and tunnel to the seeds . norway maple is generally free of serious diseases , though can be attacked by the powdery mildew uncinula bicornis , and verticillium wilt disease caused by verticillium spp . phillips , d . h . , & burdekin , d . a . ( 1992 ) . diseases of forest and ornamental trees . macmillan . '' tar spots '' caused by rhytisma acerinum infection are common but largely harmless . aceria pseudoplatani is an acarine mite that causes a 'felt gall ' , found on the underside of leaves of both sycamores ( acer pseudoplatanus ) and norway maples . plant galls retrieved : 2013-07-10