James Dole

hawaiian pineapple company . his farm grew , and dole constructed a cannery and packing plant in the town of wahiawa . soon , yields and popularity of his product proved greater than he expected and dole built a new cannery and packing plant near honolulu harbor . that same year , 1907 , dole purchased magazine advertisements to promote his canned pineapples . he developed the first nationwide consumer ad campaign in the united states and was successful . demand for hawaiian pineapple grew even more . in 1913 , dole invested in a new machine invented by henry gabriel ginaca that could peel and core 35 pineapples every minute . before the invention , dole had to contend with the slow pace of having hundreds of workers peel and core each pineapple by hand . with a fully mechanized outfit , dole 's business boomed once more . rival pineapple companies slowly began to adopt the ginaca machine , seeing how much dole improved his business with the introduction of new technologies . during this period , the hawaiian pineapple sector was at its most profitable as various small companies operating on comparatively modern small land made middling income for the operators . however , this was about to change as dole was soon to corner the market and turn it into single mighty industry dominated by a small group of companies who mass-produced the fruit for the rest of the global market . by 1922 , dole had managed to convince his family 's network in hawaii and in boston to arrange for a sizable capital investment fund with which he purchased the island of lanai and developed it as a vast pineapple plantation . it became the largest plantation in the world with over 20,000 acres ( 8,100 & nbsp ; ha ) devoted exclusively to growing pineapple . utilizing large mechanized production and importing large numbers of foreign workers who were paid at indentured servitude levels , dole managed to reduce the price of his pineapples to such a level that it drove every other producer out of the business which did n't fall into line with his scheme . with this vast pineapple cultivation at the company 's disposal , throughout the 20th century , lānai produced over seventy-five percent of the world 's pineapple crop , thereby dominating the market , and in turn , the place acquired the nickname of pineapple island . dole also purchased land on the island of maui . the largest competitors in the production of pineapple in hawaii were maui based affiliates of alexander & baldwin . in 1927 , inspired by charles lindbergh 's successful trans-atlantic flight , and seeing the potential air transportation could play in delivering his fruit , thereby making an end-run around what remained of his competitors in the alexander & baldwin affiliated matson , inc . , dole sponsored the dole air race , putting up a prize of us 25,000 for the first airplane to fly from oakland , california to honolulu , and us 10,000 for second place . those prizes were won by the only two airplanes to survive the flight . ten other people died in their attempts . however , the race opened up the air-travel business to hawaii and dole quickly developed the contacts necessary to put a stranglehold on that commercial sector . however , these investments in land , mechanization , and finally air transportation combined with the resulting decrease in the price of pineapples , placed the company in a vulnerable price position . because pineapples take two years to grow to maturity , the great depression of the 1930s and the resulting decrease in demand caused the company to lose money . by december 1932 dole was removed from management of the company and replaced by atherton richards . at that time , castle & cooke took a stake in the company . family and retirement . dole married belle dickey ( 1880–1972 ) in jamaica plain on november 23 , 1906 . his wife was the sister of architect charles william dickey , a member of another missionary family . they had five children : richard alexander dole was born on october 28 , 1907 , james drummond dole , jr . was born on february 6 , 1910 , elisabeth dole was born on april 25 , 1911 , charles herbert dole was born on october 30 , 1914 , and barbara dole was born on october 10 , 1916 . sanford dole had asked to avoid using the dole name for products , but it had become well-known , at least within hawaii . the first product to actually bear his name was the canned dole pineapple juice . dole retired in 1948 . he suffered from various ailments in retirement ; the worst were a series of strokes . a heart attack finally took dole 's life on may 20 , 1958 . dole was buried in makawao union church cemetery near makawao , hawaii on the island of maui . his grave overlooked the slopes of haleakala and the vast pineapple fields of what was at the time his maui pineapple plantation . harvard square library his wife belle inscribed the words on his gravestone , '' he was a man , take him all in all . i shall not look upon his like again . '' . legacy . about of the original estate , including surrounding horticultural gardens , was kept in the dole family until 1972 . although his original three-room house collapsed in 1971 , a kitchen house from 1901 , and a prefabricated building constructed in 1905 and expanded around 1909 for his growing family , remained but were deteriorating . in the late 1970s , the new owners developed the land into suburban residences . the remaining structures were removed from wahiawa for the new subdivision . the waipahu cultural garden in waipahu , hawaii at recreated a hawaiian plantation village . left the tourist attraction known as the dole plantation was established in 1950 as a small fruit stand in the middle of dole 's original pineapple fields . in 1989 , the fruit stand was transformed into a plantation home mounted on what looks like a hill of red dirt , characteristic of wahiawa . the plantation home became a living museum and historical archive of the life and work of the industrialist . it is located off of kamehameha highway ( route 99 ) , at . the plantation features the world 's largest maze , grown entirely out of hawaiian plants . originally built in 1998 , it lost its place in the guinness book of world records until it was expanded in july 2007 . the maze covers and paths are long . the '' pineapple express '' is a two-mile ( 3 & nbsp ; km ) train ride through the plantation that is fully animated , while explaining the history of the pineapple . the plantation garden tour gives information about north shore , the hibiscus , native species , the lei , irrigation , bromeliads , the ti leaf , and life on the plantation . in 1991 , the dole cannery closed its operations and was transformed into a multi-purpose facility with media studios , conference rooms and ballrooms . the lower levels houses a modern shopping center and an 18-screen multiplex cinema owned by regal entertainment group . the actual ginaca machines and cannery storage were preserved and turned into a museum of hawaiian pineapple company history . the cannery is located in the area known as iwilei , between honolulu harbor and kapālama , at 650 iwilei road honolulu , , and ballrooms across the street . . family tree . in-laws ' family . . references . external links . dole food company website