Droitwich Spa

history . during the roman era the settlement was known as salinae and was located at the crossroads of several roman roads . railway construction in 1847 revealed roman mosaic pavements , and later excavations unearthed a droitwich remained a fairly small town until the 1960s , when the population was still barely 7,000 , but since then it has grown considerably from overspill from birmingham with many housing estates being developed in the 1970s and '80s . in 2014 , new housing consent was granted to large developments at copcut ( 750 houses ) and yew tree hill ( 765 houses ) with a number of other in-fill developments in july 2007 , droitwich was hit heavily by the uk-wide flooding caused by some of the heaviest rainfall in many years . the flooding was pictured in uk-wide news , having flooded the majority of the heavily subsided high street . many shops in the high street remained closed almost a year later . the flooding crossed from the stream and canal in vines park , crossed roman way , and spilled across to the high street some 110 yards from the source stream . following specialist inspections at droitwich spa brine baths on 12 december 2008 , the facility was closed to allow further building investigations to take place and to avoid any potential hazard to the public or staff . salt and brine . rock salt and brine was extracted by the romans and this continued through to the middle ages . a salt tax was levied by the king until it was abolished in 1825 . a local family named wintour owned up to 25 salt evaporating pans in the area by the 1600s . brine rose naturally to the surface at three sites along the river salwarpe within vines park in the centre of droitwich . unusually the brine was fully saturated with sodium chloride , and was extremely valuable because it was economic to boil , and the yield of salt was high . because of its value the brine was divided into shares , one share comprising which produced of salt annually in the set boiling period . when it rained , particularly in the winter when brine was not being boiled , the rain water which is less dense than saltwater , settled on top of the brine and was readily removed . originally brine for boiling was extracted with buckets lowered into the pits which were naturally replenished . upwich , the deepest of the three pits at , supplied most of the brine , while the pit at netherwich was only deep . the middlewich pit , located between the two , was adversely affected by brine extraction at the other two pits and fell into disuse . steynor in the 17th century discovered the pit and set up business for himself , but eventually due to the lack of brine he failed to compete with the town monopoly . the underground brine reservoirs were only deep and in 1725 boreholes were sunk to the base of the pits , accessing brine in almost unlimited quantities and independent of the natural brine flow , and the monopoly ceased . pumps were used to draw brine , and production increased . as a result , parts of the town succumbed to subsidence . '' salt and the domesday salinae at droitwich , ad 674–1690 : a quantitative analysis '' , droitwich brine springs and archaeological trust with worcestershire archaeological society ( 1994 ) in the mid-19th century , droitwich became famous as a spa town . unlike other places , the medicinal benefits were not derived from drinking the spa water , which is almost saturated brine , but from the muscular relief derived from swimming and floating in such a dense , concentrated salt solution , at the town 's brine baths ( first opened in 1830 ) . the spa water at droitwich is the warmest in the united kingdom outside bath , but it does not meet the most common definition of a hot spring as the water is below standard human body temperature . the original brine baths have long since closed , but a new brine bath ( part of the droitwich spa private hospital ) opened to the public for relaxation and hydrotherapy but this too was closed in december 2008 due to a dispute between the operator and wychavon district council over health and safety inspections . the salt industry was industrialised and developed in the 19th century by john corbett who built the nearby chateau impney for his franco-irish wife in the french 'château ' style . he was responsible for the redevelopment of droitwich as a spa . asylums and workhouses . droitwich 's first workhouse was set up on holloway in 1688 the workhouse : droitwich , worcestershire at workhouses.org.uk accessed 2017-05-31 and the last finally abolished in the 1920s . droitwich lunatic asylum was established in 1791 . records at the worcestershire county record office show its presence in 1837 to 1838 . an advert in the transactions of the provincial medical and surgical association ( the forerunner of the british medical association ) in 1844 , records that martin ricketts , of droitwich , was the surgeon and sir charles hastings from the worcester infirmary was the physician . industry and commerce . transport . in 1714 the first turnpike in worcestershire was opened to worcester . a commemorative plaque was unveiled by patrick holcroft the lord lieutenant of worcestershire in victoria square on 1 june 2014 . collectively known as the droitwich canal , two canals met in the town centre . these are the droitwich barge canal built by james brindley in 1771 and the droitwich junction canal built in 1854 . the junction canal linked droitwich to the worcester and birmingham canal . the canals were abandoned in 1939 but a restoration program saw them re-opened in 2011 . the railway station , formerly on the great western railway , is just outside the town centre with trains to birmingham , worcester , kidderminster and stourbridge . regular buses operate from the town centre to worcester , birmingham and bromsgrove along with town services and an infrequent service ( 133 ) to kidderminster . these are operated by various operators . broadcasting . north-east of droitwich is the central longwave broadcasting facility for the uk , ( wychbold bbc transmitter ) , which is also used for transmissions in the medium wave range ; see droitwich transmitting station . the transmitting station was sited near droitwich , which was close to uk centres of population when it was established in the 1930s . considerable care was taken to avoid placing the masts above underground brine , due to the risk of subsidence ; however , there are anecdotal reports that the huge block of underground salt was desirable by providing good grounding and increased signal strength . hereford and worcester > about worcestershire > '' droitwich calling '' ( comment by max sinclair , ref . 'mr humphreys . station engineer ' ) , 2005/10/21 , at bbc.co.uk accessed 2017-05-31 . retail . droitwich shopping is mainly focused in the traditional town centre around victoria square , leading to the st andrew 's square shopping centre and down to the original high street , with its local pubs and an eclectic mix of traditional shops . farmers ' markets are also held regularly in victoria square . in the central st andrew 's square shopping precinct are several chain stores . on 14 july 2005 , waitrose opened a new supermarket in the grounds of the old covered market , directly behind the heavily-subsided high street . in 2008 , a new aldi store opened on the small retail park by roman way while the new parkridge retail park was opened in 2007 with two new stores , carpetright , since closed , and land of leather . there was also a horsatack saddlery store on the same park , which was opened in 2009 . the park already has dfs store . there is also a spar on oakland avenue , a tesco express on primsland plus a new sainsbury 's store and petrol station and marks & spencer 's store and petrol station being constructed . in 2019 a lidl supermarket opened opposite aldi , increasing the competition in the area . banks in the town include hsbc , santander , lloyds and barclays . matthew dresch : '' natwest branches to close in malvern and droitwich spa causing concern among residents '' 5 december 2016 , at worcesternews.co.uk accessed 2017-05-31 there are a number of estate agents . amenities . lido . until the late 1990s droitwich spa lido was open as a public open-air salt-water swimming pool . following its closure various schemes were proposed , with significant legal and commercial arguments as to the viability of re-building and reopening this facility . during autumn of 2006 , work started on renovating the lido and it was reopened on monday 18 june 2007 . the lido park remains a pleasant and popular space , with droitwich cricket ground on its edge as well as a bandstand with regular performances . entertainment . the norbury theatre hosts regular shows year-round , including an annual pantomime , and also shows films . the norbury has an active youth theatre for ages 12 to 18 . on the outskirts of the town is the famous chateau impney , built in the style of a traditional french chateau , which is now a hotel , restaurant and conference centre . in droitwich , the raven hotel is a wattle and daub hotel that holds a central position within the town . education . the droitwich spa pyramid of schools works on a three tier system , with one high school : ( droitwich spa high school ) ; two middle schools ( witton middle school and westacre middle school ) ; and nine first schools ( chawson , cutnall green , hindlip , ombersley , st . peter 's , st . joseph 's ( a primary school feeding into blessed edward oldcorne high school , worcester ) , tibberton , westlands—originally boycott farm first school—and wychbold first schools ) . there is also the private dodderhill school ( formerly named whitford hall and dodderhill ) , an independent school for girls from 3 to 16 years ( with some boys present in the nursery school ) . during 2019 the school merged with royal grammar school ( rgs ) worcester , under the name rgs dodderhill . droitwich children are also educated at schools outside the town including worcester 's royal grammar school and the king 's school , hawford lodge , the grange , bromsgrove school with others typically travelling to birmingham , kidderminster , hagley and stourbridge by rail . places of worship . there are six churches in droitwich including the anglican church of st andrew 's , a norman building where st richard was probably baptised . st andrew 's , droitwich . retrieved 8 february 2010 the church tower was demolished in the 1920s after becoming dangerous due to land subsidence . st . augustine 's at dodderhill , completed in 1220 and rebuilt in the 18th century on a hill , was the site of a former roman fort and a later anglo-saxon church . dodderhill parish survey project . retrieved 8 february 2010 st peter 's , built on the site of a former saxon church , has parts , including the chancel , that date from norman times , and has a memorial to edward winslow , one of the pilgrim fathers , who was born in the parish . droitwich spa parish , st peter 's , retrieved 8 february 2010 st nicholas was built in victorian times near the railway station ; droitwich spa parish , st nicholas retrieved 8 february 2010 and the roman catholic church of the sacred heart and st catherine of alexandria , on a building styled on the roman basilica churches of ravenna in italy , has the feature of the interior walls being covered almost entirely of mosaic and marble designed by gabriel pippet . sacred heart , droitwich . retrieved 8 february 2010 there are also a number of other chapels including methodist , baptist and a vibrant salvation army hall . in 2019 the tired 1970s emmanuel church building at chawson was demolished and was replaced with a new modern hall . . sport . droitwich leisure centre at briar mill has gym facilities , sports halls , a swimming pool and squash courts . there are also outside football and astroturf pitches with floodlighting . the centre also runs a squash league . droitwich spa football club was formed in 1985 and currently plays in the west midlands ( regional ) league 1st division . their home ground is also at briar mill , but due to ground grading regulations the club now plays its home games at stourport swifts , until the planned development of their former home at briar mill is complete . the club also has a junior section of under 16 , under 18 & under 21 sides . the droitwich rfc has been playing rugby union since 1972 . droitwich archery society , based at the droitwich rugby football ground , is a target archery club that was formed in 1967 , and is affiliated to the grand national archery society . other local sports include boxing , judo , tae kwon do , karate , ju jitsu and tennis . vines park bowling club is a green bowling club situated by the canal in vines park . bowling also available in the lido park droitwich spa pool league is headquartered at the fox and goose pub on westlands . droitwich spa also has a cricket club in which they support four saturday teams and two on a sunday . location . notable residents . john bickerton , european tour golfer john corbett , '' salt king '' ashley giles , england cricketer , lives in droitwich and in 2005 was made an honorary citizen of the town charlie green , singer known for his appearance on britain 's got talent in 2008 ; now touring with jimmy osmond cyril harrison , professional cricketer , made 17 first-class cricket appearances for the worcestershire county cricket club in 1934 and 1935 john heminges , born in droitwich in about 1566 , actor in william shakespeare 's company dean holdsworth , former professional footballer for wimbledon rik mayall , actor and writer in the comic strip , the young ones , bottom and other tv programmes ; lived in droitwich as a child matt neal , touring car champion , lives in droitwich graham oakey , professional footballer for coventry city in the 1970s , born in droitwich in 1954 thomas rainsborough , prominent figure in the english civil war ; leading spokesman for the levellers in the putney debates ; became mp for droitwich in 1647 st richard , bishop of chichester , born in droitwich in 1197 edward winslow , one of the pilgrim fathers , born in the town in 1595 . twin towns . droitwich spa is twinned with : bad ems , germany voiron , france , ( since 2010 ) . references . further reading . st peter 's church , droitwich ( www.amazon.co.uk ) – around droitwich ( archive photograph series ) – droitwich in old photographs – the droitwich discovery – . external links . droitwich spa town council website