Bollington

history . from the late 18th through to the mid-20th century , bollington was a major centre for cotton-spinning . waterhouse mill , now demolished , off wellington road , once spun the finest cotton in the world , and was sought after by lace makers in nottingham and in brussels , belgium . clarence mill still stands . the lower floors remain commercial but the upper floors have been converted into apartments . one of the oldest surviving mills in bollington is the very small defiance mill , built in queen street about 1800 and now restored for residential occupation . there is a large coated paper mill on the site of lower mills . the original mill was built by george antrobus in 1792 but very little of those buildings remain . a stone-built traditional mill still survives amongst the more recent brick developments . in the 1830s and 1840s this mill was rented to thomas oliver and martin swindells for the production of fine cotton thread for the lace-making industry . lowerhouse mill ( antrobus , 1819 , later occupied by samuel greg jnr ) also remains as an industrial mill , also producing coated papers . the other remaining mill is adelphi mill ( swindells , 1856 ) , which is today entirely commercial . in 1801 , the population was 1,231 . in 1851 , the population was 4,655 . in 1901 , it had grown to 5,245 . population growth slowed during the mid-20th century such that by 1951 the population was 5,644 . by 2001 the population had reached 7,095 . . governance . the town falls within the westminster constituency of macclesfield , which is currently represented by the conservative mp david rutley . bollington is represented by two councillors on the cheshire east borough council ( unitary ) . bollington town council has parish status . there are 12 councillors . from 2012 a number of responsibilities and buildings are being taken over from cheshire east council , including the civic hall and town hall . services and provisions . cheshire fire and rescue service have a retained fire station in bollington . the town has a medical practice on wellington road , and a dental surgery on bollington road . the town does not have its own police station ; policing is provided by the cheshire constabulary . the town has a small yet thriving local retail community , with two bakers , three butchers , a delicatessen , and a co-op convenience store . the town has several notable take-aways , restaurants , wine bars , and coffee shops , along with a dozen or so traditional public houses . education . bollington is served by four primary schools . the roman catholic school of st gregory is on albert road , along with the secular dean valley community primary school . the church of england has two schools in the town , st john the baptist church of england on grimshaw lane , and bollington cross church of england on bollington road . secondary-aged students travel to tytherington school , the fallibroome academy , the kings school , macclesfield , all hallows catholic college and poynton high school . sport . the recreation ground , across the road from the civic hall and library , provides a football pitch , bowling green , tennis court and cricket pitch , all of which are in regular use by bollington cricket club , bollington athletics club , and the bollington bowling club . a further cricket pitch located along clarke lane , by the lord clyde pub , is home to kerridge cricket club . bollington has a hockey club , which plays on the king 's school astroturf pitches . there are a number of other sporting activity groups including cycling , walking , and swimming . other activities are based at the bollington health and leisure centre at heath road , bollington cross . landmarks . bollington is notable for white nancy , a stone obelisk located on top of kerridge hill . at c.6m high and painted white , this 1817 monument to victory at the battle of waterloo is visible from as far away as shropshire and the western hills of cheshire . the big mills , clarence , adelphi and lowerhouse , are notable examples of 19th-century mill buildings in the northwest of england . culture . the town has several churches . the parish church of st john the baptist closed in 2006 , leaving st oswald 's church in bollington cross as the only anglican church . st gregory 's church on wellington road is the roman catholic place of worship in the town . the grade-ii listed methodist church on wellington road has been closed to worship and has been sold . in 2005 canalside community radio was launched to provide community news and entertainment for the duration of the festival . cousins john and terry waite opened the 2005 bollington festival . together with the discovery centre . in december 2008 canalside radio – the thread – began broadcasting to northeast cheshire on 102.8 fm having obtained a full-time licence after five years of trying . hiking , cycling and riding through the hills around bollington and along the macclesfield canal towpath as well as the middlewood way ( a disused railway ) are popular activities . boats and bikes can be hired for day-trips and holidays at grimshaw lane canal wharf . the peak district boundary walk runs through the town . the town has many traditional public houses , most of which have not been modernised . events . every five or six years since 1964 , the town hosts the bollington festival , which runs for two and a half weeks and involves a wide variety of community activities , from concerts , theatrical , opera , art exhibitions , to local history events , science events and competitions . the next festival will be held in may 2019 . in late september each year a ten-day walking festival promotes exercise and fresh air while taking in the beauty of the surrounding countryside , the western hills of the peak district . bollington hosts an annual 'carols around the christmas tree ' on christmas eve each year . at mid-day on christmas day each year a brass band play at white nancy . . societies and organisations . bollington has a branch of the women 's institute , which meets regularly while retired gentlemen may meet at the weekly probus , and likewise the ladies at their monthly probus . the guide and scout movements are all represented . bollington united junior football club ( jfc ) has three clubs for children ranging from under-10s to under-17s . bollington is home to 236 squadron of the royal air force 's air training corps , which has its headquarters on shrigley road . the squadron had close links with 42 ( r ) ( formerly 236 ocu ) of the royal air force before the latter was disbanded in the government defence review in 2010 . the sea cadets is for 10‑ & nbsp ; to & nbsp ; 18‑year‑olds . the bollington and macclesfield sea cadets also have a unit website . there are numerous artistic , musical and theatrical groups all providing popular exhibitions and performances . many of these are held at the bollington arts centre . . transport . road . bollington is from the a523 road that runs from hazel grove , through macclesfield to leek in staffordshire . the nearest motorway junctions are j17 and 19 ( congleton and knutsford ) on the m6 , and j1 ( stockport ) on the m60 . philip 's street atlas cheshire page vii , . bus . regular bus services connect bollington with macclesfield , hazel grove and stockport . railway . bollington no longer has its own railway station ; the nearest being in macclesfield , for inter-city trains to london and manchester , and prestbury for local stopping trains . middlewood way . water . the macclesfield canal passes through the centre of the town and is a picturesque and rural part of the cheshire ring . the stretch from marple junction on the peak forest canal to bosley is without locks and is carried on an embankment through bollington . kerridge was the scene of a spectacular breach on 29 february 1912 , where the water from bosley to buxworth emptied through the town . today , the canal is used for leisure purposes . media . bollington live ! is a publication produced three times a year by a team of volunteer writers , editor and distributors . it is funded by local businesses who sponsor and advertise . it covers a wide range of issues of local interest , from historical articles , to matters of current concern . the magazine is delivered free to every household and business in bollington , plus others in pott shrigley and whiteley green by almost fifty volunteers . the magazine was started in 1994 by a group of residents who felt that whilst bollington was served by the neighbouring macclesfield newspapers , it was in need of a bollington-centred publication . all copies are available online on the town 's extensive happy valley web site . . notable people . samuel greg ( jnr ) ( 1804–1876 ) an english industrialist and philanthropist , in 1832 he took over management of lowerhouse mill in bollington and used it as a basis for social experimentation . john ryle ( 1817–1887 ) born and died in bollington . emigrated to the united states in 1839 and became known as the '' father of the united states silk industry '' and was the mayor of paterson , new jersey from 1869 to 1870 william collard smith ( 1830 in bollington – 1894 ) emigrated to australia in 1852 , became a politician in colonial victoria ( australia ) , member of the victorian legislative assembly and minister of education 1880 to 1881 . emma brooke ( 1844–1926 ) a british novelist and a campaigner for the rights of women , brought up in bollington jack plant ( born 1870 in bollington ) an english international footballer , played professionally for bury , and earned one cap for england in 1900 sir james chadwick ( 1891 in bollington – 1974 ) nobel prize-winning physicist who proved the existence of neutrons , educated at bollington cross school . terry waite ( born 1939 in bollington ) was held hostage for four years in lebanon , and who has devoted his life to humanitarian causes , lived for a very short time in bollington ; his father was one of the town 's policemen . david dickinson ( born 1941 ) antiques expert and television presenter , lives in bollington . angie lewin ( born 1963 in bollington ) designer of prints and screens , brought up in bollington . james bailey ( born 1988 ) professional footballer , soccerbase database retrieved 11h july 2018 brought up in bollington . libby clegg , mbe ( born 1990 ) blind athlete , born and lived in bollington until moving to scotland at age 11 . ben amos ( born 1990 ) an english professional footballer soccerbase database retrieved 11h july 2018 who plays as a goalkeeper for charlton athletic , lived for some years in bollington . see also . listed buildings in bollington hollin old hall clarence mill . references . external links . happy valley , a full list of bollington 's mills with some histories .