Innerleithen

etymology . the name '' innerleithen '' comes from the scottish gaelic meaning '' confluence of the leithen '' , because it is here that the river joins the tweed . the prefix '' inner-/inver- '' ( inbhir- ) is common in many scottish placenames , such as inverness and inverurie . at this confluence , the tweed flows approximately west-east , and the leithen water flows from the north . layout . the layout of the town is dominated by the surrounding hills . to the north the peaked hill of lee pen ( 502m ) , and its southerly spur caerlee hill ( 258m ) . to the east the rounded hill of pirn craig ( 363m ) - locally known as '' rocky '' - and its townward spur of windy knowe ( 155m ) , also known as '' pirn hill '' , and to the south , beyond the tweed , the extended of ridge of plora craig rises sharply from the southerly bank . thus the town has grown in an inverted 't ' shape north up the valley of the leithen and east-west along north bank flood plain of the tweed . history . the area occupied by the town has been inhabited since pre-roman times . the remains of an iron-age hill fort are visible atop caerlee hill , in the form of defensive ditchworks . ditchworks are also visible on the hill of windy knowe and , whilst there is some local speculation that these belong to an unusual round roman hill fort , they are in fact typical of an indigenous iron age hill fort . crop marks from aerial photographs of the 1950s suggest the existence of a semi-permanent roman marching camp on the flood plain by the river tweed at toll wood ( near traquair ) and at nearby eshiels . the town is said to have been founded by an itinerant pilgrim monk called st . ronan in a.d.737 , who came to innerleithen via the river tweed in a coracle . monks would certainly have travelled the natural route of the clyde and tweed valleys on their way between the religious centres of iona and lindisfarne . a celtic stone carved with cup and rings/channels , known as the runic cross ( although there are neither runes on it , nor any evidence that it was a cross shaft ) was found on the slopes of the leithen valley suggesting that a church existed during the middle ages . the stone can be viewed in the courtyard of the parish church on leithen road . in the local legend of the town 's founding '' st . ronan cleik't the deil by the hind leg and banished him '' , possibly a metaphor for the monks bringing christian learning back into these regions . the legend was actually formalised by walter scott and was later instigated in a town festival called '' the cleikum ceremonies '' in 1901 . this was seen as a way to prevent the legends and folktales of the region from dying out . scott wrote about the town in his 1824 novel st . ronan 's well . the ceremonies continue to this day as part of st . ronans borders games , also known as 'games week ' ( although , in reality , this is a 10-day-long festival ) . the border games date from 1827 and are the oldest organised sports meeting in scotland . these happen in the first and second week in july and draw significant local and tourist participation . accounts of innerleithen date from the 12th century , when it was recorded as '' inverlethane '' . it is said that a son of king malcolm iv of scotland ( who was staying at traquair house on a hunting trip ) , drowned accidentally in a deep pool at the confluence of the rivers leithen and tweed . the body was recovered by locals and taken to the church , in recognition of which the king bestowed the right of sanctuary to the land . the pool where the drowning is alleged to have taken place is still known locally as '' the droont pool '' . however , it should be borne in mind that malcolm iv is reported to have died childless at the age of twenty five , so the tale is questionable . later written accounts of the town date from the 15th century when it is referred to as '' henderleithen '' , and at this point it is recorded as a hamlet within the parish of traquair , which with its major baronial house was centre of the parish . the industrial revolution and wool milling saw innerleithen outgrow traquair and become the larger village . innerleithen 's population rose from 1130 ( 1861 census ) to it current level of over 2500 . at one point it had five significant wool mills ( or hosiery ) . of these , only one , caerlee mills remained with a reduced workforce of 33 after its owners jj & hb cashmere went into administration in 2010 , finally closing in april 2013 . the industries which have supplanted the wool industry and allowed the town keep growing have been primarily tourism , of which mountain biking plays a huge part , and secondly timber and forestry . additionally , a significant proportion of the population now commutes to work , including to edinburgh some 30 miles north . the town has a football team vale of leithen who were established in 1891 and play in the scottish lowland league . they play their games at the town 's victoria park . tourism . image : robert smail 's printing works.jpg thumb right robert smail 's printing works typifies the buildings on the main street . tourist attractions within the town include robert smail 's printing works and st . ronans wells , and nearby traquair house . popular tourist activities in the area include golfing ( the town has a 9-hole golf course ) , walking and mountain biking with 2 excellent routes including a world standard downhill route . the area is famous for fly fishing ( both trout and salmon ) , and there is a fish ladder near the golf course , just outside the town boundary on leithen road . this proves a popular stopping point for locals and visitors to watch the autumn and winter runs of salmon . the town has several small hotels including the traquair arms hotel and the st . ronans hotel . there are also numerous private houses offering bed and breakfast , a camp site and a caravan site . the town hosts the annual innerleithen music festival in the memorial hall . in addition , it has an active amateur operatic society which stages an annual production . to get to innerleithen from edinburgh , follow the a701 , then a703 south from edinburgh , and at peebles turn east onto the a72 . the town is also served by the first bus no . 62 service which runs between edinburgh and melrose via penicuik , peebles , innerleithen and galashiels . innerleithen has several bookshops , the largest of which holds nearly 19,000 titles and is one of the largest in the scottish borders . innerleithen is also popular for mountain biking and , together with glentress , forms one of forestry and land scotland 's '' 7stanes '' . it is very popular with downhill bikers and has hosted national events since the early 1990s . current gems include the '' matador '' and '' make or break '' . in addition to the downhill trails , there is a long cross-country loop that climbs to the top of the minch moor before descending through some excellent trails . the innerleithen xc trails are more demanding than those found at glentress . since 2003 , the town has held a music festival every august . acts that have played at the festival include eddi reader , julie fowlis , dougie maclean , karine polwart , karen matheson and old blind dogs . . notable people . alexander tait ( poet ) ( b.1720 ) , known as 'sawney tait ' was a contemporary and associate of robert burns and david sillar . murray davidson ( b . 1988 ) , scottish international footballer who played for livingston f.c . and st johnstone f.c . file : traquairarmshotel.jpg traquair arms hotel , innerleithen taken in 2008 . file : innerleithensnow.jpg a snowy evening in innerleithen , taken in 2008 file : innerleithenfromafar.jpg innerleithen , taken from the nearby hills . . see also . auchentiber - the 'cleikum inn ' . list of places in the scottish borders list of places in scotland . references . external links . innerleithen online