Undercover journalism

role . the role of undercover journalism has become the topic of much debate as moral and ethical lines have been crossed . the nine elements of journalism as outlined in a book by bill kovach and tom rosenstiel are as follows : journalism 's first obligation is to tell the truth . its first loyalty is to the citizens . its essence is discipline of verification . its practitioners must maintain an independence from those they cover . it must serve as an independent monitor of power . it must provide a forum for public criticism and compromise . it must strive to make the news significant , interesting , and relevant . it must keep the news comprehensive and proportional . its practitioners must be allowed to exercise their personal conscience . as reporters have gone undercover some of these guidelines have been bent and broken in order to uphold others on the list . undercover reporting has brought to light numerous atrocities throughout history , yet often these reporters sacrifice ethical and moral code in the process . . ethics . while journalism aims to seek and report the truth , the ethics of how the truth is revealed should always be considered . if undercover journalism is an active lie to get the truth , then eventually trust can possibly be broken between reporters and the public . according to the columbia journalism review , '' overreliance on sting operations and subterfuge can weaken the public 's trust in the media and compromise journalists ' claim to be truth-tellers . undercover reporting can be a powerful tool , but it 's one to be used cautiously : against only the most important targets , and even then only when accompanied by solid traditional reporting . '' undercover journalism exposes a lot of truths that would otherwise stay under the radar . in the 1990s , abc primetime live went undercover to investigate rumors of food lion 's unsanitary practices . according to the society of professional journalists ’ code of ethics , '' journalists should . avoid undercover or other surreptitious methods of gathering information unless traditional , open methods will not yield information vital to the public . ” undercover journalism should be used scarcely and if it is used , then it should be done if there are no other options to get the information . it also should be accompanied by useful , interesting , and relevant information for the public . notable undercover journalists . journalists who are famous for their undercover reports include : james o'keefe hunter s . thompson donal macintyre alex dolan nellie bly pam zekman anas aremeyaw anas matt taibbi günter wallraff ramita navai 60 minutes and dateline nbc correspondents barbara ehrenreich ( nickel and dimed ) carmelo abbate david daleiden james o'keefe is an american journalist known for producing secretly recorded undercover audio and video encounters with figures and workers in academic , governmental , and social service organizations , in an effort to show abusive or allegedly illegal behavior by employees and/or representatives of those organizations . his ethics have been under scrutiny for alleged manipulation of these recordings in order to make subjects appear guilty of some wrongdoing . hunter s . thompson was known for his undercover work reporting on the california-based motorcycle gang , the hells angels . his book , hell 's angels : the strange and terrible saga of the outlaw motorcycle gangs , profiles the gang as thompson spent roughly a year embedded among the angels , during a time when their notoriety was at an all-time high . elizabeth jane cochran , writing under the pseudonym nellie bly , became known for her undercover work for the new york world , titled ten days in a mad-house , when she checked herself into an insane asylum as a patient to report on cruelty and neglect . after ten days she was released and later went on to help a grand jury prosecute the mental ward . gunter wallraff is a german journalist known for his undercover work , ganz unten ( '' the lowest of the low '' ) , on exposing the oppressive conditions faced by the immigrant workforce in germany . he sought employment in german factories , pharmaceutical companies , and a wide array of odd jobs for roughly two years before publishing the book . anas aremeyaw anas is a ghanaian investigative journalist born in the late 1970s . anas is famous for utilizing his anonymity as a tool in his investigation arsenal ( very few people have seen his face ) . a multimedia journalist who specializes in print media and documentary , anas focuses on issues of human rights and anti-corruption in ghana and sub-saharan africa . anas has won critical acclaim for his work advocating for the right to not be held in human slavery or servitude and to have a standard of living in the event of an illness . his investigative works have won him worldwide acclaim with president barack obama highlighting his virtues in a speech during his 2009 visit to ghana : '' an independent press . a vibrant private sector . a civil society . those are the things that give life to democracy . we see that spirit in courageous journalists like anas aremeyaw anas , who risked his life to report the truth . '' anas has won over fourteen international awards for his investigative work . he was polled as the 5th most influential ghanaian in 2011 by etv , and named one of the '' most influential africans of the year '' by the new african magazine , in december 2014 . '' chameleon '' a documentary about anas ' life and work by ryan mullins was premiered at the 2014 idfa festival in amsterdam . donal macintyre is an irish journalist who went undercover to expose employment standards in the adventure sports industry following the lyme regis canoeing disaster . he also won an award for his undercover work exposing drug dealers and private security firms that work in collusion after living in character for eleven months . alex dolan is a journalist and science teacher best known for her undercover work exposing poor student behavior in her british classroom for the filming of a channel 4 documentary undercover teacher . david daleiden , a pro-life activist , secretly recorded conversations of officials at planned parenthood . because daleiden used a falsified drivers ' license to obtain access to the planned parenthood officials , he was indicted by a houston grand jury for a second degree felony . mazher mahmood , the so-called '' fake sheik '' , who won awards for his journalism and then was jailed for perjury . books based on undercover projects . related to this are books such as black like me by john howard griffin , in which a white novelist dyed his skin black and traveled the southern united states , and self-made man by norah vincent , a woman who dressed and passed herself off as a man . gentleman 's agreement by laura z . hobson is a fictional account of a gentile journalist who poses as a jew to investigate antisemitism . see also . immersion journalism . references .