1972 in sports

alpine skiing . alpine skiing world cup men 's overall season champion : gustav thöni , italy women 's overall season champion : annemarie pröll , austria . american football . january 16 − super bowl vi : the dallas cowboys ( nfc ) won 24−3 over the miami dolphins ( afc ) location : tulane stadium attendance : 81,023 mvp : roger staubach , qb ( dallas ) orange bowl ( 1971 season ) : the nebraska cornhuskers won 38-6 over the alabama crimson tide to win the college football national championship 23 december – in the first pittsburgh steelers playoff game in 25 years ( and the franchises first playoff win ) , rookie franco harris salvages and converts into a touchdown a final seconds terry bradshaw incomplete pass in what has been called the greatest play in nfl history—the immaculate reception—to beat the oakland raiders 13-7 . association football . brazil – palmeiras wins the campeonato brasileiro fa cup – leeds united won 1–0 over arsenal uefa cup winners ' cup – rangers f.c . won 3–2 over dinamo moscow west germany beat the soviet union 3–0 to win the european championship . athletics . september – athletics at the 1972 summer olympics held in munich . australian rules football . victorian football league carlton wins the 76th vfl premiership ( carlton 28.9 ( 177 ) d richmond 22.18 ( 150 ) ) brownlow medal awarded to len thompson ( collingwood ) . baseball . the washington senators move to dallas-fort worth , texas to become the texas rangers . 19 january – the bbwaa elects sandy koufax ( 344 votes ) , yogi berra ( 339 ) , and early wynn ( 301 ) to the baseball . sparky lyle saves 35 games for the new york yankees , breaking ron perranoski 's 1970 records for al pitchers and left-handers . lyle also becomes the first left-hander to save 100 career games in the american league . world series – oakland athletics win their first world championship since the team was based in philadelphia in 1930 , and sixth in franchise history , by defeating the cincinnati reds , 4 games to 3 . 31 december – the pittsburgh pirates ' legendary right fielder roberto clemente dies in a plane crash near puerto rico on his way to bring relief supplies to nicaraguan earthquake victims . basketball . ncaa division i men 's basketball championship – ucla wins 81–76 over florida st . nba finals – los angeles lakers won 4 games to 1 over the new york knicks 1972 aba finals – indiana pacers defeat new york nets 4 games to 2 . boxing . 26 june – roberto durán stopped ken buchanan in the thirteenth round to win the wba lightweight championship . canadian football . grey cup – hamilton tiger-cats won 13–10 over the saskatchewan roughriders vanier cup – alberta golden bears won 20–7 over the wilfrid laurier golden hawks . cycling . giro d'italia won by eddy merckx of belgium tour de france – eddy merckx of belgium uci road world championships – men 's road race – marino basso of italy . disc sports . disc sports are introduced to canada at the ken westerfield in toronto . field hockey . olympic games ( men 's competition ) in munich , west germany gold medal : west germany silver medal : pakistan bronze medal : . figure skating . world figure skating championships – men 's champion : ondrej nepela , czechoslovakia ladies ' champion : trixi schuba , austria pair skating champions : irina rodnina & alexei ulyanov , soviet union ice dancing champions : lyudmila pakhomova & alexandr gorshkov , soviet union . golf . men 's professional masters tournament – jack nicklaus u.s . open – jack nicklaus british open – lee trevino pga championship – gary player pga tour money leader – jack nicklaus – 320,542 the european tour begins its first season of competition . men 's amateur british amateur – trevor homer u.s . amateur – vinny giles women 's professional lpga championship – kathy ahern u.s . women 's open – susie berning titleholders championship – sandra palmer lpga money leader – kathy whitworth – 65,063 . harness racing . 21 september – strike out became the first canadian owned harness racing horse to ever win the little brown jug . united states pacing triple crown races – cane pace – hilarious way little brown jug – strike out messenger stakes – silent majority super bowl wins the united states trotting triple crown races – hambletonian – super bowl yonkers trot – super bowl kentucky futurity – super bowl australian inter dominion harness racing championship – pacers : welcome advice . horse racing . steeplechases cheltenham gold cup – glencaraig lady grand national – well to do flat races australia – melbourne cup won by piping lane canada – queen 's plate won by victoria song france – prix de l'arc de triomphe won by san san ireland – irish derby stakes won by steel pulse english triple crown races : 2,000 guineas stakes – high top the derby – roberto st . leger stakes – boucher united states triple crown races : kentucky derby – riva ridge preakness stakes – bee bee bee belmont stakes – riva ridge . ice hockey . world hockey association 's first season . this new league signed several of the top nhl stars including bobby hull and derek sanderson . art ross trophy as the nhl 's leading scorer during the regular season : phil esposito , boston bruins hart memorial trophy – for the nhl 's most valuable player : bobby orr , boston bruins stanley cup – boston bruins win 4 games to 2 over the new york rangers 28 september – paul henderson scored the '' goal of the century '' to give canada the win in the summit series , the first ever canada versus the soviet union hockey showdown . world hockey championship men 's champion : czechoslovakia defeated the soviet union ncaa men 's ice hockey championship – boston university terriers defeat cornell university big red 4–0 in boston , massachusetts . lacrosse . the long branch p.c.o . 's win the first founders cup . the new westminster salmonbellies win the mann cup . the peterborough pco 's win the minto cup . motorsport . rugby league . 1972 nswrfl season 1972 new zealand rugby league season 1971–72 northern rugby football league season / 1972–73 northern rugby football league season 1972 rugby league world cup . rugby union . 78th six nations championship series is undecided after two matches are not played for political reasons . snooker . world snooker championship – alex higgins beats john spencer 37–32 . swimming . xx olympic games , held in munich , west germany ( 28 august – 4 september ) . tennis . grand slam in tennis men 's results : australian open – ken rosewall french open – andrés gimeno wimbledon championships – stan smith us open – ilie năstase grand slam in tennis women 's results : australian open – virginia wade french open – billie jean king wimbledon championships – billie jean king us open – billie jean king ( first player in open era to repeat as singles champion ) davis cup – united states wins 3–2 over romania in world tennis . general sporting events . 1972 summer olympics takes place in munich , germany ussr wins the most medals ( 99 ) , and the most gold medals ( 50 ) 1972 winter olympics takes place in sapporo , japan ussr wins the most medals ( 16 ) , and the most gold medals ( 8 ) seventh winter universiade held in lake placid , new york , united states . awards . associated press male athlete of the year – mark spitz , swimming associated press female athlete of the year – olga korbut , gymnastics . references .