Pub quiz

history . the pub quiz was established in the uk in the 1970s , mainly by a company called burns and porter , to get people into pubs on quieter nights . popularity grew and grew over the next few years from just 30 teams to 10,000 playing each week in a burns and porter quiz . redtooth runs an annual great british pub quiz challenge , with more than 600 pubs taking part in 2012 . a 2009 study put the number of regular weekly pub quizzes in the uk at 22,445 , and one website has counted approximately 2,000 regular weekly quizzes in the us . . format . pub quizzes ( also known as live trivia , or table quizzes ) are often weekly events and will have an advertised start time , most often in the evening . while specific formats vary , most pub quizzes involve written answers to questions which are distributed in written form or announced by a quizmaster . one format for quizzing is called '' infinite bounce '' . this format is generally used when the number of teams in the quiz is large – usually around 8–10 . every question is addressed to the team succeeding the team that answered the previous question . if no team answers the question , the next question is addressed to the team succeeding the team to whom the previous question was addressed . generally someone ( either one of the bar staff or the person running the quiz ) will come around with pens and quiz papers , which may contain questions or may just be blank sheets for writing the answers . a mixture of both is common , in which case often only the blank sheet is to be handed in . usually a team hands their answers in for marking to the quiz master or to the next team along . teams . it is up to the quizzers to form teams , which are generally based on tables , though if one table has a large group around it they may decide to split up . some pubs insist on a maximum team size ( usually between six and ten ) . the team members decide on a team name , often a supposedly humorous phrase or pun , which must be written on all papers handed in . people often have to pay to participate – ranging from around 50p to £5 per person . this is often pooled to provide prize money . many pub quizzes require no payment at all , as the event is simply a way to get paying customers into the venue , typically on less busy nights of the week . questions . the person asking the questions is known as the quizmaster . quizmasters sometimes also mark and score answers submitted by teams , although often teams will mark each others ' answer sheets . the questions may be set by the bar staff or landlord , taken from a quiz book , bought from a specialist trivia company , or be set by volunteers from amongst the contestants . in the latter case , the quiz setter may be remunerated with drinks or a small amount of money . often questions may be drawn from the realm of 'everybody knows ' trivia , sometimes leading to controversies when the answers are false or unverifiable . in addition , as the quizzes are not formal affairs , slight errors in wording may lead to confusion and have led to a 2005 court case in the uk . rounds . there may be between one and more than half a dozen rounds of questions , totalling anything from 10 to upwards of 80 questions . rounds may include the following kinds ( most common first ) : factual rounds – these are usually spoken , either over a public address system or just called out . common topics include : general knowledge – covering the topics listed below ( if they are not in a separate round ) and also topics such as history , geography and science and nature . there may well be more than one of these rounds . sport – comprising the statistics and minutiae of popular , well-known sports and general facts about others . entertainment – film , tv shows and music ( see also below ) . true or false – questions to which the answer is true or false . picture round – these use photocopy or computer-printed hand-outs and consist of pictures to be identified , such as photos of famous people ( possibly snapped out of context , or else partially obscured ) or logos of companies ( without tell-tale lettering ) , famous places or objects pictured from a strange angle . who am i ? – a series of clues to the identity of a famous person ( or thing ) . clues are given in order of descending difficulty . the earlier a team can identify the correct answer , the more points they are awarded . music round – these consist of excerpts ( often only the intro or other non-vocal segment ) of songs played over the pa system . usually the teams must identify the song and also the singer or band ( sometimes the year the song was released is also required ) . variations include the inclusion of film soundtracks and tv theme tunes ( requiring the title ) , and/or classical music ( also requiring the composer ) . some venues can not play a music round because they do not have the proper licensing from performers rights organizations . audio round – similar to music rounds , but sound clips are played from movies , television shows , youtube videos , etc . puzzle rounds – generally on a hand-out sheet . these may consist of crossword puzzles , anagrams , ditloids , rebus and basic mathematics problems . novelty rounds – themed round a specific word or name ( e.g . all the questions relate to a famous norman ) ; 'connections ' , where the last answer in the round provides a link to all the previous answers ; true or false ; and various others to break up the general stream of questions . bonus rounds . in some quizzes teams are able to select one or two rounds as '' jokers '' , in which their points will be doubled ( or otherwise multiplied ) . teams usually select their joker rounds before the start of the quiz , although some rounds may be excluded . teams who consider themselves to be particularly strong on certain subjects can improve their chances with a good joker round , but risk wasting the joker if the questions are unexpectedly difficult . the idea of using a joker in a game may come from the bbc television programme it 's a knockout . some quizzes include a bonus question , in which a single answer is required with one or more clues given each round making the answer progressively easier to solve . in some variants , the first team to hand in the correct answer wins either a spot prize or additional points to their total score . in others , the questions continue until all teams have the correct answer with each team been given progressively fewer additional points the longer it takes them to submit the correct answer . jackpots . some quizzes add a small , separate round of questions to the end of a regular quiz , with the chance to win a jackpot . each week an amount of money is added to the jackpot , and if no team answers the questions correctly , the money rolls over to the next quiz . the maximum amount of the jackpot may be limited by local gaming regulations . cash jackpots may be won by a variety of methods including one-off questions and dance-offs . marking . in some cases , the papers are marked by the bar staff . alternatively , teams may have to mark their own answers and the handed-in papers are consulted only to check that prize claimants have not cheated by altering their answers . another method is to have teams swap papers before marking , though this can be divisive . one or two points are scored for each correct answer ; some quizzes allow half marks for '' nearly right '' answers ( such as a celebrity 's surname when their full name was required ) . in some quizzes , certain questions score higher marks , particularly if they are unusually difficult . cheating . with the mass use of mobile phones and mobile internet access , cheating has become a problem for some pub quizzes , with covert calls and texts made in the toilets , recent newspapers and magazines brought along especially for the event , ringers and so on . though a maximum number of members set for teams may help to prevent large numbers of people collaborating , groups posing as several distinct teams are quite common . some quizzes now ban the use of mobiles and nullify the score of any team found to be cheating . though more prevalent where large sums of money are at stake , cheating can be observed even for relatively low stakes . some quizzes also now ban re-entry to the pub after the quiz has started , in order to prevent team members from using public internet stations , public telephones and mobile devices out of sight of the quizmaster . generally , though , a pub runs its quiz alongside its normal operation , making such a measure impractical . prizes . prizes are awarded to the highest scoring team , and often to runners-up . prizes are usually one of the following : alcoholic drinks : a case of beer or some money on a bar tab to spend at that pub are common . cash : if money was charged for entry into the quiz , this is often pooled to form prize money . this may all go to the winning team . alternatively , there may be a separate short set of questions or even a single 'jackpot ' question to win the cash ; if no team gets the right answer , the money is typically rolled over , making a larger prize the next week . vouchers : such as cinema discount-coupons , food discounts , or even drinks vouchers for use at the bar holding the quiz . drink-related promotional items from a brewery , such as t-shirts and pint glasses advertising their products . miscellaneous or novelty prizes , such as chocolate or cheap toys . the winning team may get first choice to pick a prize from a range on offer . technology . in a digital pub quiz wireless handsets replace the more usual pen and paper . a computer receives and records the answers from each team 's handset and the results are exported to a spreadsheet at the end of the quiz . a time limit can be set for each question ( e.g . 60 seconds ) and it is possible to determine which team answers in the fastest time for spot prizes and tiebreaks . commercial projects . as the pub quiz concept spread to the us in the 1990s , several companies formed to provide services to bars and restaurants organizing quizzes . different from the quiz league in the uk , us commercial pub quizzes typically involve more than just two teams and can have as many as 25–35 teams playing in a single location , with up to 6 people per team . quiz companies charge bars a fee for hosting the quiz , which may range from 80 per week to 175 or more depending on attendance . at least 20 different pub quiz companies currently exist in the us , with most operating events concentrated in major metropolitan areas . . leagues and competitions . a quiz league is an organisation that runs quizzes , normally in pubs , though such competitions are distinct from the standard pub quiz as they will normally involve two teams and often include a number of individual questions . no prizes are normally awarded at such a league match , but prizes and kudos may go to the quiz team winning a league or a knockout competition . the national trivia association runs a nationwide contest involving various pub trivia games played around the us . teams from throughout a region , county , state or country meet annually for more prestigious competitions , with greater prizes . representative teams may either be the best team from each pub , or a team selected from the best individuals . believe it or not quiz events in new zealand have held an annual champion of champions quiz in auckland since 1999 . initially open to teams from pubs within the greater auckland region , it is now open to teams from throughout new zealand . in practice , travel costs prevent most teams from the lower north island and the south island participating , although christchurch , nelson and wellington have all provided teams . the australasian pub quiz championships takes place annually since 2018 . open to teams from pubs and clubs from across australia and new zealand , the 2018 championships is simultaneously run in sydney , canberra and wellington in late april . in the united states national trivia association presents '' the riddle '' , a finals event open to eligible teams who play the official nta '' quizzo ! '' live trivia game . approximately a thousand players attended the 2008 event in atlantic city , new jersey . sporcle runs the pub champions trivia league , which hosts regional , state , and national tournaments . . world record . the largest pub quiz , according to the guinness world records , was the '' quiz for life '' , held at the flanders expo halls in ghent , belgium , on 11 december 2010 with 2,280 participants . the annual '' world famous pub quiz '' in birmingham counted approximately 2700 participants across 260 teams in august 2016 . . in popular culture . pub quizzes have appeared in the british sitcoms minder , bottom , gavin & stacey , the office and early doors , amongst others . a january 2013 episode of anger management features charlie sheen 's character involved in a game of 'bar trivia , ' by brainstormer . the new zealand television drama nothing trivial centres around five characters who meet regularly at a pub quiz . the itv game show quiz night with stuart hall was based on this concept . the set on which the show took place had a bar theme to it ; contestants and the host even drank beer while doing the show . the irish television drama trivia from 2011–2012 focuses on the captain of a pub quiz team . regional . united states . . philadelphia . in philadelphia many bars specifically those owned irish-american will have '' quizzo '' nights practice is so common that websites have been dedicated to finding bars that offer game nights . . st louis . trivia nights are sometimes used as fundraisers for nonprofit organizations , and these are very common in the greater st . louis area . st . louis non-profits turn to trivia fundraisers