Saint Louis Zoo

history . the early years . the 1904 st . louis world 's fair is credited for the birth of the saint louis zoo . the fair brought the world 's attention to st . louis and forest park . the smithsonian institution constructed a walk-through bird cage for the world 's fair . ten days after the world 's fair closed , the citizens of st . louis chose to buy the 1904 world 's fair flight cage for 3,500 , rather than have it dismantled and returned to washington , d.c . this was the first piece of what would become the saint louis zoo . by 1910 , increased interest in a zoo brought together some concerned citizens , and they organized the zoological society of st . louis . in 1914 , it was incorporated as an independent civic organization of people interested in a zoo . meanwhile , the citizens of st . louis and surrounding municipalities expressed diverse opinions as to the appropriate location of a zoo if there should be one . fairground park , carondolet park , the creve coeur area , and tower grove park were some of the places suggested in newspaper articles and letters to the editors and to civic groups . some concerned citizens residing near oakland avenue , south of forest park , expressed their displeasure with a zoo in the park because of the smell of the animals . the zoo initially held 51 deer and antelope , 11 buffaloes , a sacred cow , a sandhill crane , 20 prairie dogs , a dromedary camel , eagles , ducks , elk , foxes , geese , swans , rabbits , a raccoon , a china sheep , opossums , a buzzard , owls , peafowl , among other animals . the head of the parks department , dwight davis , voiced his opinion against forest park—that is , until the city set aside in the park in which to establish a zoological park . a five-man board was appointed to act as the zoological board of control . image : miniature railway.jpg thumb 250px right miniature railways the number of board members was increased to nine in 1916 , the same year the citizens voted to create a tax for the construction of the saint louis zoo , with a 1/5 mill tax . it is said that this was the first zoo in the world which the citizens of a community supported by passing a mill tax . 1920 through 1969 . expansion of the zoo started in 1921 when the bear pits were built . the zoo continued to expand with construction of the primate house in 1923 and the reptile house in 1927 . the new bird house was built in 1930 . with the coming of the great depression , revenues were down and construction of new exhibits slowed at the zoo . in 1935 , the antelope house was built with the help of the civil works administration ( cwa ) , a program of president franklin d . roosevelt 's new deal . this burst of construction ended in 1939 with the addition of the ape house . in 1939 , the zoo acquired two giant pandas . their names were happy and pao pei . happy died in 1945 and pao pei in 1952 . the stupp memorial pheasantry and the lion arena , now the sea lion arena , were built in 1954 . three years later , the elephant house and its arena and moated yards were constructed . major construction started on the zoo again in 1971 when the aquatic house was built . it continued with the opening of the emerson zooline railroad in 1963 , the charles h . yalem children 's zoo , and the animal nursery in 1969 . . 1971 through present . in 1972 , the zoo joined the metropolitan zoological park and museum district and began to receive revenue from a public property tax of 8 cents for every 100 assessed . this enabled continued improvements and upgrades of exhibit areas . two major areas of the zoo , big cat country and jungle of the apes , were constructed in 1976 and 1986 , respectively . in 1989 , the living world , a two-story building including classrooms , a reference library and teacher resource center , an auditorium , two exhibit halls emphasizing evolution and ecology , a large gift shop , a restaurant , and offices was built . it was designed by hellmuth , obata and kassabaum . in 1993 , the zoo received a donation of the sears lehmann farm , located west of st . louis . it is to be used for the breeding of endangered species and for educational purposes . in 1998 , new areas were added with the emerson children 's zoo . phase i of river 's edge , which opened in 1999 , represented asia : featuring asian elephants , cheetahs , dwarf mongoose , and hyenas . in 2000 , the monsanto insectarium , now called the bayer insectarium , including the butterfly house , was built . the north america ( missouri and mississippi rivers ) portion of river 's edge opened in 2001 . in 2002 , the third phase , featuring habitats of south america and africa , opened with hippos , rhinos , warthogs , carmine bee-eaters , capybaras , and giant anteaters . in 2003 , the penguin and puffin coast opened with both outdoor and indoor exhibits . also new that year was the mary ann lee conservation carousel , featuring unique hand-carved wooden animals representing endangered species at the saint louis zoo . the donn and marilyn lipton fragile forest opened in 2005 . caribbean cove , which features stingrays , opened in 2008 . in 2015 , the zoo opened polar bear point , a 16 million facility that includes different landscapes and exhibits about the polar bear 's relationship with the arctic ecosystem . its first resident is named kali , an orphaned polar bear donated to the zoo by the u.s . fish and wildlife service . the most recent update to the zoo is the addition of centene grizzly ridge , an 11.1 million , 7,000 square foot state-of-the-art habitat that replaced the bear grottos built in 1921 , which were used until 2015 when they were closed for the construction of grizzly ridge . grizzly ridge opened 15 september 2017 and is now home to two orphaned grizzlies from montana . huckleberry , or huck , and his sister finley were given to the zoo by the u.s . fish and wildlife service . grizzly ridge is the culminating project of the living promise campaign , a project started in 2010 that promised to raise 120 million in order to improve the zoo . by the end of the campaign in 2014 , the zoo had exceeded this goal by 14 million , which funded not only grizzly ridge , but also polar bear point , sea lion sound ( a new and improved way of viewing the sea lions , including a walk-through tunnel ) , and improvements to other areas of the zoo such as peabody hall and river 's edge , among others . beginning in 2013 , the saint louis zoo is undergoing a massive expansion of facilities and space for both visitors and staff . most notable amongst this is a new development planned on 13.5 acres on the grounds of the former forest park hospital , across interstate 64 from the zoo campus . once completed , the new facility will feature offices and classrooms , year-round exhibits , a mixed-use development that will link the complex with the adjacent dogtown neighborhood , and an '' iconic '' connection of the two sites over interstate 64 . most importantly , it will shift all parking to the hospital site , freeing up roughly nine acres currently used as a surface lot for additional exhibits . . zoo directors . the following people have served as directors of the zoo : george p . vierheller ( 1922–1962 ) r . marlin perkins ( 1962–1970 ) , who gained fame for the zoo as host of mutual of omaha 's wild kingdom william j . hoff ( 1970–1973 ) robert t . briggs ( 1973–1975 ) richard d . schultz ( 1975–1982 ) charles h . hoessle ( 1982–2002 ) dr . jeffrey p . bonner ( 2002–present ) . park zones . thumb . lakeside crossing . open during the warmer months , caribbean cove is a shallow touch-pool underneath a large pavilion that features cownose rays , southern stingrays , bonnethead sharks , and bamboo sharks . it is one of the only parts of the zoo requiring an admission price , but is free during the first hour the zoo is open . st . louis zoo : stingrays at caribbean cove . river 's edge . a variety of animals are represented from four continents in river 's edge . the south america exhibit displays spectacled bears , bush dogs , capybaras , giant anteaters , and scarlet macaws . the african savanna displays black rhinoceros , african wild dogs , sacred ibises , bat-eared foxes , red river hogs , and a colony of southern carmine bee-eaters . the african nile features hippopotamus , tilapia , cheetahs , spotted hyenas , and a colony of dwarf mongoose . the asia exhibit features adult asian elephants and sun bears . the north american exhibit displays fish and wildlife from the missouri and mississippi rivers containing crayfish , american bullfrog , channel catfish , gar , and bluegill . discovery corner . the st . louis children 's zoo has many educational features , such as the see-through slide through the otter pool and many birds , snakes , frogs , and other animals that volunteers and staff bring out for the kids to see up close . this is one of the only exhibits at the zoo that requires an admittance fee ; however admission is free for the first hour the zoo is open during the summer . st . louis zoo : emerson children 's zoo as of march 2016 , the zoo has tasmanian devils in this section . most of the zoo 's invertebrates are found in the monsanto insectarium . represented species include leafcutter ant , flower mantis , vietnamese walking stick , atlas beetle , american burying beetle , sunburst diving beetle , water scorpion , brown widow spider , brown recluse spider , yellow garden spiders , platymeris biguttatus , cobalt blue tarantula , texas brown tarantula , and egyptian fattail scorpion . the wild . the wild is home to grizzly ridge , polar bear point , conservation carousel , fragile forest , jungle of the apes , and penguin and puffin coast . polar bear point features a polar bear called kali . two grizzly bears named huck and finn arrived for the opening of grizzly ridge in 2017 . the fragile forest and jungle of the apes features gorillas , chimpanzees and orangutans in a naturalized outdoor setting . penguin and puffin coast displays a variety of water birds including humboldt penguins , 1 king penguins , rockhopper , gentoo penguins , horned puffins , tufted puffins , and king eiders . individual habitats for red pandas and black-tailed prairie dogs are also in the wild . historic hill . image:1904 flight cage.jpg thumb 200px right 1904 flight cage ( aviary ) historic hill contains bird house , bird garden , sea lion sound , herpetarium , chain of lakes , flight cage and cypress swamp , and primate house . the bird house features birds as varied as bald eagle , rhinoceros hornbill , hyacinth macaw , burrowing owl , toco toucan , cape thick-knee , golden pheasant , kookaburra , mariana fruit-dove , king vulture , horned guan , superb starling , tawny frogmouth , congo peafowl , and the guam kingfisher , which is extinct in the wild . the bird garden contains outdoor bird enclosures . sea lion sound provides an underwater viewing tunnel of california sea lions and three harbor seals . the herpetarium houses most of the zoo 's reptiles and amphibians , including the critically endangered jamaican iguana , chinese alligator , mccord 's box turtle , panamanian golden frog , and arakan forest turtle . other species include the komodo dragon , green anaconda , mountain chicken , spotted turtle , false gharial , king cobra , gila monster , frill-necked lizard , aldabra giant tortoise , tuatara , reticulated python , tiger salamander , three-toed amphiuma , pancake tortoise , and over two dozen species of pit vipers from around the world . the chain of lakes is a series of small enclosures between the bird house and the herpetarium and primate house , where the zoo 's north american river otters and alligator snapping turtles reside . in 1904 , the flight cage was the largest bird cage ever built , and is still one of the world 's largest free-flight aviary at long , wide , and high . the cypress swamp is dedicated to north american birds found it the cypress swamps of the southern mississippi river . among the birds in the aviary are black-crowned night heron , blue-winged teal , bufflehead duck , cattle egret , double-crested cormorant , great egret , wood duck , northern bobwhite , roseate spoonbill , snowy egret , and american white ibis . primate house is home to the zoo 's monkeys and lemurs . species included are allen 's swamp monkey , coquerel 's sifaka , golden-headed lion tamarin , black-and-white colobus monkey , lion-tailed macaque , pygmy marmoset , ring-tailed lemur , and white-faced saki . red rocks . big cat country is home to several species of big cats . the represented species are the african lion , amur leopard , amur tiger , jaguar , cougar , and snow leopard . at antelope house the species present are the addax , babirusa , banteng , bactrian camel , gerenuk , grevy 's zebra , indian muntjac , lesser kudu , okapi , reticulated giraffe , somali wild ass , speke 's gazelle , sichuan takin , gorals , soemmerring 's gazelle , transcapsian urial , and visayan warty pig . non-ungulates found in the red rocks include the marsupials red kangaroo and tammar wallaby , as well as several birds in mixed-exhibits with the ungulates , such as the ostrich , stanley crane , grey crowned crane , and sarus crane . references . external links . st . louis zoo official website saint louis zoo photo gallery at hanban photos historical photos saint louis zoo on google cultural institute