Turtle fibropapillomatosis

description . fibropapillomatosis is a benign tumour disease of marine turtles , predominantly in the green sea turtle , chelonia mydas , but it has also been reported in the loggerhead sea turtle caretta caretta , olive ridley lepidochelys olivacea , kemp 's ridley lepidochelys kempii , and leatherbacks dermochelys coriacea . this neoplastic disease causes proliferation of papillary cells ( hyperplasia ) and gives rise to excess fibrous connective tissue in both epidermal and dermal skin layers – or more specifically , proliferation of dermal fibroblasts and epidermal keratinocytes . this causes tumorigenesis in sizes less than 1 & nbsp ; cm up to more than 30 & nbsp ; cm in diameter . fp is most often found externally around the armpits , genitals , neck , eyes , and tails of turtles , but also occur in and around the mouth , and rarely in internal organs or on the carapace . this , in turn , impedes vision , feeding , and movement . around 25–30 % of turtles with external tumours also have internal tumours , primarily in heart , lungs and kidneys . fp incidence is highest among immature and juvenile green turtles , while it is rare in adults . the suggestions for this pattern include the tumours can regress and be cured , which has been documented in some individuals , even when tumours were severe . however , the responses that cause these tumour regressions is unknown . secondly , the juvenile individuals with fp might die before reaching adulthood . . prognosis . the tumours appear to be benign and can be present for many years , but if large , can mechanically hamper sight , swallowing , and swimming , which may ultimately be fatal . while external tumours hamper movement and sight , internal tumours interfere with system functioning , another potentially fatal factor . as the tumours progress , individuals with large numbers of tumours may become anaemic , have a lack of proteins and iron , and in more advanced stages even suffer from acidosis caused by imbalanced calcium/phosphorus ratios and severe emaciation . . other species . fibropapillomas are present in other animal groups , but are caused by different viruses , for example the bovine papillomavirus . . history . the first documented case of the disease was in 1938 in key west , florida . long-term studies found no signs of the disease on florida 's atlantic coast in the 1970s , but during the 1980s fp was recorded in incidences varying from 28–67 % . today , incidences as high as 92 % have been reported in kaneohe bay , oahu , hawaii . generally , fp is most prominent in warmer climates . recent research has found that fp is caused by stress and tumours have been observed in turtles that are part of turtle tourism tours . it is thought that the presence of tourists causes the turtles stress . cause . the fp is an infectious disease with horizontal transmission . an alphaherpesvirus initially called fibropapilloma-associated turtle herpesvirus ( fpthv ) , and now called chelonid alphaherpesvirus 5 , is believed to be the causative agent of the disease . the reason for this belief is because nearly all tissue samples tested from turtles with lesions carry genetic material of this herpesvirus , varying between 95 and 100 % depending on different studies and locations . the dna loads of the herpesvirus in tumour tissue are 2.5–4.5 logarithms higher than in uninfected tissue . the fpthv herpesvirus has been found in turtles free from fp and this suggest that the fp progression is multifactorial and might even involve some sort of tumour-promoting phase . the global prevalence of the disease also suggests a multifactorial cause , rather than single factors or agents . possible factors include some parasites , bacteria , environmental pollutants , uv-light , changing water temperatures and biotoxins . even physiological factors such as stress and immunologic status appear to be associated with fp . the leech genus ozobranchus is thought to be the mechanical vector of the herpesvirus , transmitting the virus from one turtle to another . these leeches are common turtle ectoparasites that exclusively feed on turtle blood , and some leeches have been found carrying more than 10 million copies of the herpesvirus dna . the green sea turtle is an herbivore and feeds primarily on seagrass and macroalgae . two toxins which are suspected to be associated with fp are found epiphytically on these plants . first , the toxic compound lyngbyatoxin from the cyanobacterium lyngbya majuscule , and second the toxin okadaic acid – a documented tumour-promoting toxin - from the dinoflagellate prorocentrum . again , causality has not been concluded , but an association seems to exist between the distribution of especially the dinoflagellates and the occurrence of fp , and as they are found on weeds , they can be ingested by foraging green sea turtles . turtles with fp are found to have a compromised immune system . they have higher phagocytic leucocyte counts ( especially heterophils ) compared to healthy individuals , which seems to be an effect of fp , as it is mostly evident in individuals with severe tumours . this further supports the hypothesis of the herpesvirus as a causative agent . immunosuppression is strongly correlated with fp , but does seem to be a consequence of the development and growth of fp rather than a prerequisite , which is similar to other virus-induced tumour diseases in other species , such as marek 's disease in poultry . . treatment . surgical removal of tumors caused by fp is the most common treatment method . photodynamic therapy and electrochemotherapy are also used , as is co 2 laser surgery . . epidemiology . fp affects green sea turtle populations all over the world , making it a panzootic . it is especially found in warmer climates , such as the caribbean , hawaii , japan , and australia , where up to 70 % of individuals in a population have fp . epidemiological links are seen between fp rates , nitrogen footprints , and invasive macroalgae . the strongest association with fp is with habitat type , especially increased anthropogenic activity causing high-nitrogen footprints in a surrounding environment where green sea turtles are found . sea turtles do live in very complex ecosystems , with both near-shore habitats and several years in the open ocean , which makes study of ecosystem associations difficult . even so , observations support the hypothesis that near-shore habitats have a strong correlation with the disease , as newly recruited individuals from the pelagic life phase have never been found with tumours , and when migrating to more shallow ocean zones , such as the neritic zone , individuals still remain free from fp , but when entering lagoon systems , turtles may become infected . the high prevalence of fp is also associated with habitats ’ poor quality , while fp is absent in some habitats of good quality . turtles are known to be robust to physical damage , but are surprisingly very susceptible to biological and chemical contaminants caused by anthropogenic activity . as the turtles forage on invasive macroalgae in nutrient-rich waters , they can ingest environmental nitrogen in the form of arginine , which is known to regulate immune activity , promote herpesviruses , and contribute to tumorigenesis . . references . external links . observations on inaturalist