Maximilian von Spee

early career . spee was born in copenhagen , denmark , on 22 june 1861 , though he was raised in the rhineland in germany , where his family had an estate . he joined the kaiserliche marine ( imperial navy ) in 1878 and initially served in the main german naval base at kiel . stewart , p . 283 tucker & roberts , p . 1108 he was commissioned an officer at the rank of leutnant zur see ( lieutenant at sea ) , and was assigned to the gunboat , which was sent to western africa . during this voyage , the germans signed treaties with local rulers in togo and cameroon , creating the colonies of togoland and kamerun , respectively . callo & wilson , p . 290 in 1887 , spee was transferred to kamerun where he commanded the port at duala . he contracted rheumatic fever while there , and had to be sent back to germany to recover , though he occasionally suffered from rheumatism for the rest of his life . after returning to germany in 1889 , he married his wife , margareta baroness von der osten-sacken . mcnally , p . 32 with her he had two sons—otto , born on 10 july 1890 , heinrich , born on 24 april 1893—and one daughter , huberta , born on 11 july 1894 . kirchhoff , p . 8 in december 1897 , spee was stationed in germany 's east asia squadron after it seized the concession at kiautschou bay , with its port at tsingtao . here , he served on the staff of vizeadmiral otto von diederichs . during the boxer rebellion in china in 1900 , spee saw action at tsingtao and on the yangtze . after arriving back in germany , he was promoted to the rank of korvettenkapitän ( corvette captain ) and assigned as the first officer aboard the pre-dreadnought battleship . between 1900 and 1908 , spee held command of several ships , including the aviso , the minelayer , and finally the pre-dreadnought . during this period , he was promoted to fregattenkapitän ( frigate captain ) on 27 january 1904 and to kapitän zur see ( captain at sea ) exactly a year later ; his command of wittelsbach followed the latter promotion . in 1908 , he was assigned as the chief of staff to the commander of the north sea station , and in 1910 he was promoted to the rank of konteradmiral ( kadm–counter admiral ) . spee was then assigned as the deputy commander for the reconnaissance forces of the high seas fleet . . east asia squadron . in late 1912 , spee was given command of the east asia squadron , replacing kadm günther von krosigk on 4 december . spee raised his flag on the armored cruiser , and departed on a tour of the southwest pacific along with scharnhorsts sister ship , during which spee made visits to several ports , including singapore and jakarta . hildebrand , röhr & steinmetz vol.7 , p . 109 spee was promoted to vizeadmiral the following year . over the following year and a half , spee met with the leaders of several east asian countries . from 1 april to 7 may 1913 , scharnhorst took spee to japan to meet the taishō emperor . later in the year , spee met with chulalongkorn , the king of siam . in may 1914 , spee took scharnhorst and the torpedo boat on a visit to port arthur and then to tianjin ; spee continued on to beijing , where he met with yuan shikai , the first president of the republic of china . he came back aboard scharnhorst on 11 may and the ship returned to tsingtao . hildebrand , röhr & steinmetz vol.7 , p . 110 spee thereafter began preparations for a cruise to german new guinea ; scharnhorst departed on 20 june . the two armored cruisers proceeded to nagasaki , japan , where they coaled in preparation for their tour . while en route to truk in the caroline islands , they received news of the assassination of archduke franz ferdinand , heir to the throne of austria-hungary . hough , pp . 11–12 on 17 july , the east asia squadron arrived in ponape in the carolines , where the ships remained while tensions steadily rose in europe . in ponape , spee had access to the german radio network , and he learned of the austro-hungarian declaration of war on serbia on 28 july , followed shortly thereafter by the russian mobilization—tantamount to a declaration of war—against austria-hungary and possibly germany . on 31 july , word came that the german ultimatum that russia demobilize its armies was set to expire ; spee ordered his ships ' crews to prepare for war . on 2 august , wilhelm ii ordered german mobilization against russia and its ally , france . hough , p . 17–18 following germany 's violation of neutral belgium during its schlieffen plan , britain declared war on germany . sondaus , p . 98 . world war i . the east asia squadron consisted of scharnhorst and gneisenau and the light cruisers , , and . halpern , p . 66 at the time , nürnberg was returning from the west coast of the united states , where leipzig had just replaced her , and emden was still in tsingtao . staff , p . 29 spee recalled his ships to consolidate his forces ; nürnberg arrived on 6 august and the three cruisers plus their colliers moved to pagan island in the marianas , at that time a german colony . emden and the liner , which had been converted into an auxiliary cruiser , joined the squadron there on 12 august . the four cruisers , accompanied by prinz eitel friedrich and several colliers , then departed the central pacific , bound for chile . on 13 august , commodore karl von müller , captain of the emden , persuaded spee to detach his ship as a commerce raider . on 14 august , the east asia squadron departed pagan for enewetak atoll in the marshall islands . hough , p . 23 while en route across the pacific , spee relaxed formalities aboard his ships , integrating the messes for officers and non-commissioned and engineering officers . sondhaus , p . 70 to keep the german high command informed , on 8 september spee detached nürnberg to honolulu to send word through neutral countries . nürnberg returned with news of the occupation of german samoa , which had taken place on 29 august . scharnhorst and gneisenau sailed to apia to investigate the situation . strachan , p . 471 spee had hoped to catch a british or australian warship by surprise , but upon his arrival on 14 september , he found no warships in the harbor . staff , pp . 29–30 spee decided against attacking the allied troops ashore , since doing so would risk killing samoans and damaging german property . sondhaus , pp . 70–71 on 22 september , scharnhorst and the rest of the east asia squadron arrived at the french colony of papeete . the germans attacked the colony , and in the ensuing battle of papeete , they sank the french gunboat zélée . the ships came under fire from french shore batteries but were undamaged . staff , p . 30 fear of mines in the harbor prevented spee from seizing the coal in the harbor . halpern , p . 89 spee then continued across the pacific , passing through the marquesas islands , where his ships acquired supplies including fresh meat by barter , purchase , or confiscation . sondhaus , p . 72 on 12 october , the squadron reached easter island , where it was reinforced by leipzig , , and four more colliers . spee 's ships were off the coast of chile by 1 november , when he learned that the british cruiser was moored in coronel , ostensibly alone ; he decided to try to sink the ship . staff , pp . 30–31 . battle of coronel . glasgow was assigned to the 4th cruiser squadron , under rear admiral christopher cradock ; as it turned out , glasgow was joined by the armored cruisers and and the auxiliary cruiser . after discovering the entire squadron off coronel , spee decided to engage the british ships , but he delayed the action using his ships ' superior speed until later in the day , when the setting sun would silhouette cradock 's ships . the german ships would meanwhile be obscured against the chilean coast , making the task of the british gunners more difficult . staff , p . 32 at 18:07 , spee issued the order to open fire , with his two armored cruisers battling cradock 's armored cruisers and his light cruisers engaging glasgow and otranto . cradock quickly detached otranto , as she had no place in the line of battle . by 18:50 , gneisenau had disabled monmouth and so shifted fire to good hope ; the combined firepower of scharnhorst and gneisenau neutralized good hope by 19:23 . spee then withdrew his two armored cruisers and sent in his light cruisers to finish off monmouth and good hope . staff , pp . 33–36 the british had lost both ships and suffered more than 1,600 dead , including cradock , though the german ships had expended around 40 & nbsp ; percent of their ammunition supply . halpern , p . 93 spee had inflicted the first defeat on a royal navy squadron since the napoleonic wars a century earlier . after the battle , spee took his ships north to valparaiso . since chile was neutral , only three ships could enter the port at a time ; spee took scharnhorst , gneisenau , and nürnberg in first on the morning of 3 november , leaving dresden and leipzig with the colliers at mas a fuera . there , spee 's ships could take on coal while he conferred with the admiralty staff in germany to determine the strength of remaining british forces in the region . staff , pp . 58–59 in addition , spee sought to counter british press reports that attempted to minimize their losses and exaggerate german casualties . a reception followed at the german club of valparaiso , though spee insisted that the event be restrained in tone . sondhaus , pp . 76 & nbsp ; 77 he received a bouquet of flowers to celebrate the victory at coronel ; spee replied that they would do nicely for his grave . gray , p . 185 he stated that , while in port , spee received the order from the admiralty staff to attempt to break through to germany . sondhaus , p . 78 the ships remained in the port for only 24 hours , in accordance with the neutrality restrictions , and arrived at mas a fuera on 6 november , where they took on more coal from captured british and french steamers . staff , p . 59 dresden and leipzig took their turn in valparaiso , after which the re-formed squadron continued south and rounded cape horn into the south atlantic . in the meantime , the royal navy sent a pair of battlecruisers— and —commanded by vice admiral doveton sturdee to hunt down spee 's squadron and avenge cradock 's defeat . sondhaus , p . 79 . battle of the falkland islands . on the morning of 6 december , spee held a conference with the ship commanders aboard scharnhorst to determine their next course of action . the germans had received numerous fragmentary and contradictory reports of british reinforcements in the region ; spee and two other captains favored an attack on the falkland islands to destroy the british wireless station there , while three other commanders argued that it would be better to bypass the islands and attack british shipping off argentina . spee 's opinion carried the day and the squadron departed for the falkland islands at 12:00 on 6 december . the ships arrived off the falkland islands two days later ; gneisenau and nürnberg were delegated for the attack . as they approached , observers aboard gneisenau spotted smoke rising from port stanley , but assumed it was the british burning their coal stocks to prevent the germans from seizing them . staff , pp . 61–62 as they closed on the harbor , shells from the elderly battleship , which had been beached as a guard ship , began to fall around the german ships , which prompted spee to break off the attack . as spee withdrew , sturdee quickly got steam up in his ships and sortied to chase the germans . strachan , p . 47 by 13:20 , the battlecruisers had caught up with spee , who realized his armored cruisers could not escape the much faster battlecruisers . he ordered the three light cruisers to attempt to break away while he tried to hold off the british squadron with scharnhorst and gneisenau . sturdee instead ordered his cruisers to chase down the fleeing german light cruisers while invincible and inflexible dealt with scharnhorst and gneisenau . bennett , p . 117 spee deftly maneuvered his ships , taking the leeward position ; the wind kept his ships swept of smoke , which improved visibility for his gunners . this forced sturdee into the windward position and its corresponding worse visibility . scharnhorst straddled invincible with her third salvo and quickly scored two hits on the british battlecruiser . the german flagship was herself not hit during this phase of the battle . staff , p . 66 sturdee attempted to widen the distance by turning two points to the north to prevent spee from closing to within the range of his numerous secondary guns . spee counteracted this maneuver by turning rapidly to the south , which forced sturdee to turn south as well to keep within range . this allowed scharnhorst and gneisenau to turn back north and get close enough to engage with their secondary 15 & nbsp ; cm guns . their shooting was so accurate that it forced the british to haul away a second time . bennett , p . 118 the british gunfire became increasingly accurate , and by 16:00 , scharnhorst had begun to list badly , while fires raged aboard the ship . spee ordered gneisenau to try to disengage while he turned scharnhorst toward his attackers in an attempt to launch torpedoes at them . at 16:17 , scharnhorst capsized and sank , taking her entire crew with her , including spee . the british , still focused on gneisenau , made no effort to rescue survivors . staff , pp . 68–69 gneisenau , leipzig , and nürnberg were also sunk . only dresden managed to escape , but she was eventually tracked to the juan fernández islands and sunk . the complete destruction of the squadron killed about 2,200 german sailors and officers , including both of spee 's sons ; herwig , p . 158 heinrich died aboard gneisenau , and otto was killed aboard nürnberg . sondhaus , p . 82 . legacy . spee was hailed as a hero in germany and the men of the east asia squadron were celebrated in the press , which emphasized their bravery and refusal to surrender . jones , pp . 184 , 193–194 in september 1917 , the second was named graf spee , and was christened by spee 's widow margarete . hildebrand , röhr & steinmetz vol.3 , p . 238 construction of the ship had not been completed by the time of the armistice of 11 november 1918 , and she was ship breaking by 1921 . gröner , p . 58 in 1934 germany named the new heavy cruiser after him ; as with the earlier vessel , a member of spee 's family christened the ship , this time his daughter . williamson , p . 39 in december 1939 , admiral graf spee was scuttled by her crew after the battle of the river plate off the coast of uruguay . bidlingmaier , p . 93 between 1959 and 1964 the federal german bundesmarine operated the training frigate graf spee . hildebrand , röhr & steinmetz vol.3 , pp . 239 & ndash ; 240 the wreck of spee 's flagship scharnhorst was found off the falklands on 5 december 2019 , almost 105 years to the day after her sinking . wilhelm graf von spee , head of the graf von spee family , called the location of the wreck '' bittersweet '' , remarking that the family took comfort '' from the knowledge that the final resting place of so many has been found , and can now be preserved , whilst also being reminded of the huge waste of life . as a family , we lost a father and his two sons on one day . like the thousands of other families who suffered an unimaginable loss during the first world war , we remember them and must ensure that their sacrifice was not in vain . '' . footnotes . references . . external links .