David Souter

u.s . supreme court career . souter opposed having cameras in the supreme court during oral arguments because he said questions would be taken out of context by the media and the proceedings would be politicized . on cameras in supreme court , souter says , 'over my dead body ' , the new york times , march 30 , 1996 he also served as the court 's designated representative to congress on at least one occasion , testifying before committees of that body about the court 's needs for additional funding to refurbish its building and for other projects . . expected conservatism . at the time of souter 's appointment , john sununu assured president bush and conservatives that souter would be a '' home run '' for conservatism . in his testimony before the senate , he was thought by conservatives to be a strict constructionism on constitutional matters , but he portrayed himself as a moderate who disliked radical change and attached a high importance to precedent . roosevelt , kermit . justice cincinnatusdavid souter—a dying breed , the yankee republican , slate , may 1 , 2009 . in the state attorney general 's office and as a state supreme court judge , he had never been tested on matters of federal law . after the appointment of clarence thomas , souter moved to the ideological middle . in two 1992 cases , souter voted with the court 's liberal wing : planned parenthood v . casey , in which the court reaffirmed the essential holding in roe v . wade ; and lee v . weisman , in which souter voted against allowing prayer at a high school graduation ceremony . in planned parenthood v . casey , kennedy considered overturning roe and upholding all the restrictions at issue in casey . souter considered upholding all the restrictions but was uneasy about overturning roe . after consulting with o'connor , the three ( who came to be known as the '' troika '' ) developed a joint opinion that upheld all the restrictions in casey except the mandatory notification of a husband while asserting the essential holding of roe , that the constitution protects the right to an abortion . by the late 1990s , souter began to align himself more with stephen breyer and ruth bader ginsburg , although as of 1995 , he sided on more occasions with the more liberal rosen , jeffrey the dissenter : majority of one , stevens at the supreme court , the new york times , september 23 , 2007 justice john paul stevens than either breyer or ginsburg , both clinton appointees . ponnuru , ramesh empty souter-supreme court justice david souter , national review , september 11 , 1995 o'connor began to move to the center . on death penalty cases , worker rights cases , criminal rights cases , and other issues , souter began voting with the court 's liberals , ( see segal-cover score ) and came to be considered part of the court 's liberal wing . because of this , many conservatives view souter 's appointment an error of the bush presidency . greenfield , jeff david souter : the justice who built the trump court politico magazine , july 9 , 2018 for example , after widespread speculation that president george w . bush intended to appoint alberto gonzales—whose perceived views on affirmative action and abortion drew criticism—to the court , some conservative senate staffers popularized the slogan '' gonzales is spanish for souter '' . a wall street journal opinion piece ten years after souter 's nomination called souter a '' liberal jurist '' and said that rudman took '' pride in recounting how he sold mr . souter to gullible white house chief of staff john sununu as a confirmable conservative . then they both sold the judge to president bush , who wanted above all else to avoid a confirmation battle . '' rudman wrote in his memoir that he had '' suspected all along '' that souter would not '' overturn activist liberal precedents . '' sununu later said that he had '' a lot of disappointment '' in souter 's positions on the court and would have preferred him to be more like scalia . . notable decisions . . planned parenthood v . casey . in 1992 's planned parenthood v . casey , souter wrote that roe v . wade should not be overturned because it would be '' a surrender to political pressure . so to overrule under fire in the absence of the most compelling reason to re-examine a watershed decision would subvert the court 's legitimacy beyond any serious question . '' . bush v . gore . in 2000 , souter voted along with three other justices in bush v . gore to allow the presidential election recount to continue while the majority voted to end the recount . the decision allowed the declaration of bush as the winner of the election in florida to stand . jeffrey toobin wrote , controversially , of souter 's reaction to bush v . gore in his 2007 book the nine : the above passage was disputed by souter 's longtime friend warren rudman . rudman told the new hampshire union leader that while souter was discomfited by bush v . gore , it was not true that he had broken down into tears over it . . relationship with other justices . souter worked well with sandra day o'connor and had a good relationship with both her and her husband during her days on the court . he generally had a good working relationship with every justice , but was particularly fond of ruth bader ginsburg , and considered john paul stevens to be the '' smartest '' justice . . international recognition . even though souter had never traveled outside the united states during his years with the supreme court , he still gained significant recognition abroad . in 1995 , a series of articles based on his written opinions and titled '' souter court '' was published by a moscow legal journal , the russian justice . those were followed by a book , written in russian and bearing souter 's name in the title . петр баренбойм , '' 3000 лет доктрины разделения властей : суд сьютера '' , m . , 1996 . / petr barenboim , '' 3000 years of the separation of powers doctrine : souter court '' , moscow , 1996 ; 2nd ed . , 2003 . / , justice of the constitutional court of the russian federation yury danilov , reviewing the 2nd edition of the book in a moscow english-language daily , made the following remark on souter 's position in bush v . gore : '' in a most critical and delicate situation , david souter had maintained the independence of his position and in this respect had become a symbol of the independence of the judiciary . '' yury danilov , the judiciary : from samuel to souter , the moscow news , october 15 , 2003 . peter barenboim , « biblical roots of separation of powers » , moscow , 2005 , p.163 , . retirement . long before the election of president obama , souter had expressed a desire to leave washington , d.c . , and return to new hampshire . the election of a democratic president in 2008 made souter more inclined to retire , but he did not want to create a situation in which there would be multiple vacancies at once . souter apparently became satisfied that no other justices planned to retire at the end of the supreme court 's term in june 2009 . as a result , in mid-april 2009 he privately notified the white house of his intent to retire at the conclusion of that term . souter sent obama a retirement letter on may 1 , effective at the start of the supreme court 's 2009 summer recess . later that day obama made an unscheduled appearance during the daily white house press briefing to announce souter 's retirement . obama announces souter retirement , the new york times , caucus blog , may 1 , 2009 on may 26 , 2009 , obama announced his nomination of federal appeals court judge sonia sotomayor . she was confirmed by the u.s . senate on august 6 . on june 29 , 2009 , the last day of the court 's 2008–09 term , chief justice roberts read a letter to souter that had been signed by all eight of his colleagues as well as retired justice sandra day o'connor , thanking him for his service , and souter read a letter to his colleagues reciprocating their good wishes . souter , sandra day o'connor , and anthony kennedy are the supreme court 's only living former justices . post-supreme court career . as a supreme court justice with retired status , souter remains a judge and is entitled to sit by designation on lower courts . since his retirement from the supreme court , he regularly sits by designation on panels of the first circuit court of appeals , based in boston and covering maine , massachusetts , puerto rico , rhode island , and his native new hampshire , generally in february or march of each year . . personal life . once named by the washington post as one of washington 's 10 most eligible bachelors , souter has never married , though he was once engaged . totenberg , nina '' supreme court justice souter to retire '' , npr , april 30 , 2009 in 2004 , souter was mugged while jogging between his home and the fort lesley j . mcnair army base in washington , dc . he suffered minor injuries from the event , visiting the medstar washington hospital center for treatment . the issue led to public questioning of the supreme court police 's security detail , which was not present at the time . according to jeffrey toobin 's 2007 book the nine , souter has a decidedly low-tech lifestyle : he writes with a fountain pen , does not use e-mail , and has no cell phone or answering machine . while he was serving on the supreme court , he preferred to drive back to new hampshire for the summer where he enjoyed mountain climbing . souter has also done his own home repairs a no-frills embrace for a low-key justice , the new york times , may 3 , 2009 and is known for his daily lunch of an apple and yogurt . former supreme court correspondent linda greenhouse wrote of souter : '' to focus on his eccentricities—his daily lunch of yogurt and an apple , core and all ; the absence of a computer in his personal office—is to miss the essence of a man who in fact is perfectly suited to his job , just not to its trappings . his polite but persistent questioning of lawyers who appear before the court displays his meticulous preparation and his mastery of the case at hand and the cases relevant to it . far from being out of touch with the modern world , he has simply refused to surrender to it control over aspects of his own life that give him deep contentment : hiking , sailing , time with old friends , reading history . '' in early august 2009 , souter moved from his family farm house in weare to a cape cod-style single-floor home in hopkinton , new hampshire , a town adjacent to the state capital of concord . souter told a disappointed weare neighbor that the two-story family farmhouse was not structurally sound enough to support the thousands of books he owns and that he wished to live on one level . off the bench , souter leaves farmhouse behind , the new york times , august 3 , 2009 over the years , souter has served on hospital boards and civic committees . he is a former honorary co-chair of the we the people national advisory committee . national advisory committee