Chris Robinson (singer)

early years . robinson was born in marietta , georgia , just outside atlanta . he is the son of nancy jane ( née bradley ) and stanley '' stan '' robinson , who had a minor billboard charted record in 1959 called '' boom-a-dip-dip '' and who died in september 2013 . along with his brother rich , robinson formed mr . crowe 's garden in the 1980s , having been heavily influenced by the faces and the rolling stones . interview with rich and chris robinson . seconds they played a variety of clubs in and around atlanta . robinson attended wofford college in spartanburg , south carolina . as a teenager , robinson decorated his dorm room with a tom waits poster and a dream syndicate poster : '' . even at 18 , i was into music . '' dunn , jancee ( 1996-10-31 ) . interview with chris robinson of the black crowes . rolling stone . retrieved on 2008-11-11 . . career . the black crowes . in 1989 , mr . crowe 's garden changed their name to the black crowes . they were signed to rick rubin 's label def american and released their debut album shake your money maker . with the success of their album they went out on tour to support it.they played one date supporting zz top . during this tour chris was criticized for talking to the audience about his opposition to corporate sponsorship . this led to zz top firing the black crowes from the tour . in may 1991 , chris robinson spat at or on a female customer at a 7-eleven convenience store . robinson was arrested for assault and disturbing the peace , and pleaded no contest six months later . in the media , robinson would openly discuss his use of cannabis . over the next nine years the black crowes went through many lineup changes and released six studio albums . in 1997 , the black crowes headlined the second furthur festival , which had been spawned in the summer of 1996 by the remaining members of the grateful dead following jerry garcia 's death in august 1995 . in early 2002 , it was announced that drummer steve gorman would be leaving the band and that the black crowes would be taking a break . solo career ; with new earth mud . his first solo recording , '' the red road '' , appeared on the soundtrack to the 2002 film the banger sisters , confirming the singer 's turn into softer material . a full-length debut , new earth mud , appeared in october and garnered positive critical reviews . written and produced with paul stacey and featuring collaborations with ex-crowes marc ford and eddie harsch , the album allowed robinson to hit the road as a headlining act . the band itself became known as new earth mud and earned a reputation for playing lengthy , jam-oriented sets across the united states . new earth mud toured well into 2003 , both headlining and sharing the bill with such acts as elvis costello , gov't mule and the string cheese incident . robinson headed into the studio after the tour concluded , again with paul stacey as co-songwriter and producer . the end result was this magnificent distance , released in june 2004 . the album was a bigger commercial success than its predecessor and showcased more of a '' full band '' sound . robinson parted ways with paul stacey and the rest of his band in early 2004 , the reason for which remains unknown . in a very cryptic post on his official message board , robinson said farewell to his original line-up and welcomed a new one , which featured ex-crowes member audley freed on guitar and george reiff on bass . the band toured in support of this magnificent distance through the summer of 2004 . another tour was planned for the fall of 2004 but was abruptly and inexplicably scrapped . robinson instead remained out of the public eye aside from three appearances with phil lesh and friends at the warfield theater in san francisco ( december 2004 ) . robinson did not perform publicly again until his february 2005 performance with his brother rich at the consumer electronics show in las vegas ( a private event for people who work in the field of consumer electronics ) . he then joined phil lesh again for the mardi gras spectacular concerts in san francisco at the end of february , which also featured members of railroad earth , particle and galactic as well as former members of the jerry garcia band . ; new earth mud band members chris robinson – vocals , guitar , harmonica ( 2002–04 ) paul stacey – lead guitar , piano , vocals ( 2002–04 ) jeremy stacey – drums , percussion ( 2002–04 ) george reiff – bass , vocals ( 2002–04 ) george laks – keyboards , ( 2002–04 ) audley freed – lead guitar ( 2004 ) steve distanislao – drums , percussion , vocals ( 2004 ) rob barraco – keyboards , vocals ( 2004 ) . the black crowes reunion . in early 2005 , it was announced that the black crowes would be reuniting for a run at new york 's hammerstein ballroom . this lineup included former members sven pipien and marc ford . this quickly turned into a full-fledged tour . although initially not part of the reunion , steve gorman did return to the band in early may . in july 2007 , during the black crowes summer tour , the live album brothers of a feather : live at the roxy was released . the album was composed of tracks culled from chris and rich robinson 's three night set at the roxy , and featured black crowes songs ( horsehead , cursed diamond , thorn in my pride ) , solo material from both brothers ( someday past the sunset , forgiven song ) , covers from some of their favorite artists ( over the hill , roll um easy , driving wheel , forever young ) , and new material ( magic rooster blues , cold boy smile ) . a new album , warpaint , was released on march 4 , 2008 . on august 31 , 2009 , the black crowes released another album of original material , recorded in front of a live audience over several shows at levon helm 's barn in new york , before the frost . each cd purchase was accompanied by a download code to receive the album 's companion release , . until the freeze . the vinyl version includes all 20 tracks . in april 2010 , it was announced that in celebration of the band 's 20th anniversary , they would release croweology , featuring new acoustic recordings of black crowes ' favorites . the two-disc set would be sold at the price of one as a thank you to fans . in conjunction with the release , the band would also embark on the '' say goodnight to the bad guys '' tour , which would stretch from august 2010 – december 2010 . the majority of the shows saw the band perform two 90 & nbsp ; minute sets , the first acoustic , and the second electric . at the end of the tour , it was announced the band would begin a new hiatus of undetermined length . the black crowes blackcrowes.com . retrieved march 2011 on january 15 , 2015 , rich robinson announced the final breakup of the band due to a disagreement with his brother chris robinson over an alleged proposal regarding ownership of the band . in an interview , drummer steve gorman indicated that prior to the breakup , the black crowes had been discussing a tour . on the november 11 , 2019 howard stern show chris and rich announced that they were reuniting to tour reprising their first studio album , shake your money maker . . chris robinson brotherhood . in the fall of 2010 , www.chrisrobinsonband.com appeared , fueling speculation that this would be chris ' new project with the advent of the crowes ' hiatus . this was confirmed at the final date of the say goodnight to the bad guys tour in san francisco , when stickers advertising the band and the website were passed out promoting april 2011 . eventually , the project was titled the chris robinson brotherhood ( crb ) , and a two-month california tour was launched on march 29 , 2011 at soho in santa barbara , california and the group toured california heavily . greenhaus , mike jambands.com the chris robinson brotherhood lineup includes adam macdougall ( of the black crowes ) on keyboards , george sluppick on drums ( george has been replaced by tony leone ) , mark '' muddy '' dutton ( of burning tree ) on bass , and neal casal on guitar . casal replaced jonathan wilson , who was initially announced as a member of the band , but left shortly after . crb went into sunset studios to record an album in january 2012 . their first album , big moon ritual , was released on june 5 , 2012 , with the companion album the magic door released on september 11 , 2012 . crb also released a 7 '' of '' blue suede shoes '' b/w a live version '' girl , i love you '' for record store day on april 21 , 2012 . . as the crow flies . in 2018 , chris robinson formed the band as the crow flies , which performs songs from the black crowes catalogue . robinson noted , '' i ’ m not out to redo the black crowes or outdo the black crowes or anything like that . i just want to sing the music . '' the band includes former crowes audley freed and adam macdougall , marcus king , andy hess , and tony leone . . production work . although he dabbled in the field earlier , robinson began consistently producing other artists ' albums in the late-2000s . although few of the albums produced under his guidance were commercial successes , most received considerable critical acclaim . crossing bridges by the kinsey report ( capitol , 1993 ) very crystal speed machine by thee hypnotics ( def american , 1994 ) vagabonds by gary louris ( rykodisc , 2008 ) acoustic vagabonds by gary louris ( rykodisc , 2008 ) ready for the flood by mark olson & gary louris ( rykodisc , 2009 ) truth & salvage co . by truth & salvage co . ( silver arrow , 2010 ) . other appearances . robinson made a cameo appearance ( playing an angel ) in the final episode of the popular sketch show the kids in the hall in 1994 . the kids in the hall episode 5.21 . internet movie database according to the kids in the hall season 5 dvd commentary , robinson met kate hudson at a live the kids in the hall performance during their 2000 reunion tour . in 2007 , chris robinson played wavy gravy 's birthday party in san francisco under the name chris robinson 's wooden family . the show was a benefit to support an international development organization called the seva foundation founded by wavy along with ram dass . jackson , blair . mickey hart performs at seva benefit ( wavy gravy 's 71st birthday ) dead.net . retrieved march 2011 in 2009 , robinson performed in the people speak , a documentary feature film that uses dramatic and musical performances of the letters , diaries , and speeches of everyday americans , based on historian howard zinn 's a people 's history of the united states . . personal life . on september 8 , 1996 , he married actress lala sloatman , niece ( by marriage ) of musician frank zappa . they were divorced in 1998 . in december 2000 , robinson married actress kate hudson . their son was born in january 2004 . on august 14 , 2006 , after nearly six years of marriage , hudson 's publicist announced their separation . on november 17 , 2006 , robinson filed divorce papers , citing irreconcilable differences and seeking joint custody of their son . divorce was granted on october 22 , 2007 , with robinson being granted joint custody . in 2009 , robinson married allison bridges . their daughter was born in december 2009 . in 2015 he moved to marin county , where he still resides . he and bridges divorced in october 2018 . in january 2020 , robinson married camille johnson in marin county . discography . new earth mud ( redline records , 2002 ) bootleg ( promotional release , 2003 ) this magnificent distance ( vector recordings , 2004 ) live at bonnaroo ( live bonnaroo records , 2004 ) brothers of a feather : live at the roxy ( eagle records , 2007 ) ( recorded live at the roxy theatre los angeles , ca 2006 . ) . references . external links . chris robinson brotherhood official website chris robinson almanac , reviews , galleries related site