Monarchy of Sweden

dynasts . the customary title of the heir apparent is crown prince ( kronprins ) or crown princess ( kronprinsessa ) . the wife of a crown prince would also receive a corresponding title , but not the husband of a crown princess . the traditional official title used until 1980 for other dynastic male heirs was hereditary prince ( arvfurste ) , although the word prince ( prins ) was used in constitutional legal texts such as the act of succession and also colloquially and informally . female dynasts are titled princess ( prinsessa ) . the swedish succession act was altered in 1980 to allow for female succession to the throne . . ducal titles . king gustav iii revived a tradition from the time of gustav vasa and the medieval era by giving male heirs to the throne ducal titles of swedish provinces . the difference between the ducal titles from the vasa era and those granted by gustav iii is they now are non-hereditary courtesy titles given at birth . since 1980 , they have been conferred to all royal heirs , male and female . the wives of royal dukes have always shared their husbands ' titles ; the husbands of royal duchesses have done so as of 2010 . symbols of the monarchy . regalia . the regalia of sweden are kept deep in the vaults of the treasury chamber , located underneath the royal palace in stockholm , in a museum which has been open to the public since 1970 . among the oldest objects in the collection are the sword of gustav vasa and the crown , orb , sceptre and key of king erik xiv . the regalia is state property and the government authority which holds it in trust is the legal , financial and administrative services agency . the last king to have been crowned was oscar ii . his son and successor , gustaf v , abstained from having a coronation . while the crowns and coronets have not been worn by swedish royalty since 1907 , they are nevertheless still displayed on royal occasions such as at weddings , christenings and funerals . until 1974 , the crown and sceptre were also displayed on cushions beside the silver throne at the annual solemn opening of the riksdag . . royal orders of chivalry . the royal orders have a historical basis , dating back to the 1606 founding of the now extinct jehova order . the royal orders of knights of sweden were only truly codified in the 18th century , with their formal foundation in 1748 by king frederick i . in 1974 the riksdag significantly changed the conditions and criteria under which orders and decorations could be awarded : that no swedish citizen outside the royal family is eligible to receive such decorations . the order of the seraphim is only awarded to foreign head of state and members of the swedish and foreign royal families , while the order of the polar star can be bestowed on any non-swedish citizen . orders , swedish royal court , date accessed 2014-10-22 . following the reforms , the order of the sword and the order of vasa are no longer conferred : officially they have been declared as '' dormant '' . since 1975 , h . m . the king 's medal is the highest honour that can be awarded to swedish citizens other than members of the royal family . royal residences . the royal palaces ( including the royal palace in stockholm , drottningholm palace , haga palace , rosendal palace , ulriksdal palace , rosersberg palace , tullgarn palace and gripsholm castle ) are government property , managed by the national property board and are at the disposal of the monarch , an arrangement that has been in place since the beginning of the 19th century . there are also residences which are held privately by the royal family , such as solliden palace on the island of öland , a cottage in storlien in the jämtland and villa mirage in sainte-maxime in southern france ( originally acquired by prince bertil ) . . royal palace . the royal palace , also known as stockholm palace , is the official residence of the king . the royal palace is located on stadsholmen ( '' city island '' ) , commonly known as gamla stan ( '' the old town '' ) in the capital ( political ) stockholm . the offices of the king , other members of the swedish royal family , and the offices of the royal court are located in the palace . the royal palace is used for representative purposes and state occasions by the king . the royal palace is guarded by högvakten , a royal guard , consisting of regular service members of the swedish armed forces . the tradition of having a regular unit of the army guarding at the royal residence dates back to 1523 . until the mid-19th century , the royal guards also maintained law and order in the city and provided firefighting services . image : slottet tre kronor 1661.jpg thumb the castle tre kronor , located on the site of today 's palace , in a painting from 1661 by govert dircksz camphuysen . the southern façade faces the grand style slope slottsbacken ; the eastern façade borders skeppsbron , a quay which passes along the eastern waterfront of the old town ; on the northern front lejonbacken is a system of ramps named for the medici lions , sculptures on the stone railings ; and the western wings border the open space högvaktsterrassen . the royal palace in stockholm is unique among european royal residences in that large portions of it are open year-round to visitors , who pay entrance fees . the first building on this site was a fortress with a core tower built in the 13th century by birger jarl to defend the entry into lake mälaren . the fortress gradually grew to a castle , known as tre kronor : named after the spire on the centre tower with three crowns , which have become the swedish national symbol . in the late 16th century , work was done to transform the castle into a renaissance palace during the reign of john iii . in 1690 , it was decided that the castle be rebuilt in baroque style in a design by nicodemus tessin the younger . in 1692 , work began on the northern row . however , much of the old castle was destroyed in a disastrous fire on 7 may 1697 . tessin rebuilt the damaged palace , and work continued for another 63 years . semicirclular wings around the outer western courtyard were finished in 1734 , the palace church was finished in the 1740s , and the exterior was finished in 1754 . the royal family moved to the palace with the southwest , southeast , and northeast wings finished . the northwest wing was finished in 1760 . in the north , lejonbacken ( the '' lion 's slope '' ) was rebuilt from 1824 to 1830 . drottningholm palace . drottningholm palace is located at drottningholm on the island of lovön ( in ekerö municipality of stockholm county ) , and is one of sweden 's royal palaces . it was originally built in the late 16th century . it has served as a residence of the swedish royal family members for most of the 18th and 19th centuries . apart from being the current private residence of the king and queen , drottningholm palace is a popular tourist attraction . the gardens and park areas surrounding drottningholm palace and adjacent to its buildings are one of the main attractions for the tourists that visit the palace each year . the gardens have been established in stages since the palace was first built , resulting in many different styles . the royal domain of drottningholm is a well-preserved milieu from the 17th and 18th centuries , inspired by french buildings such as the chateau of versailles , and is a unesco world heritage site , principally because of the drottningholm palace theatre and the chinese pavilion at drottningholm . it was added to the world heritage list in 1991 . . haga palace . image : haga slott 2008b.jpg thumb haga palace is the residence of crown princess victoria and her family . haga palace , formerly known as the queen 's pavilion , is located in the haga park , solna municipality in metropolitan stockholm . the palace , built between 18021805 , was modelled after balletmaster louis gallodier 's italian villa at drottningholm by architect carl christoffer gjörwell on appointment by king gustaf iv adolf for the royal children . it has been the home or summer house of several members of the swedish royal family – notably it was the birthplace of the present king carl xvi gustaf – until 1966 when king gustaf vi adolf transferred its disposal to the prime minister and it was turned into a guest house for distinguished foreign official visitors ( heads of state and heads of government et cetera ) . in april 2009 , it was announced by prime minister fredrik reinfeldt that the rights of disposal of the palace would be transferred back to the king and thus could be used by crown princess victoria and her husband , prince daniel , duke of västergötland . they moved into the palace in the autumn after their wedding on 19 june 2010 . . royal family . the swedish royal family is , according to the royal court , currently categorized into three groups ; first , those with royal titles and style ( manner of address ) who perform official and unofficial engagements for the nation , are the members of the royal family ( currently this category only includes the king , queen and their descendants , including spouses ) ; second , those with royal titles and style ( manner of address ) who perform no official engagements , usually stylized with the shortform kungl . huset ) ; and third , the extended family of the king , usually stylized with the shortform kungl . familjens övriga medlemmar ) which is other close relatives who are not dynasts and thus do not represent the country officially . however , in any case , there is no legislation or other public document which delineates the rules of membership in either the royal house or royal family , as it is left to the sole discretion of the king . the line of succession . the swedish act of succession provides the rules governing the line of succession and designates the legitimate heirs to the swedish throne ; it also states in article 4 that the monarch and dynastic members of the royal house must at all times be a protestantism of the pure evangelical faith ( by implication the church of sweden ) . nergelius : pp . 42–44 . a rewrite of the act , entering into force in 1980 , fundamentally changed the rules of succession from agnatic primogeniture to absolute primogeniture . this allowed for the crown to pass to the eldest child regardless of gender and thus retroactively installed princess victoria as crown princess over her younger brother , prince carl philip , who had been born as crown prince a few months before . in its present reading , article 1 of the act of succession limits the potential number of claimants to the throne , so that only the descendants of carl xvi gustaf can inherit the throne . see aos . if the royal house were to be extinct , the riksdag is not obligated to elect a new royal house , as it once was up until the constitutional reforms of the 1970s .