William Lilly

astrological career . the comfortable lifestyle and fortune that lilly inherited from ellen , gave him leisure time to frequent sermons and lectures in london society . in 1632 , shortly before ellen 's death , he began to study astrology , reading all the books on the subject he could fall in with , and occasionally trying his hand at unravelling mysteries by means of his art . the years 1642 and 1643 were devoted to a careful revision of all his previous reading , and in particular , having lighted on valentin naboth 's commentary on alcabitius , he '' seriously studied him and found him to be the profoundest author he ever met with . '' about the same time he tells us that he '' did carefully take notice of every grandaction betwixt king and parliament , and did first then incline to believe that as all earthy affairs depend on superior causes , so there , was : a possibility of discovering them by the configurations of the superior bodies . '' and , having thereupon '' made some essays , '' he '' found encouragement to proceed further , and ultimately framed to himself that method which he ever afterwards followed . '' lilly 's most comprehensive book was published in 1647 and was entitled christian astrology . it is so large that it came in three separate volumes in modern times , and it remains popular even today and has never gone totally out-of-print . it is considered one of the classic texts for the study of history of astrology from the middle ages , in particular horary astrology , which is mainly concerned with predicting future events or investigating unknown elements of current affairs , based on an astrological chart cast for the time a particular question is asked of the astrologer . worked examples of horary charts are found in volume 2 of christian astrology . he then began to issue his prophetical almanacs and other works , which met with serious attention from some of the most prominent members of the long parliament . lilly was on intimate terms with bulstrode whitelocke , william lenthall the speaker , sir philip stapleton , elias ashmole and others . even john selden seems to have acknowledged him , and probably the chief difference between him and the mass of the community at the time was that , while others believed in the general truth of astrology , he ventured to specify the future events to which he referred . in 1650 , lilly wrote a preface to christopher heydon 's an astrological discourse with mathematical demonstrations , a defence of astrology written about 1608 which was first published posthumously , largely at the expense of elias ashmole . retirement and death . after the restoration he very quickly fell into disrepute . his sympathy with the parliament , which his predictions had generally shown , was not calculated to bring him into royal favour . he came under the lash of samuel butler , who , making allowance for some satiric exaggeration , has given in the character of hudibras sidrophel a probably not very incorrect picture of the man ; and , having by this time amassed a tolerable fortune , he bought a small estate at hersham in surrey , to which he retired , and where he diverted the exercise of his peculiar talents to the practice of medicine . he died in 1681 . in 2003 a commemorative plaque was placed next to the disused aldwych tube station on the strand . lilly lived in a house on the site from 1627 to 1665 . . influence and works . the publication of a facsimile of the original 1647 edition of lilly 's christian astrology in 1985 by regulus publishing company ltd . , in the uk , brought about a renaissance in astrological scholarship in north america and europe , and also a transformation of the techniques of modern astrology . olivia barclay and other british astrologers began to unearth lilly 's astrological work , and were influential in the eventual re-publication of christian astrology . besides his 36 annual almanacs published between 1647–82 , lilly 's published works also include : merlinus anglicus junior , 1644 . supernatural sights and apparitions seen in london , june 20th 1644 , 1644 . the prophecy of the white king , 1644 . england 's prophetical merlin , 1644 . collections of prophecies , 1646 . christian astrology , 1647 . the world 's catastrophe , or europe 's many mutations 1666 , 1647 ; which includes ' a whip for wharton ' ; some copies also include elias ashmole 's translations of the prophecies of ambrose merlin , with a key , and trithemius , or the government of the world by presiding angels . an astrologicall prediction of the occurrences in england for the years 1648 , 1649 , 1650 , london , 1648 , with 'hamilton 's nativity ' , and a dedication addressed to the house of commons . monarchy or no monarchy , 1651 . mr . lillyes prognostications of 1667 , predicting the prosperity … of the english and their glorious victories … by land and sea , 1667 . the dangerous condition of the united provinces prognosticated , 1672 . mr . lillies late prophecy come to pass concerning the present war and the late unseasonableness of the weather , 1673 . mr . lillies prophesie of a general peace , 1674 . mr . lillies prophecy , or a sober prediction of a peace between the french and the dutch and their allies , 1675 . anima astrologiae , or a guide for astrologers , being translated from guido bonatus , and cardan 's seaven segments , with a new table of the fixed stars , rectified for several years to come , 1676 . mr lillies astrological predictions for 1677 , proving the happy condition of this our nation for the year ensuing , 1676 . mr . lillies prediction concerning the many lamentable fires which have lately happened , with a full account of fires at home and abroad , 1676 . strange news from the east , or a sober account of the comet or blazing star that has been seen several mornings of late , 1677 . lillies new prophecy relating to the year , 1678 . william lilly 's history of his life and times by william lilly , 1681 . fore-warn 'd , fore-arm 'd , or england 's timely warning in general , and london 's in particular , 1682 . catastrophe mundi , mr . lilly 's hieroglyphicks exactly cut , 1683 , a reissue of the appendix to monarchy or no monarchy , 1651 . notes . references . sources . patrick curry , prophecy and power : astrology in early modern england , princeton university press , 1989 . lilly , william ( 1647 ) . christian astrology , london , john partridge . . external links . lilly 's entry in the s : lilly , william ( dnb00 ) , 1885-1900 , volume 33 ; from wikisource . lilly 's account of his life and the story of christian astrology — pdf download of lilly 's introduction to his work , with annotations by deborah houlding