August von Kotzebue

life . kotzebue was born in weimar to the respected merchant kotzebue family and was educated at wilhelm-ernst-gymnasium in weimar , where his uncle , the writer and critic johann karl august musäus was among his teachers . in 1776 the young kotzebue acted alongside goethe in the latter 's play die geschwister when it premiered in weimar . gerhard schulz , die deutsche literatur zwischen französischer revolution und restauration/ teil 1 geschichte der deutschen literatur von den anfängen bis zur gegenwart / begr . von helmut de boor . bd . 7 , teil 1 , das zeitalter der französischen revolution : 1789 – 1806 , 2 . , neubearb . aufl . , münchen , beck , 2000 , s . 472 in 1777 , aged sixteen , he enrolled at the university of jena to study legal science . he continued his studies at the university of duisburg , graduating in 1780 , and practiced initially as a lawyer in weimar . through his association with graf goertz , prussian ambassador at the russian court , kotzebue became secretary to the governor general of saint petersburg . in 1783 he was appointed assessor to the high court of appeals in reval , where he married the daughter of a russian lieutenant general . he was ennobled in 1785 and became president of the magistrat of the governorate of estonia , a province of the russian empire . in reval his first literary works were favourably received . his novels die leiden der ortenbergischen familie ( the sorrows of the ortenberg family ) ( 1785 ) and geschichte meines vaters ( history of my father ) ( 1788 ) met with appreciation ; even more so did his plays adelheid von wulfingen ( 1789 ) , menschenhass und reue ( misanthropy and repentance ) ( 1790 ) and die indianer in england ( the indians in england ) ( 1790 ) . the good reputation of these works was , however , almost destroyed by a controversial dramatic satire , doktor bahrdt mit der eisernen stirn ( doctor bahrdt with the iron brow ) , which appeared in 1790 with the name of knigge on the title page . written in response to contention between j.g . zimmermann and leaders of berlin 's party of the enlightenment , it linked each of zimmermann 's opponents to a particular sexual perversion . kotzebue denied authorship , even when the police began to investigate the matter . this alienated both zimmermann and knigge , formerly his allies , and also gained kotzebue a reputation for dishonesty and lasciviousness that he would never shake off . after the death of his first wife in 1790 , kotzebue retired from the russian service and lived for a time in paris and mainz . in 1795 he settled on an estate which he had acquired near reval and devoted himself to writing . in the space of only a few years , he published six volumes of miscellaneous sketches and stories ( die jüngsten kinder meiner laune , 1793–1796 ) and more than twenty plays , many of which were translated into several european languages . in 1798 he was appointed dramatist to the burgtheater in vienna , but differences with the actors soon obliged him to resign . he then returned to his native town , but as he was not on good terms with the powerful goethe and had openly attacked the romantic style for which goethe was known , his position in weimar was uncomfortable . in april 1800 he decided to return to saint petersburg , but on his journey there he was arrested at the border on suspicion of being a jacobin and was escorted to tobolsk in siberia . however , he had written a comedy which flattered the vanity of emperor paul i of russia ; he was soon brought back , presented with an estate in vooru from the crown lands of livonia , and appointed director of the german theatre in saint petersburg . kotzebue wrote about this period in his life in the autobiographical das merkwürdigste jahr meines lebens ( the strangest year of my life ) . kotzebue returned to germany in 1801 , after the assassination of the emperor paul i . failing to establish himself in weimar 's literary circles , he moved to berlin , where he edited der freimutige in collaboration with garlieb merkel from 1803 to 1807 . in 1803 he began his almanach dramatischer spiele ( almanac of the dramatic arts ) , which was published posthumously in 1820 . in 1806 , after napoleon 's victory in the battle of jena-auerstedt , kotzebue fled to russia and , in the safety of his estate in jerlep , estonia , wrote many satirical articles against napoleon bonaparte , published in his journals die biene ( the bee ) and die grille ( the cricket ) . he started working for the department of foreign affairs in saint petersburg in 1816 and was sent to germany as consul general for russia a year later . some suspected him of being a spy , and this view persisted for a long time , but in modern times it has been shown to be unfounded : he reported only on matters that were already public knowledge . nevertheless , it is fair to say he was russia 's advocate in germany . . assassination . in a weekly journal ( literarisches wochenblatt ) which he published in weimar , he scoffed at the pretensions of those germans who demanded free institutions , and soon became detested by nationalist liberals . one of them , karl ludwig sand , a theology student , plotted to kill him . on 18 march 1819 , soon after kotzebue had moved with his family to mannheim , sand attacked kotzebue at his house . according to alexandre dumas , père , when one of kotzebue 's children appeared and started to cry , sand became overwrought and stabbed himself . sand was arrested and carefully nursed back to health . at his trial , he protested that kotzebue was an enemy of the german people , but he was convicted of the murder and executed later that year . the assassination of kotzebue provided prince metternich with arguments to convince the confederation to enact the carlsbad decrees , imposing greater restrictions on universities and the press . work . thumb though he was unfavourably reviewed by critics many of whom saw his work as immoral kotzebue was one of the most popular writers of his time . in his essay '' why do i have so many enemies ? '' , he blamed jealousy of his fame . he was politically conservative and cosmopolitan in outlook and spoke out against the antisemitism of student nationalists . he was approached in 1812 by beethoven , who suggested that kotzebue write the libretto for an opera about attila , which was never written . beethoven did , however , produce incidental music for two of kotzebue 's plays , the ruins of athens ( beethoven 's opus 113 ) and king stephen ( opus 117 ) . besides his plays , kotzebue wrote several historical works : his history of the german empires was burned by nationalist students at the 1817 wartburg festival ( which sand attended ) . still read are his autobiographical writings , meine flucht nach paris im winter 1790 ( 1791 ) , über meinen aufenthalt in wien ( 1799 ) , das merkwürdigste jahr meines lebens ( 1801 ) , erinnerungen aus paris ( 1804 ) , and erinnerungen von meiner reise aus liefland nach rom und neapel ( 1805 ) . as a dramatist he was extremely prolific : his plays numbered over 200 and were highly popular , not only in germany but throughout europe . his success , however , was seen as due less to any conspicuous literary or poetic ability than to his great facility in the invention of effective situations . he is at his best in comedies such as der wildfang , die beiden klingsberg and die deutschen kleinstädter , which contain cameos of german life . these plays held the stage in germany long after the once-famous menschenhass und reue ( misanthropy and repentance , but known in england as the stranger ) , graf benjowsky , and ambitious exotic tragedies like die sonnenjungfrau and die spanier in peru ( which sheridan adapted as pizarro ) were forgotten . theatre historians usually consider the runaway success of the stranger , the english version of menschenhass und reue , in both england ( where it opened in 1798 ) and the united states as one of the harbingers of the emerging popularity of theatrical melodrama , which dominated european and american stages for the first seventy-five years of the nineteenth century . two collections of kotzebue 's dramas were published during his lifetime : schauspiele ( 5 vols . , 1797 ) ; neue schauspiele ( 23 vols . , 1798–1820 ) . his sämtliche dramatische werke appeared in 44 volumes in 1827–1829 , and again , under the title theater , in 40 volumes in 1840–1841 . a selection of his plays in 10 volumes appeared in leipzig in 1867–1868 . see heinrich doring , a . von kotzebues leben ( 1830 ) ; w . von kotzebue , a . von kotzebue ( 1881 ) ; ch . rabany , kotzebue , sa vie et son temps ( 1893 ) ; w . sellier , kotzebue in england ( 1901 ) . legacy . kotzebue was the father of 18 children , among them karl von kotzebue ( diplomat ) , moritz von kotzebue , paul demetrius kotzebue , alexander kotzebue and the explorer otto von kotzebue . kotzebue street in kalamaja , tallinn , estonia , is named after him and other family members who lived on the street , especially his son otto . beethoven 's '' turkish march '' , originally written as part of the incidental music to von kotzebue 's the ruins of athens , became one of this composer 's most well-known pieces . jane austen saw a kotzebue play , the birthday , at bath in 1799 . she later used a translated version of another of his plays , das kind der liebe ( 1791 , known in england as lover 's vows , in her novel mansfield park . . references . . external links . works of august von kotzebue in german by epoche napoleon august friedrich ferdinand von kotzebue