Albrecht Ritschl

biography . ritschl was born in berlin . his father , georg karl benjamin ritschl ( 1783–1858 ) , became in 1810 a pastor at the church of st mary in berlin , and from 1827 to 1854 was general superintendent and pomeranian evangelical church . albrecht ritschl studied at bonn , halle , heidelberg and tübingen . at halle he came under hegelian influences through the teaching of julius schaller and johann erdmann . in 1845 he became a follower of the tübingen school , and in his work das evangelium marcions und das kanonische evangelium des lukas , published in 1846 and in which he argued that the gospel of luke was based on the apocryphal gospel of marcion , he appears as a disciple of the hegelian new testament scholar ferdinand baur . this did not last long with him , however , for the second edition ( 1857 ) of his most important work , on the origin of the old catholic church ( die entstehung der alt-kathol . kirche ) , shows considerable divergence from the first edition ( 1850 ) , and reveals an entire emancipation from baur 's method . thumb ritschl was professor of theology at bonn ( extraordinarius 1852 ; ordinarius 1859 ) and göttingen ( 1864 ; consistorialrath also in 1874 ) , his addresses on religion delivered at the latter university showing the impression made upon his mind by his enthusiastic studies of immanuel kant and friedrich schleiermacher . finally , in 1864 , ritschl came the influence of hermann lotze . he wrote a large work on the christian doctrine of justification and atonement , die christliche lehre von der rechtfertigung und versöhnung , published during the years 1870–1874 , and in 1882–1886 a history of pietism ( die geschichte des pietismus ) . his system of theology is contained in the former . he died at göttingen in 1889 . his son , otto ritschl , was also a theologian . theology . ritschl claimed to carry on the work of luther and schleiermacher , especially in ridding faith of the tyranny of scholastic philosophy . his system shows the influence of kant 's destructive criticism of the claims of pure reason , recognition of the value of morally conditioned knowledge , and doctrine of the kingdom of ends ; of schleiermacher 's historical treatment of christianity , regulative use of the idea of religious fellowship , emphasis on the importance of religious feeling ; and of lotze 's theory of knowledge and treatment of personality . he attempted to demonstrate that kant 's epistemology was compatible with lutheranism . stephen palmquist ( 1989 ) immanuel kant : a christian philosopher ? , page 71 ritschl 's work made a profound impression on german thought and gave a new confidence to german theology , while at the same time it provoked a storm of hostile criticism . in spite of this resistance the ritschlian '' school '' grew with remarkable rapidity , with followers dominating german theological faculties in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . this is perhaps mainly due to the bold religious positivism with which he assumes that spiritual experience is real and that faith has not only a legitimate but even a paramount claim to provide the highest interpretation of the world . the life of trust in god is a fact , not so much to be explained as to explain everything else . ritschl 's standpoint is not that of the individual subject . the objective ground on which he bases his system is the religious experience of the christian community . the '' immediate object of theological knowledge is the faith of the community , '' and from this positive religious datum theology constructs a '' total view of the world and human life . '' thus the essence of ritschl 's work is systematic theology . nor does he painfully work up to his master-category , for it is given in the knowledge of jesus revealed to the community . that god is love and that the purpose of his love is the moral organization of humanity in the '' kingdom of god '' – this idea , with its immense range of application – is applied in ritschl 's initial datum . from this vantage-ground ritschl criticizes the use of aristotelianism and speculative philosophy in scholastic and protestant theology . he holds that such philosophy is too shallow for theology . hegelianism attempts to squeeze all life into the categories of logic : aristotelianism deals with '' things in general '' and ignores the radical distinction between nature and spirit . neither hegelianism nor aristotelianism is '' vital '' enough to sound the depths of religious life . neither conceives god '' as correlative to human trust '' ( cf . theologie und metaphysik ) . but ritschl 's recoil carries him so far that he is left alone with merely '' practical '' experience . '' faith '' knows god in his active relation to the kingdom , '' but not at all as '' self-existent '' . his limitation of theological knowledge to the bounds of human need might , if logically pressed , run perilously near phenomenalism ; and his epistemology ( '' we only know things in their activities '' ) does not cover this weakness . in seeking ultimate reality in the circle of '' active conscious sensation '' , he rules out all '' metaphysic '' . indeed , much that is part of normal christian faith—e.g . the eternity of the son—is passed over as beyond the range of his method . ritschl 's theory of '' value-judgments '' ( werthurtheile ) illustrates this form of agnosticism . religious judgments of value determine objects according to their bearing on our moral and spiritual welfare . they imply a lively sense of radical human need . this sort of knowledge stands quite apart from that produced by '' theoretic '' and '' disinterested '' judgments . the former moves in a world of '' values '' , and judges things as they are related to our '' fundamental self-feeling . '' the latter moves in a world of cause and effect . ( n.b . ritschl appears to confine metaphysic to the category of causality . ) the theory as formulated has such grave ambiguities , that his theology , which , as we have seen , is wholly based on uncompromising religious realism , has actually been charged with individualistic subjectivism . if ritschl had clearly shown that judgments of value enfold and transform other types of knowledge , just as the '' spiritual man '' includes and transfigures but does not annihilate the '' natural man '' , then within the compass of this spiritually conditioned knowledge all other knowledge would be seen to have a function and a home . the theory of value-judgments is part too of his ultra-practical tendency : both '' metaphysic '' and '' mysticism '' are ruthlessly condemned . faith-knowledge appears to be wrenched from its bearings and suspended in mid-ocean . perhaps if he had lived to see the progress of will-psychology he might have welcomed the hope of a more spiritual philosophy . illustrative examples . a few instances will illustrate ritschl 's positive systematic theology . the conception of god as father is given to the community in revelation . he must be regarded in his active relationship to the '' kingdom '' , as spiritual personality revealed in spiritual purposiveness . his '' love '' is his will as directed towards the realization of his purpose in the kingdom . his '' righteousness '' is his fidelity to this purpose . with god as first cause or '' moral legislator '' theology has no concern ; nor is it interested in the speculative problems indicated by the traditional doctrine of the trinity . natural theology has no value save where it leans on faith . again , christ has for the religious life of the community the unique value of founder and redeemer . he is the perfect revelation of god and the exemplar of true religion . his work in founding the kingdom was a personal vocation , the spirit of which he communicates to believers , '' thus , as exalted king '' , sustaining the life of his kingdom . his resurrection is a necessary part of christian belief ( g ecke , pp . & nbsp ; 198–99 ) . '' divinity '' is a predicate applied by faith to jesus in his founding and redeeming activity . we note here that though ritschl gives jesus a unique and unapproachable position in his active relation to the kingdom , he declines to rise above this relative teaching . the '' two nature '' problem and the eternal relation of the son to the father have no bearing on experience , and therefore stand outside the range of theology . once more , in the doctrine of sin and redemption , the governing idea is god 's fatherly purpose for his family . sin is the contradiction of that purpose , and guilt is alienation from the family . redemption , justification , regeneration , adoption , forgiveness , reconciliation all mean the same thing-the restoration of the broken family relationship . all depends on the mediation of christ , who maintained the filial relationship even to his death , and communicates it to the brotherhood of believers . everything is defined by the idea of the family . the whole apparatus of '' forensic '' ideas ( law , punishment , satisfaction , etc . ) is summarily rejected as foreign to god 's purpose of love , ritschl is so faithful to the standpoint of the religious community , that he has nothing definite to say on many important questions , such as the relation of god to non-christians . his school , in which wilhelm herrmann , julius kaftan and adolf harnack are the chief names , diverges from his teaching in many directions ; e.g . kaftan appreciates the mystical side of religion , harnack 's criticism is very different from ritschl 's exegesis . they are united on the value of faith knowledge as opposed to '' metaphysic '' . bibliography . the christian doctrine of justification and reconciliation . edinburgh : t & t clark , 1900 . die christliche lehre von der rechtfertigung und versöhnung . bonn : marcus , 1882 . geschichte des pietismus in der reformierten kirche . vol . 1 of the geschichte des pietismus . bonn : marcus , 1880 . geschichte des pietismus in der lutherischen kirche des 17 . u . 18 . jahrhunderts . vol . 2 and vol . 3 of the geschichte des pietismus . bonn : marcus , 1884 /1886 . die entstehung der altkatholischen kirche : eine kirchen- und dogmengeschichtliche monographie . 2nd ed . bonn : marcus , 1857 . gesammelte aufsätze . freiburg : mohr , 1896 . notes . references . . further reading . karl barth . '' ritschl , '' in protestant theology from rousseau to ritschl . new york : harper , 1959 . ch . xi , pp . & nbsp ; 390–398 . garvie , alfred e . the ritschlian theology critical and constructive : an exposition and an estimate . edinburgh : t & t clark , 1902 . jodock , darrell , ed . ritschl in retrospect : history , community , and science ( augsburg fortress publishing , 1995 ) mueller , david livingstone . an introduction to the theology of albrecht ritschl ( westminster press , 1969 ) richmond , james . ritschl , a reappraisal : a study in systematic theology ( collins , 1978 ) ritschl , otto . '' ritschl , albrecht benjamin , '' in new schaff-herzog encyclopedia of religious knowledge , vol . x . new york : funk and wagnalls , 1911 . pp . & nbsp ; 43–46 . swing , albert t . the theology of albrecht ritschl . new york : longmans , green & co . , 1901 . zachhuber , johannes . theology as science in nineteenth century germany : from fc baur to ernst troeltsch ( oxford university press , 2013 )