Suzanne Duchamp

early life and education . suzanne was born in blainville-crevon , seine-maritime in the haute-normandie region of france , near rouen . she was the fourth of six children born into the artistic family of justin isidore ( eugène ) duchamp ( 1848-1925 ) and marie caroline lucie duchamp ( née nicolle ) ( 1860-1925 ) , the daughter of painter and engraver émile frédéric nicolle . suzanne duchamp-crotti was the younger sister of famous artists jacques villon ( né émile méry frédéric gaston duchamp ) , a painter and printmaker , raymond duchamp-villon , a sculptor , and marcel duchamp , a painter , sculptor and author . she was closest in age and temperament to marcel duchamp , forming and maintaining a close bond and emotional attachment with him throughout their lives . scholars , such as arturo schwarz , have speculated that there may have been an incestuous relationship between the two , although that was influenced by freudian school of thought at the time . she began her studies as a painter at the école des beaux-arts in her native rouen when she was sixteen years old in 1905 . her early works reflected styles ranging from intimism and fauvism to impressionism and a conservative cubism , often depicting family and childhood scenes around rouen . from 1909-1910 , marcel and suzanne participated together in the activities of the société normande de de peinture moderne , an artists ' group based in rouen . through this group , she was exposed to avant-garde trends . at age 21 , in 1911 , she married a local pharmacist named charles desmares but quickly divorced , moving to paris to serve as a nurse during the world war i , living in marcel 's apartment in rue la condamine . she worked in the les invalides , one of the largest french military hospitals . during this time , she continued to work as an artist , establishing a presence in the parisian quarter of montparnasse and often asking marcel for feedback or advice . early work . in late 1915 , suzanne went to clear out marcel 's studio in paris and this is when/where she first learned about his readymades . between 1916 and 1921 she produced a significant body of work in a formal language that has come to be called 'mechanomorphic ' - images taken from commonplace mechanical or technological objects arranged to describe or infer human agency , desire or behavior . the work of francis picabia typifies the mechanomorphic tendency . in a letter from marcel written in january 1916 , marcel elaborated on his concept of the ready-mades and mentioned the bicycle wheel and the bottlerack which she should have encountered in the studio . he asked her to complete one of them by adding the inscription '' d'après marcel duchamp , '' which translates to '' after marcel duchamp . '' this collaboration with marcel exhibited his trust in suzanne about her openness towards radical art production . in 1916 , suzanne met jean crotti , an artist who worked in the same studio as marcel . during this time is when her first surge of activity occurred , creating some of her best work . she produced '' un et une menacés , '' '' a threatened male and female '' which references mechanical symbolism as well as real machine parts , which greatly lends itself to the dadaist movement . one of her most noteworthy works is multiplication broken and restored , completed in 1919 . the composition contains dadaist imagery with man-made objects such as a tower and cityscape . it is also believed that this piece comes directly from her private experience rather than being a severe critique of cultural norms . after the war ended , suzanne and jean married in paris in 1919 . as a wedding present , marcel sent them instructions for a readymade which involved suspending a geometry textbook on the porch and letting the wind and rain gradually tear it apart . during this time , dada was gaining traction in paris due to figures like tristan tzara . jean and suzanne were not very involved until 21 , but both exhibited three works in the prestigious salon des independants , alongside artists such as francis picabia . the art emphasized was that of the provocative mecanomorphic style . after this , suzanne continued to work on her dadaist oeuvre , creating more delicate watercolor or gouache paintings . one of these paintings is '' marcel 's unhappy readymade , '' depicting the geometry textbook she received from him as a gift . interestingly , suzanne inverted the painting so that it was presented upside down . completed in 1920 , her work ariette of oblivion in the thoughtless chapel is regarded as the strongest dadaist work that she created with seemingly nonsense inscriptions and mechanical imagery . however , much like multiplication broken and restored , the inspiration for this piece emerged from the devotion she experienced in her relationship . this personal perspective runs contrary to the dada sentiment of criticizing social conventions and undermining culture . in 1921 , jean and suzanne sign , along with 20 other artists , the dada souléve tout , a manifesto created by tristan tzara to rebuke the increasingly fascist italian futurism , marinetti . hemus , ruth . '' dada 's female form : the interventions of five women artists , writers and performers in the european dada movement '' . university of edinburgh , 2006 . p192 in april 1921 , she exhibited with crotti at the tabu exhibition the salon d'autonme , ( at the galerie montaigne in paris ) ; this was a few weeks before the dada salon at the same location . in later years , duchamp and crotti moved further away from dada calling their work 'tabu ' . the tabu pieces were more geometric and abstract , seeking certain universal tropes , but still reveal a highly personalized symbolic language . tabu works drew on a range of domestic or everyday issues , simplified and combined in often striking ways . these works never brought the acclaim of duchamp 's earlier mechanomorphic pieces and are not discussed widely in literature on the artist . . later life . throughout her life , suzanne continues to participate in exhibitions , such as the '' femmes peintures français '' exhibition at galerie barbazanges , organized by women artists wanting recognition in the art world . she also exhibited along with marie laurencin in '' les femmes artistes d'europe '' at the musée du jeu de paume in 1937 . in 1945 , after the war , suzanne duchamp becomes a member of the union des femmes peintres et sculpteurs and regularly exhibited landscapes , portraits , and flower still lifes at its salons . in 1967 , in rouen , france , her brother marcel helped organize an exhibition called les duchamp : jacques villon , raymond duchamp-villon , marcel duchamp , suzanne duchamp . some of this family exhibition was later shown at the musée national d'art moderne in paris . she died in neuilly-sur-seine ( seine-saint-denis ) , france in 1963 , within a month of being diagnosed with a brain tumor . references . tomkins , calvin , duchamp : a biography . henry holt and company , inc . , 1996 . external links . tiny biography chef d'oeuvre accordéon , yale university art gallery , new haven , connecticut sailboats , yale university art gallery , new haven , connecticut head of a man , yale university art gallery , new haven , connecticut portrait of suzanne duchamp by man ray , yale university art gallery , new haven , connecticut suzanne duchamp wikiart page