Lady Bird Lake

history . the city of austin constructed longhorn dam in 1960 to form town lake . the city needed the reservoir to serve as a cooling pond for the holly street power plant , which operated from 1960 until 2007 . before 1971 , the shoreline of town lake was mostly a mixture of weeds , unkempt bushes , and trash . local television station ktbc referred to the lake as an '' eyesore '' . some concerned austinites led small projects to clean up the lake . roberta crenshaw , chair of the austin board of parks and recreation , purchased nearly 400 trees and shrubs in an effort to spearhead parkland development around the lake . during his two terms in office ( 1971–75 ) , the mayor of austin roy butler led the austin city council to establish the town lake beautification committee , and he appointed lady bird johnson as the project 's honorary chairman . johnson 's involvement brought attention and money ( including 19,000 of her own ) to the town lake project , allowing for the planting of hundreds of shrubs and trees . wear , ben . '' lady bird helped turn town lake into town treasure '' . austin american-statesman , july 13 , 2007 . pa1 , a6 . the city also built a system of hike and bike trails along the shoreline of the lake . on july 26 , 2007 , the austin city council passed a controversial resolution authorizing the renaming of the reservoir from town lake to lady bird lake in honor of lady bird johnson , who had died earlier that month . raskin , amy ( 2007 ) . '' austin changes town lake name to lady bird lake '' . houston chronicle . july 26 , 2007 . johnson had declined the honor of having the lake renamed for her while she was alive . in renaming the lake , the city council recognized johnson 's dedication to beautifying the lake and her efforts to create a recreational trail system around the lake 's shoreline . wilson , janet ( 2007 ) . '' lady bird johnson dies at 94 '' . austin american-statesman . july 12 , 2007 . in 2009 , non-profit organization keep austin beautiful launched '' clean lady bird lake '' . the program mobilizes thousands of community volunteers annually to conduct large-scale cleanups along the lake every other month and targeted cleanups throughout the year . . recreational uses . lady bird lake is a major recreation area for the city of austin . the lake 's banks are bounded by the ann and roy butler hike-and-bike trail , and businesses offer recreational watercraft services along the lakefront portion of the trail . austin 's largest downtown park , zilker park , is adjacent to the lake , and barton springs , a major attraction for swimmers , flows into the lake . the city of austin prohibits the operation of most motorized watercraft on lady bird lake . ellis , luke ( 2006 ) . '' the common law : boating on town lake – what 's the law ? '' march 17 , 2006 . as a result , the lake serves as a popular recreational area for paddleboards , kayaks , canoes , dragon boats , and rowing shells . austin 's warm climate and the river 's calm waters , nearly length and straight courses are especially popular with crew teams and clubs . along with the university of texas women 's rowing team and coeducational club rowing team , who practice on lady bird lake year-round , teams from other universities ( including the university of wisconsin , the university of chicago , the university of oklahoma , and the university of nebraska ) train on lady bird lake during christmas holidays and spring break . other water sports along the shores of the lake include swimming in deep eddy pool , the oldest swimming pool in texas , and barton springs pool , a natural pool on barton creek which flows into lady bird lake . below tom miller dam is red bud isle , a small island formed by the 1900 austin dam failure ( texas ) that serves as a recreation area with a dog park and access to the lake for canoeing and fishing . '' austin parks and recreation department , red bud isle '' swimming in lady bird lake is illegal not due to poor water quality from the run-off from area streets , which is a false rumor , but rather due to several drownings as well as debris in the water from bridges and dams destroyed by floods in years past . the city of austin enacted the ban in 1964 , and the fine can be up to 500 . music venues on the banks of lady bird lake are home to a number of events year-round , including the austin city limits music festival in the fall , the austin reggae festival and spamarama in the spring , and many open-air concerts at auditorium shores on the south bank and fiesta gardens on the north bank . the austin aqua festival was held on the shores of lady bird lake from 1962 until 1998 . the late austin resident and slide guitar legend , stevie ray vaughan played a number of concerts at auditorium shores and is honored with a memorial statue on the south bank . ann and roy butler hike-and-bike trail . the ann and roy butler hike-and-bike trail , formerly the town lake hike and bike trail , creates a complete circuit around lady bird lake . it is one of the oldest urban texas hike and bike paths . the trail is the longest trail designed for non-motorized traffic maintained by the austin , texas parks and recreation department . a local nonprofit , the trail foundation , is the trail 's private steward and has made trail-wide improvements by adding user amenities and infrastructure including trailheads and lakefront gathering areas , locally-designed jewel box restrooms , exercise equipment , as well as doing trailwide ecological restoration work on an ongoing basis . the butler trail loop was completed in 2014 with the public-private partnership 1-mile boardwalk project , which was spearheaded by the trail foundation . the trail is long and mostly flat , with 97.5 % of it at less than an 8 % grade . the trail 's surface is smooth and is mostly crushed granite except for a few lengths of concrete and a boardwalk on the south-side of the lake . a pedestrian bridge incorporated into the trail bridges barton creek . the roberta crenshaw pedestrian walkway spans lady bird lake beneath mopac boulevard and provides the trail 's westernmost crossing of lady bird lake . fishing . lady bird lake has been stocked with several species of fish intended to improve the utility of the reservoir for recreational fishing . the predominant fish species in lady bird lake are largemouth bass , catfish , carp , and sunfish . fishing is regulated , requiring a fishing license , and daily bag and length limits apply for most species . a ban on the consumption of fish caught in the lake was issued by the city of austin in 1990 , as a result of excessively high levels of chlordane found in the fish . texas environmental almanac . '' water quality '' . texas environmental almanac . ch . 2 , p . 6 . although the use of chlordane as a pesticide was banned in the united states in 1988 , the chemical sticks strongly to soil particles and can continue to pollute groundwater for years after its application . the ban on the consumption of fish caught in the lake was finally lifted in 1999 . texas parks and wildlife commission ( 1999 ) . '' regulations committee meeting '' . commission meeting transcript . november 17 , 1999 . . drinking water uses . the first water treatment facility in the city of austin , the thomas c . green water treatment plant , was built in 1925 to treat water from the colorado river . the plant occupied just west of the principal downtown business district . the water treatment facility was decommissioned in late 2008 . city of austin ( 2008 ) . '' green water treatment plant decommissioning ceremony tuesday '' . press release . december 15 , 2008 . . references . external links . texas parks and wildlife : town lake austin parks and recreation department the trail foundation town lake hike and bike trail map the history of lady bird lake