Imperial cult

historical imperial cults . ancient egypt . the ancient egyptian pharaohs were , throughout ancient egyptian history , believed to be incarnations of the deity horus ; thereby derived by being the son of osiris , the afterlife deity , and isis , goddess of marriage . the ptolemaic dynasty based its own legitimacy in the eyes of its greek subjects on their association with , and incorporation into , the imperial cult of alexander the great . imperial china . in imperial china , the emperor was considered the son of heaven . the scion and representative of heaven on earth , he was the ruler of all under heaven , the bearer of the mandate of heaven , his commands considered sacred edicts . a number of legendary figures preceding the proper imperial era of china also hold the honorific title of emperor , such as the yellow emperor and the jade emperor . ancient rome . even before the rise of the caesars , there are traces of a '' regal spirituality '' in roman society . in earliest roman times the king was a spiritual and patrician figure and ranked higher than the flamen ( priestly order ) , while later on in history only a shadow of the primordial condition was left with the sacrificial rex sacrorum linked closely to the plebeian orders . king numitor corresponds to the regal-sacred principle in early roman history . romulus , the legendary founder of rome , was heroized into quirinus , the '' undefeated god '' , with whom the later caesars identified and of whom they considered themselves incarnations . varro spoke of the initiatory mystery and power of roman regality ( adytum et initia regis ) , inaccessible to the exoteric communality . in plutarch 's phyrro , 19.5 , the greek ambassador declared amid the roman senate he felt instead like being in the midst of '' a whole assembly of kings '' . as the roman empire developed the imperial cult gradually developed more formally and constituted the worship of the roman emperor as a god . this practice began at the start of the empire under augustus , and became a prominent element of roman religion . the cult spread over the whole empire within a few decades , more strongly in the east than in the west . emperor diocletian further reinforced it when he demanded the proskynesis and adopted the adjective sacrum for all things pertaining to the imperial person . the deification of emperors was gradually abandoned after the emperor constantine i started supporting christianity . however , the concept of the imperial person as '' sacred '' carried over , in a christianized form , into the byzantine empire . ancient and imperial japan . image : hirohito in dress uniform.jpg thumb 100px emperor hirohito was the last divine emperor of japan . in ancient japan , it was customary for every clan to claim descendancy from gods ( ujigami ) and the royal family or clan tended to define their ancestor as the dominant or most important kami of the time . later in history , this was considered common practice by noble families , and the head members of the family , including that of the imperial family , were not seen to be divine . rather than establish sovereignty by the manner of claimed godhood over the nation however , the emperor and the imperial family stood as the bond between the heavens and the earth by claims of descending from the goddess amaterasu , instead dealing in affairs related with the gods than any major secular political event , with few cases scattered about history . it was not until the meiji period and the establishment of the empire , that the emperor began to be venerated along with a growing sense of nationalism . arahitogami – the concept of a god who is a human being applied to the hirohito ( emperor hirohito as he was known in the western world ) , until the end of world war ii . ningen-sengen – the declaration with which the emperor shōwa , on new year 's day 1946 , ( formally ) declined claims of divinity , keeping with traditional family values as expressed in the shinto religion . ancient southeast asia . devaraja is the hindu-buddhist cult of deified royalty in southeast asia . it is simply described as southeast asian concept of divine king . the concept viewed the monarch ( king ) as the living god , the incarnation of the supreme god , often attributed to shiva or vishnu , on earth . the concept is closely related to indian concept of chakravartin ( universal monarch ) . in politics , it is viewed as the divine justification of a king 's rule . the concept gained its elaborate manifestations in ancient java and cambodia , where monuments such as prambanan and angkor wat were erected to celebrate the king 's divine rule on earth . in the medang kingdom , it was customary to erect a candi ( temple ) to honor the soul of a deceased king . the image inside the garbhagriha ( inner sanctum ) of the temple often portrayed the king as a god , since the soul was thought to be united with the god referred to , in svargaloka . it is suggested that the cult was the fusion of hinduism with native austronesian ancestor worship . in java , the tradition of the divine king extended to the kediri , singhasari and majapahit kingdoms in the 15th century . the tradition of public reverence to the king of cambodia and king of thailand is the continuation of this ancient devaraja cult . the susuhunan of surakarta and sultan of yogyakarta are the direct descendants of the mataram sultanate founded in the late 17th century , and was said to be the continuation of the ancient 8th century mataram kingdom . tibet . tibetan buddhism uses the tulku system , an ancient way of finding the reincarnation of a previous deceased lama : they are usually young boys , sometimes of wealthy and influential families and sometimes of peasant families like the current 14th dalai lama , that are found and enthroned as the reincarnation of an enlightened person that has already deceased . every tulku is still called on the title of rinpoche and is given as much respect as his previous reincarnation . complying with each and every wish of a child or adult tulku is not unusual . tulkus lead responsible lives because of their status as a bodhisattva . while many tulkus are monks , some tulkus choose to lead lay lives with families of their own . examples of divine kings in history . image : hong xiuquan.jpg thumb 100px hong xiuquan some examples of historic leaders who are often considered divine kings are : africa pharaohs of ancient egypt shilluk kingdom was ruled by a divine monarchy ghanas ( kings ) of the empire of ghana asia god worshipping society leader hong xiuquan , leader of the taiping rebellion , claimed to be christ 's younger brother , and attempted to establish rule as a divine king korean buddhist monk gung-ye , king of taebong the japanese emperors up to the end of world war ii javanese kings during hindu-buddhist era ( 4th century – 15th century ad ) such as sailendra dynasty , kediri , singhasari and majapahit empire kings of khmer empire , cambodia srivijaya emperors the dalai lamas of tibet americas kings of the maya maya city of the classical period sharer and traxler 2006 , p.183 . sapa incas in pre-hispanic south america ; considered descendants of the sun god inti . wilfred byford-jones , four faces of peru , roy publishers , 1967 , p . 17 ; p . 50 . oceania kings or alii of the hawaiian islands before 1839 europe many roman emperors were declared gods by the roman senate ( generally after their death ) . ( see imperial cult ( ancient rome ) . ) . see also . notes . references . . further reading .