Adenosine monophosphate deaminase deficiency type 1

symptoms and signs . for reasons that are not understood , many people with defective variants of the ampd genes are asymptomatic , while others have symptoms including exercise intolerance , and/or muscle pain and cramping . ; fatigue madd lowers aerobic power output , so increased anaerobic power is needed to perform the same amount of work . without myoadenlyate deaminase , heavy activity causes adenosine to be released into the cell or perfused into the surrounding tissues . fatigue and sedation after heavy exertion can be caused by excess adenosine in the cells which signals muscle fiber to feel fatigued . in the brain , excess adenosine decreases alertness and causes sleepiness . in this way , adenosine may play a role in fatigue from madd . recovery from over-exertion can be hours , days or even months . in cases of rhabdomyolysis , which is the rapid breakdown of muscle fibers , time to recovery is dependent on duration and intensity of original activity plus any excess activity during the recovery period . ; muscle pain muscle pain from madd is not well understood , but is partially due to high levels of lactate . increased levels of free adenosine temporarily decrease pain , allowing over-exertion without awareness . the over exertion can cause mild to severe cases of rhabdomyolysis , which is painful . adenosine mediates pain through adenosine receptors . madd causes an increase of free adenosine during heavy activity which may cause exercise-induced muscle pain . over time , excess free adenosine down-regulates primary a1 adenosine receptors , leading to increased muscle pain . secondary receptors ( a3 ) increase peripheral inflammation , which also increases pain . ; muscle cramping the cause of cramping is unknown , but may be related to elevated lactate , increased calcium signaling across the sarcoplasmic reticulum caused by membrane instability from reduced levels of atp , or increased levels of free adenosine . ; muscle weakness muscle weakness is not a major symptom , though the progressive effects of chronic muscle damage from rhabdomyolysis will eventually cause significant weakness . similarly , the long-term metabolic effects may result in nerve damage . . potential complications . there is an increased risk that statin ( cholesterol-reducing drugs ) will cause myopathy ( muscle weakness ) in individuals with madd . anesthesia has the potential to cause malignant hyperthermia , an uncontrolled increase in body temperature , and permanent muscle damage in patients with madd . individuals with madd are advised to notify their anesthesiologist about their condition prior to surgery . in most cases where myopathy is present with madd , a second muscle disease is present and symptoms are worse than either disease in isolation . . causes . amp deaminase is an enzyme that converts adenosine monophosphate ( amp ) to inosine monophosphate ( imp ) , freeing an ammonia molecule in the process . it is a part of the metabolic process that converts sugar , fat , and protein into cellular energy . in order to use energy , a cell converts one of the above fuels into adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) via the mitochondria . cellular processes , especially muscles , then convert the atp into adenosine diphosphate ( adp ) , freeing the energy to do work . during heavy or prolonged mild to moderate activity , other enzymes convert two molecules of adp into one atp molecule and one amp molecule , making more atp available to supply energy . amp is normally converted into imp by myoadenylate deaminase—so myoadenylate deaminase deficiency reduces energy that would be available to the cell through the purine nucleotide cycle . instead of being converted to imp , the amp builds up in the cells of affected individuals , spills into the blood , and is eventually metabolized in the liver . in persons with a defective enzyme , 5'-nucleotidase removes the ribose and phosphorus from amp , increasing levels of adenosine measured in muscle cells by ~16–25× , after exercise . . mechanism . this failure to deaminate the amp molecules has three major effects . first , significant amounts of amp are lost from the cell and the body . second , ammonia is not freed when the cell does work . third , the level of imp in the cell is not maintained . the first effect—the loss of amp—is mostly significant because amp contains ribose , a sugar molecule that is also used to make dna , rna , and some enzymes . though the body can manufacture some ribose and obtain more from rna-rich sources such as beans and red meat , this loss of ribose due to madd is sometimes sufficient to create a shortage in the body , resulting in symptoms of severe fatigue and muscle pain . this outcome is especially likely if the individual regularly exercises vigorously or works physically over a period of weeks or months . the second effect , the absence of ammonia , is not well understood . it may result in a reduction of the amount of fumarate available to the citric acid cycle , and it may result in lower levels of nitric oxide ( a vasodilator ) in the body , reducing blood flow and oxygen intake during vigorous exercise , though this may be offset by increased levels of adenosine , another vasodilator . the third effect , the reduction in imp , is also not well understood . it may somehow result in a reduction in the amount of lactic acid produced by the muscles , though serum lactate is typically slightly elevated with madd . the following is a very simplified model of what may be going on inside a muscle cell with ampd deficiency . there are two major semi-stable states : one with intra-cellular glycogen available , and one with glycogen exhausted . both states are modified by how much the citric acid cycle is down-regulated by default . start from the state where glycogen is available and the citric acid cycle is severely down-regulated . once the cell has received a non-trivial load , and has expended the phosphocreatine reserve , a small quantity of atp will become discharged down to amp . amp will instantly up-regulate myophosphorylase , which will start liberating glucose from glycogen and make it available to the glycolytic pathway , producing pyruvate and recharging amp back to atp . due to the greater availability of pyruvate as a substrate , and pyruvate also contributing a citric acid cycle intermediate , α-ketoglutarate , while consuming glutamate , the citric acid cycle will also speed up . the combination of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle now balances atp production with atp demand and the pool of amp does not grow further . because all pyruvate is not burned down in the citric acid cycle — a consequence of the pyruvate 's concentration regulating its burning at this moment — the excess is converted to lactate and passed into blood as lactic acid . in muscle cells with normal ampd activity , the purine nucleotide cycle would now start to gradually add fumarate to the pool of the citric acid cycle intermediates . this would decrease the excess rate of pyruvate production by increasing its consumption , increase the rate of amp recharge to atp by the citric acid cycle , and consequently reduce liberation of glucose from glycogen , until increased supply of blood-borne fuels allows to shut down glycogenolysis completely . in muscle cells with ampd deficiency , atp production rate of the citric acid cycle will not be synchronized with atp demand . it was demonstrated , that muscle cells , that lack ampd1 , stock and consume significantly more glutamate , and produce more alanine in this state , compared to healthy controls , which indicates occurrence of a higher concentration of pyruvate in the cell during exercise . the pool of amp also grows bigger than in the controls , which would cause higher rate of glucose liberation from glycogen . this state can last for as long as glycogen is available , and can be prolonged by constantly eating carbohydrate-rich food . if the load on muscles is greater than the body 's ability to recycle lactate back into glucose , lactate will start to build up in the blood . once lactate reaches its renal re-absorption threshold ( 5–6 & nbsp ; mmol/l in general population ) , it gets lost to urine , wasting many calories ( and producing bright matte yellow particles on surfaces where urine dries ) . at about the same time the kidney will also start correcting blood acidity by acidifying urine . overly acidic urine causes irritation that feels like a frequent urge to urinate ( with little volume ) and a '' hot '' urine . in order to excrete lactate , kidney must also excrete magnesium as an obligatory cation , which may lead to acute and chronic magnesium deficiency . supplementary magnesium in the form of lactate or citrate may be rapidly lost in the same way . because magnesium is essential to aerobic metabolism , over time , magnesium loss may lead to a vicious cycle , where the citric acid cycle is further down-regulated , lactate production is increased , and magnesium loss is increased again . although probably unrelated to ampd deficiency , if the person happens to have a high load of d-lactate in the blood ( mostly from food and colonic fermentation ) , the precipitate , the lactate loss and the magnesium loss may occur even before l-lactate ( mostly from muscles ) reaches its renal re-absorption threshold . this happens because l-lactate and d-lactate compete with each other for renal re-absorption , and because d-lactate has a significantly lower renal re-absorption threshold , which allows the citric acid cycle to be sped up by some other mechanism ( perhaps by the allosteric mechanism that reacts to the lower concentration of atp , or by amplification of the residual ampd activity by the bloated amp pool ) , until atp production is balanced with atp consumption . amp conversion to adenosine , excretion to the blood ( as amp and its various metabolites ) , further conversion to uric acid and excretion to urine becomes significant for some time , until all amp is eliminated from the muscle cell . the muscle movements become noticeably less precise . breathing slows down , and from this moment reacts very weakly to the load and not at all to the perceived effort . it becomes hard to rapidly increase the load on a muscle , as in mcardle 's disease , and such a rapid load increase will dump even more purines into blood and urine ( looking like translucent or rust-colored sharp shiny crystals and being highly irritating ) . the same situation would occur if blood flow to muscle cells becomes insufficient ( except that somewhat less amp is spilled over , and somewhat more of it is metabolized inside the muscle cell ) . on the other hand , there will be no lasting muscle pain from lactate , and continuous aerobic activity is possible . oxidation of odd-numbered saturated fatty acids may provide another mechanism , although very gradual , to up-regulate citric acid cycle during exercise . as the short-term regulation of atp production becomes very weak after the exhaustion of glycogen , the medium-term regulation becomes enabled , but with a progressively weaker authority at higher purine nucleotide energy charge levels , which causes some differences in symptoms compared to mcardle 's . in mcardle 's , the highly active amp deaminase , which additionally experiences amplification from the bloated amp pool due to the lack of the moderating effect of myophosphorylase , is able to produce a readily observable '' second wind '' phenomenon almost exactly 7 minutes after a significant load increment . in ampd deficiency , glycogen-less muscles will feel mostly the same by the time they become able to take another load increment . a load decrement may produce some sense of relief , though , if the pool of the citric acid cycle intermediates built up so far is sufficient to maintain full purine nucleotide energy charge at the lower load . it is unclear , what , if anything , does it take to unknowingly trigger rhabdomyolysis at this point , assuming the muscle cell is otherwise healthy . adenosine production and lack of ammonia overproduction seem to strongly suppress rhabdomyolysis down to the purine nucleotide energy charge level , where the cell is able to signal pain , or where individual muscle fibers start cramping ( fail to relax from contraction in sync with the rest of the muscle ) , or the whole muscle fails to contract ( when walking quickly downhill ) , allowing the person to appropriately modulate the exertion . most of the amp probably spills into blood unchanged , and is gradually returned to the muscle cell , if its concentration there falls due to gradual recharge to atp . the blood thus plays a role of a big amp buffer . idle muscles may also take up some free amp . the spillover also limits , how much the residual ampd activity can be amplified in this state . thus , it may take the residual ampd activity less time to build up citric acid cycle intermediates , when the whole body is warmed up for an exercise at the same time , rather than a specific group of muscles needed in the exercise . in case of leg muscles , where circulation is substantially dependent on their cyclical contraction when the body is upright , a small but useful degree of initial up-regulation of the citric acid cycle may be achieved just by standing still for a few minutes . it is most useful when a long period of rest , or sitting in a vehicle , must be followed by brisk walking . if the person keeps standing still for longer , rather than restoring circulation in the leg muscles ( e.g . by sitting down , walking , or cycling ) , the ammonia , produced by the amplified residual ampd activity , may accumulate in the muscle cells and in the surrounding tissues to toxic levels , and may also indirectly affect other organs . there is little or no warning for nearing toxicity , because the purine nucleotide energy charge is still relatively high , the leg muscles do not cramp , and remain functional . in contrast , while muscle glycogen is available , accumulation of lactic acid in this situation would produce a noticeable sensation . on the other hand , in persons with balanced ampd and myophosphorylase activities in muscle cells , lactic acid and ammonia are produced simultaneously , counteracting each other 's effects to some degree . some seldom used but strong voluntary muscles , such as those involved in '' pushing '' during the act of defecation , are not tuned for aerobic mode , and may dump plenty of purines during their short work routine , if it happens in this state . if a food containing even small but perceivable amount of sugar ( simple sugars or disaccharides that can be tasted sweet , or starch that is at least minimally hydrolyzed by salivary amylase , or even some non-sugar sweeteners ) is eaten in this state , there may be a period of time after it enters stomach and before bulk absorption occurs , when continuous exercise becomes very hard , and easily triggers rhabdomyolysis . it probably happens because the digestive system senses and signals forthcoming delivery of sugars , inhibiting fatty acid release and oxidation , and starving glycogen-less muscle cells of the sole available source of energy . even simple continuous exercise , like walking or washing dishes by hand right after the meal , may trigger rhabdomyolysis in the exercising muscles . this rhabdomyolysis is probably not of exertional , but of hypoglycemic nature , as loaded glycogen-less muscles can rapidly remove glucose from blood , and the normal mechanism of glucose homeostasis lacks the required responsiveness or capacity to prevent hypoglycemia . the broken down myocytes probably do not yield much glucose . unlike the case with exertional rhabdomyolisys , there is no warning . at rest , however , the liver will effortlessly cover the whole body energy needs until absorption of carbohydrates occurs . if a large group of muscles is still actively drawing fuels from blood after the most recent continuous exercise , in order to replenish the atp and the phosphocreatine reserve , it may become sour without any additional exercise by the time the carbohydrate meal is finished . if the carbohydrate meal consists of a food ( which does n't need to be carbohydrate itself ) , that requires prolonged vigorous chewing , and then some time to be digested , for instance parboiled long grain rice , chewing may suddenly become very slow and difficult halfway through the meal . when a carbohydrate-rich food has been eaten before amp has been eliminated from muscle cells , when bulk absorption starts , plenty of glucose becomes available in the blood , is taken up by muscle cells , is added to the glycogen store , but then immediately becomes liberated by the still up-regulated myophosphorylase . the resulting excess of glucose is metabolized down to lactic acid ( the body can not increase aerobic metabolism in an instant ) , recharging all amp to atp . the lactate is dumped back into blood and urine . the higher the glycemic index of the food is , the greater proportion of carbohydrates ( and calories ) is wasted into urine . if the person is at rest at this moment , and pays attention , a sudden increase in the breathing frequency due to lactate dumping is readily observable . if the rise in the blood lactate is particularly sharp , and the person happened to be breathing slowly , a heart palpitation may sometimes be observable . the lactic acidosis with palpitation may also occur during sleep , if stomach emptying has been delayed e.g . due to digestion requirements of the food or its high volume , and the person went to sleep before absorption has started . in this case the person will be awaken in a state of distress , with rapid breathing . the person may recall seeing a nightmare . delayed stomach emptying creates especially favorable conditions for the shock lactic acidosis , because the digestive system may meanwhile still inhibit fatty acid release and oxidation , helping more muscles to run out of glycogen in those persons , who are otherwise still able to maintain its stores between meals . it has been experimentally demonstrated , that delayed gastric emptying prolongs the duration of the glp-1 signal . notably , a small quantity of dietary fructose does not produce this effect ( the lactic acidosis ) , as it is captured by liver and may be fully expended for replenishing liver glycogen . once all amp has been recharged to atp , and glycogen stores allowed to replenish , the cell transitions back to the unmodified original state . if carbohydrate-rich food is not consumed in this state , amp elimination from the cell eventually completes , glycogen stores can be replenished again , and the cell transitions back to the original state but with reduced atp pool and an up-regulated citric acid cycle . it may be especially important to have adequate dietary iodine in the glycogen-less state , so that stomach emptying is not excessively delayed , the up-regulation of the citric acid cycle in muscle cells in response to a load increment is not too slow , and the muscles can each time accept a bigger load increment relative to the perceived effort . diagnosis . the diagnosis of madd needs to be considered in patients suffering exercise induced myalgia , cramps and sometimes weakness . a mildly elevated creatine kinase may also occur . exclusion of other muscular diseases such as mcardle 's disease and carnitine cycle abnormalities should occur . madd may be identified if there is a lack of ammonia rise after forearm exercise testing . the diagnosis may then be confirmed with genetic testing . treatment . it is important for madd patients to maintain strength and fitness without exercising or working to exhaustion . learning this balance may be more difficult than normally , as muscle pain and fatigue may be perceived differently from normal individuals . symptomatic relief from the effects of madd may sometimes be achieved by administering ribose orally at a dose of approximately 10 & nbsp ; grams per 100 pounds ( 0.2 g/kg ) of body weight per day , and exercise modulation as appropriate . taken hourly , ribose provides a direct but limited source of energy for the cells . patients with myoadenylate deaminase deficiency do not retain ribose during heavy exercise , so supplementation may be required to rebuild levels of atp . creatine monohydrate could also be helpful for ampd patients , as it provides an alternative source of energy for anaerobic muscle tissue and was found to be helpful in the treatment of other , unrelated muscular myopathies . . references . further reading . . external links .