1974 in sports

alpine skiing . alpine skiing world cup men 's overall season champion : piero gros , italy women 's overall season champion : annemarie pröll , austria . american football . 13 january – super bowl viii : the miami dolphins ( afc ) won 24–7 over the minnesota vikings ( nfc ) location : rice stadium attendance : 71,882 mvp : larry csonka , fb ( miami ) world bowl i – birmingham americans won 22–21 over florida blazers ( at birmingham , alabama ) sugar bowl ( 1973 season ) : the game was actually played on 31 december 1973 ; other major bowl games were played on 1 january 1974 the notre dame fighting irish won 24–23 over the alabama crimson tide to win ap poll national championship 1974 college football season : the oklahoma sooners win the ap poll national championship ; do not play in any bowl the following january due to sanctions . artistic gymnastics . world artistic gymnastics championships – men 's all-around champion : shigeru kasamatsu , japan women 's all-around champion : ludmilla tourischeva , ussr men 's team competition champion : japan women 's team competition champion : ussr . association football . brazil – cr vasco da gama wins the campeonato brasileiro fifa gives to colombia the right to host the 1986 fifa world cup , but colombian officials decided in late 1982 that they could not afford to host the tournament on the scale fifa required . football world cup – west germany won 2–1 over the netherlands . fa cup – liverpool won 3–0 over newcastle united . ecuador – ecuadorian serie a champions : liga deportiva universitaria de quito . athletics . january – 1974 commonwealth games held at christchurch , new zealand september – east german athlete manfred kuschmann wins the 1974 european championships in rome . australian rules football . victorian football league richmond wins the 78th vfl premiership ( richmond 18.20 ( 128 ) d north melbourne 13.9 ( 87 ) ) brownlow medal awarded to keith greig ( north melbourne ) . baseball . 16 january – former yankees teammates mickey mantle and whitey ford are inducted into the baseball hall of fame . mantle becomes only the seventh player to make it in his first try . his 536 home runs with the yankees ranked second only to babe ruth and he played in more games ( 2,401 ) than any other pinstriper , including lou gehrig . ford was arguably the greatest yankees pitcher of all time , retiring with more wins ( 236 ) , more innings ( 3,171 ) , more strikeouts ( 1,956 ) , and more shutouts ( 45 ) than anyone in club history . frank robinson becomes the first african-american manager in major league baseball . 8 april – hank aaron hit home run 715 in the fourth inning off los angeles dodgers pitcher al downing breaking babe ruth 's career home run record . 4 june – the cleveland indians hosted '' ten cent beer night '' , but had to forfeit the game to the texas rangers due to drunken and unruly fans . world series – oakland athletics win 4 games to 1 over the los angeles dodgers . 14 october – shigeo nagashima , a well known sports player from japan , retires from the yomiuri giants of tokyo , after a 17-year baseball player career . basketball . ncaa division i men 's basketball championship – north carolina state wins 76–64 over marquette in the semifinals of this tournament , north carolina state defeated ucla 80–77 in overtime , ending ucla 's record streak of seven national titles . the last previous tournament not won by the bruins was the 1966 tournament . nba finals – boston celtics win 4 games to 3 over the milwaukee bucks 1974 aba finals – new york nets defeat utah stars , 4 games to 1 fiba world championship ussr world champion 19 january – notre dame defeats ucla 71–70 , ending the bruins ' record 88-game winning streak . boxing . 9 february in paris – carlos monzón retains his world middleweight title by a knockout in round seven over world welterweight champion josé nápoles . 17 to 30 august – 1974 world amateur boxing championships held in havana , cuba 30 october in kinshasa , zaire – muhammad ali regained the world heavyweight title by knocking out george foreman in the eighth round of what was called the rumble in the jungle . canadian football . grey cup – montreal alouettes won 20–7 over the edmonton eskimos vanier cup – western ontario mustangs won 19–15 over the toronto varsity blues . cycling . giro d'italia won by eddy merckx of belgium tour de france – eddy merckx of belgium uci road world championships – men 's road race – eddy merckx of belgium . disc sports . ken westerfield and jim kenner introduce the first disc freestyle competition and other disc sports to canada at the canadian open frisbee championships , in toronto . dog sledding . iditarod trail sled dog race – carl huntington won with lead dog : nugget . field hockey . men 's european nations cup held in madrid and won by spain women 's world cup held in mandelieu , france , and won by the netherlands . figure skating . world figure skating championships – men 's champion : jan hoffmann , germany ladies ' champion : christine errath , germany pair skating champions : irina rodnina & alexander zaitsev , soviet union ice dancing champions : lyudmila pakhomova & alexandr gorshkov , soviet union . golf . men 's professional masters tournament – gary player u.s . open – hale irwin british open – gary player pga championship – lee trevino pga tour money leader – johnny miller – 353,022 men 's amateur british amateur – trevor homer u.s . amateur – jerry pate women 's professional lpga championship – sandra haynie u.s . women 's open – sandra haynie lpga money leader – joanne carner – 87,094 . harness racing . united states pacing triple crown races – cane pace – boyden hanover little brown jug – armbro omaha messenger stakes – armbro omaha united states trotting triple crown races – hambletonian – christopher t . yonkers trot kentucky futurity australian inter dominion harness racing championship – pacers : hondo grattan . horse racing . steeplechases cheltenham gold cup – captain christy grand national – red rum flat races australia – melbourne cup won by think big canada – queen 's plate won by amber herod france – prix de l'arc de triomphe won by allez france ireland – irish derby stakes won by english prince english triple crown races : 2,000 guineas stakes – nonoalco the derby – snow knight st . leger stakes – bustino united states triple crown races : kentucky derby – cannonade preakness stakes – little current belmont stakes – little current . ice hockey . art ross trophy as the nhl 's leading scorer during the regular season : phil esposito , boston bruins hart memorial trophy for the nhl 's most valuable player : phil esposito – boston bruins stanley cup – philadelphia flyers win 4 games to 2 over the boston bruins world hockey championship – men 's champion : soviet union defeated czechoslovakia avco world trophy – houston aeros win 4 games to 0 over the chicago cougars ncaa men 's ice hockey championship – university of minnesota-twin cities golden gophers defeat michigan technological university huskies 4–2 in boston , massachusetts . lacrosse . the 2nd world lacrosse championship is held in melbourne , australia . the united states win , and there is a 3-way tie for the runner-up position . the national lacrosse league ( 1974–75 ) is formed . it is not related to the modern national lacrosse league . the rochester griffens defeat the philadelphia wings in the six-game national lacrosse league ( 1974–75 ) championship , 4 to 2 games . the new westminster salmonbellies win the mann cup . the whitby transporters win the founders cup . the peterborough pco 's win the minto cup . the johns hopkins university bluejays defeat the university of maryland terrapins 17–12 to win the ncaa division i men 's championship . motorsport . rugby league . 1974 amco cup captain morgan trophy 1974 new zealand rugby league season 1974 nswrfl season 1973–74 northern rugby football league season / 1974–75 northern rugby football league season . rugby union . 80th six nations championship series is won by ireland . snooker . world snooker championship – ray reardon beats graham miles 22–12 . tennis . grand slam in tennis men 's results : australian open – jimmy connors french open – björn borg wimbledon championships – jimmy connors us open – jimmy connors grand slam in tennis women 's results : australian open – evonne goolagong french open – chris evert wimbledon championships – chris evert us open – billie jean king davis cup – south africa wins over india ( walkover ) in world tennis . last year in which us open was played on grass courts . volleyball . 1974 fivb men 's world championship held in mexico city and won by poland . yacht racing . the new york yacht club retains the america 's cup as courageous defeats australian challenger southern cross , of the royal perth yacht club , 4 races to 0 ; it is australian businessman alan bond 's first cup challenge . general sporting events . asian games held in teheran , iran commonwealth games held in christchurch , new zealand central american and caribbean games held in santo domingo , dominican republic international olympic committee choose moscow to host the 1980 summer olympics . awards . associated press male athlete of the year – muhammad ali , boxing associated press female athlete of the year – chris evert , tennis . references .