Izaak Walton

biography . walton was born at stafford in 1593 . the register of his baptism in september 1593 gives his father 's name as jervis , or gervase . his father , who was an innkeeper as well as a landlord of a tavern , died before izaak was three , being buried in february 1596/7 as jarvicus walton . his mother then married another innkeeper by the name of bourne , who later ran the swan in stafford . izaak also had a brother named ambrose , as indicated by an entry in the parish register recording the burial in march 1595/6 of an ambrosius filius jervis walton . his date of birth is traditionally given as 9 august 1593 . however , this date is based on a misinterpretation of his will , which he began on 9 august 1683 . he is believed to have been educated in stafford before moving to london in his teens . he is often described as an ironmonger , but he trained as a linen draper , a trade which came under the ironmongers ' company . jessica martin , 'walton , izaak ( 1593–1683 ) ' , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 ; online edn , may 2013 accessed 1 jan 2017 he had a small shop in the upper storey of thomas gresham 's royal exchange ( london ) in cornhill . in 1614 he had a shop in fleet street , two doors west of chancery lane in the parish of st dunstan's . reynolds , h . the churches of the city of london . bodley head , 1922 he became verger and churchwarden of the church , and a friend of the vicar , john donne . he joined the ironmongers ' company in november 1618 . walton 's first wife was rachel floud ( married december 1626 ) , a great-great-niece of thomas cranmer . she died in 1640 . he soon remarried , to anne ken ( m . 1641 ? -1662 ) , who appears as the pastoral kenna of the angler 's wish ; she was a stepsister of thomas ken , afterwards bishop of bath and wells . after the cavalier defeat at marston moor in 1644 , walton retired from his trade . he went to live just north of his birthplace , at a spot between the town of stafford and the town of stone , where he had bought some land edged by a small river . his new land at shallowford included a farm , and a parcel of land ; however by 1650 he was living in clerkenwell , london . following the restoration of the monarchy it was revealed he had aided the royalists , izaak was a staunch royalist supporter , and at great personal risk he managed to safeguard one of the crown jewels ( referred to as the little or lesser george ) following charles ii defeat at the battle of worcester . walton was entrusted with returning it to london from where it was smuggled out of the country to charles ii who was then in exile . poulton-smith , a . bloody british history . history press , 2013 the first edition of his book the compleat angler was published in 1653 . his second wife died in 1662 , and was buried in worcester cathedral , where there is a monument to her memory . one of his daughters married dr hawkins , a prebendary of winchester . the last forty years of his life were spent visiting eminent clergymen and others who enjoyed fishing , compiling the biographies of people he liked , and collecting information for the compleat angler . after 1662 he found a home at farnham castle with george morley , bishop of winchester , to whom he dedicated his life of george herbert and his biography of richard hooker . he sometimes visited charles cotton in his fishing house on the dove . walton died in his daughter 's house at winchester on 15 december 1683 and was buried in winchester cathedral . . extract of walton 's will . isaac walton , by will , dated 9 august 1698 , gave to the town or corporation of stafford , in which he was born , a farm , situate at halfhead ( adjoining to shallowford ) , in the parish of chebsey , for the good and benefit of some of the said town , to bind out , yearly , two boys , the sons of honest and poor parents , to be apprentices to some tradesmen or handicraftmen , to the intent that the said boys might the better afterwards get their own living : and he also gave £5 . yearly , out of the said rent , to some maid servant that should have attained the age of 21 years , or to some honest poor man 's daughter , to be paid to her on her marriage ; and this being done , his will was , that what rent should remain of the said farm and land , should be disposed of as follows ; first , he gave 20s , yearly , to be spent by the mayor of stafford , and that what money or rent should remain undisposed of , should be employed to buy coals for some poor people that should have most need thereof in the said town . walton 's cottage at shallowford . walton left his property as described above at shallowford in staffordshire for the benefit of the poor of his native town . he had purchased halfhead farm there in may 1655 . in doing this he was part of a more general retreat of royalist gentlemen into the english countryside , in the aftermath of the english civil war , a move summed up by his friend charles cotton 's well-known poem '' the retirement '' ( first published in the 5th edition of walton 's compleat angler ) . the cost of shallowford was £350 , and the property included a farmhouse , a cottage , courtyard , garden and nine fields along which a river ran . part of its attraction may have been that the river meece , which he mentions in one of his poems , formed part of the boundary . the farm was let to tenants , and walton kept the excellent fishing . the cottage is now a walton museum . the ground floor of the museum is set-out in period , with information boards covering walton 's life , his writings and the story of the izaak walton cottage . upstairs a collection of fishing related items is displayed , the earliest dating from the mid-eighteenth century , while a room is dedicated to his lives and the compleat angler . the izaak walton cottage and gardens are open to the public on sunday afternoons during the summer . . the compleat angler . the compleat angler was first published in 1653 , but walton continued to add to it for a quarter of a century . it is a celebration of the art and spirit of fishing in prose and verse ; 6 verses were quoted from john dennys 's 1613 work the secrets of angling . it was dedicated to john offley , his most honoured friend . there was a second edition in 1655 , a third in 1661 ( identical with that of 1664 ) , a fourth in 1668 and a fifth in 1676 . in this last edition the thirteen chapters of the original had grown to twenty-one , and a second part was added by his friend and brother angler charles cotton , who took up venator where walton had left him and completed his instruction in fly fishing and the making of flies . chisholm , 1911 . walton did not profess to be an expert with a fishing fly ; the fly fishing in his first edition was contributed by thomas barker , a retired cook and humorist , who produced a treatise of his own in 1659 ; but in the use of the live worm , the grasshopper and the frog '' piscator '' himself could speak as a master . the famous passage about the frog , often misquoted as being about the worm— '' use him as though you loved him , that is , harm him as little as you may possibly , that he may live the longer '' —appears in the original edition . the additions made as the work grew did not affect the technical part alone ; quotations , new turns of phrase , songs , poems and anecdotes were introduced as if the author , who wrote it as a recreation , had kept it constantly in his mind and talked it over point by point with his many friends . there were originally only two interlocutors in the opening scene , '' piscator '' and '' viator '' ; but in the second edition , as if in answer to an objection that '' piscator '' had it too much in his own way in praise of angling , he introduced the falconry , '' auceps , '' changed '' viator '' into '' venator '' and made the new companions each dilate on the joys of his favourite sport . the best-known old edition of the angler is j . major 's ( 2nd ed . , 1824 ) . the book was edited by andrew lang in 1896 , followed by many other editions . . walton 's lives . walton also made significant contributions to seventeenth-century life-writing throughout his career . his leisurely labours as a biographer seem to have grown out of his devotion to angling . it was probably as an angler that he made the acquaintance of sir henry wotton , but it is clear that walton had more than a love of fishing and a humorous temper to recommend him to the friendship of the accomplished ambassador . at any rate , wotton , who had intended to write the life of john donne , and had already corresponded with walton on the subject , left the task to him . walton had already contributed an elegy to the 1633 edition of donne 's poems , and he completed and published the life , much to the satisfaction of the most learned critics , in 1640 . sir henry wotton dying in 1639 , walton undertook his life also ; it was finished in 1642 and published in 1651 as a preface to the volume reliquiae wottonianae . his life of hooker was published in 1665 , and his biography of george herbert in 1670 , the latter coinciding with a collected edition of walton 's biographical writings , the lives of dr . john donne , sir henry wotton , mr . richard hooker , mr . george herbert ( 1670 , 1675 ) . his life of bishop robert sanderson appeared in 1678 . all these subjects were endeared to the biographer by a certain gentleness of disposition and cheerful piety ; three of them at least—donne , wotton and herbert—were anglers . walton studied these men 's lives in detail , and provides many insights into their character . encyclopædia britannica ( 1911 ) , pp . 300–01 . other literary works . sir john skeffington john chalkhill waltoniana – an 1878 collection of walton 's poems and prose fragments . walton in literature . walton has appeared in a number of works of literature , both non-fiction and fiction . non-fiction . charles lamb , in his letter to samuel taylor coleridge , recommends the compleat angler : '' it breathes the very spirit of innocence , purity , and simplicity of the heart . there are many choice old verses interspersed in it ; it would sweeten a man 's temper at any time to read it ; it would christianise every discordant angry passion ; pray make yourself acquainted with it . '' lamb , charles . letter to samuel taylor coleridge . gilbert ryle uses him in his 1949 book the concept of mind as an example of '' 'knowing how ' before 'knowing that ' '' ; in his collected essays he writes that '' we certainly can , in respect of many practices , like fishing , cooking and reasoning , extract principles from their applications by people who know how to fish , cook and reason . hence isaak walton , mrs beeton and aristotle . but when we try to express these principles we find that they can not easily be put in the indicative mood . they fall automatically into the imperative mood . '' zane grey mentions him in a fishing passage in his 1903 book betty zane on page 84 . '' alfred clark said ' i never knew one ( girl ) who cared for fishing . ' '' '' betty zane answered 'now you behold one . i love dear old izaak walton . of course you ( clark ) have read his book ? ' '' . fiction . charles dickens makes reference to him in chapter 14 of book 2 of a tale of two cities . '' the honoured parent steering northward , had not gone far , when he was joined by another disciple of izaak walton , and the two trudged on together . '' . other commemorations . advertising mogul and land developer barron collier founded the izaak walton fly fishing club in 1908 at his useppa island resort near fort myers , florida . the izaak walton league is an american association formed in 1922 in chicago , illinois , to preserve fishing streams . walton has been inducted into the american national fresh water fishing hall of fame . there is a forest preserve in homewood , il called the izaak walton forest preserve . there are two pubs in england named the izaak walton : one in the village of east meon , hampshire , the other in cresswell , staffordshire . in the county town of stafford , there is now a statue of him placed in the town park , by the bank of the river . this route through the park was originally known as 'izaak walton walk ' , there is also a street in the north part of stafford named for him . there is a creek named after him in owatonna , minnesota . there is also a pub in norwich named 'the compleat angler ' . the compleat angler hotel in bimini , bahamas was destroyed by fire in 2006 ; the hotel bar was frequented by ernest hemingway . the allen-edmonds shoe company of port washington , wisconsin produces a '' walton '' style in tribute . in the silver divide region of the sierra nevada mountain range of california , a major peak is named after izaak walton . the izaak walton state recreation site in sterling , alaska is located at the confluence of the moose river and the kenai river , and his name is lent to the historic izaak walton inn in montana . there is an izaak walton inn in embu , kenya , overlooking a small stream that feeds into the rupingazi river . there is a pub named 'izaak walton ' in the village of east meon in hampshire , england . notes . references . sources . . further reading . . external links . izaak walton 's cottage ( official stafford borough council page ) the official izaak walton league of america website bbc local heroes : stoke & staffordshire : izaak walton