1977 in sports

alpine skiing . alpine skiing world cup men 's overall season champion : ingemar stenmark , sweden women 's overall season champion : lise-marie morerod , switzerland . american football . january 9 − super bowl xi : the oakland raiders ( afc ) won 32−14 over the minnesota vikings ( nfc ) location : rose bowl attendance : 103,438 mvp : fred biletnikoff , wr ( oakland ) october 9 - eddie brown sets nfl record for punt returns in a game ( 11 ) . november 20 – playing despite a fever as a result of the flu , chicago bears running back walter payton sets a new single-game nfl rushing record , gaining 275 yards in a 10–7 victory over the minnesota vikings . december 11 – tampa bay buccaneers in their second nfl season win their first ever game over the new orleans saints . the win ends their nfl record 26-game losing streak encompassing the entire 1976 season and the first 12 games in 1977 . sugar bowl ( 1976 season ) : the pittsburgh panthers won 27–3 over the georgia bulldogs to win the college football national championship . association football . liverpool dominate english and european football , winning both the european cup and the football league championship , but they miss out on a '' treble '' by losing in the fa cup final . january 18 – death of luciano re cecconi ( 28 ) , lazio and italy , who was shot during a hoax robbery october 1 - pelé played the final game of his storied career at giants stadium in east rutherford , new jersey . he played the first half for his current club , the new york cosmos , and the second half for his old brazilian club santos . australian rules football . 1977 vfl season may 7 : hawthorn kick 25.41 ( 191 ) against st . kilda . that score breaks by seven the record for the most behinds by a team in a match , and by six the most scoring shots . neither record has been equalled . north melbourne wins the 81st vfl premiership ( north melbourne 9.22 ( 76 ) drew collingwood football club 10.16 ( 76 ) , replay north melbourne 21.25 ( 151 ) d collingwood 19.10 ( 124 ) ) brownlow medal awarded to graham teasdale ( sydney swans ) . baseball . january 19 – ernie banks is elected to the baseball hall of fame in his first year of eligibility . he won back-to-back mvp awards , but is best remembered for his famous line , '' let 's play two '' . sparky lyle breaks ron perranoski 's major league record for left-handers of 179 career saves . the major league baseball expansion seattle mariners and toronto blue jays make their debuts ( both are american league teams ) . it would be the last expansion in mlb until 1993 . world series – the new york yankees defeat the los angeles dodgers . this is the series in which reggie jackson becomes known as '' mr . october . '' . basketball . ncaa men 's division i basketball championship – marquette wins 67–59 over north carolina nba finals – portland trail blazers won 4 games to 2 over the philadelphia 76ers . boxing . after 13 years and 82 contests , including 14 title defences , world middleweight champion carlos monzón retired undefeated . canadian football . grey cup – montreal alouettes won 41–6 over the edmonton eskimos vanier cup – western ontario mustangs win 48–15 over the acadia axemen . cricket . 12–17 march , melbourne - centenary test played between australia and england to commemorate 100th anniversary of first test match . australia won by 45 runs , exactly the same margin as in the first test match in 1877 . world series cricket begins playing games in competition to official international cricket council sanctioned matches . cycling . giro d'italia won by michel pollentier of belgium tour de france - bernard thévenet of france uci road world championships – men 's road race – francesco moser of italy . dogsled racing . iditarod trail sled dog race – rick swenson won with lead dogs : andy & o.b . ( old buddy ) . figure skating . world figure skating championships – men 's champion : vladimir kovalev , soviet union ladies ' champion : linda fratianne , united states pair skating champions : irina rodnina & alexander zaitsev , soviet union ice dancing champions : irina moiseyeva & andrei minenkov , soviet union . golf . men 's professional masters tournament - tom watson u.s . open - hubert green british open - tom watson pga championship - lanny wadkins pga tour money leader - tom watson - 310,653 ryder cup - united states won 12½ -7½ over britain & ireland in team golf . this was the last ryder cup to feature a side exclusively from the british isles ; the u.s . opponents in the next ryder cup , held in 1979 at white sulphur springs , west virginia , would be drawn from all of europe . the u.s.-europe format has continued ever since . men 's amateur british amateur - peter mcevoy u.s . amateur - john fought women 's professional lpga championship - chako higuchi u.s . women 's open - hollis stacy lpga money leader - judy rankin - 122,890 . harness racing . united states pacing triple crown races – cane pace - jade prince little brown jug - governor skipper messenger stakes - governor skipper united states trotting triple crown races – hambletonian - green speed yonkers trot - green speed kentucky futurity - texas australian inter dominion harness racing championship – pacers : stanley rio . horse racing . red rum wins the grand national a third time steeplechases cheltenham gold cup – davy lad grand national – red rum flat races australia – melbourne cup won by gold and black canada – queen 's plate won by sound reason france – prix de l'arc de triomphe won by alleged ireland – irish derby stakes won by the minstrel english triple crown races : 2,000 guineas stakes – nebbiolo the derby – the minstrel st . leger stakes – dunfermline united states triple crown races : kentucky derby – seattle slew preakness stakes – seattle slew belmont stakes – seattle slew . ice hockey . art ross trophy as the nhl 's leading scorer during the regular season : guy lafleur , montreal canadiens hart memorial trophy for the nhl 's most valuable player : guy lafleur - montreal canadiens stanley cup – montreal canadiens defeat the boston bruins 4 games to 0 . world hockey championship men 's champion : czechoslovakia defeated sweden junior men 's champion : soviet union defeated canada avco world trophy - quebec nordiques won 4 games to 3 over the winnipeg jets . motorsport . radiosport . eighth amateur radio direction finding european championship held in skopje , yugoslavia . first iaru radiosport championship held in july . rugby league . 1977 amco cup 1977 european rugby league championship 1977 new zealand rugby league season 1976–77 northern rugby football league season / 1977–78 northern rugby football league season 1977 nswrfl season - st george and parramatta draw 9–9 in the grand final . st george takes the title by winning the replay 22–0 . 1977 pacific cup 1977 rugby league world cup . rugby union . 83rd six nations championship series is won by france who complete the grand slam and do so by using the same 15 players in all four matches , the first time that an unchanged team has won the grand slam . snooker . world snooker championship – john spencer beats cliff thorburn 25-12 world rankings – ray reardon remains world number one for 1977/78 . swimming . july 3 – usa 's joseph bottom sets a world record in the 50m freestyle at a swimming meet in etobicoke , ontario ( canada ) , clocking 23.74 . tennis . grand slam in tennis men 's results : australian open - january : roscoe tanner - december : vitas gerulaitis french open - guillermo vilas wimbledon championships - björn borg us open - guillermo vilas grand slam in tennis women 's results : australian open – january : evonne goolagong - december : kerry reid french open - mima jaušovec wimbledon championships - virginia wade us open - chris evert davis cup – australia won 3–1 over italy in world tennis . volleyball . men and women 's european volleyball championship held in finland : both men 's and women 's tournaments won by ussr . yacht racing . the new york yacht club retains the america 's cup as media mogul ted turner skippers courageous to victory over challenger australia , of the sun city yacht club , 4 races to 0 . general sporting events . ninth summer universiade held in sofia , bulgaria . awards . associated press male athlete of the year – steve cauthen , horse racing associated press female athlete of the year – chris evert , tennis abc 's wide world of sports athlete of the year : steve cauthen , horse racing . references .