Laboratory

overview . laboratories used for scientific research take many forms because of the differing requirements of specialists in the various fields of science and engineering . a physics laboratory might contain a particle accelerator or vacuum chamber , while a metallurgy laboratory could have apparatus for casting or refining metals or for testing their strength . a chemist or biology might use a wet laboratory , while a psychology laboratory might be a room with one-way mirrors and hidden cameras in which to observe behavior . in some laboratories , such as those commonly used by computer scientists , computers ( sometimes supercomputers ) are used for either simulations or the analysis of data . scientists in other fields will use still other types of laboratories . engineers use laboratories as well to design , build , and test technological devices . scientific laboratories can be found as research room and learning spaces in schools and university , industry , government , or military facilities , and even aboard ships and spacecraft . despite the underlying notion of the lab as a confined space for experts , the term '' laboratory '' is also increasingly applied to workshop spaces such as living lab , fab lab , or hackerspaces , in which people meet to work on societal problems or make prototypes , working collaboratively or sharing resources . this development is inspired by new , participatory science to science and innovation and relies on user-centred design methods iso 13407 : ( 1999 ) , titled human-centred design processes for interactive systems , is an iso standard providing guidance on human-centred design activities throughout the life cycle of interactive computer-based systems . and concepts like open innovation or user innovation , . von hippel , e . ( 1986 ) . lead users : a source of novel product concepts . management science 32 , 791–805 . chesbrough , h.w . ( 2003 ) . open innovation : the new imperative for creating and profiting from technology . boston : harvard business school press . one distinctive feature of work in open labs is phenomena of translation , driven by the different backgrounds and levels of expertise of the people involved . . history . early instances of '' laboratories '' recorded in english involved alchemy and the preparation of medicines . : '' originally : a room or building for the practice of alchemy and the preparation of medicines . later : one equipped for carrying out scientific experiments or procedures , esp . for the purposes of research , teaching , or analysis ; ( also ) one in which chemicals or drugs are manufactured . '' the emergence of big science during world war ii increased the size of laboratories and scientific equipment , introducing particle accelerators and similar devices . the early laboratories . the earliest laboratory according to the present evidence is a home laboratory of pythagoras of samos , the well-known greek philosopher and scientist . this laboratory was created when pythagoras conducted an experiment about tones of sound and vibration of string . in the painting of louis pasteur by albert edelfelt in 1885 , louis pasteur is shown comparing a note in his left hand with a bottle filled with a solid in his right hand , and not wearing any personal protective equipment . researching in teams started in the 19th century , and many new kinds of equipment were developed in the 20th century . a 16th century underground alchemical laboratory was accidentally discovered in the year 2002 . rudolf ii , holy roman emperor was believed to be the owner . the laboratory is called speculum alchemiae and is preserved as a museum in prague . file : chemielabor des 18 . jahrhunderts , naturhistorisches museum wien.jpg chemistry laboratory of the 18th century , of the sort used by antoine lavoisier and his contemporaries file : edison in his nj laboratory 1901.jpg thomas edison in his laboratory , 1901 file : fotothek df n-09 0000024.jpg a laboratory in the 1970s file : muic chem lab.jpg chemical laboratory in mahidol university international college since 2009 file : muic counter in lab chem.jpg early 2000s style of counter in chemical laboratory , mahidol university international college , thailand file : chemisches labor.jpg laboratory for organic chemistry at the fh aachen , germany . techniques . laboratory techniques are the set of procedures used on natural sciences such as chemistry , biology , physics to conduct an experiment , all of them follow the scientific method ; while some of them involve the use of complex laboratory equipment from laboratory glassware to electrical devices , and others require more specific or expensive supplies . equipment and supplies . laboratory equipment refers to the various tools and equipment used by scientists working in a laboratory : the classical equipment includes tools such as bunsen burners and microscopes as well as specialty equipment such as operant conditioning chambers , spectrophotometers and calorimeters . ; chemical laboratories laboratory glassware such as the beaker or reagent bottle analytical devices as hplc or spectrophotometry ; molecular biology laboratories + life science laboratories autoclave microscope centrifuges shakers & mixers pipette thermal cyclers ( pcr ) photometer refrigerator universal testing machine ult freezer incubators bioreactor biosafety cabinet sequencing instruments fume hoods environmental chamber humidifier weighing scale reagents ( supply ) pipettes tips ( supply ) polymer ( supply ) consumables for small volumes ( µl and ml scale ) , mainly sterile laboratory equipment is generally used to either perform an experiment or to take measurements and gather data . larger or more sophisticated equipment is generally called a scientific instrument . specialized types . the title of laboratory is also used for certain other facilities where the processes or equipment used are similar to those in scientific laboratories . these notably include : film laboratory or darkroom clandestine lab for the production of illegal drugs computer lab crime lab used to process crime scene evidence language laboratory medical laboratory ( involves handling of chemical compounds ) public health laboratory industrial laboratory . safety . image:2008-07-02 eye wash station.jpg thumb an eyewash station in a laboratory . in many laboratories , hazards are present . laboratory hazards might include poisons ; infectious agents ; flammable , explosive , or radioactive materials ; moving machinery ; extreme temperatures ; lasers , strong magnetic fields or high voltage . therefore , safety precautions are vitally important . rules exist to minimize the individual 's risk , and safety equipment is used to protect the lab users from injury or to assist in responding to an emergency . the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) in the united states , recognizing the unique characteristics of the laboratory workplace , has tailored a standard for occupational exposure to hazardous chemicals in laboratories . this standard is often referred to as the '' laboratory standard '' . under this standard , a laboratory is required to produce a chemical hygiene plan ( chp ) which addresses the specific hazards found in its location , and its approach to them . in determining the proper chemical hygiene plan for a particular business or laboratory , it is necessary to understand the requirements of the standard , evaluation of the current safety , health and environmental practices and assessment of the hazards . the chp must be reviewed annually . many schools and businesses employ safety , health , and environmental specialists , such as a chemical hygiene officer ( cho ) to develop , manage , and evaluate their chp . additionally , third party review is also used to provide an objective '' outside view '' which provides a fresh look at areas and problems that may be taken for granted or overlooked due to habit . inspections and audits like also be conducted on a regular basis to assess hazards due to chemical handling and storage , electrical equipment , biohazards , hazardous waste management , chemical waste , housekeeping and emergency preparedness , radiation safety , ventilation as well as respiratory testing and indoor air quality . an important element of such audits is the review of regulatory compliance and the training of individuals who have access to or work in the laboratory . training is critical to the ongoing safe operation of the laboratory facility . educators , staff and management must be engaged in working to reduce the likelihood of accidents , injuries and potential litigation . efforts are made to ensure laboratory safety videos are both relevant and engaging . . organization . organization of laboratories is an area of focus in sociology . scientists consider how their work should be organized , which could be based on themes , teams , projects or fields of expertise . work is divided , not only between different jobs of the laboratory such as the researchers , engineers and technicians , but also in terms of autonomy ( should the work be individual or in groups ) . for example , one research group has a schedule where they conduct research on their own topic of interest for one day of the week , but for the rest they work on a given group project . finance management is yet another organizational issue . the laboratory itself is a historically dated organizational model . it came about due to the observation that the quality of work of researchers who collaborate is overall greater than a researcher working in isolation . from the 1950s , the laboratory has evolved from being an educational tool used by teachers to attract the top students into research , into an organizational model allowing a high level of scientific productivity . some forms of organization in laboratories include : their size : varies from a handful of researches to several hundred . the division of labor : '' occurs between designers and operatives ; researchers , engineers , and technicians ; theoreticians and experimenters ; senior researchers , junior researchers and students ; those who publish , those who sign the publications and the others ; and between specialities . '' the sociology of scientific work p98 the coordination mechanisms : which includes the formalization of objectives and tasks ; the standardization of procedures ( protocols , project management , quality management , knowledge management ) , the validation of publications and cross-cutting activities ( number and type of seminars ) . there are three main factors that contribute to the organizational form of a laboratory : the educational background of the researchers and their socialization process . the intellectual process involved in their work , including the type of investigation and equipment they use . the laboratory 's history . other forms of organization include social organization . social organization . a study by richard h.r . harper , involving two laboratories , will help elucidate the concept of social organization in laboratories . the main subject of the study revolved around the relationship between the staff of a laboratory ( researchers , administrators , receptionists , technicians , etc . ) and their locator . a locator is an employee of a laboratory who is in charge of knowing where each member of the laboratory currently is , based on a unique signal emitted from the badge of each staff member . the study describes social relationships among different classes of jobs , such as the relationship between researchers and the locator . it does not describe the social relationship between employees within a class , such as the relationship between researchers . through ethnography studies , one finding is that , among the personnel , each class ( researchers , administrators . ) has a different degree of entitlement , which varies per laboratory . entitlement can be both formal or informal ( meaning it 's not enforced ) , but each class is aware and conforms to its existence . the degree of entitlement , which is also referred to as a staff 's rights , affects social interaction between staff . by looking at the various interactions among staff members , we can determine their social position in the organization . as an example , administrators , in one lab of the study , do not have the right to ask the locator where the researchers currently are , as they are not entitled to such information . on the other hand , researchers do have access to this type of information . so a consequence of this social hierarchy is that the locator discloses various degrees of information , based on the staff member and their rights . the locator does not want to disclose information that could jeopardize his relationship with the members of staff . the locator adheres to the rights of each class . social hierarchy is also related to attitudes towards technologies . this was inferred based on the attitude of various jobs towards their lab badge . their attitude depended on how that job viewed their badge from a standpoint of utility , ( how is the badge useful for my job ) morality ( what are my morals on privacy , as it relates to being tracked by this badge ) and relations ( how will i be seen by others if i refuse to wear this badge ) . for example , a receptionist would view the badge as useful , as it would help them locate members of staff during the day . illustrating relations , researchers would also wear their badge due to informal pressures , such as not wanting to look like a spoil-sport , or not wanting to draw attention to themselves . another finding is the resistance to change in a social organization . staff members feel ill at ease when changing patterns of entitlement , obligation , respect , informal and formal hierarchy , and more . in summary , differences in attitude among members of the laboratory are explained by social organization : a person 's attitudes are intimately related to the role they have in an organization . this hierarchy helps understand information distribution , control , and attitudes towards technologies in the laboratory . . see also . cargo cult science chemical accident contamination control controlled lab reactor environmental health fume hood hackspace iso/iec 17025 lab website laboratory automation laboratory safety science tourism standard conditions for temperature and pressure workshop . references . external links . nobel laureates interactive 360° laboratories qa explore