1973 in music

specific locations . 1973 in british music 1973 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1973 in country music 1973 in heavy metal music 1973 in jazz . events . january–april . 8 january – british rail authorities restrict pipe major gordon speirs to playing his bagpipes just one minute in every fifteen on liverpool street station , london , on grounds that his playing ( part of a holiday campaign by the scottish tourist board ) '' interferes with station business '' . anon . , '' pipe down , rail chiefs tell major '' , the times issue 58676 ( january 9 , 1973 ) 9 january – mick jagger 's request for a japanese visa is rejected on account of a 1969 drug conviction , putting an abrupt end to the rolling stones ' plans to perform in japan during their forthcoming tour . 14 january elvis presley 's aloha from hawaii television special is broadcast in over 40 countries around the world . ( 41 counting der schwarze kanal on fernsehen der ddr ) grateful dead bassist phil lesh is arrested for drug possession at his marin county home . 18 january – the rolling stones ' benefit concert for nicaraguan earthquake victims raises over 350,000 . on december 22 , 1972 , an earthquake destroyed managua , the capital of nicaragua . 20 january – mike curb serves as master of ceremonies and chairman of the nixon youth inaugural concert in washington , dc . the events performers include solomon burke , tommy roe , jimmy osmond , ray stevens , the sylvers , don costa orchestra , laurie lee schaefer , the mike curb congregation , the mob and curb himself . 21 january – the rolling stones open their pacific tour of hawaii , australia and new zealand in honolulu , hawaii . 30 january – kiss perform their first concert , at the coventry club in queens . 2 february – the midnight special makes its début as a regular series on nbc . helen reddy is the featured artist . 14 february – david bowie collapses from exhaustion after a performance at new york 's madison square garden . 18 february – the king biscuit flower hour is first broadcast with performances by blood , sweat & tears , the mahavishnu orchestra , and new artist bruce springsteen . 1 march leonard bernstein conducts pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky 's violin concerto for the first time in his career , with soloist isaac stern and the new york philharmonic orchestra . the joffrey ballet 's deuce coupe ballet opens . the ballet is set entirely to music by the beach boys . pink floyd releases the dark side of the moon , which goes on to become one of the list of best-selling albums . the album debuts on the billboard 200 on march 17 , reaches 1 on april 28 , and eventually logs the all-time record of 741 weeks on that chart . 3 march – the 15th annual grammy awards are presented in nashville , hosted by andy williams . the concert for bangladesh , credited to george harrison & friends , wins album of the year , while roberta flack 's version of '' the first time ever i saw your face '' wins both record of the year and song of the year . america win best new artist . 5 march – jimi hendrix 's former personal manager , michael jeffery , is killed in a plane crash . jeffery was travelling from majorca to england . all passengers on board the plane were killed . 6 march – the new york office of the us immigration department cancels john lennon 's visa extension five days after granting it . 7 march – the director of talent acquisition at columbia records , john h . hammond , suffers a non-fatal heart attack following a performance by one of his most recent finds , bruce springsteen . 8 march – paul mccartney is fined 240 after pleading guilty to charges of growing marijuana outside his scottish farm . p300-307 14 march – the singers stephen stills and véronique sanson are married near guildford , england . 24 march – lou reed is bitten on the buttocks by a fan during a concert in buffalo , new york . 2 april – capitol records releases two collections of the beatles ' greatest hits , the beatles 1962-1966 and the beatles 1967-1970 ( commonly referred to as the '' red album '' and the '' blue album '' , respectively ) . 7 april – in luxembourg , the 18th eurovision song contest is won by luxembourg for the second consecutive year , this time with '' tu te reconnaîtras '' , sung by anne-marie david . spain finish in second place with '' eres tú '' , sung by mocedades ; the united kingdom finish third with cliff richard singing '' power to all our friends '' . the top three placed songs become international hits . 8 april – opening of the first la rochelle festival of contemporary music , under the direction of claude samuel . featured composers include karlheinz stockhausen and iannis xenakis 13 april – the wailers 's fifth studio album , catch a fire , was released under island records to critical acclaim . becoming one of the biggest albums of the reggae genre , it established the wailers and bob marley . 15 april – tenth royan festival begins , including concerts featuring music by jean barraqué and horațiu rădulescu , amongst others . 16 april – paul mccartney 's first solo television special , james paul mccartney , airs on abc . the special includes performances by mccartney and wings . 18 april – violinist jascha heifetz deposits parts from his prized guarnerius violin in the newly poured wet concrete of the foundation for the new virginia ramo hall of music , under construction at the university of southern california , in order to ensure the building will be '' in tune '' , and to bring luck . may–august . 4 may – 29 july – led zeppelin embarks on a tour of the united states , during which they set the record for highest attendance for a concert , 56,800 , at the tampa stadium in tampa , florida . the record was previously held by the beatles . performances for the movie the song remains the same are also filmed . 9 may – mick jagger adds 150,000 of his own money to the 350,000 raised by the rolling stones ' january 18 benefit concert for the victims of the nicaraguan earthquake . 12 may – david bowie is the first rock artist to perform at earls court exhibition centre . 13 may – daniel barenboim collapses with a gastric upset during a concert at the brighton festival , but later recovers sufficiently to be driven home . 23 may – don robey sells duke records , peacock records and backbeat records to abc dunhill records . 25 may – mike oldfield 's tubular bells becomes the first release on richard branson 's newly launched virgin label . 1 june – robert wyatt is crippled after falling three storeys from a london apartment block after leaving a party . during his six-month stay in hospital , he wrote the material for his solo album rock bottom . he would continue his musical career from a wheelchair . 4 june – ronnie lane plays his last show with faces at the edmonton sundown in london . lane had informed the band three weeks earlier that he was quitting . 15 june – the first istanbul international music festival opens . 16 june – benjamin britten 's opera death in venice , receives its première at snape maltings . 29 june – the scorpions play their first gig with uli roth at a festival in vechta . roth was originally intended as a temporary replacement for michael schenker , who had just been snapped up by ufo earlier in the month . 30 june – ian gillan quits deep purple . 1 july – slade play a sell-out earls court in london after two number one singles this year . 3 july – david bowie 'retires ' his stage persona ziggy stardust in front of a shocked audience at the hammersmith odeon at the end of his british tour . 4 july – slade drummer don powell is critically injured in a car crash in wolverhampton ; his 20-year-old girlfriend is killed . with his life in danger , the band 's future is left in the balance . powell recovers after surgery , and is able to join the band ten weeks later in new york , to record '' merry xmas everybody '' . 13 july the everly brothers break up . queen releases their debut album . 15 july – ray davies of the kinks makes an emotional outburst during a performance at white city stadium , announcing he is quitting the group . he later recants the statement . 28 july – summer jam at watkins glen rock festival is attended by 600,000 , who see the allman brothers band , the band , and the grateful dead . 30 july – soviet officials grant permission for gennadi rozhdestvensky to accept a three-year appointment as chief conductor of the stockholm philharmonic orchestra , the first time a soviet orchestra conductor has been allowed to take up such a position outside of the eastern bloc . anon . , '' russia lets conductor take post in sweden '' , the times , issue 58848 ( july 31 , 1973 ) : 5 col g . 6 august – stevie wonder is seriously injured in a car accident outside durham , north carolina , spending the next four days in a coma . 11 august – dj kool herc originates the hip hop genre in new york city . 20 august – the london symphony orchestra becomes the first british orchestra to take part in the salzburg festival . 25 august – the allman brothers nearly suffer another tragedy when butch trucks crashes his car near macon , georgia , not far from where duane allman was killed two years earlier . trucks survives with only a broken leg . september–december . 1 september – the rolling stones open their european tour in vienna , austria . 8 september – elton john performs at the hollywood bowl . 20 september – jim croce , maury muehleisen and four others die in a plane crash in louisiana . 22 september – benita valente makes her debut with the metropolitan opera , singing pamina in the magic flute . 23 september – the roxy theatre opens in west hollywood , california . 27 september – don kirshner 's rock concert premieres on syndicated television with a performance by the rolling stones . 29 september – jan akkerman from the netherlands was chosen 'best guitarist in the world ' by the readers of the uk magazine , melody maker . 6 october – brighouse and rastrick brass band become the national brass-band champions of great britain by defeating 18 other bands at the albert hall in london . anon . , '' brass band champions '' , the times issue 58907 ( october 8 , 1973 ) : 2 col . g . 12 october – genesis releases their 5th studio album selling england by the pound , one of their most critically acclaimed albums 13 october – family play their last concert at de montfort hall at leicester polytechnic ( now de montfort university ) before splitting up for good . a farewell party at a local holiday inn after the show ends in a good-natured melée , with people jumping in or pushed into the motel pool . 17 october – the 1973 oil crisis begins , causing shortages of the vinyl needed to manufacture records . a number of new albums are either delayed or only available in limited quantities until after the holiday season . 19 october – the who release quadrophenia , one of their most critically acclaimed albums . 20 october – elizabeth ii opens sydney opera house . 23 october – luis alberto spinetta presents the album artaud , considered to be his magnum opus , at the astral theatre on avenida corrientes . 1 november – kiss becomes the first act signed to neil bogart 's new label , casablanca records . 5 november cellist jacqueline du pré is forced to retire because she has been diagnosed with multiple sclerosis . anon . , '' miss du pré is forced by illness to retire '' , the times issue 58931 ( november 6 , 1973 ) : 1 col . a . two friends of the recently deceased gram parsons hand themselves in to police and confess to having carried out an impromptu cremation of the singer 's body at the joshua tree national monument . 7 november – harold holt ltd . , agent for jacqueline du pré , deny newspaper reports that she will never perform again , while at the same time confirming she has been diagnosed with '' a mild case of multiple sclerosis '' and has no definite plans for future performances . tim devlin , '' miss du pré 'very ill ' report denied '' , the times , issue 58932 ( november 7 , 1973 ) : 5 col c . 20 november – the who open their quadrophenia us tour with a concert at san francisco 's cow palace , but drummer keith moon passes out and has to be carried off the stage . pete townsend asks for a volunteer from the audience to replace moon and gets one ; nineteen-year-old fan scot halpin , who finishes the show . halpin says backstage after the show : '' i really admire their stamina ; i only played three numbers , and i was dead ! '' december – paul pena produces his second album , new train , but due to a dispute with albert grossman of bearsville records the album was never released . the album was finally released on hybrid recordings in 2000 . 3 december – cbgb music club opens in manhattan . 15 december – jermaine jackson marries hazel gordy , daughter of motown records executive berry gordy . 25 december – universal pictures releases the sting , reviving interest in the ragtime music of scott joplin . 31 december brothers malcolm and angus young perform under the name ac/dc at the former sydney nightclub 'chequers ' for their new year 's eve party . the second annual new year 's rockin ' eve airs on nbc , with performances by tower of power , billy preston and the pointer sisters . unknown dates . musica antiqua köln formed . royal manchester college of music and the northern school of music merge to create the royal northern college of music . the santa fe chamber music festival is launched , with pablo casals as its president . u.f.o . signs a contract with chrysalis records . approximate date – salsa music originates in new york city . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1973 . bands disbanded . see musical groups disestablished in 1973 . albums released . january . . other selected singles . published popular music . '' and i love you so '' w.m . don mclean '' candle in the wind '' w . bernie taupin m . elton john '' i 'll have to say i love you in a song '' w.m . jim croce '' i 've got to use my imagination '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . gerry goffin & barry goldberg '' last song '' w.m . lawrence wayne evoy '' liaisons '' w.m . stephen sondheim from the musical a little night music '' midnight train to georgia '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . jim weatherly '' misdemeanor '' w.m . foster sylvers '' nadia 's theme '' m . barry devorzon and perry botkin , jr . , from the tv soap opera the young and the restless '' ( say has anybody seen ) my sweet gypsy rose '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . irwin levine & l . russell brown '' piano man '' w.m . billy joel '' send in the clowns '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . stephen sondheim from the musical a little night music '' stuck in the middle with you '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . joe egan & gerry rafferty '' there used to be a ballpark '' w.m . joe raposo '' top of the world '' w.m . john bettis & richard carpenter '' the way we were '' w . alan and marilyn bergman m . marvin hamlisch from the film the way we were '' wold ( song ) '' – harry chapin '' yesterday once more '' w.m . john bettis & richard carpenter . other notable songs ( world ) . '' desert of passion '' – the peanuts ( japan ) '' fusil contra fusil '' – silvio rodríguez ( cuba ) '' goodbye , my love , goodbye '' – demis roussos ( europe-wide ) '' i love you because '' – michel polnareff ( france ) '' j'ai un probleme '' – sylvie vartan ( france ) '' mistero '' – gigliola cinquetti ( italy ) . classical music . jean absil – concerto for piano and orchestra no . 3 william alwyn – fantasy sonata for flute and harp malcolm arnold – symphony no . 7 günter bialas – trois moments musicaux , for piano luciano berio concerto for two pianos and orchestra still , for orchestra linea for two pianos , marimba and vibraphone john cage etcetera , for small orchestra , tape and , optionally , three conductors exercise , for an orchestra of soloists ( based on etcetera ) carlos chávez estudio a rubinstein , for piano paisajes mexicanos , for orchestra partita , for timpani sonante , for orchestra gloria coates – music on open strings ( symphony no . 1 ) george crumb – makrokosmos volume ii for amplified piano morton feldman string quartet and orchestra for frank o'hara , for flute , clarinet , percussion , piano , violin , and cello voices and cello , for 2 female voices and cello alberto ginastera – string quartet no . 3 lou harrison – organ concerto with percussion anthony iannaccone – rituals ben johnston '' i 'm goin ' away '' , for satb choir string quartet no . 3 , '' vergings '' string quartet no . 4 , '' ascent '' ( '' amazing grace '' ) paul lansky – mild und leise ( computer music ) bruno maderna – oboe concerto no . 3 daniel stolper , tom stacy , ned rorem and a new concerto , the double reed , vol . 17 , no . 2 , 1992 frank martin – requiem donald martino – notturno , for piccolo/flute/alto flute , clarinet/bass clarinet , violin , viola , 'cello , piano , and percussion ( awarded the 1974 pulitzer prize in music ) akira miyoshi – nocturne luigi nono – canto per il vietnam carl orff – de temporum fine comoedia arvo pärt – ukuaru valss walter piston – three counterpoints , for violin , viola , and cello henri pousseur – vue sur les jardins interdits , for saxophone quartet dmitri shostakovich – six poems of marina tsvetaeva , op . 143 eduard tubin – symphony no . 10 . opera . robert beadell – napoleon ( 2 february , university of nebraska , lincoln ) nikolai korndorf – feast in the time of plague . jazz . musical theater . gigi ( alan jay lerner and frederick loewe ) – broadway production ( adaptation of the film version ) grease – london production gypsy ( jule styne and stephen sondheim ) – london production opened at the piccadilly theatre on may 29 starring angela lansbury , barrie ingham and zan charisse irene – broadway revival the king and i ( rodgers & hammerstein ) – london revival a little night music ( stephen sondheim ) – broadway production opened at the shubert theatre and ran for 601 performances no , no , nanette ( irving caesar , otto harbach , vincent youmans ) – london revival the pajama game ( richard adler and jerry ross ) – broadway revival pippin ' – london production raisin – broadway production opened at the 46th street theatre and ran for 847 performances the rocky horror show ( richard o'brien ) – london production seesaw – broadway production opened at the uris theatre on march 18 and ran for 296 performances treasure island london production opened at the mermaid theatre on december 17 . starred bernard miles , jonathan scott taylor and spike milligan . two gentleman of verona – london production . musical films . allá en el norte andrea dnestrovskiye melodii charlotte 's web godspell jaal jesus christ superstar lost horizon maria d'oro und bello blue robin hood tom sawyer . births . 1 january – magnus sahlgren , swedish guitarist and linguist 9 january – sean paul , jamaican reggae and dancehall artist 12 january hande yener , turkish singer matt wong ( reel big fish ) 13 january – juan diego flórez , peruvian operatic tenor 2 february – latino , brazilian singer-songwriter 21 february – justin sane , singer , guitarist and songwriter 22 february gustavo assis-brasil , brazilian guitarist scott phillips , drummer 23 february – peter andre , english born australian singer , songwriter , businessman and television personality . ( katie price ) 24 february – chris fehn , american rock percussionist ( slipknot ) 26 february – atb , german dj 1 march – ryan peake , canadian rock musician ( nickelback ) 10 march – dan swanö , swedish musician 17 march – caroline corr , irish drummer ( the corrs ) 25 march – anders fridén , swedish vocalist 3 april marija gluvakov , pianist pharrell williams , american rapper , singer , songwriter , record producer , and film producer . ( the neptunes , n.e.r.d , chad hugo ) andreas carlsson , swedish music producer , composer , and pop songwriter . 4 april – kelly price , soul singer 16 april – akon , american singer , songwriter , businessman , record producer and actor 29 april – mike hogan , irish bassist ( the cranberries ) 2 may – justin burnett , film score composer 5 may – casino versus japan , electronic musician 13 may – eric lewis , jazz pianist 14 may natalie appleton , canadian singer-songwriter and actress , ( all saints ) shanice , american singer 17 may – joshua homme , american guitarist and vocalist of queens of the stone age 21 may – noel fielding , english comedian , writer , actor , artist , musician and television presenter . 23 may – jacopo gianninoto , italian musician 26 may – magdalena kožená , czech mezzo-soprano 1 june – heidi klum , german business woman , singer , television producer-personality , model , actress , author , and fashion designer 9 june – jana sýkorová , czech operatic contralto 10 june faith evans , american singer-songwriter , record producer , and actress flesh-n-bone , american rapper 13 june – cheryl '' coko '' clemons , american singer ( swv ) 17 june – krayzie bone , american rapper and producer ( bone thugs-n-harmony ) 19 june – jörg widmann , german clarinetist and composer 20 june – chino moreno , american singer-songwriter ( deftones , team sleep , and crosses ) 23 june – marie n , latvian eurovision-winning singer 26 june – gretchen wilson , american singer 4 july – gackt , japanese musician , singer , songwriter , record producer and actor . 5 july bengt lagerberg , swedish drummer ( the cardigans ) róisín murphy , irish singer-songwriter and record producer 11 july – andrew bird , american violinist , singer , and songwriter 15 july – buju banton , jamaican dancehall , ragga , and reggae musician 17 july – tony dovolani , albanian-american dancer and actor 22 july aleksey igudesman , russian violinist , composer , conductor and actor daniel jones , english-australian guitarist , songwriter , and producer ( savage garden ) petey pablo , american rapper and actor 23 july – fran healy , british singer ( travis ) 25 july – dani filth , israeli-born musician ( cradle of filth ) 29 july wanya morris , american singer ( boyz ii men ) amy s . foster , canadian singer-songwriter and author 7 august – zane lowe , new zealand born radio presenter , dj , tv presenter , and record producer 8 august – scott stapp , american singer ( creed ) 9 august – meg okura , jazz violinist , erhu player and composer 12 august – grey delisle , american voice actress and singer 13 august – gregory vajda , hungarian clarinetist , conductor and composer 15 august – adnan sami , british-born singer , music composer , pianist 22 august beenie man , reggae/dancehall artist howie dorough , american singer ( backstreet boys ) 24 august – grey delisle-griffin , american singer and voice actress 1 september – j.d . fortune , canadian rock singer ( inxs ) 3 september jennifer paige , american singer and songwriter rose mcgowan , american activist , former actress , author , model , and singer 5 september – rose mcgowan , american actress , model , singer , and author 12 september – dorota miśkiewicz , polish singer , songwriter , composer and violinist 14 september – nas , american rapper 17 september – amy black , british operatic mezzo-soprano ( died 2009 ) 18 september – ami onuki , japanese singer 22 september yoo chae-yeong , south korean singer and actress martin owen ( bbc symphony orchestra ) 26 september – julienne davis , american actress/model/singer 29 september alfie boe , operatic tenor rie eto , japanese singer 2 october proof american rapper and member of d12 ( d . 2006 ) lene nystrøm , norwegian singer ( aqua ) latocha scott , american singer verka serduchka , ukrainian pop star 9 october terry balsamo , american guitarist , songwriter jen cloher , australian singer/songwriter/musician october 24 – laura veirs , n american singer-songwriter . 3 november sticky fingaz , american rapper ( onyx ) mick thomson , guitarist of slipknot 9 november – nick lachey , american singer ( 98 degrees ) 10 november – jacqui abbott , english singer ( the beautiful south ) 11 november – jason white , american rock musician ( green day ) 12 november - mayte garcia , american actress , singer , author and dancer 28 november – jade puget ( afi ) 4 december – kate rusby , english folk singer-songwriter 8 december – corey taylor , american musician , singer , songwriter , actor , and author ( slipknot ) 7 december – chantelle barry , australian singer-songwriter and actress 9 december – bárbara padilla , a mexican-american operatic soprano . 11 december – mos def , rapper 17 december – eddie fisher ( onerepublic ) 27 december – kristoffer zegers , dutch composer 29 december – pimp c , american rapper ( d . 2007 ) undated – xian zhang . chinese-born orchestral conductor . deaths . 16 january – clara ward , gospel singer , 48 ( stroke ) 23 january – kid ory , jazz trombonist and bandleader , 86 3 february – andy razaf , composer , poet and lyricist , 77 7 february – pixinguinha , choro composer and woodwind player , 75 19 february joseph szigeti , violinist , 80 leon washington , jazz saxophonist , 63 ( leukemia ) 28 february – terig tucci , argentine composer , violinist , pianist and mandolinist , 75 5 march – michael jeffery , jimi hendrix 's personal manager 8 march – ron pigpen mckernan , musician and songwriter ( grateful dead ) , 27 ( stomach hemorrhage ) 19 march – lauritz melchior , wagnerian tenor , 82 26 march safford cape , american composer and musicologist , 66 noël coward , composer and dramatist , 73 28 march – gertrude johnson , coloratura soprano , 78 18 april – willie 'the lion ' smith , us jazz pianist , 79 9 may – mark wessel , pianist and composer , 79 21 may – vaughn monroe , us singer and bandleader , 61 27 may – ilona kabos , hungarian-british pianist and teacher , 79 4 june – murry wilson , musician and record producer , 55 8 june – tubby hayes , jazz musician , 38 ( during heart surgery ) 2 july – betty grable , us actress and singer , 56 ( lung cancer ) 3 july – karel ančerl , conductor , 65 6 july – otto klemperer , conductor , 88 11 july – alexander mosolov , russian composer , 72 15 july – clarence white , guitarist ( the byrds ) , 29 ( road accident ) 2 august – rosetta pampanini , operatic soprano , 76 4 august – eddie condon , jazz banjoist and guitarist , 67 6 august – memphis minnie , blues singer and guitarist , 76 16 august – astra desmond , operatic contralto , 80 17 august jean barraqué , french classical composer , 45 paul williams , baritone singer and co-founder of the motown group , the temptations , 34 ( suicide by gunshot ) 19 august – brew moore , jazz saxophonist , 49 ( fell downstairs ) 1 september – graziella pareto , operatic soprano , 84 6 september – sir william henry harris , organist and composer , 90 10 september – allan gray , composer , 71 11 september – martha angelici , operatic soprano , 66 16 september – víctor jara , chilean folk singer , 40 ( murdered ) 17 september– hugo winterhalter , us conductor and arranger , 53 19 september – gram parsons , guitarist/vocalist , 26 ( drug overdose ) the encyclopedia of dead rock stars : heroin , handguns , and ham sandwiches by jeremy simmonds p . 66 20 september jim croce , 30 , singer-songwriter and maury muehleisen , 24 , multi-instrumentalist and songwriter ( plane crash ) ben webster , jazz saxophonist , 64 9 october – sister rosetta tharpe , gospel singer , 58 16 october gene krupa , drummer , 64 jorge peña hen , composer , 45 22 october – pablo casals , cellist , 95 27 october – norman allin , english singer , 88 10 november zeke zettner ( the stooges ) , 25 ( heroin overdose ) david '' stringbean '' akeman , country banjo player and comedian , 57 ( murdered ) 18 november – alois hába , composer , 80 23 november – de de pierce , jazz trumpeter , 69 26 november – edith mason , operatic soprano , 81 27 november – frank christian , jazz trumpeter , 85 13 december – fanny heldy , operatic soprano , 85 20 december – bobby darin , american singer and actor , 37 ( heart failure ) 31 december – emile christian , jazz trombonist , 78 date unknown – cäwdät fäyzi , tatar composer and folklorist . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1973 . country music association awards . . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1973 . references .