Samuel Clarke

early life and studies . clarke was born in norwich , the son of edward clarke , an alderman of norwich and member of parliament , and brother of john clarke . he was educated at norwich school and caius college , cambridge . his tutor at caius was john ellis , a personal friend of isaac newton , but who in natural philosophy taught in line with the cartesianism that prevailed in the university . clarke , however , came to adopt the new physical system of newton ; he used the vehicle of an annotated translation of a work on physics in the cartesian tradition to comment on the superiority of the newtonian system . this textbook was published in 1697 , and in the same year clarke met the newtonian william whiston . it was a chance encounter in norwich , but whiston was then chaplain to john moore , bishop of norwich . having taken holy orders , clarke became chaplain to moore in whiston 's place , and was presented by moore to the rectory of drayton , norfolk . in 1706 , through the influence of moore , clarke obtained the rectory of st benet paul 's wharf , london . soon afterwards queen anne appointed him one of her chaplains in ordinary , and in 1709 presented him to the rectory of st james 's , westminster . his church brought clarke into personal contact with newton . . boyle lectures ( 1704 ) . clarke was boyle lecturer for two years , and produced two books . the newtonian theologians used the boyle lectures to attack opponents ( thomas hobbes and baruch spinoza , deists and freethinkers in particular ) . clarke 's lectures set the agenda for further debates . he dealt in 1704 with the being and attributes of god , an example of a physico-theological system ; and in 1705 with the evidences of natural and revealed religion . these books were later published together . as a discourse concerning the being and attributes of god , the obligations of natural religion , and the truth and certainly of the christian revelation ; subtitled as in opposition to hobbes , spinoza , the author of the oracles of reason ( i.e . charles blount ) , and other '' deniers of natural and revealed religion '' . clarke 's reputation rested largely on his effort to demonstrate the existence of god , and his theory of the foundation of rectitude . the former is not a purely a priori argument , and it was not presented as such . the intelligence , for example , of the self-existence and original cause of all things is , he says , '' not easily proved a priori , '' but '' demonstrably proved a posteriori from the variety and degrees of perfection in things , and the order of causes and effects , from the intelligence that created beings are confessedly endowed with , and from the beauty , order , and final purpose of things . '' the theses maintained in the argument are : that something has existed from eternity that there has existed from eternity some one immutable and independent being that that immutable and independent being , which has existed from eternity , without any external cause of its existence , must be self-existent , that is , necessarily existing what the substance or essence of that being is , which is self-existent or necessarily existing , we have no idea , neither is it at all possible for us to comprehend it that though the substance or essence of the self-existent being is itself absolutely incomprehensible to us , yet many of the essential attributes of his nature are strictly demonstrable as well as his existence , and , in the first place , that he must be of necessity eternal that the self-existent being must of necessity be infinite and omnipresent must be but one must be an intelligent being must be not a necessary agent , but a being endued with liberty and choice must of necessity have infinite power must be infinitely wise , and must of necessity be a being of infinite goodness , justice , and truth , and all other moral perfections , such as become the supreme governor and judge of the world . in order to establish his sixth thesis , clarke contended that time and space , eternity and immensity , are not substances , but attributes : the attributes of a self-existent being . the work of clarke on the existence of god set off a british debate that lasted to the middle of the century . edmund law and other writers represented clarke as arguing from the existence of time and space to the existence of deity . law was influenced by a 1718 work of samuel colliber that modified clarke 's approach . . correspondence with anthony collins . the public correspondence of samuel clarke with the english freethinker anthony collins in 1707 and 1708 was a debate on the nature of consciousness . the principal focus of the correspondence was the possibility of a materialist theory of mind . collins defended the materialist position that consciousness was an emergent property of the brain , while clarke opposed such a view and argued that mind and consciousness must be distinct from matter . the correspondence also inquired into the origins of consciousness , personal identity , free will , and determinism . the debate arose from a controversy of 1706 on the immortality of the soul . clarke published a refutation of the views of henry dodwell , and this drew in collins , who wrote a letter to mr dodwell in his defence . by the sixth edition ( 1731 ) , clarke 's own letter to mr dodwell of 1706 had grown to 475 pages , including the replies of collins . clarke 's main argument against dodwell was that the soul , being immaterial , must be immortal . john norris argued differently , though on clarke 's side of the debate , using in particular the ideas of malebranche . collins challenged clarke on the ground of his substance dualism . liam p . dempsey , thinking-matter then and now : the evolution of mind-body dualism , history of philosophy quarterly vol . 26 , no . 1 ( jan . 2009 ) , pp . 43-61 , at p . 52 . published by : university of illinois press on behalf of north american philosophical publications . stable url : . the scripture doctrine of the trinity ( 1712 ) . clarke studied scripture in the original languages , and the primitive christian writers . he took the degree of d.d . in 1710 , defending as his thesis the two propositions : nullum fidei christianae dogma , in sacris scripturis traditum , est rectae rationi dissentaneum , and sine actionum humanarum libertate nulla potest esse religio . the formal disputation was long remembered for clarke 's virtuosity ; but the presiding regius professor , henry james , received the distinct impression that clarke 's views on the trinity were unorthodox . clarke was required to swear to keep the 39 articles ; and his attempt at self-justification by putting his views in book form were not immediately successful . during 1712 clarke published his treatise on the scripture doctrine of the trinity . the scripture-doctrine of the trinity ; london : printed for james knapton , at the crown in st . paul 's church-yard , 1712 . it is divided into three parts . the first contains a collection and exegesis of texts in the new testament relating to the doctrine of the trinity ; in the second the doctrine is set out , and explained as a set of propositions ; and in the third passages in the liturgy of the church of england relating to the doctrine of the trinity are considered . whiston claimed that , some time before publication , a message was sent to clarke by sidney godolphin , to the effect '' the affairs of the public were with difficulty then kept in the hands of those that were for liberty '' , and that therefore it was a bad time for the publication of a controversial book . clarke in any case took no notice of any whig qualms . maurice wiles calls clarke 's views '' moderate arianism '' . at the time they were certainly denounced as arianism ; they belonged , as did newton 's , to the type of antitrinitarianism later called '' high arianism '' . clarke 's position was subordinationist , and less radical than newton 's and typical english unitarians of his time . he looked at 1251 biblical texts , and rejected the comma johanneum . he made a more careful case than whiston . . the trinitarian controversy . the controversy within the church of england to which clarke was a major contributor had been initiated by george bull , with his publication in 1685 of views on the opinions of the church fathers before the first council of nicaea ( 325 ad ) . he was reacting to issues that had been raised elsewhere in europe , by petavius , by christopher sandius and daniel zwicker for the socinian camp , and the arminians . it was only with the close discussions of clarke and his major opponent daniel waterland , a generation later , that the theological and historical points involved came clearly into focus . clarke and waterland had definite differences on the theology of consubstantiality and aseity . waterland argued in theology for the anglican orthodoxy of time , in particular that the possible attitudes were , besides the orthodox athanasian view , limited to arianism and sabellianism ; and that the two latter were not consistent with scripture . he also championed bull 's historical claim , that the fathers before nicaea held the views that were orthodox after nicaea . clarke 's resistance to both points has had serious support from modern scholars . the trajectory of the english controversy from 1712 involved at least ten writers . by summer 1714 the debate on the scripture doctrine of the trinity had ramified , and provoked a formal complaint from the lower house of convocation : the blasphemy act 1697 still made it an offence for '' any person , educated in or having made profession of the christian religion , by writing , preaching , teaching or advised speaking , to deny the holy trinity '' . clarke drew up an apologetic preface , and then gave explanations which satisfied the upper house of convocation . he had strong supporters among the bishops . clarke promised not to preach or write on the topic . arthur ashley sykes and john jackson from then on acted as his proxies . other main participants in the controversy were john edwards , francis gastrell , james knight who published with bull 's biographer robert nelson , richard mayo of great kimble ( son of the nonconformist richard mayo ) , stephen nye , edward welchman and edward wells . caroline of ansbach , the princess of wales , requested that clarke defend his views in a disputation with edward hawarden , and it took place in 1719 , in her presence . hawarden returned to the subject in answer to dr . clarke and mr . whiston ( 1729 ) . . correspondence with leibniz . in 1715 and 1716 clarke had a discussion with gottfried leibniz on the principles of natural philosophy and religion , which was cut short when leibniz died . a collection of the papers which passed between them was published in 1717 . georg victor leroy , die philosophischen probleme in dem briefwechsel leibniz und clarke , giessen , 1893 . . later life and death . in 1719 clarke was presented by nicholas lechmere , 1st baron lechmere , to the mastership of wigston 's hospital in leicester . in 1727 , on the death of sir isaac newton , he was offered by the court the place of master of the mint , worth on an average from £1200 to £1500 a year . he refused the post . on sunday 11 may 1729 , when going out to preach before the judges at serjeants ' inn , clarke had a sudden illness . it caused his death on the saturday following , in london . . translations . clarke published a latin version of the traité de physique of jacques rohault ( 1617 ( ? ) -1672 ) with notes , which he finished before he was twenty-two . the system of rohault was based on cartesian principles , and was previously known only through the medium of a crude latin version . clarke 's translation ( 1697 ) continued to be used as a text-book in the university till supplanted by the treatises of newton . four editions were issued , the last being that of 1718 . it was translated into english in 1723 by his younger brother john , dean of salisbury . in 1706 clarke translated newton 's opticks into latin , for which the author presented him with £500 . in 1709 , at the request of the author , clarke revised william whiston 's english translation of the apostolical constitutions . in 1712 he published an annotated edition of caesar 's commentaries , with engravings , dedicated to john churchill , 1st duke of marlborough . in 1729 he published the first twelve books of homer 's iliad . this edition , dedicated to william augustus , duke of cumberland , was praised by bishop hoadly . three years after his death appeared also the last twelve books of the iliad , published by his son samuel clarke , the first three of these books and part of the fourth having , as he states , been revised and annotated by his father . . other works . in 1699 clarke published two treatises : three practical essays on baptism , confirmation and repentance and some reflections on that part of a book called amyntor , or a defence of milton 's life , which relates to the writings of the primitive fathers , and the canon of the new testament . in 1701 he published a paraphrase upon the gospel of st matthew , which was followed , in 1702 , by the paraphrases upon the gospels of st mark and st luke , and soon afterwards by a third volume upon st john . they were subsequently printed together in two volumes and passed through several editions . in 1724 clarke published seventeen sermons , eleven of which had not before been printed . in 1728 was published '' a letter from dr clarke to benjamin hoadly , f.r.s . , occasioned by the controversy relating to the proportion of velocity and force in bodies in motion , '' printed in the philosophical transactions . soon after his death his brother , dr john clarke , published , from his original manuscripts , an exposition of the church catechism , and ten volumes of sermons . the exposition is composed of the lectures which he read on thursday mornings , for some months in the year , at st james 's church . he revised them , and left them ready for the press . . moral views . clarke 's ethical theory of '' fitness '' is formulated on the analogy of mathematics . he held that in relation to the will things possess an objective fitness similar to the mutual consistency of things in the physical universe . this fitness god has given to actions , as he has given laws to nature ; and the fitness is as immutable as the laws . the theory was criticized by théodore simon jouffroy , amédée jacques , sir james mackintosh , thomas brown , francis hutcheson , and others , but substantially defended by john balguy against hutcheson 's sentimentalist case against moral rationalism . a similar form of moral rationalism is developed by the cambridge platonist ralph cudworth . influence . clarke had an influence on enlightenment philosophers including lord monboddo . he left notes on the book of common prayer . these became the source of theophilus lindsey 's the book of common prayer reformed according to the plan of the late dr . samuel clarke 1774 , and other liturgical works . . family . clarke married his first cousin katherine lockwood ( d . 1753 ) , daughter of the rev . mr . lockwood of little massingham , norfolk and katherine clarke in st margaret 's church , burnham norton , norfolk on 17 october 1700 . they had seven children , of whom five survived him ; only three children are mentioned in their mother 's will , samuel , dorothy and katherine . '' will of catherine clarke , widow of saint james westminster , middlesex '' , proved 25 june 1753 , prob 11/802/391 , national archives . clarke 's surviving son samuel clarke ( b . 1710 ) died without issue sometime in 1778 . his will was proved by his cousin frances clarke , one of the daughters of his uncle john clarke on 13th may 1778 . '' will of samuel clarke of saint george hanover square , middlesex '' , proved 13 may 1778 , prob 11/1042/264 , national archives . . writings . a demonstration of the being and attributes of god : and other writings , edited by ezio vailati , cambridge : cambridge university press , 1998 . g . w . leibniz and samuel clarke . correspondence , edited by roger ariew , indianapolis : hackett , 2000 . see also . axiom of equity thomas chubb . notes . attribution . further reading . alexander bain , moral science ( 1872 ) , p . & nbsp ; 562 foil . , and mental science ( 1872 ) , p . & nbsp ; 416 . preface by benjamin hoadly to clarke 's works ( 4 vols . , london , 1738–1742 ) . john hunt , religious thought in england ( 1870–78 , 3 vols . ) , passim , but particularly in vol . ii . 447-457 , and vol . iii . 20-29 and 109-115 , & c . on his general philosophical position . j . e . le rossignol , ethical philosophy of s . clarke ( leipzig , 1892 ) . ortner , ulrich j . , die trinitätslehre samuel clarkes . ein forschungsbeitrag zur theologie der frühen englischen aufklärung , frankfurt am main : lang , 1996 . pfizenmaier , thomas c . the trinitarian theology of dr . samuel clarke ( 1675-1729 ) : context , sources , and controversy , leiden : brill , 1997 . henry sidgwick , methods of ethics ( 6th ed . , 1901 ) , p . & nbsp ; 384 . leslie stephen , english thought in the eighteenth century ( 3rd ed . , 1902 ) , c . iii . william whiston , historical memoirs of the life and writings of dr . samuel clarke , london , 1730 . robert zimmermann , samuel clarke 's leben und lehre : ein beitrag zur geschichte des rationalismus in england in denkschriften d . k . akademie der wissenschaften , phil . hist . classe , bd . xix . ( vienna , 1870 ) . external links . a fairly readable version of the correspondence with leibniz , a correspondence with joseph butler , and clarke 's '' demonstration of the being and attributes of god '' .