Bobby Chacon

biography . early career . born in pacoima , in the san fernando valley , chacon graduated from san fernando high school and turned professional in 1972 while a student at california state university , northridge , leading to the nickname '' schoolboy '' . he trained under joe ponce and won his first 19 fights , including a win against former champion jesus castillo . fourteen months into his professional career , chacon faced world champion rubén olivares but lost the bout when olivares scored a ninth-round knock out . after suffering his first defeat against olivares , chacon won his next four bouts , then faced off against cross-town rival and future champion danny lopez . chacon outboxed lopez and stopped him in the ninth round . wbc featherweight title . on september 7 , 1974 , chacon won the vacant wbc featherweight title by defeating former wba junior lightweight champion alfredo marcano in nine rounds at the grand olympic auditorium in los angeles . during his first period as a world champion , chacon got to enjoy the good life , but he loved partying and became an alcoholic . chacon lost his title in his second defense against arch-rival rubén olivares . almost immediately after the loss , he fought the first of bobby chacon vs . rafael limon , rafael limón , beginning what some boxing experts and historians called one of the fiercest and most spectacular boxing rivalries in history . limón beat chacon in their first bout by a decision . chacon then scored nine straight wins , leading him to a third match with olivares . this time , chacon defeated olivares in their 12-round bout by a decision . in chacon 's next fight , he lost an upset decision to arturo leon . chacon rebounded by scoring victories over ignacio campos , augie pantellas , gerald hayes and shig fukuyama . he then fought to a technical draw in a rematch against rafael limón . in november 1979 , chacon received a shot at the wbc title , versus world champion alexis argüello . arguello defeated him by a devastating knock out after chacon suffered a bad cut in the seventh round . in 1980 , chacon had only one fight , but it was a significant one . he beat limón in their third bout , and the wbc once again made him their number one challenger . in 1981 , arguello had left the title vacant and gone up in weight to pursue the world 's lightweight title . limón then beat idelfonso bethelmy by a knockout in 15 in los angeles to win the wbc world jr . lightweight championship . in his first title defense , he lost it by a decision to uganda 's cornelius boza-edwards , who , in turn , defended his title against chacon on his first defense . in a televised bout , edwards retained the world title by a knockout in the thirteenth round . chacon won five fights in a row in 1982 , including a rematch victory over arturo leon , which kept him as the number one challenger , but then a dramatic development outside the ring changed his life forever : chacon 's wife , valorie chacon , flew to hawaii on february of that year , hoping to convince him to leave boxing and move there if she found them good jobs . she was able to find a job , but unable to convince him to join her in hawaii , so she flew back . she pleaded for him to leave the sport but was unsuccessful , and the night before he boxed salvador ugalde , she shot and killed herself with a rifle . chacon went through with the fight and ko'ed ugalde in the third round . he dedicated his win to his deceased wife . . wbc super featherwight title . two more victories followed before his fourth and final bout with limón . limón had regained the world 's jr . lightweight title by beating rolando navarrete by a knockout in 12 rounds . navarrete , for his part , had won the title by beating edwards by a knockout in five rounds . chacon-limón iv became one of the fights of the year and the decade , according to such magazines as the ring , ko magazine , and ring en español , and after 15 rounds chacon secured a close decision and his second world title in sacramento . about one and a half years after his wife 's suicide , chacon remarried and bought a large farm with a mansion and , according to what he said at an interview , about 40 horses . he also acquired a collection of rolls royce cars and some other vehicles . in between , he and boza edwards met for a second time , with his world title on the line , in what the ring called 1983 's fight of the year . chacon rose from a knockdown in round one and recovered from a dangerous cut . the announcers , including ferdie pacheco , were explicit in saying the fight should be stopped because of the pounding chacon endured . but chacon came back to drop boza edwards in round twelve and avenge his earlier defeat to the ugandan former champion . in 1983 , chacon was signed to defend his wbc title in that rematch against boza edwards , who was the wbc 's mandatory challenger . even though wbc rules stated the mandatory challenger should receive a shot at the title , the wbc insisted chacon fight héctor camacho in puerto rico instead , then stripped him of his title when he refused . chacon started 1984 with a move up in weight , to the lightweight division , where he tried to join the exclusive club of boxing 's three division world champions , but was knocked out in three during his challenge against world champion ray mancini in reno . chacon then beat carlton sparrow by a tko in five rounds and announced his retirement . chacon came back in 1985 and he won five fights , including one against former world champion arturo frias by a knockout in seven , and a knockout in five over rafael solis , who had challenged camacho for the world jr . lightweight title that had once belonged to chacon . in 1987 and 1989 he won one fight each year . he retired in 1989 winning 14 out of his last 15 fights . later life , death . chacon was placed on probation in 1984 for beating his second of three wives . his life was again marred by tragedy in 1991 , when his son bobby jr . was killed in a gang slaying . in 1996 , he was spotted at a public appearance in phoenix , arizona , to see the fight between oscar de la hoya and julio césar chávez . by 2000 he had lost most of his savings and was being cared for by a nurse as he suffered from the effects of dementia pugilistica ( boxer 's syndrome ) . he died after suffering a fall while in hospice care for dementia on september 7 , 2016 . he was 64 . honors and references . in 1982 , he was named comeback fighter of the year by the ring . his wins over limon in 1982 and edwards in 1983 , were both named ring magazine fights of the year . in 2003 , chacon was included on the rings list of '' the 100 greatest punchers of all-time '' . chacon was inducted into the international boxing hall of fame in january 2005 ; he was to be inducted into the west coast boxing hall of fame later in september 2016 . the chorus of warren zevon 's song '' boom boom mancini '' , from his 1987 album sentimental hygiene , makes reference to chacon 's fight with mancini three years earlier . chacon died thirteen years to the day after zevon .