USS San Marcos (LSD-25)

u.s . navy career . san marcos keel was laid down on 1 september 1944 at the philadelphia navy yard . she was launched on 10 january 1945 , and commissioned on 15 april 1945 with commander l . & nbsp ; e . ellis in command . san marcos completed shakedown in early may , took on a cargo of landing boats ; and , on 19 may , sailed for the panama canal and pearl harbor . arriving on 24 june , she transferred her cargo of 40 & nbsp ; boats , loaded a similar cargo , and departed on 29 may . after taking on dredging equipment at guam , she anchored in buckner bay , okinawa , on 12 august – three days before the cessation of hostilities . on 15 august , she shifted to naha , repaired tank landing craft ( lcts ) through 20 august , then , proceeded to saipan . there , she loaded mechanized landing craft ( lcm-6s ) , vehicle and personnel landing craft , ( lcvps , '' higgins boats '' ) , and large personnel landing craft ( lcpls ) , for use by occupation forces in the tokyo bay area ; and , on 4 september , she arrived in japan to offload her cargo and to commence operation and maintenance of a boat pool . in early december , she was reassigned to cargo operations ; and , through the end of the year , she ferried boats from aomori to yokohama . in january 1946 , san marcos was assigned to joint task force & nbsp ; 1 ( jtf & nbsp ; 1 ) for operation crossroads , the series of atomic tests scheduled for bikini atoll during the summer . she first shifted south to okinawa ; then , in february , moved east to kwajalein , whence she helped to prepare the test site . she remained in jtf & nbsp ; 1 through the july tests , and , on 29 august , she was detached . in early september , the ship moved from the marshall islands to hawaii ; and , in october , she arrived at san francisco . granted provisional radiological clearance , she resumed cargo operations along the west coast in early november ; and , by the end of the month , was carrying supplies , boats , and vehicles to the aleutian islands . in december , she put into the puget sound navy yard at bremerton ; received final clearance in january 1947 ; and , in the spring , resumed cargo runs between the west coast and the aleutians . she terminated those operations in september and proceeded to southern california where her capabilities as a temporarily converted seaplane drydock were tested . in december , she commenced inactivation , and , on 19 december , was decommissioned and berthed with the san diego group of the pacific reserve fleet . 1950s . after the outbreak of war in korea , san marcos was ordered activated . recommissioned on 26 january 1951 , she completed shakedown in march , was assigned to the atlantic fleet 's amphibious force , and , in may , sailed for the panama canal and little creek , virginia . she arrived at the latter in late may and , soon thereafter , commenced arctic summer resupply operations , under the military sea transportation service ( msts ) , to bases in canada and greenland . with the fall , she moved to the caribbean sea for fleet exercises , then returned home . in november , she shifted to baltimore , maryland , for a shipyard overhaul , and with the new year , 1952 , resumed active duty . caribbean exercises took her into march . in april she departed norfolk , virginia , embarked marines and their equipment at morehead city , and headed east for her first mediterranean deployment . she transited the straits of gibraltar in early may and operated with the sixth fleet , ranging from the south of france to benghazi and phaleron bay , into october . she then recrossed the atlantic , and , after disembarking the marines in north carolina , proceeded to little creek . she resumed east coast operations with a joint army–navy exercise in november . during 1953 , san marcos conducted exercises and carried cargo along the east coast and in the caribbean and underwent overhaul at boston , massachusetts . winter , spring , and fall of 1954 saw a continuation of those operations including a reserve training cruise , while the summer brought a return to arctic waters for resupply missions . in january 1955 , she proceeded again to the mediterranean sea . completing that deployment in may , she resumed a schedule of east coast , caribbean , and – during the summers of 1956 and 1957 – polar logistic support operations . in september 1958 , she was again deployed to the mediterranean for a six-month tour with the sixth fleet . she rejoined the second fleet in march 1959 ; and , in may , tested recovery methods for project mercury . during the summer , she participated in operation inland seas , conducted in the great lakes and made possible by the opening of the st . lawrence seaway . amphibious force exercises and local operations occupied the remainder of the year . 1960s . throughout the 1960s and into the 1970s , san marcos rotated regularly between the second and sixth fleets . while with the second , she participated in exercises and carried cargo and personnel from new england to the caribbean . severing of diplomatic relations and increased tension between the united states and cuba and political unrest in the dominican republic brought extended operations in the greater antilles in early 1961 . in april , san marcos supported the bay of pigs invasion , carrying lcus and lcvps loaded with vehicles and equipment to a rendezvous a few miles off the coast with the ships carrying brigade 2506 . those operations were followed by duty in support of project mercury ; and , in september , she received modifications which added helicopter operations to her capabilities . then a five-month fleet rehabilitation and modernization ( fram & nbsp ; ii ) overhaul in 1962 and 1963 modernized her equipment and living spaces and improved her operational abilities in transporting , launching , and controlling assault craft ; besides providing drydocking and repair services to landing ships and craft . her annual ( excluding 1964 ) mediterranean deployments brought participation in fleet , binational , and multinational ( nato ) exercises . in 1964 , she deployed only briefly , in september , to participate in operation steel pike , a large-scale amphibious operation held off the coast of spain . on 13 august 1970 , san marcos returned to little creek to complete her last mediterranean tour . local and caribbean exercises took her into 1971 , when she was designated for transfer to the government of spain . the first detachment of her future spanish crew arrived in mid-april ; the remainder joined her on 30 may . june was spent in familiarization activities and , on 1 july 1971 , san marcos was decommissioned and turned over . spanish navy career . the former san marcos was commissioned in the spanish navy as galicia ( ta31 ) on 1 july 1971 . she was sold outright to spain on 1 august 1974 . galicias pennant number was changed to l31 circa 1980 . galicia was stricken from the spanish navy list in early 1988 , and scrapped in 1989 . notes .