Training

types . physical training . physical training concentrates on mechanistic goals : training programs in this area develop specific motor skills , agility , strength or physical fitness , often with an intention of peaking at a particular time . in military use , training means gaining the physical ability to perform and survive in combat , and learn the many skills needed in a time of war . these include how to use a variety of weapons , outdoor survival skills , and how to survive being captured by the enemy , among many others . see military education and training . for psychological or physiological reasons , people who believe it may be beneficial to them can choose to practice relaxation training , or autogenic training , in an attempt to increase their ability to relax or deal with stress . » relaxation training may cut hypertension medication among elderly - thaindian news while some studies have indicated relaxation training is useful for some medical conditions , autogenic training has limited results or has been the result of few studies . occupational skills training . some occupations are inherently hazardous , and require a minimum level of competence before the practitioners can perform the work at an acceptable level of safety to themselves or others in the vicinity . professional diving , rescue , firefighting and operation of certain types of machinery and vehicles may require assessment and certification of a minimum acceptable competence before the person is allowed to practice as a licensed instructor . on job training . some commentators use a similar term for workplace learning to improve performance : '' training and development '' . there are also additional services available online for those who wish to receive training above and beyond that which is offered by their employers . some examples of these services include career counseling , skill assessment , and supportive services . job training - alaska department of worker and workforce development one can generally categorize such training as on-the-job or off-the-job . the on-the-job training method takes place in a normal working situation , using the actual tools , equipment , documents or materials that trainees will use when fully trained . on-the-job training has a general reputation as most effective for vocational work . it involves employees training at the place of work while they are doing the actual job . usually , a professional trainer ( or sometimes an experienced and skilled employee ) serves as the instructor using hands-on practical experience which may be supported by formal classroom presentations . sometimes training can occur by using web-based technology or video conferencing tools . simulation based training is another method which uses technology to assist in trainee development . this is particularly common in the training of skills requiring a very high degree of practice , and in those which include a significant responsibility for life and property . an advantage is that simulation training allows the trainer to find , study , and remedy skill deficiencies in their trainees in a controlled , virtual environment . this also allows the trainees an opportunity to experience and study events that would otherwise be rare on the job , e.g . , in-flight emergencies , system failure , etc . , wherein the trainer can run 'scenarios ' and study how the trainee reacts , thus assisting in improving his/her skills if the event was to occur in the real world . examples of skills that commonly include simulator training during stages of development include piloting aircraft , spacecraft , locomotives , and ships , operating air traffic control airspace/sectors , power plant operations training , advanced military/defense system training , and advanced emergency response training . off-the-job training method takes place away from normal work situations — implying that the employee does not count as a directly productive worker while such training takes place . off-the-job training method also involves employee training at a site away from the actual work environment . it often utilizes lectures , seminars , case studies , role playing , and simulation , having the advantage of allowing people to get away from work and concentrate more thoroughly on the training itself . this type of training has proven more effective in inculcating concepts and ideas . many personnel selection companies offer a service which would help to improve employee competencies and change the attitude towards the job . the internal personnel training topics can vary from effective problem-solving skills to leadership training . a more recent development in job training is the on the job training plan or ojt plan . according to the united states department of the interior , a proper ojt plan should include : an overview of the subjects to be covered , the number of hours the training is expected to take , an estimated completion date , and a method by which the training will be evaluated . . religion and spirituality . in religion and spiritual use , the word '' training '' may refer to the purification of the mind , heart , understanding and actions to obtain a variety of spiritual goals such as ( for example ) closeness to god or freedom from dukkha . note for example the institutionalised spiritual training of threefold training in buddhism , meditation in hinduism or discipleship in christianity . these aspects of training can be short-term or can last a lifetime , depending on the context of the training and which religious group it is a part of . compare religious ritual . church-affiliated schools . parochial schools are a fairly widespread institution in the united states . a parochial school is a primary or secondary school supervised by a religious organization , typically a roman catholic day-school affiliated with a parish or a holy order . , out of the approximately 50 million children who were enrolled in american grade schools , 4.2 million children ( approximately 1 in 12 students ) attended a church-affiliated school . within the christian religion one can attend a church-affiliated college with the intent of getting a degree in a field associated with religious studies . some people may also attend church-affiliated colleges in pursuit of a non-religious degree , and typically do it just to deepen their understanding of the specific religion that the school is associated with . the largest non-public school system in the united states , the catholic school system , operates 5,744 elementary schools and 1,206 secondary schools . instructor 's guides and lesson plans . instructor guide ( ig ) , is an important document available to an instructor . specifically , it is used within a lesson plan , as the blueprint that ensures instruction is presented in proper sequence and to the depth required by the objectives . objectives of a lesson plan : to ensure that instructors have considered all factors necessary to conduct a safe and effective lesson . to guide you in conducting lesson activities . to help maintain a constant check on training activities and students ’ progress . to standardize instruction . to inform training managers of what is being taught . us navy , center for personal professional development ( 2010 ) . navy instructional theory navedtra 14300a , chapter 9 course materials . . artificial-intelligence feedback . researchers have developed training methods for artificial intelligence devices as well . evolutionary algorithms , including genetic programming and other methods of machine learning , use a system of feedback based on '' fitness functions '' to allow computer programs to determine how well an entity performs a task . the methods construct a series of programs , known as a “ population ” of programs , and then automatically test them for '' fitness '' , observing how well they perform the intended task . the system automatically generates new programs based on members of the population that perform the best . these new members replace programs that perform the worst . the procedure repeats until the achievement of optimum performance . genetic programming : an introduction , wolfgang banzhaf , peter nordin , robert e . keller , and frank d . francone , morgan kaufmann publishers , inc . , 1998 in robotics , such a system can continue to run in real-time after initial training , allowing robots to adapt to new situations and to changes in themselves , for example , due to wear or damage . researchers have also developed robots that can appear to mimic simple human behavior as a starting point for training .