Walther Rathenau

early life . rathenau was born in berlin to emil rathenau , a prominent jewish businessman and founder of the aeg ( aeg ) , an electrical engineering company , and mathilde nachmann . . he studied physics , chemistry , and philosophy in berlin and strasbourg , and received a doctorate in physics in 1889 after studying under august kundt . mendelsohn , e . , hoffman , s . , cohen , r.i . , against the grain : jewish intellectuals in hard times , 2013 , , p . 106 his german jewish heritage and his assimilated wealth were both factors in establishing his deeply divisive reputation in german politics at a time of antisemitism among gentiles . view excerpt in questia . he summed up his feelings about growing up in germany : i am a german of jewish origin . my people are the german people , my home is germany , my faith is german faith , which stands above all denominations . walther rathenau , an deutschlands jugend , p . 9 he worked as a technical engineer in a swiss aluminium factory , and then as a manager in a small electro-chemical firm in bitterfeld , where he conducted experiments in electrolysis . he returned to berlin and joined the aeg board in 1899 , becoming a leading industrialist in the late german empire and early weimar republic periods . in 1903 his younger and much more entrepreneurial brother erich rathenau died . heart-broken , his father had to be satisfied with walther 's help instead . walther rathenau was a successful industrialist : in only a decade he set up power stations in manchester , buenos aires , and baku . aeg acquired ownership of a streetcar company in madrid ; and in east africa he purchased a british firm . in total he was involved with 84 companies worldwide . aeg was particularly praised for vertical integration methods and a strong emphasis on supply chain management . rathenau developed an expertise in business restructuring , turning companies around . high organizational capabilities made his company very rich , and it produced the standards for new chemicals development , such as acetone in manchester . he made large profits from commercial lending on a wide industrial scale , and those profits were reinvested in capital and assets . supply chains for the world war . an experienced journalist , rathenau published in the berliner tageblatt an article accusing his own country of manipulating politics in vienna . as the dual monarchy 's relations with russia drifted , the paper described a secret conspiracy at work in moltke 's war department in which he had taken part . during world war i his opinions hardened . he held senior posts in the raw materials department of the war ministry and became chairman of aeg upon his father 's death in 1915 . rathenau played a key role in convincing the war ministry to set up the war raw materials department ( kriegsrohstoffabteilung , kra ) , of which he was put in charge from august 1914 to march 1915 and established the fundamental policies and procedures . his senior staff were on loan from industry . the kra focused on raw materials threatened by the british blockade , as well as supplies from occupied belgium and france . it set prices and regulated the distribution to vital war industries . it began the development of ersatzkaisertum raw materials , developing supply chains to bring peace and for regime change within germany . the kra suffered many inefficiencies caused by the complexity and selfishness encountered from commerce , industry , and the government itself . d . g . williamson , '' walther rathenau and the k.r.a . august 1914 – march 1915 '' , zeitschrift für unternehmensgeschichte ( 1978 ) , vol . 23 , no . 2 , pp . 118–136 . . personal character . rathenau wrote about personal and social responsibility to the community at a time when solidarity was required to keep the peace . his characteristics were courage , vision , imagination , tenacity and creativity ; yet he insisted technology come to the aid of manual labourers . so one of the joys of work included '' pleasure from profit '' to elevate society . according to one biographer he is said to have identified a sense of inferiority with his jewishness , writing that he realised completely for the first time that he had come into this world as a second-class citizen and that no amount of ability and merit could ever free him from this condition . w . rathenau , gessammelte schriften , vol . 1 , berlin ( 1925 ) p . 188 ; wehler , p . 106 one heavy criticism which he bore stoically was the implication that jews could never put germany first ; the idea that the jews were '' our misfortune '' , as the german nationalist historian heinrich treitschke wrote , led to the proliferation from 1880s of anti-semitic parties . there were no jewish officers in the whole prussian army – the ruling-class in the imperial officer corps was both blatantly and latently anti-semitic , eventually supporting the nazis ' anti-semitic policies . wehler , p . 160 rathenau wanted to stand on a platform for one world order for a transcendental peace that banished anarchy . after versailles ( 1919 ) he founded a '' league for industry '' , an offshoot of internationalism that blamed german defeat on a lack of industrial readiness . he wished to exculpate the blame for germany 's war guilt articulated through an acquaintance with colonel house . rathenau to house , 10 november 1918 , in letourneau , pp . 206–7 . postwar statesman . rathenau was a moderate liberal in politics , and after world war i , he was one of the founders of the german democratic party ( german : deutsche demokratische partei , ddp ) , but he moved to the left in the advent of post-war chaos . passionate about rights of social equality , he rejected state ownership of industry and instead advocated greater worker participation in the management of companies . '' the separation of the classes is so strict here . '' he wrote to e norlind , cited in w.rathenau , briefe , vol.1 , p . 250 ; wehler , p . 235 his ideas were influential in postwar governments . he was put forward as a socialist candidate for first president ; but on standing in the reichstag was dismissed amid '' rows and shrieks of laughter '' which visibly upset the man . ebert 's election by the left failed to heal the deep rifts and social divisions in german society that occurred throughout the weimar . rathenau advised that a small town in central germany was the wrong place for the capital and seat of government . but his own adequacy was under-appreciated ; immediately giving rise to extreme right-wing organizations within months of the communist-inspired spartacist revolt , '' the product of a state in which for centuries no one has ruled who was not a member of , or a convert to military feudalism . , '' he told the reichstag , at once deploring the foundation of the fatherland party in 1917 . von stumm 's motion ; wehler , p . 99 in 1918 he established the zag living through his philosophy of deutsche gemeinwirtschaft a collective economic community . s . berger , germany , p . 129 rathenau was a natural central planner with an eye for economic detail . he encouraged free traders , was honestly unrepentant believing in the efficacy of '' preparedness and directional efficiency '' . aeg was influential : his colleague wichard von moellendorff was appointed as undersecretary of the reich economy office ; for a time in july 1919 they worked closely for weimar with republican rudolf wissell . but hindenburg 's technocratic rational economic programme was borrowed ; while rathenau , being democratic , warned against short-termism . berlin 's march days was a consequence of the internal struggle between finance and economic ministries . on 20 february 1919 he proposed workers councils '' which had already been explained in his writings '' . the plan for a socialist league of nations was overtly pro-union mocked as the '' paris league '' – a throwback to the second communist international – they challenged openly for democratic ideas . but a rapprochement with soviet union was inspired by rathenau ; it tried to prevent an expansive 'greater germany ' . rathenau was appointed minister of reconstruction and in may 1921 held a second meetings with lloyd george and the reparations committee . he established good relations with aristide briand who praised '' a strong , healthy , booming germany '' . the era of erfullungspolitik was high , altruistic self-confidence ; he shared a pre-war fascination for the hegelian complex for a corporate germany chastised by a reverence to a supreme being . he was wary of allied decadence , complacent , corrosive of an innocent romanticism expanded into mysticism . his ideas were challenged as '' objectively impossible '' ; weimar lacked clarity and leadership , while rathenau was deterministic , and robust over the details . a levee en masse would be part of this utilitarianism that bestrode his menschen philosophies . this contradistinction about an '' unravelled '' versailles which was incompatible with fulfillment and the role of reconstruction . felix , rathenau , pp . 67–8 ; . bravely rathenau held out against the partition of poland ; despite erzberger 's assassination ; and threats for extreme national bolshevists when he joined joseph wirth 's government after cannes on 31 january 1922 , there was a horrible fear that his days were numbered . in 1922 he became foreign minister : on which occasion he sought lili deutsch 's solace , his mother 's comfort , and the company of a pistol for protection . writing before the genoa conference that concern for his personal safety was prescient of a foreboding for his own death . kessler , p . 319 the insistence that germany should fulfill its obligations under the treaty of versailles , but work for a revision of its terms , infuriated extreme german nationalists . he also angered such extremists by negotiating on 22 january 1922 treaty of rapallo with the soviet union , although the treaty implicitly recognized secret german-soviet collaboration begun in 1921 that provided for the rearmament of germany , including german-owned aircraft manufacturing in russian territory . . the leaders of the ( still obscure ) national socialist german workers ' party ( german : nationalsozialistische deutsche arbeiterpartei , abbreviated nsdap ) and other extremist groups falsely claimed he was part of a '' jewish bolshevism , '' despite the fact that he was a liberal german nationalist who had bolstered the country 's recent war effort . the british politician robert boothby wrote of him , '' he was something that only a german jew could simultaneously be : a prophet , a philosopher , a mystic , a writer , a statesman , an industrial magnate of the highest and greatest order , and the pioneer of what has become known as 'industrial rationalization ' . '' despite his desire for economic and political co-operation between germany and the soviet union , rathenau remained skeptical of the methods of the soviets : w.r . , kritik der dreifachen revolution – apologie , 1919 , s . fischer , berlin , la triple revolution , 1921 , aux éditions du rhin , paris – bâle , pp . 265–266 , internet archive . the question of war reparations vexed rathenau : art . 231 imposed repayments that crippled germany until 1990 . expunging war guilt , converting it into financial and economic responsibility was critical to relations with the big four . yet rathenau was unable to convince germans of its applicability . he talked in his '' apocalyptic way about society , politics and the problems of responsibility . '' kessler , twenties , 12 june 1919 ; kessler , w rathenau , pp . 275 ; the times , 9 june 1919 ; . he was persuasive ; the entente would recognise , he urged , that germany had to be '' capable of discharging its obligations . '' the times . philosophy of imagery . philosopher for socialism . although he never married , rathenau did fall in love with otto hermann kahn , ( née kahn ) , a society beauty and the wife of his father 's business partner felix deutsch . she was the daughter of bernhard and emma kahn ( née eberstadt ) of mannheim and the sister of , among others , composer robert kahn and wall st . financier otto hermann kahn . / philosopher for socialism / john kobler , otto the magnificent ( ny : scribner & sons ) , 1988 , pp . 10–11 . he related in a notebook titled brevarium mysticum finding revealed love in the sight of a soaring eagle , a soulful dedication on a sojourn in the harz mountains . walther was highly literate and intelligent , wrote several books with deep philosophical overtones . in zur kritik der zeit contemporary human conditioning was critically examined on a sociological basis found in a life of business . this put together another critique into an intellectual context of 'mind over matter ' , social wisdom and corporate discipline as a framework in the socialistic sciences – zur mechanik des geistes . rathenau moved ever closer to a rejection of religion , embracing the power of science . he tried to bring people 's attention to what changes would be required for a futuristic romantic movement in von kommenden dingen to openly challenge the living of lives . mechanistics rejected the central feature of malthusian thoughts on human progress motivated by population growth . his focus was the importance of technology , rather than abstinence for standardisation , specialization and abstraction with positive approbation . the corollary for rathenau of information-gathering was an exponential explosive growth in data that would enrich globalization . rathenau delineated his arguments by dividing men into classifications : mutmenschen and furchtmenschen outlined the problems of mass migration across europe which had resonance with the past . but he saw real significance for zweckmenschen as utilitarian cunning to set the men of fear in motion . the philosophy amounted to social darwinism but there was an unaccredited presumption of delphic adoration for the greek parnassus . kessler , rathenau , pp . 35–7 ; letourneau , rathenau , pp . 72–77 ; 103–8 the theories of mechanization argued that competition could not go on forever as it died in love . intellectual perorations were reached in pronouncements preceding a great vision for the future of german business . he can not be directly held responsible for the mechanization of the panzers movement , for his social idealism was grounded in rousseau 's great enlightenment path . pure mechanization would have to transmogrify psychological mutation , risk tragedy , and plunging into the abyss . rathenau was assimilated by a love for st francis assisi , a message of service dedicated to the community that restricted his ambitions . a modified or applied mysticism , rathenau 's idea always expressed work as '' a joy '' , and like schopenhauer he rejected materialism and recognised its pitfalls , using a deep knowledge of technology to simultaneously warn of its dangers . s.berger , germany , p . 101 this distinction with soviet working methods of dialectical materialism was unwelcome in a germany seeking to rearm . thus he rallied ideas for management and control as head of raw materials and efficacy of science . assassination and aftermath . on 24 june 1922 , two months after the signing of the treaty of rapallo ( which renounced german territorial claims from world war i ) , rathenau was assassinated . on this saturday morning , rathenau had himself chauffeured from his house in grunewald to the foreign office in wilhelmstraße . during the trip , his nag convertible was passed by a mercedes touring car with ernst werner techow behind the wheel and erwin kern and hermann fischer in the backseats . kern opened fire with an mp 18 submachine gun at close range , killing rathenau almost instantly , while fischer threw a hand grenade into the car before techow quickly drove them away . also involved in the plot were techow 's younger brother hans gerd techow , future writer ernst von salomon , and willi günther ( aided and abetted by seven others , some of them schoolboys ) . all conspirators were members of the ultra-nationalist secret organisation consul ( o.c . ) . a memorial stone in the königsallee in grunewald marks the scene of the crime . rathenau 's assassination was but one in a series of assassinations perpetrated by organisation consul . most notable among them had been the assassination of former finance minister matthias erzberger in august 1921 . while fischer and kern prepared their plot , former chancellor philipp scheidemann barely survived an attempt on his life by organisation consul assassins on 4 june 1922 . historian martin sabrow points to hermann ehrhardt , the undisputed leader of the organisation consul , as the one who ordered the murders . ehrhardt and his men believed that rathenau 's death would bring down the government and prompt the left to act against the weimar republic , thereby provoking civil war , in which the organisation consul would be called on for help by the reichswehr . after an anticipated victory ehrhardt hoped to establish an authoritarian regime or a military dictatorship . in order not to be completely delegitimized by the murder of rathenau , ehrhardt carefully saw to it that no connections between him and the assassins could be detected . although fischer and kern connected with the berlin chapter of the organisation consul to use its resources , they mainly acted on their own in planning and carrying out the assassination . their aims were not achieved , however , and civil war did not come . instead , millions of germans gathered on the streets to express their grief and to demonstrate against anti-republican terrorism . when the news of rathenau 's death became known in the reichstag , the session turned into turmoil . dnvp politician karl helfferich in particular became the target of scorn because he had just recently uttered a vitriolic attack upon rathenau . during the official memorial ceremony the next day , chancellor joseph wirth from the centre party made a speech which soon became famous , in which , while pointing to the right side of the parliamentary floor , he used the well known formula of philipp scheidemann : '' there is the enemy – and there is no doubt about it : this enemy is on the right ! '' the crime itself was soon cleared up . willi günther had bragged about his participation in public . after his arrest on 26 june , he confessed to the crime without holding anything back . hans gerd techow was arrested the following day , ernst werner techow , who was visiting his uncle , three days later . fischer and kern , however , remained on the loose . after a daring flight , which kept germany in suspense for more than two weeks , they were finally spotted at saaleck castle in thuringia , whose owner was himself a secret member of the organisation consul . on 17 july , they were confronted by two police detectives . while waiting for reinforcements during the stand-off , one of the detectives fired at a window , unknowingly killing kern by a bullet in the head . fischer then took his own life . when the crime was brought to court in october 1922 , ernst werner techow was the only defendant charged with murder . twelve more defendants were arraigned on various charges , among them hans gerd techow and ernst von salomon , who had spied out rathenau 's habits and kept up contact with the organisation consul , as well as the commander of the organisation consul in western germany , karl tillessen , a brother of erzberger 's assassin heinrich tillessen , and his adjutant hartmut plaas . the prosecution left aside the political implications of the plot , but focused upon the issue of antisemitism . ahead of his assassination , rathenau had indeed been the frequent target of vicious antisemitic attacks , and the assassins had also been members of the deutschvölkischer schutz- und trutzbund . kern had , according to ernst werner techow , argued that rathenau had to be murdered , because he had intimate relations with bolshevik russia , so that he had even married off his sister to the communism karl radek – a complete fabrication – and that rathenau himself had confessed to be one of the three hundred '' elders of zion '' . ernst von salomon has later claimed that kern 's argument was merely pretextual . historian norman cohn believes that techow 's evidence stands . cohn , norman ( 1967 ) . warrant for genocide : the myth of the jewish world conspiracy and the protocols of the elders of zion , new york : harper & row , pp . 145–6 . but the defendants vigorously denied that they had killed rathenau because he was jewish . ; neither was the prosecution able to fully uncover the involvement of the organisation consul in the plot . thus tillessen and plaas were only convicted of non-notification of a crime and sentenced to three and two years in prison , respectively . salomon received five years imprisonment for accessory to murder . ernst werner techow narrowly escaped the death penalty because , in a last-minute confession , he managed to convince the court that he had only acted under the threat of death by kern . instead he was sentenced to fifteen years in prison for being an accessory to murder . initially , the reactions to rathenau 's assassination strengthened the weimar republic . the most notable reaction was the enactment of the ( law for the defense of the republic ) , which took effect on 22 july 1922 . as long as the weimar republic existed , the date 24 june remained a day of public commemorations . in public memory , rathenau 's death increasingly appeared to be a martyr-like sacrifice for democracy . the situation changed with the machtergreifung in 1933 . the nazis systematically wiped out public commemoration of rathenau by destroying monuments to him , closing the walther-rathenau-museum in his former mansion , and renaming streets and schools dedicated to him . instead , a memorial plate to kern and fischer was solemnly unveiled at saaleck castle in july 1933 and in october 1933 , a monument was erected on the assassins ' grave . the nuremberg u-bahn station rathenauplatz is not only named after him but also bears his face in portrait along the walls . fictional portrayal . rathenau is generally acknowledged to be , in part , the basis for the german noble and industrialist paul arnheim , a character in robert musil 's novel the man without qualities . rathenau also appears as the ghostly subject of a nazi seance in a famous scene in thomas pynchon 's gravity % 27s rainbow . in 2017 , the events and aftermath of rathenau 's assassination were depicted in the first episode of the national geographic series genius . works . reflektionen ( 1908 ) zur kritik der zeit ( 1912 ) zur mechanik des geistes ( 1913 ) von kommenden dingen ( 1917 ) vom aktienwesen . eine geschäftliche betrachtung ( 1917 ) an deutschlands jugend ( 1918 ) die neue gesellschaft ( 1919 ) the new society translated by arthur windham , ( 1921 ) new york : harcourt , brace and co . der neue staat ( 1919 ) der kaiser ( 1919 ) kritik der dreifachen revolution ( 1919 ) was wird werden ( 1920 , a utopian novel ) gesammelte schriften ( 6 volumes ) gesammelte reden ( 1924 ) briefe ( 1926 , 2 volumes ) neue briefe ( 1927 ) politische briefe ( 1929 ) . see also . contributions to liberal theory 1920s berlin liberalism . explanatory notes . references . secondary sources . berger , stefan , inventing the nation : germany london : hodder , 2004 . felix , david . walther rathenau and the weimar republic , johns hopkins up , 1971 . gilbert , sir martin , first worls war ( london , 1971 ) henderson , w . o . '' walther rathenau : a pioneer of the planned economy , '' economic history review ( 1951 ) 4 1 pp . & nbsp ; 98–108 in jstor himmer , robert . '' rathenau , russia , and rapallo , '' central european history ( 1976 ) 9 2 pp . & nbsp ; 146–183 in jstor kollman , eric c . '' walther rathenau and german foreign policy : thoughts and actions , '' journal of modern history ( 1952 ) 24 2 pp . & nbsp ; 127–142 in jstor pois , robert a . '' walther rathenau 's jewish quandary , '' leo baeck institute year book ( 1968 ) , vol . 13 , pp 120–131 . strachan , hew , the first world war : volume i : to arms ( 2001 ) pp 1014–49 on rathenau and kra in the war wehler , hans-ulrich , the german empire 1871–1918 leamington : berg , 1985 . williamson , d . g . '' walther rathenau and he k.r.a . august 1914 – march 1915 , '' zeitschrift für unternehmensgeschichte ( 1978 ) issue 11 , pp . & nbsp ; 118–136 . primary sources . vossiche zeitung – a newspaper tagebuch 1907–22 ( düsseldorf , 1967 ) harry kessler , walther rathenau , new york 1969 count harry kessler , berlin in lights : the diaries of count harry kessler ( 1918–1937 ) grove press , new york , ( 1999 ) . w rathenau , die mechanisierung der welt ( fr . ) ( paris 1972 ) w rathenau , schriften und reden ( frankfurt-am-main 1964 ) w rathenau , the sacrifice to the eumenides ( 1913 ) walter rathenau : industrialist , banker , intellectual , and politician ; notes and diaries 1907–1922 . hartmut p . von strandmann ( ed . ) , hilary von strandmann ( translator ) . clarendon press , 528 pages , in english . october 1985 . ( hardcover ) . external links . walther rathenau gesellschaft e . v . speech by german president friedrich ebert at rathenau 's burial