2000 in literature

events . february – el ateneo grand splendid bookstore takes over the teatro gran splendid in buenos aires , converting it for use as retail space . february 13 – the final original peanuts comic strip is published . march 14 – stephen king 's novella riding the bullet is published in e-book format only , as the world 's first mass-market electronic book . september 26 – english politician and writer jeffrey archer is charged with perjury , and on the same day opens in the title role of his own courtroom drama , the accused . december 15 – in a landmark censorship case , little sisters book and art emporium v . canada ( minister of justice ) , the supreme court of canada rules that canada customs has no authority to make judgments on the permissibility of material being shipped to retailers , only to confiscate material specifically ruled by the courts to constitute an offence under the canadian criminal code . new books . fiction . reed arvin – the will margaret atwood – the blind assassin louis auchincloss – her infinite variety trezza azzopardi – the hiding place iain m . banks – look to windward russell banks – the angel on the roof matt beaumont – e raymond benson – doubleshot ben bova – jupiter t . c . boyle – a friend of the earth dan brown – angels & demons jim butcher – storm front peter carey – true history of the kelly gang michael chabon – the amazing adventures of kavalier & clay tom clancy – the bear and the dragon mary higgins clark and carol higgins clark – deck the halls miriam cooke – hayati , my life bernard cornwell – harlequin ( also the archer 's tale ) patricia cornwell – the last precinct mark z . danielewski – house of leaves august derleth – the original text solar pons omnibus edition k . sello duiker – thirteen cents ken follett – code to zero jon fosse – morning and evening david s . garnett – bikini planet amitav ghosh – the glass palace myla goldberg – bee season linda grant – when i lived in modern times john grisham – the brethren mohsin hamid – moth smoke joanne harris – blackberry wine elisabeth harvor – excessive joy injures the heart joseph heller – portrait of an artist , as an old man kazuo ishiguro – when we were orphans elfriede jelinek – greed robert jordan – winter 's heart barbara kingsolver – prodigal summer sophie kinsella – the secret dreamworld of a shopaholic andrus kivirähk – rehepapp ehk november ( old barny or november ) joe r . lansdale the bottoms the big blow robert ludlum – the prometheus deception tim lahaye and jerry b . jenkins the indwelling the mark colleen mccullough – morgan 's run alistair macleod – island patrick maher – candid confessions barry n . malzberg – in the stone house juliet marillier – son of the shadows george r . r . martin – a storm of swords zakes mda – the heart of redness mikael niemi – popular music from vittula ( populärmusik från vittula ) joyce carol oates – blonde kenzaburō ōe ( 大江 健三郎 ) – the changeling ( 取り替え子 ( チェンジリング , torikae ko chenjiringu ) daniel olivas – the courtship of maría rivera peña robert b . parker – hugger mugger james patterson – roses are red rosamunde pilcher – winter solstice giuseppe pontiggia – nati due volte ( born twice ) terry pratchett – the truth mario puzo – omertà jean raspail – le roi au-delà de la mer kathy reichs – deadly decisions philip roth – the human stain peter ruber editor – arkham 's masters of horror marjane satrapi – persepolis ( graphic novel , first part ) jean-jacques schuhl – ingrid caven christina schwarz – drowning ruth helen simpson – hey yeah right get a life michael slade – hangman gillian slovo – red dust zadie smith – white teeth muriel spark – aiding and abetting michael stackpole dark tide : onslaught dark tide : ruin domenico starnone – via gemito danielle steel the house on hope street journey kathy tyers – balance point andrew vachss – dead and gone mario vargas llosa – the feast of the goat ( la fiesta del chivo ) chris ware – jimmy corrigan , the smartest kid on earth ( graphic novel ) edmund white – the married man . children and young people . lloyd alexander – the cat who wished to be a man david almond – counting stars margaret beames – oliver in the garden kirsten boie – wir kinder aus dem möwenweg ( first in the kinder aus dem möwenweg series ) lauren child – beware of the storybook wolves deborah ellis – the breadwinner ( also parvana , first in the breadwinner series of four books ) mem fox – harriet , you 'll drive me wild ! cornelia funke – the thief lord jamila gavin – coram boy hwang sun-mi – the hen who dreamed she could fly ( 마당을 나온 암탉 , sakyejul ) shirley isherwood – flora the frog jim murphy – blizzard ! the storm that changed america beverley naidoo – the other side of truth jerry pinkney – aesop 's fables philip pullman – the amber spyglass j . k . rowling – harry potter and the goblet of fire jacqueline wilson – vicky angel . drama . david auburn – proof timothy findley – elizabeth rex tanika gupta – the waiting room dusty hughes – helpless joe penhall – blue/orange . poetry . anne carson – men in the off hours paul celan – glottal stop : 101 poems by paul celan ( translated by heather mchugh and nikolai popov ) fanny howe – fanny howe : selected poems pierre labrie – à tout hasard grazyna miller – sull'onda del respiro ( on the wave of breath ) owen sheers – the blue book dejan stojanović znak i njegova deca ( the sign and its children ) prosveta , beograd . oblik ( the shape ) gramatik , podgorica , montenegro . tvoritelj ( the creator ) narodna knjiga–alfa , beograd . krugovanje ( circling ) , 3rd ed . . non-fiction . peter ackroyd – london : a biography martin amis – experience the beatles anthology mark buchanan – ubiquity : the science of history michael burleigh – the third reich : a new history christian cannuyer – coptic egypt : the christians of the nile john colapinto – as nature made him : the boy who was raised as a girl mary craig – blessings gerina dunwich – your magickal cat : feline magick , lore , and worship dave eggers – a heartbreaking work of staggering genius charles foster – stardust and shadows : canadians in early hollywood john bellamy foster – marx 's ecology aileen fox – aileen : a pioneering archaeologist ( autobiography ) malcolm gladwell – the tipping point : how little things can make a big difference taras grescoe – sacré blues faculty of arts , 2001 , edna staebler award . wilfrid laurier university . previous winners : taras grescoe . retrieved 2012–11–17 . christina hoff sommers – the war against boys : how misguided feminism is harming our young men will hutton – the world we 're in stephen king – on writing : a memoir of the craft lawrence lessig – code and other laws of cyberspace roger lowenstein – when genius failed : the rise and fall of long-term capital management sidney poitier – the measure of a man : a spiritual autobiography arun shourie – harvesting our souls paul h . ray – the cultural creatives : how 50 million people are changing the world lorna sage – bad blood diane stanley – michelangelo patrick tort – darwin and the science of evolution peter ward and donald brownlee – rare earth : why complex life is uncommon in the universe michael white – leonardo : the first scientist bruce wilkinson – the prayer of jabez : breaking through to the blessed life . deaths . january 2 – patrick o'brian ( richard patrick russ ) , english historical novelist ( born 1914 ) january 26 kathleen hale , english children 's author and illustrator ( born 1898 ) a . e . van vogt , canadian american science fiction author ( born 1912 ) january 31 – gil kane , latvian american comic book cartoonist ( born 1926 ) february 12 – charles m . schulz , american cartoonist ( born 1922 ) march 28 – anthony powell , english novelist ( born 1905 ) april 13 – giorgio bassani , italian writer ( born 1916 ) april 15 – edward gorey , american illustrator and writer ( born 1925 ) april 28 – penelope fitzgerald , english novelist , poet and biographer ( born 1916 ) may 21 – dame barbara cartland , english novelist and playwright ( born 1901 ) august 3 – michael meyer , english translator and biographer ( born 1921 ) august 25 – carl barks , american comic book cartoonist ( born 1901 ) september 3 – jack simmons , english historian ( born 1915 ) september 7 – sir malcolm bradbury , english novelist and critic ( born 1932 ) september 14 – hwang sun-won , korean fiction writer ( born 1915 ) september 22 – yehuda amichai , israeli hebrew-language poet ( born 1924 ) october 8 – charlotte lamb ( sheila holland , sheila coates , etc . ) , english romantic novelist ( born 1937 ) october 30 – steve allen , american writer , television presenter and songwriter ( born 1921 ) november 2 – robert cormier , american young adult fiction writer ( born 1925 ) november 6 – l . sprague de camp , american sci-fi , fantasy and science writer ( born 1907 ) december 3 – gwendolyn brooks , african american poet ( born 1917 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : gao xingjian camões prize : autran dourado . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : stephen gray , the artist is a thief c . j . dennis prize for poetry : john millett , iceman kenneth slessor prize for poetry : jennifer maiden , mines mary gilmore prize : lucy dougan , memory shell miles franklin award : tie : thea astley , drylands ; kim scott , benang . canada . giller prize : michael ondaatje , anil 's ghost – tied with : david adams richards , mercy among the children see 2000 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : wayson choy , paper shadows faculty of arts , 2000 , edna staebler award . wilfrid laurier university . previous winners : wayson choy . retrieved 2012–11–17 . . france . prix femina : camille laurens , dans ces bras-là prix goncourt : jean-jacques schuhl , ingrid caven prix décembre : anthony palou , camille prix médicis french : armelle lebras-chopard , le zoo des philosophes prix médicis non-fiction : yann apperry , diabolus in musica prix médicis international : michael ondaatje , anil 's ghost . serbia . rastko petrović award : dejan stojanović , conversations ( '' razgovori '' ) . united kingdom . bollinger everyman wodehouse prize for comic literature ( first award ) : howard jacobson , the mighty walzer booker prize : margaret atwood , the blind assassin caine prize for african writing : leila aboulela , '' the museum '' carnegie medal for children 's literature : beverley naidoo , the other side of truth james tait black memorial prize for fiction : zadie smith , white teeth james tait black memorial prize for biography : martin amis , experience cholmondeley award : alistair elliot , michael hamburger , adrian henri , carole satyamurti eric gregory award : eleanor margolies , antony rowland , antony dunn , karen goodwin , clare pollard orange prize for fiction : linda grant , when i lived in modern times samuel johnson prize : david cairns , berlioz : volume 2 queen 's gold medal for poetry : edwin morgan 2000 whitbread awards : matthew kneale , english passengers . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize awarded to quan barry for asylum aiken taylor award for modern american poetry , eleanor ross taylor bernard f . connors prize for poetry , corey marks , '' renunciation '' , and ( separately ) christopher patton , '' broken ground '' bobbitt national prize for poetry , david ferry for of no country i know : new and selected poems and translations brittingham prize in poetry , greg rappleye , a path between houses business week best book of the year : roger lowenstein , when genius failed compton crook award : stephen l . burns , flesh and silver edgar award : joe r . lansdale , the bottoms frost medal : anthony hecht hugo award : vernor vinge , a deepness in the sky national book award for fiction : to in america by susan sontag national book critics circle award : to newjack : guarding sing sing by ted conover nebula award : greg bear , darwin 's radio newbery medal for children 's literature : christopher paul curtis , bud , not buddy pen/faulkner award for fiction : to waiting by ha jin pulitzer prize for drama : donald margulies , dinner with friends pulitzer prize for fiction : jhumpa lahiri , interpreter of maladies pulitzer prize for poetry : c.k . williams , repair wallace stevens award : frank bidart whiting awards : : fiction : robert cohen , samantha gillison , lily king , john mcmanus , colson whitehead : nonfiction : andrew x . pham : plays : kelly stuart : poetry : albert mobilio ( poetry/fiction ) , james thomas stevens , claude wilkinson . other . finlandia prize : johanna sinisalo not before sunset ( ennen päivänlaskua ei voi ) international dublin literary award : nicola barker , wide open premio nadal : lorenzo silva , el alquimista impaciente viareggio prize : giorgio van straten , il mio nome a memoria and sandro veronesi , la forza del passato . references .