Orient Express

train eclair de luxe ( the '' test '' train ) . in 1882 , georges nagelmackers , a belgian banker 's son , invited guests to a railway trip of on his '' train eclair de luxe '' ( '' lightning luxury train '' ) . the train left paris gare de l'est on tuesday , 10 october 1882 , just after 18:30 and arrived in vienna the next day at 23:20 . the return trip left vienna on friday , 13 october at 16:40 and , as planned , re-entered the gare de l'est at 20:00 on saturday 14 october . georges nagelmackers was the founder of compagnie internationale des wagons-lits , which expanded its luxury trains , travel agencies and hotels all over europe , asia , and north africa . its most famous train remains the orient-express . the train was composed of : baggage car sleeping coach with 16 beds ( with bogies ) sleeping coach with 14 beds ( 3 axles ) restaurant coach ( nr . 107 ) sleeping coach with 13 beds ( 3 axles ) sleeping coach with 13 beds ( 3 axles ) baggage car ( complete 101 ton ) the first menu on board ( 10 october 1882 ) : oysters , soup with italian pasta , turbot with green sauce , chicken ‘ à la chasseur ’ , fillet of beef with ‘ château ’ potatoes , ‘ chaud-froid ’ of game animals , lettuce , chocolate pudding , buffet of desserts . . routes . original train . on 5 june 1883 , the first express d'orient left paris for vienna . vienna remained the terminus until 4 october 1883 . the train was officially renamed orient express in 1891 . the original route , which first ran on 4 october 1883 , was from paris , gare de l'est , to giurgiu in romania via munich and vienna . at giurgiu , passengers were ferried across the danube to ruse , bulgaria , to pick up another train to varna . they then completed their journey to constantinople via rail from vienna to belgrade and niš , carriage to plovdiv , and rail again to i̇stanbul . in 1889 , the train 's eastern terminus became varna in the principality of bulgaria , where passengers could take a ship to constantinople . on 1 june 1889 , the first direct train to constantinople left paris ( gare de l'est ) . istanbul , known as constantinople until circa 1930 in english , remained its easternmost stop until 19 may 1977 . the eastern terminus was the sirkeci terminal by the golden horn . ferry service from piers next to the terminal would take passengers across the bosphorus to haydarpaşa terminal , the terminus of the asian lines of the ottoman railways . the onset of the first world war in 1914 saw orient express services suspended . they resumed at the end of hostilities in 1918 , and in 1919 the opening of the simplon tunnel allowed the introduction of a more southerly route via milan , venice , and trieste . the service on this route was known as the simplon orient express , and it ran in addition to continuing services on the old route . the treaty of saint-germain contained a clause requiring austria to accept this train : formerly , austria allowed international services to pass through austrian territory ( which included trieste at the time ) only if they ran via vienna . the simplon orient express soon became the most important rail route between paris and i̇stanbul . the 1930s saw the orient express services at its most popular , with three parallel services running : the orient express , the simplon orient express , and also the arlberg orient express , which ran via zürich and innsbruck to budapest , with sleeper cars running onwards from there to bucharest and athens . during this time , the orient express acquired its reputation for comfort and luxury , carrying sleeping-cars with permanent service and restaurant cars known for the quality of their cuisine . royalty , nobles , diplomats , businessperson , and the bourgeoisie in general patronized it . each of the orient express services also incorporated sleeping cars which had run from calais to paris , thus extending the service from one end of continental europe to the other . the start of the second world war in 1939 again interrupted the service , which did not resume until 1945 . during the war , the german mitropa company had run some services on the route through the balkans , but yugoslav partisans frequently sabotaged the track , forcing a stop to this service . following the end of the war , normal services resumed except on the athens leg , where the closure of the border between yugoslavia and the kingdom of greece prevented services from running . that border re-opened in 1951 , but the closure of the bulgarian–turkish border from 1951 to 1952 prevented services running to i̇stanbul during that time . as the iron curtain fell across europe , the service continued to run , but warsaw pact increasingly replaced the wagon-lits cars with carriages run by their own railway services . by 1962 , the orient express and arlberg orient express had stopped running , leaving only the simplon orient express . this was replaced in 1962 by a slower service called the direct orient express , which ran daily cars from paris to belgrade , and twice weekly services from paris to i̇stanbul and athens . in 1971 , the wagon-lits company stopped running carriages itself and making revenues from a ticket supplement . instead , it sold or leased all its carriages to the various national railway companies , but continued to provide staff for the carriages . 1976 saw the withdrawal of the paris–athens direct service , and in 1977 , the direct orient express was withdrawn completely , with the last paris–i̇stanbul service running on 19 may of that year . the withdrawal of the direct orient express was thought by many to signal the end of the orient express as a whole , but in fact a service under this name continued to run from paris to bucharest as before ( via strasbourg , munich , and budapest ) . however , a through sleeping car from paris to bucharest – and even eastwards from vienna – was only operated until 1982 , and also a through seating car was only operated seasonally . this meant , that paris–budapest and vienna–bucharest coaches were running overlapped , so a journey was only possible with changing carriages – despite the unchanged name and numbering of the train . in 1991 the budapest-bucharest leg of the train was canceled , the new final station has become budapest . in the summer season of 1999 and 2000 a sleeping car from bucharest to paris reappeared twice a week – now operated by cfr . this continued until 2001 , when the service was cut back to just paris–vienna , already in euronight quality – but in both cases the coaches were in fact rather attached to a paris–strasbourg express . this service continued daily , listed in the timetables under the name orient express , until 8 june 2007 . with the opening of the lgv est paris–strasbourg high speed rail line on 10 june 2007 , the orient express service was further cut back to strasbourg–vienna , departing nightly at 22:20 from strasbourg , and still bearing the name , but lost the number 262/263 which was owned for decades . the remains of the train had a convenient connection from/to the strasbourg-paris tgv , but due to the less flexible prices the changing has become less attractive . in the last years through coaches between vienna and karlsruhe ( continuing first to dortmund , then to amsterdam , and finally – partly from budapest – to frankfurt ) were attached . the last train with the name orient-express ( now with a hyphen ) departed from vienna on 10 december 2009 , and one day later from strasbourg . on 8 december 2020 , it was announced that sleeper service between vienna and paris via munich would be reestablished in 2021 . today , . route legacy . though the final service ran only from strasbourg to vienna , it was possible to retrace the entire original orient express route with four trains : paris–strasbourg , strasbourg–vienna , vienna–belgrade , and belgrade-i̇stanbul , each of which were operated daily . other routes from paris to i̇stanbul exist even today , such as paris–munich–budapest–bucharest–i̇stanbul , or paris–zürich–belgrade–i̇stanbul , all of which have comparable travel times of approximately 60 hours without delays . train services across the border to turkey were stopped through several years due to construction works , but they were reintroduced in june 2017 , however , ending in i̇stanbul 's suburb halkalı , from where a transfer bus is provided to the city centre . the luxurious dining car , where scenes for murder on the orient express and other films were filmed , is now in the ose museum of thessaloniki . the local authorities plan to refit the train to make it available for tourist use around the balkans in the near future . privately run trains using the name . in 1976 , the swiss travel company intraflug ag had first hired , then also bought , several ciwl-carriages , and operated them as nostalgie istanbul orient express from zürich to i̇stanbul . in 1983 , the 100th anniversary of the orient-express was celebrated by a trip of this train from paris to i̇stanbul , and in 1988 it was run to hong kong via the soviet union and china . from there it was transferred by ferry to japan and runs between hiroshima and tōkyō , after then it used there for some excursions ( orient express '88 ) . after the failure of the american european express ( see below ) , intraflug became bankrupt , and the carriages were taken over by the reisebüro mittelthurgau . the sleeping cars and some other coaches ( pullmans , dining cars , luggage vans ) were transferred to russia and used between moscow and the mongolian-chinese border . ( the adjacent chinese train was also branded for a while as china orient express ; nowadays it 's known as shangri-la express . ) the remaining vehicles were used in germany and switzerland as diner trains until the company 's 2003 bankruptcy . since then the trains have been standing unused in different countries , as the new owners sort out problems with operations due to a lawsuit about the usage rights of the name orient express . in 1982 , the venice-simplon orient express was established as a private venture , running restored 1920s and 1930s carriages from london to venice . this service runs between march and november , and is firmly aimed at leisure travellers , with tickets costing over 3,120 per person from london to venice ( via paris , zürich , innsbruck , and verona—also , despite its name , the train is running via the brenner pass instead of the simplon tunnel ) including meals . two or three times a year , prague or vienna and budapest are also accessed , starting from venice , and returning to paris and london . every september the train also goes from london and paris to i̇stanbul via budapest , sinaia , and bucharest—in the last three cities a sightseeing ( and in the two capitals an overnight in hotel ) also takes place—the return trip on the same route ends up in venice . while the above-mentioned routes are available almost every year , some seasons have also included unique destinations , among them cologne , rome , florence , lucerne , the high tatras , kraków , dresden , copenhagen , and stockholm . such a journey is provided currently to berlin . the company also offers a similarly themed luxury train in singapore , malaysia , and thailand called the eastern and oriental express , and operates other luxury overnight trains in scotland , ireland , and peru . the pullman orient express was established by the ciwl in 1994 . this train has only pullman and dining cars , but no sleepers . it 's used for gourmet trips in france . after the legal disputes about the name it was taken over by the sncf and operated since then as pullman orient-express . in north america , the american orient express , formerly the american european express and later grandluxe express , operated several train sets in charter service between 1989 and 2008 . ciwl phototheque and historical archives . the ciwl archives contain more than 100 years of posters , photos , plans , and communication material that represents a tremendous interest for cultural , academic , or commercial projects . creators and artists have been hired by ciwl since 1883 to create luxury conditions and comfort in travel , as well as a particular graphic style that is now recognized worldwide by its quality . great efforts have been made to digitalize images ( photos , plans , and posters ) , although vast paper archives remain preserved , waiting to be sorted and classified in the future . as of today , available digital archives consist of more than 250 ciwl posters , 800 plm posters , and more than 6,000 archive photos , representing probably one of the most extensive poster collections in the world with works dating from the end of the 19th century to the late 1950s . these archives are regularly used for all types of publishing and media projects , all over the world , as well as cultural events ( see below : exhibition ) . unauthorized use of ciwl property is illegal . for any request , contact www.wagons-lits-diffusion.com . in popular culture . the glamour and rich history of the orient express has frequently lent itself to the plot of books and films and as the subject of television documentaries . literature . dracula ( 1897 ) by bram stoker : whilst count dracula escapes from england to varna by sea , the cabal sworn to destroy him travels to paris and takes the orient express , arriving in varna ahead of him . stamboul train ( 1932 ) by graham greene the short story '' have you got everything you want ? '' ( 1933 ) , by dame agatha christie murder on the orient express ( 1934 ) by dame agatha christie , one of the most enduring tales that take place on the simplon orient express oriënt-express ( 1934 ) a novel by a . den doolaard : it takes place in north macedonia . from russia , with love ( 1957 ) , a james bond novel by ian fleming travels with my aunt ( 1969 ) by graham greene paul theroux ( 1975 ) devotes a chapter of the great railway bazaar to his journey from paris to i̇stanbul on the direct-orient express . the orient express ( 1992 ) a novel by gregor von rezzori follows a european american who , having ridden the original orient express in his youth , returns late in life to ride the refurbished version . flashman and the tiger ( 1999 ) by george macdonald fraser : harry paget flashman travels on the train 's first journey as a guest of the journalist henri blowitz . the orient express appeared in the 2004 novel lionboy and its sequel lionboy : the case by zizou corder . charlie ashanti was stowing away on the train on his way to venice when he met king boris of bulgaria . the short story '' on the orient , north '' by ray bradbury the orient express appeared as a technologically advanced ( for its time ) train in the book behemoth , by scott westerfeld . thea stilton and the mystery on the orient express by elisabetta dami madness on the orient express is an anthology of horror stories , all connected to the orient express , edited by james lowder . first class murder ( 2015 ) by robin stevens from the a murder most unladylike series is set on the orient express . film . orient express ( 1934 ) , film adaptation of graham greene 's stamboul train . orient express ( 1944 ) , german film about a murder on the train . sleeping car to trieste ( 1948 ) , film by the rank organisation , story by clifford grey . a stolen diplomatic document is the quest of various groups on the orient express from paris to trieste . copyright by two cities films ltd . orient express ( 1954 ) , whose plot revolves around a two-day stop at a village in the alps by passengers on the orient express . from russia with love ( 1963 ) : james bond , along with bond girl tatiana romanova and ally ali kerim bey , tries to travel on the orient express from istanbul to trieste , but complications involving spectre assassin red grant force bond and tatiana to jump off the train in yugoslav istria . ( 1968 ) : thriller , made for television , starring gene barry . travels with my aunt ( 1972 ) : henry pulling accompanies his aunt , augusta bertram , on a trip from london to turkey . the two board the orient express in paris ; the train takes them to turkey ( though they disembark briefly at the milan stop ) . minder on the orient express ( 1985 ) is a comedy/thriller television film made as a spin-off from the successful television series minder . it was first broadcast on christmas day 1985 , as the highlight of that year 's itv christmas schedule . murder on the orient express ( 1974 ) , ( 2001 ) and ( 2017 ) : film adaptations of the agatha christie novel . romance on the orient express ( 1985 ) : tv movie with cheryl ladd . 102 dalmatians ( 2000 ) death , deceit and destiny aboard the orient express ( 2000 ) around the world in 80 days ( 2004 ) : mr fogg travels on the train to i̇stanbul . orient express ( 2004 ) murder mystery ( 2019 ) : in the final scene nick and audrey spitz are travelling on the orient express . mission : impossible 7 ( 2021 ) . television . orient express was a syndicated tv series in the early- to mid-1950s . filmed in europe , its half-hour dramas featured such stars as paul lukas , jean-pierre aumont , geraldine brooks and erich von stroheim . in '' the orient express '' ( episode number 48 of the world of commander mcbragg cartoon series ) , the commander tells the story of how he once rode on that fabled train , dodging several assassination attempts on his life en route . daylight robbery on the orient express , an episode of the award-winning british comedy television series the goodies , was first broadcast on 5 october 1976 and is partially set aboard the train . mystery on the orient express : a television special featuring illusionist david copperfield . during the special , copperfield rode aboard the train and , at its conclusion , made the dining car seemingly disappear . '' the istambul train '' , '' il treno d'istanbul '' ( 1980 ) hungarian–italian television series '' stamboul train '' original title by graham greene ( 1932 ) . '' minder on the orient express '' ( 1985 ) : a special episode of the long-running itv sit-com minder . whicker 's world – aboard the orient express : travel journalist alan whicker joined the inaugural service of the venice-simplon orient express to venice in 1982 , interviewing invited guests and celebrities along the way . gavin stamp 's orient express : in 2007 uk 's five broadcast an arts/travel series which saw the historian journey from paris to istanbul along the old orient express route . the 1987 cartoon teenage mutant ninja turtles had an episode titled '' turtles on the orient express '' . as the title suggests it is primarily based on the train . ninjaturtles : turtles on the orient express a 1993 advert for bisto fuller flavour gravy granules featured in it with a young couple . the 1995 cartoon madeline had an episode titled madeline on the orient express , in which a chef stole a snake . the episode '' emergence '' of the science fiction television series star trek : the next generation partially takes place on a holodeck representation of the orient express . on 15 may 2007 broadcast of jeopardy ! , the think music was played by a person on the train 's piano , since the final jeopardy clue was about the orient express . in the british soap opera eastenders , in 1986 , characters den and angie watts spent their honeymoon on the train . it was also where it was revealed that angie was lying about her illness , preceding the ultimate storyline on christmas day 1986 . '' aboard the orient express '' get smart series 1 , episode 13 is set on the orient express , though filmed on set . in one episode of the british cartoon series danger mouse , called '' danger mouse on the orient express '' ( a parody of murder on the orient express ) , danger mouse and penfold travel on the train on their way back to london from venice . danger mouse 's arch enemy greenback is also on the train . in an episode of the television series chuck , chuck and sarah decide to go awol and take a trip on the orient express . at the end of the doctor who episode '' the big bang '' , the doctor receives a call for help from the '' orient express — in space '' . this setting is used in the episode '' mummy on the orient express '' , including a reference to the ending of '' the big bang '' , four years later . in episode 15 of television series forever ( 2014 tv series ) , dr henry morgan travelled from budapest to i̇stanbul with his wife abigail morgan on his honeymoon in 1955 . he performed an appendectomy on a member of the fictional urkesh royalty . the backyardigans episode '' le master of disguise '' features the orient express , showing uniqua , pablo , austin , tasha and tyrone going to istanbul from paris . in an episode titled '' murder on the orient express '' of agatha christie 's poirot , poirot investigates the murder of a shady american businessman stabbed in his compartment on the orient express when it is blocked by a blizzard in croatia . michael palin 's around the world in eighty days ( 1988 ) . michael palin travelled on the orient express in episode 1 from london victoria to innsbruck , using a ferry across the english channel from folkestone . the train did n't continue on to venice because of a strike on the italian railways . music . alex otterlei ’ s '' horror on the orient express '' is inspired by the call of cthulhu rpg . the integral symphonic version was released on cd in 2002 , a 26-minute suite for concert band was published in 2012 . orient expressions : musical group from turkey who combine traditional turkish music with elements of electronica . the jean michel jarre album the concerts in china has a track entitled '' orient express '' as track 1 of disc 2 , though the relation to the train is unknown . a concert band piece , orient express is written by philip sparke . there was a band based in hawaii called liz damon 's orient express . computer games and other games . sources : the role-playing game call of cthulhu rpg ( 1981 ) used the train for one of its more famous campaigns , horror on the orient express . the tsr role-playing game top secret had a 1983 module based on the orient titled '' operation orient express '' . just games released a murder mystery boardgame ( 1985 ) called orient express using the famous train route as a backdrop for solving murders . the game is based on the novel murder on the orient express by agatha christie . heart of china ( 1991 computer game ) has a final sequence in the orient express . an action scene takes place on the roof . in 1994 's season 1 episode of where on earth is carmen sandiego ? called , '' the gold old bad days '' , carmen sandiego and her v.i.l.e . gang are given a challenge to do something low tech by the player robbery . carmen 's goal is the train . the orient express plays host to an adventure game by jordan mechner : the last express ( 1997 computer game ) is a murder mystery game set around the last ride of the orient express before it suspended operations at the start of world war i . robert cath , an american doctor wanted by french police as he is suspected of the murder of an irish police officer , becomes involved in a maelstrom of treachery , lies , political conspiracies , personal interests , romance and murder . the game has 30 characters representing a cross-section of european forces at the time . in the game crash bandicoot 3 : warped ( 1998 ) for ps1 , the third level ( which is asian-themed ) is named after orient express . the orient express was featured in two scenarios in the railroad tycoon series : in railroad tycoon ii ( 1998 ) , players get to connect paris to constantinople in a territory buying challenge . in railroad tycoon 3 ( 2003 ) players need to connect vienna to istanbul . the train is featured in microsoft train simulator ( 2001 ) , where its route is a section from innsbruck to sankt anton am arlberg in austria . the orient express cars were made available for download to use in auran 's trainz railroad simulator 2004 or later versions by the content creation group : fma . the adventure company developed a point-and-click adventure based on agatha christie 's novel , agatha christie : murder on the orient express ( 2006 ) . the first scenes of the raven : legacy of a master thief , a 2013 game for pc , involve a mystery set amongst train carriages inspired by the orient express . the entire orient express set was used in the facebook game , trainstation ( 2010 ) . the orient express is a usable engine and caboose in the mobile game tiny rails ( 2016 ) . exhibitions . il était une fois l'orient express , 30 april – 22 june 2014 . arab world institute , paris , france . see also . lists of named passenger trains orient-express hotels the last express . references . notes . . bibliography . . further reading . orient express : the life and times of the world 's most famous train by e h cookridge . detail from a copy of the first publication of the book with black and white plates by allen lane london in 1979 . external links . orient-express