Financial Crimes Enforcement Network

mission . fincen 's director expressed its mission in november 2013 as '' to safeguard the financial system from illicit use , combat money laundering and promote national security . '' fincen serves as the u.s . financial intelligence unit ( fiu ) and is one of 147 fius making up the egmont group of financial intelligence units . fincen 's self-described motto is '' follow the money . '' the website states : '' the primary motive of criminals is financial gain , and they leave financial trails as they try to launder the proceeds of crimes or attempt to spend their ill-gotten profits . '' it is a network bringing people and information together , by coordinating information sharing with law enforcement agencies , regulators and other partners in the financial services . . history . fincen was established by order of the secretary of the treasury ( treasury order numbered 105-08 ) on april 25 , 1990 . in may 1994 , its mission was broadened to include regulatory responsibilities , and in october 1994 the treasury department 's precursor of fincen , the office of financial enforcement was merged with fincen . on september 26 , 2002 , after patriot act , title iii was passed , treasury order 180-01 made it an official bureau in the department of the treasury . since 1995 , fincen employs the fincen artificial intelligence system ( fais ) . the fincen ai system : finding financial crimes in a large database of cash transactions in september 2012 , fincen 's information technology called fincen portal and query system migrated with 11 years of data into fincen query , a search engine similar to google . it is a '' one stop shop '' accessible via the fincen portal allowing broad searches across more fields than before and returning more results . since september 2012 fincen generates 4 new reports : suspicious activity report ( fincen sar ) , currency transaction report ( fincen ctr ) , the designation of exempt person ( doep ) and registered money service business ( rmsb ) . . organization . 350px as of november 2013 , fincen employed approximately 340 people , mostly intelligence professionals with expertise in the financial industry , illicit finance , financial intelligence , the aml/cft ( money laundering/terrorist financing ) regulatory regime , computer technology , and enforcement '' . the majority of the staff are permanent fincen personnel , with about 20 long-term detailees assigned from 13 different regulatory and law enforcement agencies . fincen shares information with dozens of intelligence agencies , including the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , and firearms ; the drug enforcement administration ; the federal bureau of investigation ; the u.s . secret service ; the internal revenue service ; the customs service ; and the u.s . postal inspection service . fincen directors . brian m . bruh ( 1990–1993 ) stanley e . morris ( 1994–1998 ) james f . sloan ( april 1999 – october 2003 ) william j . fox ( december 2003 – february 2006 ) robert w . werner ( march 2006 – december 2006 ) james freis ( march 2007 – august 2012 ) jennifer shasky calvery ( september 2012 – may 2016 ) jamal el-hindi ( acting , june 2016 – november 2017 ) kenneth blanco ( current , november 2017 - present ) . 314 program . the 2001 usa patriot act required the secretary of the treasury to create a secure network for the transmission of information to enforce the relevant regulations . fincen 's regulations under section 314 ( a ) enable federal law enforcement agencies , through fincen , to reach out to more than 45,000 points of contact at more than 27,000 financial institutions to locate accounts and transactions of persons that may be involved in terrorist financing and/or money laundering . a web interface allows the person ( s ) designated in §314 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( a ) to register and transmit information to fincen . the partnership between the financial community and law enforcement allows disparate bits of information to be identified , centralized , and rapidly evaluated . . hawala . as early as 2003 fincen disseminated information on '' informal value transfer systems '' ( ivts ) , including hawala , a network of people receiving money for the purpose of making the funds payable to a third party in another geographic location , . generally taking place outside of the conventional banking system through non-bank financial institutions or other business entities whose primary business activity may not be the transmission of money . on september 1 , 2010 , fincen issued a guidance on ivts referencing united states v . banki and hawala . . virtual currencies . in july 2011 , fincen added '' other value that substitutes for currency '' to its definition of money services businesses in preparation to adapt the respective rule to virtual currencies . on march 18 , 2013 fincen issued a guidance regarding virtual currency , according to which , exchangers and administrators , but not users of convertible virtual currency are considered money transmitters , and must comply with rules to prevent money laundering/terrorist financing ( '' aml/cft '' ) and other forms of financial crime , by record-keeping , reporting and registering with fincen . jennifer shasky calvery , director of fincen said , '' virtual currencies are subject to the same rules as other currencies . … basic money services business rules apply here . '' at a november 2013 senate hearing , calvery stated , '' it is in the best interest of virtual currency providers to comply with these regulations for a number of reasons . first is the idea of corporate responsibility , '' contrasting bitcoin 's understanding of a peer to peer system bypassing corporate financial institutions . she stated that fincen collaborates with the federal financial institutions examination council , a congressionally-chartered forum called the '' bank secrecy act ( bsa ) advisory group '' and bsa working group to review and discuss new regulations and guidance , with the fbi-led '' virtual currency emerging threats working group '' ( vcet ) formed in early 2012 , the fdic-led '' cyber fraud working group '' , the terrorist financing & financial crimes-led '' treasury cyber working group '' , and with a community of other financial intelligence units . according to the department of justice , vcet members represent the fbi , the drug enforcement administration , multiple u.s . attorney 's offices , and the criminal division 's asset forfeiture and money laundering section and computer crime and intellectual property section . . controversies . in 2009 , the gao found '' opportunities '' to improve '' interagency and state examination coordination '' , noting that the federal banking regulators issued an interagency examination manual , that sec , cftc , and their respective self-regulatory organizations developed bank secrecy act ( bsa ) examination modules , and that fincen and irs examining nonbank financial institutions issued an examination manual for money services businesses . therefore multiple regulators examine compliance of the bsa across industries and for some larger holding companies even within the same institution . regulators need to promote greater consistency , coordination and information-sharing , reduce unnecessary regulatory burden , and find concerns across industries . fincen estimated that it would have data access agreements with 80 percent of state agencies that conduct bsa examinations after 2012 . since fincen 's inception in 1990 the electronic frontier foundation in san francisco has debated its benefits compared to its threat to privacy . fincen does not disclose how many suspicious activity reports result in investigations , indictments or convictions , and no studies exist to tally how many reports are filed on innocent people . fincen and money laundering laws have been criticized for being expensive and relatively ineffective , while violating fourth amendment rights , as an investigator may use fincen 's database to investigate people instead of crimes . it has also been alleged that fincen 's regulations against structuring are enforced unfairly and arbitrarily ; for example , it was reported in 2012 that small businesses selling at farmers ' markets have been targeted , while politically connected people like eliot spitzer were not prosecuted . spitzer 's reasons for structuring were described as '' innocent '' . in february 2019 , it was reported that mary daly , the oldest daughter of united states attorney general william barr , is to leave her position at the united states deputy attorney general 's office for a fincen position . in september 2020 , findings based on a set of 2,657 documents including 2121 suspicious activity reports ( sars ) leaked from fincen were published as the fincen files . the leaked documents showed that although both fincen and the banks that filed sars knew about billions of dollars in dirty money being moved through the banks , both did very little to prevent the transactions . . in popular culture . the 2016 film the accountant features a fincen investigation into the title character .