Battle of Dresden

prelude . on the 16 august , napoleon had sent marshal saint-cyr 's corps to fortify and hold dresden in order to hinder allied movements and to serve as a possible base for his own manoeuvres . he planned to strike against the interior lines of his enemies and defeat them in detail , before they could combine their full strength . he had a field army of 442,810 men and 1,284 guns in 559 battalions and 395 squadrons against allied field forces totaling 512,113 men in 556 battalions , 572 squadrons and 68 cossack regiments , and 1,380 guns . the coalition avoided battle with napoleon himself , choosing to attack his subordinate commanders as per the trachenberg plan . on the 23 august , at the battle of grossbeeren , south of berlin , crown prince charles of sweden ( formerly french marshal bernadotte , napoleon 's own marshal ) defeated his old comrade nicolas oudinot . on the 26 august , prussian marshal blücher crushed marshal macdonald 's army at the battle of katzbach . battle . on 25 august , the three monarchs—alexander i of russia , francis ii of austria , and frederick william iii of prussia—and their staffs assembled on an overlook of the city to discuss their strategy . the city 's weak defenses were clear from this vantage point : the french and saxon garrison of 20,000 men under marshal saint-cyr could not hope to hold a city of that size . the tsar and general jean victor moreau , formerly a general of france and by 1813 an adviser to the coalition , wanted to attack at once ; schwarzenberg wanted to wait until additional forces arrived . smith . 1813 . pp . 18–21 the following day , 26 august , karl philipp fürst zu schwarzenberg , sent the coalition force of over 200,000 men to attack saint-cyr . the army of bohemia was divided into three parts : the left wing consisted of austrians and commanded by schwarzenberg himself and included the 9 divisions of infantry , 3 divisions of cavalry and 128 guns ; the right wing consisted of russians and prussians under wittgenstein and included 2 russian infantry divisions and von kleist 's prussian corps and 158 guns ; the reserves behind the center consisted of the best russian and prussian troops under barclay de tolly and included 2 russian grenadier divisions , 4 russian guard cavalry divisions , the prussian royal guard and about 150 guns . the monarchs stayed with the reserves . in dresden , saint-cyr 's xiv corps manned the various redoubts and defensive positions . from 6:00am to noon , the allies probed the french defenses . napoleon arrived from the north about 10:00am with the guard infantry and murat 's i cavalry corps arriving shortly afterwards , covering in forced marches over three days . napoleon 's guard consisted of 2 young guard corps and the old guard division . shortly after 11:00am , the coalition monarchs noticed the stream of french troops hurrying into dresden from the north . there was a lull in the battle between noon and 3:00pm while the french reinforcements took positions and the coalition leaders pondered whether they should fight napoleon or withdraw . the coalition finally began a bombardment and general assault starting about 3:00pm against the southern suburbs of the city . as the coalition forces made progress , napoleon swiftly dispatched reinforcements to the threatened areas - the i cavalry corps to the french right , ney and the ii young guard corps to the center and mortier and the i young guard corps to the french left . at 5:30pm , napoleon launched his riposte . by nightfall , the french had regained almost all of saint-cyr 's original positions . as night fell on 26 august , a torrential downpour started that lasted throughout the night . the streams became swollen with water and the ground turned to mud . after being reinforced overnight with victor 's ii corps , marmont 's vi corps and the guard cavalry , napoleon attacked the following morning on the 27 august in a steady rain , destroyed the allied left flank , and won an impressive tactical victory . the flooded weisseritz cut off a large portion the left wing of the allied army , commanded by johann von klenau and ignaz gyulai , from the coalition 's main body in the center . marshal joachim murat took advantage of this isolation and inflicted heavy losses on the austrians . chandler , the campaigns of napoleon , pp . 910–911 . a french participant observed , '' murat . cut off from the austrian army klenau 's corps , hurling himself upon it at the head of the carabinier and cuirassiers . nearly all his klenau 's battalions were compelled to lay down their arms , and two other divisions of infantry shared their fate . '' marcellin marbot . the memoirs of general baron de marbot , volume ii , , chapter 23 . electronic book widely available . of klenau 's force , lieutenant field marshal joseph , baron von mesko de felsö-kubiny 's division of five infantry regiments was surrounded and captured by murat 's cavalry , which amounted to approximately 13,000 & nbsp ; men , and 15 & nbsp ; colours . smith , p . 445 . mesko was wounded , and retired the following year . kurdna and smith , mesko . gyulai 's divisions also suffered serious losses when they were attacked by murat 's cavalry supported by victor 's ii corps during a rainstorm . with damp flints and powder , their muskets would not fire and many battalions became an easy prey to the french cuirassiers and dragoons . as the allied left wing was being disintegrated , the french attacked on the allied right wing with ney , mortier and saint-cyr . despite desperate charges by the russian and prussian cavalry , this flank was also driven back . the french center was held by marmont 's vi corps but the center was largely limited to an artillery duel . by about 5:00pm , the entire allied force had to slowly pull back even though schwarzenberg 's powerful reserves had not been committed . that night , the coalition decided that they have had enough and quietly withdrew south . napoleon did not realize that they had left until the following morning . an effective rear-guard and the weather allowed schwarzenberg to withdraw and escape any attempt of encirclement or pursuit . the coalition had lost some 38,000 men and 40 guns . french casualties totaled around 10,000 . some of napoleon 's officers noted he was '' suffering from a violent colic , which had been brought on by the cold rain , to which he had been exposed during the whole 2nd day of the battle . '' . aftermath . on the 27 august , general vandamme received orders to advance on pirna and bridge the elbe there with his i corps . this was accomplished in a pouring rain , without disturbing the russians drawn up on the heights of zehista . this advance by vandamme ran into the midst of the allied forces withdrawing from dresden and resulted in the battle of kulm three days later . after being attacked from all sides , vandamme was eventually compelled to surrender . this loss along with the defeats of nicolas oudinot and marshal macdonald overshadowed napoleon 's victory at dresden . napoleon 's old rival jean victor marie moreau , who had only recently returned from his banishment from the united states , was talking to the tsar ( who wished to see napoleon defeated ) and was mortally wounded in the battle , dying later on the 2 september in louny . hoffman . the author and composer e . t . a . hoffmann happened to be in dresden during the battle , being at the time employed by a locally based orchestra . on the 22 august , after the end of the armistice , the hoffmann family was forced to relocate from their pleasant house in the suburbs into the town . during the next few days , as the battle raged , they experienced the ongoing bombardments . as hoffman later recounted , many people were killed by bombs directly in front of him . after the main battle was over , he visited the gory battlefield . his account can be found in vision auf dem schlachtfeld bei dresden . references . bibliography . lawford , james . napoleon , the last campaigns 1813-1815 . crown publishers . new york , 1979 . petre , f . lorraine . napoleon 's last campaign in germany in 1813 . hippocrene books , inc . new york , 1977 . wimble , ed . la bataille de dresde . clash of arms games . sassamansville , pa , 2015 . external links . battle of dresden 1813 – maps , illustrations battle of dresden 1813 allied order of battle battle of dresden 1813 french order of battle french garrison of dresden , 22 august 1813 ( george nafziger collection ) allied forces at dresden , 26/27 august 1813 ( george nafziger collection ) french forces at dresden , 26/27 august 1813 ( george nafziger collection ) memoirs of the duke rovigo