1970 in sports

alpine skiing . alpine skiing world cup men 's overall season champion – karl schranz , austria women 's overall season champion – michèle jacot , france . american football . 11 january – super bowl iv : the kansas city chiefs ( afl ) won 23–7 over the minnesota vikings ( nfl ) location : tulane stadium attendance : 80,562 mvp : len dawson , qb ( kansas city ) cotton bowl ( 1969 season ) : the texas longhorns won 21–17 over the notre dame fighting irish to win the college football national championship 16 june – death of brian piccolo , chicago bears player 15 august – patricia palinkas becomes the first woman to play in a professional football game for the orlando panthers in the atlantic coast football league . 3 september – death of vince lombardi , green bay packers coach ; subsequently , his name is given to the super bowl trophy and the rotary lombardi award 2 october – the wichita state university football team plane crash claims approximately half the football team when one of two planes crashes on the way to a game at utah state university . 14 november – a plane carrying most of the marshall university team crashes just short of landing near huntington , west virginia , killing all 75 aboard , including 37 players . artistic gymnastics . world artistic gymnastics championships men 's all-around champion : eizo kenmotsu , japan women 's all-around champion : ludmilla tourischeva , ussr men 's team competition champion : japan women 's team competition champion : ussr . athletics . 26 december – death from cancer of lillian board ( 22 ) , british middle-distance runner july – 1970 commonwealth games held at edinburgh december – 1970 asian games held at bangkok . baseball . 16 january – gold glove outfielder curt flood files a civil lawsuit challenging baseball 's reserve clause , a suit that will have historic implications . flood refused to report to the phillies after he was traded by the cardinals , contending the baseball rule violates federal antitrust laws . 17 january – the sporting news names willie mays as player of the decade for the 1960s . 20 january – lou boudreau is elected to the baseball , receiving 232 of a possible 300 votes from the bbwaa . 7 april – the milwaukee brewers play their first ever game as the brewers at milwaukee county stadium , after the team had relocated from seattle . 12 june – dock ellis of the pittsburgh pirates throws a no-hitter against the san diego padres . it is later revealed that he did so while under the influence of lsd . robert w . peterson 's book only the ball was white is published . the book brings pressure on major league baseball to recognize the african-american players from negro league baseball by honoring its stars in the baseball hall of fame . world series – the american league 's baltimore orioles win their second world title by defeating the national league 's cincinnati reds , 4 games to 1 . basketball . ncaa men 's division i basketball championship – ucla wins 80–69 over jacksonville national basketball association – new york knicks won 4 games to 3 over the los angeles lakers 1970 aba finals – indiana pacers defeat los angeles stars 4 games to 2 fiba world championship – yugoslavia world champion . boxing . 15 february – carlos cruz , featherweight boxing champion died in a plane crash 16 february – joe frazier wins the undisputed world heavyweight title with the knock out of jimmy ellis in five rounds . 30 december – death of sonny liston ( 38 ) , former heavyweight champion . canadian football . grey cup – montreal alouettes win 23–10 over the calgary stampeders vanier cup – manitoba bisons win 38–11 over the ottawa gee-gees . cricket . 6 january – australia commences a controversial tour of south africa . 4 march – south africa completes a 4–0 series whitewash over australia at port elizabeth . this was to be south africa 's last test match for 22 years . 22 may – the british government forces england to cancel the planned tour of england by south africa . a '' rest of the world '' team captained by garry sobers plays five unofficial test matches against england winning the series 4–1 . in their centenary year kent wins the english county championship for the first time since 1913 . the international cricket council votes to suspend south africa from international cricket indefinitely because of its government 's apartheid policy . cycling . giro d'italia won by eddy merckx of belgium tour de france – eddy merckx of belgium uci road world championships – men 's road race – jean-pierre monseré of belgium . field hockey . men 's european nations cup held in brussels and won by west germany . figure skating . world figure skating championships – men 's champion : tim wood , united states ladies ' champion : gabrielle seyfert , germany pair skating champions : irina rodnina & alexei ulanov , soviet union ice dancing champions : lyudmila pakhomova & alexandr gorshkov , soviet union . golf . men 's professional masters tournament – billy casper u.s . open – tony jacklin british open – jack nicklaus pga championship – dave stockton pga tour money leader – lee trevino – 157,037 men 's amateur british amateur – michael bonallack u.s . amateur – lanny wadkins women 's professional lpga championship – shirley englehorn u.s . women 's open – donna caponi titleholders championship – not played lpga money leader – kathy whitworth – 30,235 . harness racing . fresh yankee was named '' horse of the year '' by the u.s . trotting association and the u.s . harness writers association . most happy fella won the united states pacing triple crown races – cane pace – most happy fella little brown jug – most happy fella messenger stakes – most happy fella united states trotting triple crown races – hambletonian – timothy t . yonkers trot – victory star kentucky futurity – timothy t . australian inter dominion harness racing championship – pacers : bold david . thoroughbred racing . nijinsky wins all three english triple crown races and the irish derby steeplechases cheltenham gold cup – l'escargot grand national – gay trip flat races australia – melbourne cup won by baghdad note canada – queen 's plate won by almoner france – prix de l'arc de triomphe won by sassafras ireland – irish derby stakes won by nijinsky english triple crown races : 2,000 guineas stakes – nijinsky the derby – nijinsky st . leger stakes – nijinsky united states triple crown races : kentucky derby – dust commander preakness stakes – personality belmont stakes – high echelon . ice hockey . art ross trophy – bobby orr becomes the first defenseman in the history of the national hockey league to lead the league in scoring . hart memorial trophy for the nhl 's most valuable player : bobby orr , boston bruins stanley cup – boston bruins win the cup for the first time in 29 years , defeating the st . louis blues four games to none . defenseman , bobby orr is awarded the conn smythe trophy as the series mvp ( most valuable player ) . world hockey championship men 's champion : soviet union defeated sweden ncaa men 's ice hockey championship – cornell university big red defeat clarkson university golden knights 6–4 in lake placid , new york ; only ncaa hockey team to complete season undefeated and untied ( 31–0 ) . lacrosse . stx is founded by richard b.c . tucker sr . the new westminster salmonbellies win the mann cup . the whitby transporters win the castrol cup . the lakeshore maple leafs win the minto cup . motorsport . rugby league . 15 march – the final match of the 1969–70 european championship is played , with england crowned champions for finishing on top of the league 19 september – the 1970 nswrfl season culminates with south sydney 's 23–12 grand final victory over manly-warringah 8 november – the 1970 world cup is won by australia , who defeated great britain 12–7 in the final . snooker . world snooker championship – ray reardon beats john pulman 37–33 . speed skating . first isu sprint speed skating championships for men and ladies held in west allis , u.s.a . swimming . 22 august – us swimmer mark spitz breaks his own , nearly three-year-old world record in the men 's 200m butterfly ( long course ) with a time of 2:05.4 . at the same meet and on the same day in los angeles , california he loses it to gary hall sr . , who swims 2:05.0 . tennis . grand slam in tennis men 's results : australian open – arthur ashe french open – jan kodeš wimbledon championships – john newcombe us open – ken rosewall margaret court wins the grand slam in tennis – australian open – margaret court french open – margaret court wimbledon championships – margaret court us open – margaret court davis cup – united states wins 5–0 over germany in world tennis . volleyball . 1970 fivb men 's world championship held in sofia and won by east germany . yacht racing . the new york yacht club retains the america 's cup as intrepid defeats australian challenger gretel ii , of the royal sydney yacht squadron , 4 races to 1 . multi-sport events . sixth asian games held in bangkok , thailand british commonwealth games held in edinburgh , united kingdom central american and caribbean games held in panama city , panama sixth summer universiade held in turin , italy sixth winter universiade held in rovaniemi , finland . awards . associated press male athlete of the year – george blanda , national football league associated press female athlete of the year – chi cheng , track and field . references .