Funk metal

characteristics and origins . according to allmusic , funk metal '' takes the loud guitars and riff of heavy metal and melds them to the popping bass lines and syncopated rhythms of funk '' . they go on to state '' funk metal evolved in the mid-'80s when alternative bands like the red hot chili peppers and fishbone began playing the hybrid with a stronger funk underpinning than metal , although early attempts at combining the two music styles had existed as far back as 1975 when the welsh heavy metal band budgie released their album bandolier . the bands that followed relied more on metal than funk , though they retained the wild bass lines . '' funk metal . retrieved february 1 , 2012 . in spite of the genre 's name , the website categorises it as a style of alternative rock rather than heavy metal music . in his book know your enemy : the story of rage against the machine , joel mclver wrote that funk metal is '' a slightly clumsy term applied in the late eighties to any rock band whose bass player used a slapping style . '' he goes on to write '' the best known funk-metallers were the red hot chili peppers ( who later achieved global success with a more pop-oriented approach ) and living colour ( an impossibly talented group of players who were just too far ahead of their time to keep it together for long ) . other funk-metallers ranged from the credible , such as infectious grooves ( a side-project of hardcore punks suicidal tendencies ) , to the relatively obscure , such as the dan reed network . '' the self-titled 1984 debut album from red hot chili peppers has been cited as the first funk metal or punk-funk release . faith no more , another californian group who gained popularity in the mid-1980s , have been described as a funk metal band that also dabbled in rap metal . rap-metal . retrieved february 1 , 2012 . rage against the machine 's mix of funk and metal not only included rap , but also elements of hardcore . the battle of los angeles : rolling stone . november 1 , 2003 . archived from the original on april 14 , 2010 . retrieved february 1 , 2012 . certain bands not from a alternative rock background , such as glam metal groups bang tango and extreme , have also frequently incorporated funk into their musical style . prato , greg . bango tango > overview . retrieved february 3 , 2012 . erlewine , stephen thomas . extreme > biography . retrieved february 3 , 2012 . bands such as primus and mordred emerged from the thrash metal underground . primus , a band that crosses many genres , has been widely described as funk metal , though bandleader/bassist les claypool dislikes the categorization . gore , joe ( august 1991 ) . new rage : the funky from guitar player . retrieved february 1 , 2012 . claypool remarked in 1991 , '' we 've been lumped in with the funk metal thing just about everywhere . i guess people just have to categorise you '' . living colour have been named by rolling stone as '' black funk metal pioneers . '' fricke , david ( november 13 , 2003 ) . living colour : collideoscope : music reviews : rolling stone . archived from the original on april 12 , 2009 . retrieved february 1 , 2012 . entertainment weekly noted in a may 1991 article that '' despite the rise of black rockers like living colour , the american funk-metal scene is predominantly white . '' many reviewers often cited living colour as having been a band that were directly inspired by the red hot chili peppers . the vocalist of the red hot chili peppers , anthony kiedis , played down similarities between the two bands . he stated at the time , '' living colour to me sounds nothing like red hot chili peppers . but i have to deal with this on a daily basis : 'wow , living colour 's really biting your style . y'ever see the guy on stage ? he moves just like you . ' '' the funk metal sound was most prevalent in the west coast of the united states , particularly in the state of california , although it managed to gain some international recognition through foreign acts such as british group scat opera and super junky monkey , an all-female funk metal/avant-garde band from japan . . popularity and decline . the success of faith no more 's 1989 song '' epic '' helped heighten interest in the genre . anthony kiedis later claimed faith no more 's singer , mike patton , had stolen the funk metal aesthetic he pioneered in the 1980s , specifically in '' epic '' and its popular music video . he said '' i watched their 'epic ' video , and i see him jumping up and down , rapping , and it looked like i was looking in a mirror . '' since the red hot chili peppers had not yet broken outside of america , he believed european audiences would view him as being an imitator of patton . the la weekly state : '' faith no more , then led by vocalist chuck mosley , before patton joined the band , used to open for the similarly progressive peppers just as the funk-metal scene was gaining momentum . by 1989 , as both bands were getting exceedingly popular , they both landed european tours , with faith no more ’ s scheduled to begin a few months before rhcp 's . this wasn ’ t an issue , until kiedis saw the video for fnm ’ s 'epic ' '' . faith no more 's keyboardist roddy bottum responded to kiedis ' allegations by saying , '' to me , our band sounds nothing like red hot chili peppers . if you 're talking about long hair , rapping with his shirt off , then yeah , i can see similarities . i have n't talked to them since this whole thing started . '' kerrang magazine ( august 1990 ) the feud continued in the late 90s and early 2000s with patton 's other funk metal band , mr . bungle , who were heavily inspired by the red hot chili peppers in their early days . the genre had reached a commercial peak by late 1991 , with funk metal albums such as blood sugar sex magik ( by red hot chili peppers ) , sailing the seas of cheese ( by primus ) and mr . bungle 's self-titled debut attaining critical acclaim from the mainstream music press . mark jenkins of the washington post claimed in a 1991 article that '' much of it sounds like art rock '' . allmusic described the genre as a '' brief but extremely media-hyped stylistic fad '' . according to steev esquivel of the band skinlab , the prevalance of funk metal around this time hurt the popularity of thrash metal music in the san francisco bay area . he said primus and faith no more '' came in and shut down the metal scene single handedly '' , and that bands such as these attracted a large female demographic that had previously followed thrash metal . steev esquivel , 2019 by the latter part of the 90s , funk metal was represented by a smaller group of bands , including incubus , sugar ray , jimmie 's chicken shack and 311 . bands from other genres such as nu metal ( korn , primer 55 , bloodhound gang ) and punk ( snot , zebrahead ) also incorporated elements of funk metal into their sound during the late 90s and early 2000s . korn , who are often credited with popularizing the nu metal genre on their 1994 debut , have mentioned faith no more and the red hot chili peppers as their two earliest influences . mega ! ! kung fu radio , the 1997 major label debut of powerman 5000 , showcased an aggressive form of funk metal , which the band themselves branded as '' action-rock '' . all subsequent releases from powerman 5000 moved towards an industrial metal/industrial rock sound . allmusic suggests the genre was '' played-out by the end of the decade '' . influential 80s and early 90s acts such as faith no more , mr . bungle and red hot chili peppers had largely abandoned the sound in favor of other styles by this point . faith no more 's bassist billy gould claimed he was '' sick '' of the genre as early as 1992 , although the band 's 1992 album angel dust has been described as having some funk metal characteristics . in 1995 , he said : '' we were perceived as a gimmick : a mixture of metal and funk and we had this pretty-boy singer . we found it really repulsive . we started getting tapes from bands who were heavy metal funk bands and they were saying we were their main influence , it was horrible . angel dust was a way for us to stretch our arms out and hold on to our identity , mike patton cut his hair and changed how he looked . '' red hot chili peppers ' 1995 album one hot minute was still considered to have elements of their original funk metal/punk-funk sound , however , beginning with 1999 's californication , they began heading towards a more mainstream funk-influenced pop direction . according to the washington post in 1999 , acts such as korn and limp bizkit built on the '' funk/metal/rap hybrid '' of red hot chili peppers during the four year interval between one hot minute and californication . however , anthony kiedis has stated , '' i do n't think any of those conservative , ultra-aggro , rap metal bands had the funk influence or punk-rock energy that we had . '' during 2001 , alien ant farm released a hugely successful funk metal cover of michael jackson 's '' smooth criminal '' , an electro funk song . bands from the 2000s and 2010s described as funk metal include psychostick , twelve foot ninja and prophets of rage ( a supergroup featuring members of cypress hill , public enemy and rage against the machine ) . in 2016 , vice magazine referred to funk metal as '' a mostly-forgotten and occasionally-maligned genre '' . mr . bungle guitarist trey spruance mentioned his fondness for the genre in a 2007 interview . when asked if he thought it would make a comeback , he stated '' fuckin ' revisionists probably wo n't think its cool enough . they 'll go straight for the grunge . '' . citations . bibliography .