Monmouth College

sustainability . monmouth college has reduced its energy consumption and has substantially increased its recycling contributions in recent years . these efforts include energy reduction through the installation of numerous new heating boilers throughout campus , the use of energy-efficient lighting , low-flow water systems and the replacement of windows in nearly all older buildings . the new center for science and business includes energy efficient heating/cooling systems and heat recapture exhaust systems among many other features . recycling efforts now extend into every student residence and office building . some students have also committed themselves to sustainability of food production by opting to live in the college 's garden theme housing which grows its own organic food and harvests its own honey using college facilities including seven acres set aside for such use . the college also provides scholarships for students who have demonstrated leadership in sustainability prior to enrolling . the college provides free access to bicycles for student use , and an electric vehicle recharging station is located on campus . . study abroad and off-campus . over seventy off-campus programs are available in over fifty countries and may run for as little as ten days or as long as a year but generally last one semester . programs offered through the associated colleges of the midwest consortium take place usually for one semester at over a dozen locales around the globe and include cultural , scientific , economic , historical and other forms of study and research . the diversity of these programs spans such topics as scientific research at oak ridge national laboratory to government interning in washington , d.c . to cultural activities in florence , italy . monmouth college faculty frequently teach in these programs along with other members of the consortium including carleton college , grinnell college , and eleven other colleges . other programs run exclusively by monmouth college include a wide-ranging program in scotland . in 2012 , four monmouth college students studied at the fulbright international summer institute in bulgaria , accompanied by a monmouth college associate dean who taught at the institute . . hewes library . with over a half-million items catalogued , the hewes library provides students access to its broad collections . besides books and periodicals and a large interlibrary loan capability , the library also houses collections of antiquities , rare books , art , archaeology , and also computer laboratories and high-tech support . a major remodeling in 2000 has resulted in a modern open-stack facility . . fellowships and internships . hundreds of internships are arranged annually for students through the wackerle career and leadership center . these include public service work around the country . students have also interned , beginning as early as the first year , opting from opportunities at such businesses as caterpillar inc . , deere & co . , monsanto , law offices , medical offices , and many others . summer internships are also available at the college in such offices as admission , financial aid , student life , hewes library , marketing communication , fundraising and others . summer research opportunities exist for students and also incoming freshmen and transfers in the sciences and many other areas of study . this research is conducted with professors and students working in groups and includes such varied topics such as lightning research , archaeology and music . included are allowances for a stipend and room and board expenses . cost of attendance and financial aid . monmouth 's comprehensive tuition , room , and board fees for the 2015–16 academic year is 42,450 . once miscellaneous personal expenses are factored in the total cost to attend for the 2015–16 academic year is approximately 45,400 . despite its cost of attendance shown above , monmouth college provides scholarships or financial aid to over 98 % of students . the average financial aid package award for 2014–15 was 30,090 ( of which 4,325 were loans and work study ) ; the average net price of attendance was 10,760 . this average is for all freshmen students including those with no financial need . merit scholarships are automatically offered upon the completion of application to the college . competitive scholarships in the areas of fine arts , sustainability , presbyterian , and latin are determined by an application process in january or february annually . need-based financial aid is determined by the student filing the fafsa federal form . these students are encouraged to file this form in january although later filing is accepted . the college maintains a staff of experts who aid students and parents in working through these processes in order to build the best possible financial package . outside scholarships are accepted with no reduction in monmouth college aid or scholarships . students and staff . students . students represent about 30 states and about 35 countries . ninety-three percent of students live on campus in dormitories , theme houses , greek housing , or apartment buildings . student profile . size : 900 points of origin : 28 states ; 21 countries diversity : 50 % women ; 50 % men ; 35 % american minorities and international . faculty profile . size : 133 ( 92 full-time , 41 part-time ) student-faculty ratio : 10:1 qualifications : 85 percent have ph.d . or other terminal degree average class size : 14 . men 's fraternities . φδθ phi delta theta σφε sigma phi epsilon ατω alpha tau omega ζβτ zeta beta tau . women 's fraternities . αξδ alpha xi delta πβφ pi beta phi ( alpha chapter founded at mc , 1867 ) κκγ kappa kappa gamma ( alpha chapter founded at mc , 1870 ) . coeducational fraternities . μλρ mu lambda rho ( alpha chapter founded at mc , 2013 ) ( local ) . student groups . there are over 120 student groups that pursue various interests through student-led organizations funded by the student government or the college , including cultural , religious , publications , professional , honors , fine and performing arts , political advocacy , service groups , housing , and athletic organizations . the honor societies at monmouth college are : αλδ alpha lambda delta ( freshmen scholastic ) αψω alpha psi omega ( theatre ) βββ beta beta beta ( biology ) blue key ( junior service ) ησφ eta sigma phi , gamma omicron chapter ( classics ) κδπ kappa delta pi ( education ) λπη lambda pi eta , kappa chapter ( communication ) mortar board , tau pi chapter ( senior service ) φαθ phi alpha theta ( history ) πδφ pi delta phi ( french ) πγμ pi gamma mu ( social science ) πσα pi sigma alpha ( political science ) ψχ psi chi ( psychology ) γδπ sigma delta pi ( spanish ) γομ sigma omicron mu ( senior scholastic ) γτδ sigma tau delta ( english ) society of physics students american chemical society ( student affiliates ) . traditions . the college 's scottish heritage is celebrated by its bagpipes and drums band that have won national titles in recent years . the freshmen walkout is an autumn event that acquaints all the students with the town . scholars day held in conjunction with founders day celebrates academic achievements with a wide variety of events . the college owns a restored civil war cannon which currently resides in the basement of their athletic facility , the '' huff . '' it was once used to signal every touchdown the fighting scots made at homecoming football games , but this tradition has not been practiced since at least 2013 . alma mater . the alma mater of monmouth college is '' a flame of white and crimson . '' it was written in 1924 . a flame of white and crimson weaves mem'ry 's shadow spell , and a thousand hearts ' devotion to the school we love so well . thy name means honor , loyalty and beauty . ever be thy strength , our strength and pride for aye . old monmouth , hail to thee ! . safety . monmouth college 's safety record rates highly among american colleges and universities . the college is located in a residential neighborhood of victorian homes , removing it from the safety concerns of many urban campuses . the college provides security patrols , an emergency broadcasting system and emergency text messaging system , plus extensive security lighting and the use of some security cameras . fire safety is highly rated by the princeton review . all dormitories are equipped with sprinkler systems and smoke detectors . athletics . monmouth college is a member of the midwest conference and the ncaa division iii . list of ncaa division iii institutions the college offers eleven varsity sports for men and eleven for women . the college has won the midwest conference men 's all-sports trophy each of the last two years . the college also offers intramural sports . monmouth college wellness office . '' intramural sports '' . retrieved on october 16 , 2015 . the athletic teams ' nickname , fighting scots , was coined in 1928 to reflect the scotch-irish heritage of the college 's founders . '' fighting scots '' is a registered trademark of monmouth college . the monmouth college men 's track and field team placed third in the ncaa division iii outdoor track and field championships on may 26 , 2007 . it was the first national team trophy that a monmouth college sports team has won . the following year , monmouth 's men 's track and field team took second place in the ncaa division iii indoor track and field championships . monmouth 's track program has produced nine individual national champions , the most recent of which was james wilson , who won the ncaa division iii indoor long jump national title in 2013 . in 2014 , the college 's sports teams and student-athletes won awards for academic achievement including national academic honors from seven different organizations . volleyball and men 's golf earned team academic accolades from their respective national coaches ' organizations for their high team gpa . eleven team members also earned individual national honors for their academic excellence including one student who became monmouth 's first winner of the ncaa 's elite 89 award , given to the student-athlete with the highest gpa participating in one of the ncaa 's 89 sponsored championships . four softball players , three track student-athletes , two women 's golfers and a men 's tennis player also received national academic honors for the 2013–14 academic year . monmouth began its college football rivalry with knox college in galesburg in 1888 , making it the sixth-oldest college football rivalry in the country . the two schools play annually for the bronze turkey trophy in november ( originally on thanksgiving ) . espn 's jeff merron has classified the trophy as the fifth-most-unusual in college football . '' page 2 blog : 'these really stand out in the case ' '' retrieved on october 16 , 2015 . the bronze turkey has been stolen several times and was at one time buried under the old mc indoor track for five years . monmouth leads the series with 71 wins , 50 losses and 10 ties . the monmouth college football team has appeared in the ncaa division iii playoffs in 2005 , 2008 , 2009 , 2011 , 2016 , 2017 , and 2019 . monmouth 's recent varsity football alumni include two former quarterbacks who went on to the national football league . through 2013 , alex tanney '11 has played for kansas city , dallas , cleveland , tampa , and the new york giants . mitch tanney '06 is director of analytics for the chicago bears . varsity water polo for both men and women was added in 2013 . the men 's water polo team won the cwpa division iii club national championship in 2012 . varsity lacrosse was to be added in 2016 . monmouth college was a member of the illinois intercollegiate athletic conference from 1921 to 1937 . . men 's varsity teams . baseball basketball cross country football golf indoor track outdoor track soccer swimming tennis water polo lacrosse ( 2016 ) . women 's varsity teams . basketball cross country golf indoor track outdoor track soccer softball swimming tennis volleyball water polo lacrosse ( 2016 ) . club and intramural athletics . monmouth college fields over twenty club athletic teams for men and women spanning about a dozen indoor and outdoor sports . these include sand volleyball , ultimate frisbee , badminton , floor hockey , wrestling and ping pong in addition to the more traditional flag football , basketball , and softball . some teams are co-ed . music . in the monmouth college music department , majors and non-majors alike have the opportunity to perform in ensembles including chorales , male and female a capella , marching band , concert bands and an orchestra . the college also has a gospel choir and provides opportunities for musical theater . the chorale has toured extensively both nationally , visiting nearly half the states in the us , and internationally , including a recent trip to scotland and a tour of spain in spring , 2012 . in 2013 the group performed in carnegie hall in new york city . all classes , ensembles , and lessons are taught by members of the faculty , rather than by teaching assistants . the faculty are experts in their respective fields , as well as active performers . the music department subsidizes some vocal ensembles . the kasch performance hall , a 600-seat concert hall and stage which is inside the dahl chapel , was given a 3 million restoration in 2003 . faculty offices , most lessons and classes , practice rooms , and a piano lab are located in austin hall , which is a few blocks away . . rankings . monmouth college is one of 249 national liberal arts colleges ( out of 2,968 four-year u.s . colleges ) classified by u.s . news & world report and is included in tier 1 of its best colleges rankings . parchment student choice rankings , which uses a methodology '' based on student enrollment decisions , '' ranks monmouth 93rd out of the top 722 four-year colleges in the united states . money magazine ranked monmouth 28th out of 736 '' best colleges '' in the most affordable private colleges category . the college provides programming to assist its students in achieving more after graduation and its efforts in this area have been recognized by washington monthly , which ranks monmouth as 38 ( out of 248 top four-year institutions ) in social mobility which includes predicted versus actual graduation rate achievement of its graduates . the princeton review named monmouth college a '' best in the midwest '' in its 2015 best colleges survey . monmouth 's highest ratings came in the areas of fire safety , financial aid , interesting professors and accessibility of professors . the college is ranked in the top 17 % ( 154 ) of 925 colleges and universities in forbes college financial grades rankings of financial fitness . this ranking is based on balance sheet health , operational soundness , admissions yield , freshmen receiving institutional grants , and instructional expenses per student . monmouth was named to the 2013 president 's higher education community service honor roll . . notable alumni . reid k . beveridge 1964 , brigadier general ( ret . ) in the national guard of the united states ; functionary , the presbyterian church ; and journalist robert h . brink 1968 , representative , virginia house of delegates ; attorney ralph waddell douglass 1920 , award-winning artist ; author of the calligraphic lettering style ; coauthor and illustrator of the mesaland series of children 's books james k . l . duncan 1866 , medal of honor recipient robert hugo dunlap 1942 , major in the united states marine corps , medal of honor recipient jug earp 1921 , national football league player , green bay packers ; inducted into green bay packers hall of fame ; also played for the new york yankees football team dean e . fischer 1958 , assistant secretary of state for public affairs ; spokesman for the united states department of state ; was a united states journalist with time magazine ronald reagan : nomination of dean e . fischer to be an assistant secretary of state , june 4 , 1981 roger j . fritz 1950 was a management consultant , columnist , international speaker and author of 63 management development and motivational books ; 17th president of willamette university in oregon from 1969–1972 ann garry 1965 , founding director , center for the study of genders and sexualities and chair of the department of philosophy at california state university , los angeles ; humphrey chair of feminist philosophy at the university of waterloo ; fulbright lecturer at the university of tokyo and at eötvös loránd university , budapest calvin bryce hoover 1922 , founder of the field of comparative economic systems ; noted economist and professor , duke university ; wrote the economic life of soviet russia in 1931 the economic life of soviet russia . new york , the macmillan company , 1931 . philip g . killey 1963 , united states air force major general ( ret . ) ; adjutant general , south dakota national guard ; director , air national guard ; commander , first air force william medcalf kinsey 1869 , u.s . representative from missouri ; circuit court judge ; and attorney jane kurtz 1973 , author of over 30 children 's books ; golden kite award ( best picture book text ) ; year 's best children 's books ( the washington post ) martha lena morrow lewis 1892 , national lecturer , monmouth , illinois ; organizer , united states ; first woman member , national executive committee of the core curriculum mari jo buhle , women and american socialism , 1870–1920 . urbana , il : university of illinois press , 1981 ; pg . 162 . solon deleon with irma c . hayssen and grace poole ( eds . ) , the american labor who 's who . new york : hanford press , 1925 ; pg . 138 . edgar martin 1921 , cartoonist , boots and her buddies , reached an audience of 700 newspapers and 60 million readers lynn , ernest . '' edgar martin : fathered the 'sweetheart of the comics ' '' . altoona mirror , september 2 , 1960 . cochran , hal . '' boots celetrates her 25th anniversary '' . statesville daily record , february 21 , 1949 . robert wilson mcclaughry 1860 , warden of the united states penitentiary at leavenworth , kansas and early leader in modern penal reform ; general superintendent of police , chicago robert t . mcloskey 1928 , u.s . representative from illinois ; member of the illinois house of representatives thomas h . mcmichael 1886 , m.a . 1889 , president of monmouth college ( 1903–1936 ) ; moderator , presbyterian church of north america ( 1915 ) keith molesworth 1928 , chicago bears football player ; backfield coach , pittsburgh steelers ; head coach , baltimore colts ; vice president and director of personnel , baltimore colts rachel j . nicol 1868 , a founder of pi beta phi , first secret collegiate society for women patterned after men 's fraternities ; and a physician ( m.d . ) danielle nierenberg 1995 , activist , author , journalist , and co-founder and president of food tank : the food think tank george h . palmer 1861 , medal of honor recipient james l . pate 1963 , chairman of the board and chief executive officer , pennzoil-quaker state company ; assistant secretary of commerce and spokesman for u.s . president gerald r . ford ; pate , joel ( february 17 , 2003 ) . '' pate texas obit – james leonard pate '' . rootsweb . rootsweb . retrieved june 8 , 2015 . chairman of board , devon energy corporation ; '' list of public companies worldwide , letter '' . businessweek . retrieved june 8 , 2015 . chief economist , b.f . goodrich company abram , lynwood ( january 21 , 2003 ) . '' deaths : james pate , former pennzoil ceo '' . houston chronicle . retrieved june 8 , 2015 . harold '' red '' poling 1949 , chairman and ceo , ford motor company ; member , sigma phi epsilon fraternity σφε robert william porter 1949 , united states federal judge , attorney , and mayor of richardson , texas kennedy j . reed 1967 , theoretical physicist , lawrence livermore national laboratory ( llnl ) ; founder of the national physical science consortium ( npsc ) ; distinguished african american scientists of the twentieth century , james h . kessler , greenwood publishing group , 1996 . presidential award for excellence in science , mathematics and engineering mentoring ; '' obama : u.s . 'outpaced ' by other nations in math and science '' by david jackson , usa today , 2010-01-06 fellow , american physical society ; presidential award for excellence in science , mathematics and engineering mentoring , office of the press secretary , the white house , july 9 , 2009 fellow , american association for the advancement of science ; chairs , international union of pure and applied physics commission on physics for development maurice h . rees , medical educator and dean of university of colorado school of medicine from 1925 to 1945 james h . rupp , illinois state senator , mayor of decatur , illinois , and businessman 'illinois blue book 1985-1986 , ' biographical sketch of james h . rupp , pg . 114 chad simpson 1998 , micro award-winning short and flash fiction author ; teresa a . white award , quiddity international literary journal . richard elihu sloan 1877 , governor of arizona territory ; associate justice of the arizona territorial supreme court ; judge , united states district court charles a . sprague 1910 , governor of oregon ( 1939–1943 ) ; editor , and publisher of oregon statesman james stockdale 1946 , vice admiral , u.s . navy ; u.s . vice-presidential candidate ; medal of honor recipient ; president , naval war college joe tait 1959 , longtime radio voice , cleveland cavaliers alex tanney 2011 , national football league quarterback samuel martin thompson 1924 , philosopher and author of three bestselling textbooks of philosophy ; an author of the confession of 1967 , one of the major statements of faith of the presbyterian church ( usa ) monmouth moves magazine , monmouth college , august 1983 , pages 6-7 david turnbull 1936 , chemist , made seminal contribution to solidification theory and glass formation ; elected to the national academy of sciences ; fellow , of the american academy of arts and sciences , awarded the japan prize ; awarded the franklin medal science 6 july 2007 : vol . 317 . no . 5834 , pp . 56–57 ; jim verraros , dance ( music ) and actor ( transferred to columbia college chicago before graduating ) . earl w . vincent 1909 , republican u.s . representative from iowa 's 9th congressional district ; federal judge ; fifth judicial district of iowa judge ; and attorney helen wagner 1938 , actress and star of as the world turns ; 2004 lifetime achievement award , academy of television arts and sciences dan everett waid , 1887 , chief architect , metropolitan life insurance company of new york ; president , new york state board of examiners and registration of architects ( 1915–1923 ) ; president , american institute of architects ( aia ) ( 1924–26 ) ; fellow of the american institute of architects ilo browne wallace 1911 , second lady of the united states ; a founder of pioneer hi-bred international ; '' weekly corporate growth report '' , 22 march 1999 retrieved on 30 december 2006 sponsor of the john findley wallace 1872 , chief engineer , panama canal project and illinois central railroad matthew parker . hell 's gorge : the battle to build the panama canal . p.214–16 william j . winslade 1963 , prolific author and research principal of philosophy , medicine , and ethics ; professor of philosophy of medicine , university of texas charles f . wishart 1894 , president , college of wooster 1921–1944 ; moderator , presbyterian general assembly 1924 charles frederick wishart , jean snyder felt , memoirs of charles frederick wishart , 1870–1960 ( s.l . : s.n . , 1982 ) . john m . work 1891 , founding member and executive secretary of the socialist party of america ; author . there are about 12,600 living alumni . see also . monmouth university , in west long branch , new jersey , was also named monmouth college until 1995 . notes . references . external links . official website official athletics website