Wild River (film)

plot . in the early 1930s , chuck glover ( montgomery clift ) arrives in garthville , tennessee , upstream from a new hydroelectric dam of the tennessee valley authority , to head the tva 's land purchasing office after its previous supervisor quit . he is responsible for supervising the clearing of land to be flooded but must first acquire garth island on the tennessee river , the last piece of property yet to be sold to the government . the previous supervisor was unable to convince elderly ella garth ( jo van fleet ) , matriarch of a large family that has lived on the island for decades , to sell her land to the government , which to avoid bad publicity the tva wants to acquire without using force . the clearing of the land for the coming lake is also proceeding behind schedule because the mayor , the town 's barber , uses only white labor . chuck goes to garth island but ella and the other garth women , including ella 's granddaughter carol baldwin ( lee remick ) , refuse to listen to him . he tries to reason with ella 's three grown sons , hamilton ( jay c . flippen ) , cal ( james westerfield ) , and joe john , but being relocated means working for a living and they have never worked in their lives . joe john tosses chuck into the river . hamilton comes to chuck 's room soon after to invite him to the island for a formal apology and to speak with ella . chuck arrives the next day to find ella castigating president franklin d . roosevelt and his new deal to her black farm hands and their families . to make her point to chuck , she feigns attempting to compel sam johnson ( robert earl jones ) , a field hand , to sell her his beloved hunting dog against his will . chuck tries to reason with ella , passionately laying out the benefits the dam will bring , but ella denounces dams and the taming of the river as going '' against nature . '' when he asks ella what 's going to happen to her , she takes him to the family cemetery plot on the highest point of the island . there he learns from carol that she is a widow with two small children who moved back to the island when her husband died three years before . she is also expected to marry walter clark ( frank overton ) , a businessman in town , but chuck urges her not to if she does n't love him . she walks chuck back to the ferry where the anxious field hands are also waiting . chuck invites them to come to his office to discuss working for the tva , reasoning that when they leave the island , ella will have no choice except to sell . on an impulse , carol invites chuck to see her former home above the landing on the opposite shore . her loneliness and attraction to chuck combine to make her beg him to spend the night with her there . the next morning , saying goodbye , it is apparent to both that they are falling in love . back in town chuck apprises the mayor , who is sympathetic , of his plan but is warned that hiring '' colored labor '' will cause the white workers to quit and bring out other elements to oppose him . when chuck hires ella 's field hands , three prominent businessmen urge chuck to create segregated work gangs and pay the black workers less than the whites , which chuck refuses to do despite insinuations that '' less responsible '' opponents will use harsher tactics . carol and chuck are confused by their passion for each other but spend another night together again at her house , unaware that walter clark has seen them . the next morning ella 's workers and their families pack up and leave , and ella remains alone except for sam , who loyally refuses to go . ella knows what carol and chuck have done and when carol begs her grandmother to join her at her own house , orders her off the island . the '' less responsible '' element is led by r . j . bailey ( albert salmi ) , a bully who farms cotton using black workers who are leaving him to work for the tva . to scare chuck from seeing carol , walter agrees to lure him back that night to his hotel room , where bailey is waiting , but experiencing a change of heart when chuck treats him decently about their rivalry for carol , walter warns him at the last second . bailey demands to be compensated by the government for a worker who quit and when chuck refuses , literally shakes him down for the money . bailey gives it to walter to purchase some moonshine for chuck to console himself with . the two men get drunk together and go out to the island to talk with ella , to whom chuck admits his understanding of her fight to protect her dignity . the following day , chuck learns that the dam 's flood gates will be closed in a few days and ella must be evicted immediately . hamilton and cal tell chuck that they are going to have ella competence ( law ) to permit them to sell the land themselves , which chuck rejects . he reluctantly asks the u.s . marshal to have ella removed the next day , then goes to the island to use the machinations of her sons in a final attempt to persuade her to leave on her own . she calls her sons worthless and refuses to talk to him further . carol knows that chuck will be moving on to a new assignment within a few days and pleads with him to take her with him , telling him she would make a '' damned good wife '' for him . chuck is still trying to cope with his new feelings and does not know what to say . walter rushes to carol 's house to warn them that bailey and his men are coming to terrorize them . while the local sheriff stands aside , telling his deputy , '' they 're just having some fun '' , the thugs shoot out a window with a rifle , overturn chuck 's car , and drive walter 's truck into the side of the house . refusing to be run out of town , chuck confronts bailey but is knocked out with one punch . carol leaps on bailey , who hits her too , finally forcing the sheriff to run off the crowd . chuck proposes to carol and they are married that night by a justice of the peace . the next day , with chuck and carol present , ella is read the eviction notice and leaves her island as her former workers fell the trees . at her new home , ella sits on the porch , dispiritedly refusing to speak . soon after , while chuck is supervising the burning of the garth house , carol tells him that ella just died . before leaving the valley , chuck and carol join her family and former workers in burying ella in the family plot , now the only part of garth island above water in the new lake . cast . montgomery clift as chuck glover lee remick as carol garth baldwin jo van fleet as ella garth albert salmi as r.j . bailey jay c . flippen as hamilton garth james westerfield as cal garth barbara loden as betty jackson frank overton as walter clark malcolm atterbury as sy moore bruce dern as jack roper ( uncredited ) robert earl jones as sam johnson ( uncredited ) . production . coon denton island on the hiwassee river , in northern bradley county , tennessee , upriver from charleston , served as the fictional garth island , and the city of charleston 's old business district served as the fictional city of garthville . a peninsula northwest of cleveland , tennessee , on chickamauga lake , was also used , and a studio for interior shooting was created in the cleveland armory . a few other locations in rural bradley county near charleston were also used . . preservation . wild river was preserved by the academy film archive . . references . external links .