Ceefax

history . early electro-mechanical system . during the late 1960s , engineers geoff larkby and barry pyatt , at the designs department ( television group ) of the bbc , worked on an experimental analogue text transmission system . its object was to transmit a printable page of text during the nocturnal '' close-down '' period of normal television transmission . hugh greene , then director general of the bbc , was interested in making farming and stock-market prices available as hard copy via the dormant tv transmitters . the remit received by bbc designs department was '' the equivalent of one page of the times newspaper to be transmitted during shut-down '' . their system employed a modified , alexander muirhead designed , rotating drum , facsimile transmitter , and larkby & pyatt 's own , unique , design of hard-copy printer . this printer used pressure-sensitive '' till-roll '' paper passing over a drum with a raised helix of steel wire . the drum was synchronised with the transmission drum by means of the '' start of page '' , and '' start of line '' information inherent in the muirhead system . printing was effected by a hardened steel blade driven by , initially , a loudspeaker-type moving coil , then by a printed-circuit coil , and finally by a special ceramic piezo element manufactured by clevite . the combination of rotating helix and oscillating moving blade , with the till-roll paper moving linearly between them , enabled a raster to be drawn on the paper . fully-electronic version . the idea was later taken up again , this time in digital and on-screen form , under the new name of ceefax , and the new system was announced in october 1972 , and following test transmissions in 1972–74 , the ceefax system went live on 23 september 1974 with thirty pages of information . created in the united kingdom in the early 1970s by the philips lead designer for vdus john adams , his design was given to the bbc so they could start transmission . bbc were working on ways of providing televisual subtitles for deaf people , it was the first teletext system in the world . james redmond , the bbc 's director of engineering at the time , was a particular enthusiast . other broadcasters soon took up the idea , including the independent broadcasting authority ( iba ) , who had developed the incompatible oracle teletext system , at around the same time . before the internet and the world wide web become popular , ceefax pages were often the first location to report a breaking story or headline . after technical negotiations , the two broadcasters settled in 1974 on a single standard , different from both ceefax and oracle , which ultimately developed into world system teletext ( 1976 ) , and which remained in use for analogue broadcasts until 2012 . the display format of 24 rows by 40 columns of characters was also adopted for the prestel system . the technology became the standard european teletext system and replaced other standards , including the antiope system formerly used in france . in 1983 , ceefax started to broadcast computer programs , known as telesoftware , for the bbc micro ( a home computer available in the united kingdom ) . the telesoftware broadcasts stopped in 1989 . a similar idea was the french c plus direct satellite channel which used different , higher speed technology to broadcast pc software . the basic technology of ceefax remained compatible with the 1976 unified rollout ; system elaborations in later years were made such that earlier receivers were still able to do a basic decode of pages , but would simply ignore enhanced information rather than showing corrupted data . closure . right right until 2012 , the bbc 's ceefax service was still providing information on topics covering news , sport , weather , tv listings and businesses . the pages were kept up to date until the uk digital switchover was completed on tuesday 23 october 2012 . in 2002 , the bbc stopped broadcasting ceefax on the digital satellite sky digital service , but later brought back a limited service including a tv schedule for bbc one and bbc two ; and subtitles . the bbc has tried to reuse the old ceefax page numbers where possible on the freeview and digital satellite bbc red button ceefax-replacement services . how we assign our page numbers bbc blogs it was announced that ceefax would not be replaced when the analogue signal was switched off in october 2012 . the bbc red button service was seen as an alternative to ceefax and since 2007 the number of regions with a ceefax supported analogue signal had declined as digital switchover progressed across the uk . as of the end of 2011 , three-quarters of the uk tv regions had completed or were in the process of being switched over . ceefax was the last remaining text service available via analogue tv transmissions in the uk , as itv and channel 4 's teletext service closed in december 2009 . channel 5 's '' five text '' ancillary service closed in 2011 . a limited analogue teletext service through itv and channel 4 was still available through terrestrial until the digital switchover was completed on 23 october 2012 . at 23:32:19 bst on 23 october 2012 , ceefax was switched off after 38 years of providing news , weather and sport information when the olympic games champion dame mary peters turned off the last analogue tv signal in northern ireland . a series of graphics on ceefax 's front page marked its 38 years on the bbc . bbc news ' website also has memories of ceefax . in a tongue-in-cheek article on the 2017 general election , the guardian gave political satirist lord buckethead a '' best policy '' award for the latter 's manifesto pledge to bring back ceefax . . bbc red button service . the analogue switch-off in the uk saw the closure of ceefax in october 2012 . its replacement , bbc red button , is available on most digital services including freeview , virgin media , sky and freesat . bbc red button is accessed by pressing the red button or the text button on any bbc channel . as well as being able to display plain text , bbc red button offers richer graphics than ceefax and a number of interactive video streams . pages can be navigated to by scrolling with the remote or entering the correct page number ; most of the page numbers previously used on ceefax are the same on bbc red button , such as sports being on page number 301 with football on 302 and football results on 316 . the new bbc red button service is used as much as ceefax and is especially popular among football fans . in september 2019 , the bbc announced that the red button service would be discontinued in 2020 , ending 45 years of text content delivery via tv broadcast . however , on 29 january 2020 , one day before the scheduled date of shutdown , the bbc suspended its decision pending a review into it after there were some protests concerning certain demographs of people , for example , the elderly , with regards to what impact the removal of the service would have on them . technology . the ceefax/oracle standard was internationalised in the 1980s as world system teletext , which was adopted into the international standard ccir 653 ( now itu-r bt.653 ) of 1986 as ccir teletext system b . as with other teletext systems , text and simple graphics are transmitted in-band with the picture signal , and decoded by controller circuitry . pages and content . pages were retrieved using a three-digit number . from the 1996 relaunch onwards , the main sections were organised as follows : 100s – news 200s – business news 300s – sport 400s – weather and travel 500s – entertainment ( including 555 – national lottery results and 570 – newsround ) 600s – tv and radio listings 888 – subtitles . pages from ceefax . pages from ceefax was a selection of content from the ceefax service and normally only shown in the absence of any other programming . it consisted of selected ceefax pages which were transmitted as an ordinary tv picture which was viewable on any receiver . audio accompaniment typically consisted of stock music or sometimes a discontinuous tone . the limited set of rolling pages shown on pages from ceefax had been accessible at any time of day on teletext-equipped televisions on page 198 ( bbc1 ) and 298 ( bbc2 ) , moving to page 196 in 1992 and to page 152 in november 1996 . content . initially the in-vision broadcasts featured a variety of different topics - news , sport , weather and bbc tv listings . also other topics would be included from time to time , such as financial news , travel news , a recipe and information about the bbc . in late 1989 the ceefax service was relaunched as a news-focused service and the in-vision sequence became a news only service plus a weather forecast . a headline page for business , sport and travel reappeared in 1992 . in-vision history . in-vision ceefax was first shown in march 1980 , originally in 30-minute slots and by 1983 it was a common filler during daytime downtime . transmissions were originally billed on-air as ceefax in vision but from 7 january 1984 , the radio times began to list daytime ceefax transmissions under the title of pages from ceefax . from march 1983 , bbc1 started to air a selection of ceefax pages every weekday morning at 6.00am called ceefax am which would lead into the start of breakfast time at 6.30am . from may 1983 , bbc1 would transmit ceefax pages during their weekday daytime hours , as bbc1 did not have a codified daytime schedule at that time . this situation continued until monday 27 october 1986 , when bbc1 launched a full daytime schedule , resulting in the only ceefax transmission on bbc1 being the weekday 6.00am ceefax am broadcast . bbc genome blog 27 october 2016 on bbc2 from 19 september 1983 , a selection of ceefax pages would air for a large part of their broadcast day , especially when schools programmes were not on the air , and on many occasions until september 1986 , pages from ceefax would air continuously from 9.00am until the start of regular programming at around 5.30pm . from the late 1980s onwards , pages from ceefax was increasingly marginalised by the bbc 's move towards a near-continuous service and by the start of the 1990s they were shown for short periods , usually for around 15 minutes , before the first programme of the day . however , when the bbc launched bbc learning zone in 1995 , it was shown during overnight downtime on bbc two although latterly bbc news filled many of the late night/early morning gaps in the schedules . the last pages from ceefax broadcast on bbc1 was on 9 november 1997 but they continued to be broadcast on bbc2 until the ceefax service was closed down . the final transmission was in the early hours of monday 22 october 2012 and featured special continuity announcements and a specially created end caption featuring various ceefax graphics from over the years . the music chosen for the final minutes was '' bart '' by ruby , which had been frequently used for pages from ceefax and for other continuity . since then , overnight downtime has been filled with a rolling loop of previews of forthcoming bbc two programmes . similar services on other channels . channel 4 showed pages from oracle from 1983 until 1989 and 4-tel on view from 1983 until 1997 , and in the late 1980s and early 1990s some itv companies broadcast jobfinder which consisted of teletext pages showing job vacancies and related information . itv nightscreen also used teletext pages in its first few years on air . also , in its early days , sky one showed in-vision pages from the skytext service during its overnight downtime . teefax . teefax is a revamped version of ceefax for the raspberry pi computer introduced in august 2016 by peter kwan . to view teefax , enthusiasts connect a raspberry pi running appropriate software to the signal input of a teletext-capable tv . kwan said : '' it 's like the modern-day equivalent of restoring steam engines . it 's completely useless but it keeps us occupied . '' the service has 12 pages of up-to-date news and kwan hopes to create an online archive of old teletext pages from britain , germany and france . a few pages of teefax can be seen on this itv news report . . references . external links . bbc ceefax at bbc online last day of ceefax bbc news article celebrating 30th anniversary of ceefax online representation of ceefax as it looked in november 2009