Al Jaffee

the fold-in . in issue 86 of 1964 , jaffee created his longest-running mad feature , the fold-in . in each , a drawing is folded vertically and inward to reveal a new '' hidden '' picture ( as well as a new caption ) . originally , jaffee intended it as a one-shot '' cheap '' satire of the triple fold-outs that were appearing in glossy magazines such as playboy , national geographic and life . but jaffee was asked to do a second installment , and soon the fold-in became a recurring feature on the inside back cover of the magazine . in 2011 , jaffee reflected , '' the thing that i got a kick out of was & nbsp ; . jeopardy ! showed a fold-in and the contestants all came up with the word they were looking for , which was '' fold-in . '' so i realized , i created an english language word . '' in 2010 , jaffee described the earliest fold-ins : : i thought to myself & nbsp ; . now it 's folded in and i 've got to have something on the left side here , and something right side here . and the only thing that popped into my head was that elizabeth taylor had just dumped eddie fisher and was carrying on with richard burton . so i had elizabeth taylor kissing richard burton , and a cop is holding the crowd back & nbsp ; – and just for the fun of it i put eddie fisher being trampled by the crowd . what a cruel thing to do ! and then , when you fold it in , she 's moving on from richard burton and kissing the next guy in the crowd . it 's so simplistic and silly and juvenile ! and anyone could have done that ! : i showed it to al feldstein , and the first thing i said was , '' al , i 've got this crazy idea , and you 're not going to buy it , because it mutilates the magazine . '' so i put it in front of him , and the thing about al was , he liked things that intrigued him . the mechanics of it intrigued him . he said , '' you mean , you fold it , like this . ? and then . ? '' he folded it , he unfolded it , he folded it , and then he said , '' i like this ! '' but i said , '' al , it mutilates the magazine . '' and he said , '' well , i 'll have to check it with bill . '' he takes it , runs it to bill 's office , and he was there a little while , and he comes back and he says , '' we 're going to do it ! you know what bill said ? bill said , 'so they mutilate the magazine , and then they 'll buy another one to save ! ' : four or five weeks later , al comes over to me and says , '' when are you going to do the next fold-in ? '' and i said , '' i do n't have another fold-in . that was it ! '' so he said , '' come on , you can come up with something else . '' i wracked my brain , and the only thing i could come up with was nixon whose face was hidden within curtain folds . that one really set the tone for what the cleverness of the fold-ins has to be . it could n't just be bringing someone from the left to kiss someone on the right . '' the boston phoenix the fold-in became one of mads signature features , and appeared in almost every issue of the magazine from 1964–2020 . a single issue in 1977 was published without a fold-in ( though jaffee supplied the issue 's back cover ) , and a 1980 issue instead featured a unique double-visual gimmick by jaffee in which the inside back cover and the outside back cover merged to create a third image when held up to the light . the third-ever fold-in in 1964 featured a unique diagonal folding design , rather than the standard left-right vertical format . the image revealed the four members of the beatles becoming bald ( and thus losing their popularity ) . in a mad-like wrinkle , there are two answers to the question '' when was jaffee 's last fold-in ? '' the final one he designed appeared in the june 2019 issue . but his last fold-in to be published , a personal farewell to readers , appeared in the august 2020 issue . jaffee had prepared it six years in advance , to be published after his own death . instead , it ran after he officially announced his retirement at the age of 99 , as the conclusion of an '' all jaffee '' tribute issue . name '' wapo '' > cartoonist johnny sampson is currently carrying the feature on . the far side creator gary larson described his experience with the fold-in : '' the dilemma was always this : very slowly and carefully fold the back cover & nbsp ; . without creasing the page and quickly look at the joke . jaffee 's artistry before the folding was so amazing that i suspect i was not alone in not wanting to deface it in any way . '' in 1972 , jaffee received a special features reuben award for his fold-ins . jaffee uses a computer only for typographic maneuvers to make certain fold-in tricks easier to design and he typically takes two weeks to sketch and finalize an image . otherwise , all his work is done by hand . '' i 'm working on a hard , flat board . i can not fold it . that 's why my planning has to be so correct . '' in 2008 , jaffee told one newspaper , '' i never see the finished painting folded until it 's printed in the magazine . i guess i have that kind of visual mind where i can see the two sides without actually putting them together . '' contrasting current art techniques and jaffee 's approach , mads art director , sam viviano , said , '' i think part of the brilliance of the fold-in is lost on the younger generations who are so used to photoshop and being able to do stuff like that on a computer . '' . 21st century . until 2019 , jaffee continued to do the fold-in for mad , as well as additional artwork for articles . his last original fold-in appeared in the june 2019 issue , which was one that had originally been rejected from the june 2013 issue due to sensitivity about gun violence . since august 2019 , mad has been either reprinting old fold-ins or publishing new ones by johnny sampson . in december 2019 , al 's original work was featured in the magazine for the last time . mads oldest regular contributor , jaffee 's work appeared in 500 of the magazine 's first 550 issues , a total unmatched by any other writer or artist . he has said , '' i work for a magazine that 's essentially for young people , and to have them keep me going , i feel very lucky & nbsp ; . to use an old cliché , i 'm like an old racehorse . when the other horses are running , i want to run too . '' he is the longest tenured contributor to the mad magazine . in august 2008 , jaffee was interviewed for an ny1 feature about his career . he said , '' it astonishes me that i still am functioning at a fairly decent level . because there were a lot of dark days , but you have to reinvent yourself . you get knocked down and you pick up yourself and you move on . '' a four-volume hardcover boxed set , the mad fold-in collection : 1964–2010 , was published by chronicle books in september 2011 , . jaffee announced in june 2020 that he would be retiring . to honor this , mad published a tribute issue that month . . frequent themes . will forbis wrote : '' this is the core of jaffee 's work : the idea that to be alive is to be constantly beleaguered by annoying idiots , poorly designed products and the unapologetic ferocity of fate . competence and intelligence are not rewarded in life but punished . '' in the book inside mad , fellow mad writer desmond devlin called jaffee '' the irreplaceable embodiment of mad magazine 's range : smart but silly , angry but understanding , sophisticated but gross , upbeat but hopeless . he 's uncommonly interested in figuring out how things work , and exasperated because things never work . '' inside mad , time home entertainment inc . , 2013 , pg . 95 jaffee has contributed to hundreds of mad articles as either a writer or an artist and often both . these include his long-running '' snappy answers to stupid questions '' , which present multiple putdowns for the same unnecessary or clueless inquiry , and several articles on inventions and gadgets , which are presented in an elaborately detailed '' blueprint '' style . sergio aragones says of jaffee , '' he is brilliant at many things , but especially inventions . when he draws a machine for mad , no matter how silly the idea , it always looks like it works . he thinks that way because he is not only an artist , but a technician as well . he is the guy who can do anything . '' in a patent file for a self-extinguishing cigarette , the inventor thanked jaffee for providing the inspiration . other actual inventions that have since come to pass had appeared earlier in jaffee articles , such as telephone redial and address books ( 1961 ) , snowboarding ( 1965 ) , the computer spell-checker ( 1967 ) , peelable stamps , multi-blade razors ( 1979 ) , and graffiti-proof building surfaces ( 1982 ) . '' i could imagine those things , '' jaffee told an interviewer . '' that was the fun part . but i never had the problem of trying to figure out how to manufacture them . '' sacks , mike , and here 's the kicker , writer 's digest books , 2009 , pgs . 224–225 during the vietnam war , jaffee also created the short-lived gag cartoon hawks and doves , in which a military officer named major hawks is antagonized by private doves , an easygoing soldier who contrives to create surreptitious peace signs in various locations on a military base . in a 1998 issue , all the hawks & doves strips were republished , along with an original strip in color on the back of the issue . some of jaffee 's features were expanded into stand-alone books , including a 1997 collection of fold-ins titled fold this book ! and eight '' snappy answers '' paperbacks . referring to the latter , jaffee said , '' i was going through a divorce when i started that . i got a lot of my hostility out through snappy answers . '' . techniques and materials . when designing his mad fold-ins , jaffee starts with the finished '' answer '' to the fold-in , and then spreads it apart and places a piece of tracing paper over it in order to fill in the center '' throw-away '' aspect of the image , which is covered up when the page is folded over , using regular pencil at this stage . jaffee will then trace the image onto another piece of illustration board using carbon paper . at this stage he uses red or green color pencils , which are distinct from the black pencil of the original drawing , in order to discern his progress . once the image is on the illustration board , he will then finish it by painting it . because the illustration board is too inflexible to fold , jaffee does not see the finished fold-in image until it is published . jacobs , erik ( september 28 , 2010 ) . '' making a fold-in with al jaffee '' . the new york times . . awards and recognition . jaffee won the national cartoonists society advertising and illustration award for 1973 , its special features award for 1971 and 1975 , and its humor comic book award for 1979 . in 2008 , he won the reuben awards ' cartoonist of the year . in 2005 , the production company motion theory created a video for recording artist beck 's song '' girl '' using jaffee 's mad fold-ins as inspiration ; jaffee 's name appears briefly in the video , on a television screen . '' girl '' ( beck music video ) , via '' back in a jaffee way '' . the ephemerist . august 24 , 2008 . retrieved october 14 , 2009 . the march 13 , 2006 , episode of the colbert report aired on jaffee 's 85th birthday , and comedian stephen colbert saluted the artist with a fold-in birthday cake . the cake featured the salutary message '' al , you have repeatedly shown artistry & care of great credit to your field . '' when the center section of the cake was removed , the remainder read , '' al , you are old . '' that was not jaffee 's first interaction with the comedian . in 2010 , he recalled : : i got a call from the daily show & nbsp ; – they asked me if i would contribute a fold-in to their book , america . i said i 'd be happy to do it . when i was done , i called up the producer who 'd contacted me , and i said , '' i 've finished the fold-in , where shall i send it ? '' and he said & nbsp ; – and this was a great compliment & nbsp ; – '' oh , please mr . jaffee , could you deliver it in person ? the whole crew wants to meet you . '' and that 's where i met stephen colbert and jon stewart and all the writers , and they told me it was our work in mad that inspired them . not me , particularly , but us , generally . they said , '' without you guys , we would n't be here . '' and i felt really good about that . in july 2013 , during the san diego comic-con , jaffee was one of six inductees into the will eisner hall of fame . jaffee , who worked for eisner in his studio for one of his earliest jobs , was not present during the convention , and the award was accepted by mad art director sam viviano , who presented it to jaffee at a later date . the other inductees were lee falk , mort meskin , spain rodriguez , joe sinnott , and trina robbins . '' eisner awards current info '' . comic-con international : san diego . retrieved september 11 , 2013 . '' al jaffee inducted into the will eisner hall of fame '' . mad ' . september 11 , 2013 . in april 2014 , jaffee was elected to the society of illustrators ' hall of fame . '' 2014 hall of fame honorees : '' . society of illustrators . retrieved april 26 , 2014 . in october 2013 , columbia university announced that jaffee had donated most of his archives to the college . grimes , william ( october 6 , 2013 ) . '' ivy league home for a cartoonist 's vast archive '' . the new york times . on march 30 , 2016 , it was officially declared that jaffee had '' the longest career as a comics artist '' at '' 73 years , 3 months '' by guinness world records . guinness noted that he had worked continuously , beginning with jaffee 's contribution to the december 1942 issue of joker comics and continuing through the april 2016 issue of mad magazine . personal life . jaffee married ruth ahlquist in 1945 ; they had two children , richard and debbie . they divorced in 1967 . after the divorce , gaines provided jaffee with studio space at the mad offices . his oldest younger brother harry jaffee ( 1922–1985 ) , who also had artistic talent , had long been coping with various illnesses—for a time he had been committed to bellevue . harry had been living with the jaffees at the time . after the divorce , jaffee took two apartments in manhattan , one for him , and one nearby for harry . jaffee also hired him from 1970–77 to do his background detail and lettering . harry quit upon jaffee 's remarriage . in 1977 , jaffee married joyce revenson , a widow . they lived in manhattan , summer in provincetown , massachusetts , and winter in puerto vallarta , mexico . joyce died in january 2020 . . in books . mary-lou weisman , a friend of jaffee for more than three decades , wrote a profile of him for provincetown arts , which she later expanded into the biography , al jaffee 's mad life , published in 2010 by it books , an imprint of harper collins , . in addition to reprints of his past work , jaffee joined weisman in telling his life story with more than 70 color illustrations depicting his childhood and later years . see also . list of cartoonists list of illustrators . references . further reading . . external links . '' mad magazine contributors '' . doug gilford 's mad cover site . '' al jaffee wins the reuben award ! '' . national cartoonists society . may 25 , 2008 . heater , brian ( march 3 , 2009 ) . '' interview : al jaffee pt . 1 ( of 3 ) '' . the daily cross hatch . heater , brian ( march 9 , 2009 ) . '' interview : al jaffee pt . 2 ( of 3 ) '' . the daily cross hatch . heater , brian ( march 16 , 2009 ) . '' interview : al jaffee pt . 3 ( of 3 ) '' . the daily cross hatch . '' fold-ins , past and present '' . the new york times . october 1 , 2010 . kloeffler , dan ; abraham , mary-rose ( february 14 , 2014 ) . '' cartoonist al jaffee reveals the one fold-in 'mad magazine ' wouldn ’ t run '' . yahoo ! news . '' al jaffee papers , 1945-2018 '' . columbia university libraries . rare book & manuscript library .