Medium frequency

propagation . radio waves at mf wavelengths propagate via ground waves and reflection from the ionosphere ( called skywaves ) . ground waves follow the contour of the earth . at these wavelengths they can bend ( diffract ) over hills , and travel beyond the visual horizon , although they may be blocked by mountain ranges . typical mf radio stations can cover a radius of several hundred miles from the transmitter , with longer distances over water and damp earth . mf radio station use ground waves to cover their listening areas . mf waves can also travel longer distances via skywave propagation , in which radio waves radiated at an angle into the sky are refracted back to earth by layers of charged particles ( ions ) in the ionosphere , the e and f layers . however , at certain times the d layer ( at a lower altitude than the refractive e and f layers ) can be electronically noisy and absorb mf radio waves , interfering with skywave propagation . this happens when the ionosphere is heavily ionised , such as during the day , in summer and especially at times of high solar activity . at night , especially in winter months and at times of low solar activity , the ionospheric d layer can virtually disappear . when this happens , mf radio waves can easily be received hundreds or even thousands of miles away as the signal will be refracted by the remaining f layer . this can be very useful for long-distance communication , but can also interfere with local stations . due to the limited number of available channels in the mw broadcast band , the same frequencies are re-allocated to different broadcasting stations several hundred miles apart . on nights of good skywave propagation , the signals of distant stations may reflect off the ionosphere and interfere with the signals of local stations on the same frequency . the north american regional broadcasting agreement ( narba ) sets aside certain channels for nighttime use over extended service areas via skywave by a few specially licensed am broadcasting stations . these channels are called clear channels , and the stations , called clear-channel stations , are required to broadcast at higher powers of 10 to 50 & nbsp ; kw . uses and applications . a major use of these frequencies is am broadcasting ; am radio stations are allocated frequencies in the medium wave broadcast band from 526.5 & nbsp ; khz to 1606.5 & nbsp ; khz in europe ; in north america this extends from 525 & nbsp ; khz to 1705 & nbsp ; khz some countries also allow broadcasting in the 120-meter band from 2300 to 2495 & nbsp ; khz ; these frequencies are mostly used in tropical areas . although these are medium frequencies , 120 meters is generally treated as one of the shortwave bands . there are a number of coast guard and other ship-to-shore frequencies in use between 1600 and 2850 & nbsp ; khz . these include , as examples , the french mrcc on 1696 & nbsp ; khz and 2677 & nbsp ; khz , stornoway coastguard on 1743 & nbsp ; khz , the us coastguard on 2670 & nbsp ; khz and madeira on 2843 & nbsp ; khz . mf/hf ssb frequencies rn northwood in england broadcasts weather fax data on 2618.5 & nbsp ; khz . non-directional beacon ( ndbs ) for maritime and aircraft navigation occupy a band from 190 to 435 & nbsp ; khz , which overlaps from the lf into the bottom part of the mf band . 2182 khz is the international calling and distress frequency for ssb maritime voice communication ( radiotelephony ) . it is analogous to channel 16 on the marine vhf band . 500 khz was for many years the maritime international distress frequency , and there are more ndbs between 510 and 530 & nbsp ; khz . navtex , which is part of the current global maritime distress safety system occupies 518 & nbsp ; khz and 490 & nbsp ; khz for important digital text broadcasts . lastly , there are aeronautical and other mobile ssb bands from 2850 & nbsp ; khz to 3500 & nbsp ; khz , crossing the boundary from the mf band into the hf radio band . u.s . government frequency allocation chart an amateur radio band known as 160 meters or 'top-band ' is between 1800 and 2000 & nbsp ; khz ( allocation depends on country and starts at 1810 & nbsp ; khz outside the americas ) . amateur operators transmit cw morse code , digital signals and ssb and am voice signals on this band . following world radiocommunication conference 2012 ( wrc-2012 ) , the amateur service received a new allocation between 472 and 479 & nbsp ; khz for narrow band modes and secondary service , after extensive propagation and compatibility studies made by the arrl 600 meters experiment group and their partners around the world . in recent years , some limited amateur radio operation has also been allowed in the region of 500 & nbsp ; khz in the us , uk , germany and sweden . many home-portable or cordless telephones , especially those that were designed in the 1980s , transmit low power fm audio signals between the table-top base unit and the handset on frequencies in the range 1600 to 1800 & nbsp ; khz . . antennas . image : ferritantenne 2.jpg thumb ferrite loopstick receiving antenna used in am radios transmitting antennas commonly used on this band include monopole mast radiators , top-loaded wire monopole antennas such as the inverted-l and t antennas , and wire dipole antennas . ground wave propagation , the most widely used type at these frequencies , requires vertically polarized antennas like monopoles . the most common transmitting antenna , the quarter wave monopole , is physically large at these frequencies , requiring a tall radio mast . usually the metal mast itself is used as the antenna , and is mounted on a large porcelain insulator to isolate it from the ground ; this is called a mast radiator . the monopole antenna , particularly if electrical length requires a good , low resistance earth ground connection for efficiency , since the ground resistance is in series with the antenna and consumes transmitter power . commercial radio stations use a ground system consisting of many heavy copper cables , buried a few feet in the earth , radiating from the base of the antenna to a distance of about a quarter wavelength . in areas of rocky or sandy soil where the ground conductivity is poor , above ground counterpoises are used . lower power transmitters often use electrical length quarter wave monopoles such as inverted-l or t antennas , which are brought into resonance with a loading coil at their base . receiving antennas do not have to be as efficient as transmitting antennas since in this band the signal to noise ratio is determined by atmospheric noise . the noise floor in the receiver is far below the noise in the signal , so antennas small in comparison to the wavelength , which are inefficient and produce low signal strength , can be used . the most common receiving antenna is the ferrite loopstick antenna ( also known as a ferrite rod aerial ) , made from a ferrite rod with a coil of fine wire wound around it . this antenna is small enough that it is usually enclosed inside the radio case . in addition to their use in am radios , ferrite antennas are also used in portable radio direction finder ( rdf ) receivers . the ferrite rod antenna has a dipole radiation pattern with sharp nulls along the axis of the rod , so that reception is at its best when the rod is at right angles to the transmitter , but fades to nothing when the rod points exactly at the transmitter . other types of loop antennas and random wire antennas are also used . see also . electromagnetic spectrum global maritime distress safety system maritime broadcast communications net navtex types of radio emissions . references . federal standard 1037c . further reading . charles allen wright and albert frederick puchstein , '' telephone communication , with particular application to medium-frequency alternating currents and electro-motive forces '' . new york etc . mcgraw-hill book company , inc . , 1st ed . , 1925 . lccn 25008275 . external links . tomislav stimac , '' definition of frequency bands ( vlf , elf . etc . ) '' . ik1qfk home page ( vlf.it ) .