USS Kentucky (BB-6)

design . the kearsarge-class battleships were designed to be used for coastal defense . they had a displacement of , an length overall of , a beam of and a draft of . the two 3-cylinder vertical triple-expansion steam engines and five scotch boilers , connected to two propeller shafts , produced a total of , and gave a maximum speed of . kentucky was manned by 40 officers and 514 enlisted men , a total of 554 crew . kentucky , like , had two double turrets , with two /35 caliber guns and two /40 caliber guns each , stacked on two levels . the guns and turret armor were designed by the bureau of ordnance , while the turret itself was designed by the bureau of construction and repair . the configuration caused the guns to be mounted far back in the turret , making the ports very large . admiral william sims claimed that as a result of the gun mounting , a shell fired into the port could reach the magazines below , disabling the guns . in addition to these guns , kentucky carried fourteen /40 caliber guns , twenty 6-pounder guns , eight 1-pounder guns , four machine guns , and four 18 inch ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes . kentucky had a very low freeboard , often making her guns unusable during bad weather . the ship 's waterline belt armor was thick . her main gun turrets were protected by of armor , while the secondary turrets had of armor . the barbettes were thick , and the conning tower had of armor . the ship 's armor was made of harvey armor . construction . kentucky was authorized on 2 march 1895 . the contract for her construction was awarded on 2 january 1896 , and her keel was laid down on 30 june 1896 by newport news shipbuilding & dry dock company in virginia . the total cost was 4,998,119.43 . in preparation for the kentuckys christening , the navy asked kentucky governor william o'connell bradley to select a member of his family to perform the ceremony . bradley chose his daughter , christine , who was attending school in washington , d.c . the bradleys were a family of teetotalers , so governor bradley sent a bottle of water from lincoln spring in hodgenville , kentucky , for christine to use during the ceremony . kentucky was christened on 24 march 1898 , the same day as her sister ship , kearsarge . soon after miss bradley broke the bottle of water over the kentuckys bow , a delegation from the women 's christian temperance union , led by frances beauchamp , presented the governor 's daughter with a gift of a silver tray , a water pitcher , and two goblets . the inscription read , '' kentucky christian temperance union to miss christine bradley , as a tribute to her loyalty to conviction in the christening of the battleship kentucky with water . march 10 , 1898 . '' kentucky was commissioned on 15 may 1900 , under the command of captain colby mitchell chester . service history . during the summer of 1900 , kentucky was fitted out in the new york navy yard . on 26 october , during the boxer rebellion , she left tompkinsville , staten island for china , passing through gibraltar and the suez canal . on 5 february 1901 she arrived at manila , and on 23 march she replaced the protected cruiser as the flagship of rear admiral louis kempff . between 1901 and 1904 , kentucky visited numerous ports in china and japan , including chefoo , wusong , nanking , taku forts , hong kong , xiamen , nagasaki , kobe , and yokohama . in 1902 , kentucky became the flagship of rear admiral frank wildes , although he moved his flag to the distilling ship on 12 april 1902 . in november 1902 , she became the flagship of rear admiral robley d . evans . on 13 march 1904 she sailed from manila , passing through the suez canal and the strait of gibraltar , and arriving at new york city on 21 may . after receiving upgrades at the new york navy yard , including the addition of smoke ejectors , kentucky joined the north atlantic squadron . the battleship participated in the welcome of the british north atlantic squadron at annapolis , maryland , in october 1905 . during the 1906 cuban insurrection , she carried marines to cuba , embarking them from provincetown on 23 september , and landing them at havana , cuba , on 1 october . she remained there until 9 october , and then returned to new england . kentucky attended the jamestown exposition at norfolk , virginia , on 15 april 1907 , and then participated in exercises off the new england coast . great white fleet . in 1907 , the great white fleet was ordered by u.s . president theodore roosevelt to circle the world , as a demonstration of the might of the united states navy . kentucky was attached to the fourth division of the second squadron , and was commanded by captain walter c . cowles , while the fleet as a whole was commanded by rear admiral evans , kentuckys former flag officer . on 16 december 1907 , the fleet saluted the presidential yacht , and left from hampton roads . the fleet then sailed south , passing trinidad and rio de janeiro , and going through the straits of magellan . from there she passed the west coast of south america , visiting punta arenas and valparaíso , chile , callao , peru , and magdalena bay , mexico . the fleet arrived at san diego on 14 april 1908 and continued to san francisco on 6 may . two months later it arrived at honolulu , and from there sailed to auckland , new zealand , arriving on 9 august . on 20 august , the fleet reached sydney , australia , and a week later sailed for melbourne . kentucky departed albany , western australia , on 18 september , passing through ports in the philippine islands , japan , china , and ceylon before traveling through the suez canal . the fleet split at port said on 8 january 1909 , with kentucky visiting tripoli and algiers before rejoining the other ships at gibraltar . she returned to hampton roads on 22 february , and was inspected by president roosevelt . later service . as with most of the great white fleet ships , kentucky was modernized on her return . she was decommissioned at the philadelphia naval shipyard on 28 august 1909 , and her modernization was completed in 1911 , at a cost of 675,000 . the ship received cage masts , new water-tube boilers , and another four 5-inch guns . the 1-pounder guns were removed , as were sixteen of the 6-pounders . on 4 june 1912 , she was recommissioned in the second reserve , and on 31 may 1913 she was transferred to the atlantic reserve fleet in philadelphia . she was recommissioned again at philadelphia on 23 june 1915 . on 11 september that year , following the united states occupation of veracruz , she sailed to mexico , arriving at veracruz on 28 september . she remained there during the mexican revolution , staying until 2 june 1916 , except for a visit to new orleans for the mardi gras festival in march 1916 . the battleship stopped at guantanamo bay naval base and santo domingo on her way back to philadelphia , arriving there on 18 june 1916 . from july until september , she trained militiamen near block island and boston . on 2 october kentucky returned to new york , and entered the new york naval shipyard on 2 january 1917 , remaining there until the united states entered world war i . she arrived at yorktown , virginia on 2 may , and trained recruits along the atlantic coast , from chesapeake bay to long island sound . during the war , she trained several thousand men , in 15 groups of recruits . kentucky was overhauled at the boston navy yard , beginning on 20 december 1918 . on 18 march 1919 , she left for exercises in guantanamo bay , norfolk , and along the new england coast . between 29 may and 30 august 1919 , kentucky trained united states naval academy midshipman . following world war i , the united states agreed to the washington naval treaty , which was aimed at preventing a naval arms race by limiting the size of the signatories ' fleets . as a result , many old and obsolete ships were scrapped , including kentucky . kentucky was decommissioned on 29 may 1920 . her name was struck from the naval vessel register on 27 may 1922 and she was sold for scrap to dravo corporation on 24 march 1923 .