Cracker Jack

history . early beginnings . the origin of sugar-coated popcorn with a mixture of peanuts is unknown , but periodicals document the manufacture and sale of sugar-coated popcorn in america as far back as the early 19th century . the freeport , illinois daily journal newspaper published on january 29 , 1857 , for example , contains an advertisement by a local merchant selling sugar-coated popcorn . recipes for popcorn and peanut mixtures were mentioned in american literature and expressions of speech : page 4 of the friday , august 23 , 1867 , edition of the evening star newspaper published in washington , d . c . contains the notice : the nantucket inquirer and mirror says , '' peanuts and popcorn were not mixed up with piety when we first knew camp meetings , nor cigar smoking nor psalm singing . but the times are changed and we with them . '' an inquiry was published on page 362 of the december 5 , 1885 issue of scientific american , asking how the sugar coating was prepared after the popcorn had popped . page 222 of the 1886 edition of the pennsylvania historical review , gazetteer , post-office , express and telegraph guide lists goodwin brothers , 105 north front street , philadelphia , pennsylvania , as manufacturers of sugar coated popcorn , prize balls , corn balls , corn cakes , etc . in chicago there are two legends of how cracker jack originated : the older attributes it to charles f . gunther ( 1837-1920 ) , also known as '' the candy man '' and '' cracker-jacks king '' ; the other attributes it to frederick william rueckheim , a german immigrant known informally as '' fritz '' , who sold popcorn at 113 fourth avenue ( now known as federal street ) , in chicago beginning in 1871 . the rueckheim legend is filled with exaggerations , since sugar-coated popcorn with molasses and mixed with peanuts was already known by the 1860s . the rueckheim popcorn was made by hand , using steam equipment . in 1873 , fritz bought out his partner william brinkmeyer and brought his brother , louis from germany to join in his venture , forming the company f.w . rueckheim & bro . the rueckheim brothers produced a new recipe including popcorn , peanuts , and molasses , and first presented it to the public at the world 's columbian exposition ( chicago 's first world 's fair ) in 1893 . unfortunately , the molasses of this early version was too sticky . chmelik , samantha . '' frederick rueckheim . '' in immigrant entrepreneurship : german-american business biographies , 1720 to the present , vol . 4 , edited by jeffrey fear . german historical institute . last modified october 10 , 2013 . in 1896 , louis discovered a method to separate the kernels of molasses-coated popcorn during the manufacturing process . as each batch was mixed in a cement-mixer-like drum , a small quantity of oil was added—a closely guarded trade secret . before this change , the mixture had been difficult to handle , as it stuck together in chunks . . naming and packaging . in 1896 , the first lot of cracker jack was produced , the same year the product 's name and tagline ; '' the more you eat , the more you want '' , were trademark . it was named by an enthusiastic sampler who remarked : '' that 's a crackerjack ! '' ( crackerjack is a colloquialism meaning '' of excellent quality '' ) . in 1899 , henry gottlieb eckstein developed the '' waxed sealed package '' for freshness , known then as the '' eckstein triple proof package '' , a dust- , germ- , and moisture-proof paper package . in 1902 , the company was reorganized as rueckheim bros . & eckstein . in 1907 , the release of the song , '' take me out to the ball game '' , written by the lyricist jack norworth and composer albert von tilzer , gave cracker jack free publicity , with its line : '' buy me some peanuts and cracker jack ! '' in 1922 , the name of the chicago company was changed to the cracker jack company . . mascots . cracker jack 's mascots sailor jack and his dog bingo were introduced as early as 1916 and registered as a trademark in 1919 . sailor jack was modeled after robert rueckheim , grandson of frederick . robert , the son of the eldest of the rueckheim brothers , edward , died of pneumonia shortly after his image appeared at the age of 8 . the sailor boy image acquired such meaning for the founder of cracker jack that he had it carved on his tombstone , which can still be seen in st . henry 's cemetery in chicago . sailor jack 's dog bingo was based on a real-life dog named russell , a stray adopted in 1917 by henry eckstein , who demanded that the dog be used on the packaging . russell died of old age in 1930 . . ownership . the cracker jack company was purchased by borden in 1964 after a bidding war between borden and frito-lay and was manufactured for years in northbrook , illinois . borden sold the brand to frito-lay parent pepsico in 1997 , and cracker jack was quickly incorporated into the frito-lay portfolio . frito-lay transferred production of cracker jack from northbrook to wyandot snacks in marion , ohio soon thereafter . snack-maker wyandot launches updated web site retrieved december 14 , 2018 in 2013 , frito-lay announced that cracker jack would undergo a slight reformulating , adding more peanuts and updating the prizes to make them more relevant to the times . . cracker jack 'd . on april 30 , 2013 , frito-lay expanded the cracker jack product line to include other salty snacks in the spirit of the original cracker jack . called cracker jack 'd , it is distinct from the original cracker jack by using black packaging instead of the traditional red and white , as well as showing a close-up version of sailor jack & bingo . in addition , unlike the original cracker jack , cracker jack 'd has not featured prizes in its packages . one of the products available under the cracker jack 'd line , the power bites , gained much criticism before its official launch due to accusations it contains unhealthy amounts of caffeine . . baseball connection . cracker jack is known for being commonly sold at baseball games and is mentioned in the american standard '' take me out to the ball game '' . each july from 1982 to 1985 , cracker jack sponsored an old-timers ' day game featuring former mlb players , held at rfk stadium in washington , d.c . on june 16 , 1993 , the 100th anniversary of cracker jack was celebrated at wrigley field during the game between the cubs and the expansion florida marlins . before the game , sailor jack , the company 's mascot , threw out the ceremonial first pitch . in 2004 , the new york yankees baseball team replaced cracker jack with the milder , sweet butter toffee-flavored crunch ' n munch at home games . after public outcry , the club switched back to cracker jack . . advertising . the cracker jack company began advertising on television in 1955 . cracker jack sponsored cbs television 's on your account , which was televised on 130 stations nationally . actor jack gilford appeared in many tv commercials for cracker jack from 1960 until 1972 , and was most recognized as the '' rubber-faced guy on the cracker jack commercials '' for a dozen years . puppeteer shari lewis and her puppet lamb chop appeared in cracker jack commercials in 1961 . a new television ad for cracker jack ran during super bowl xxxiii on january 31 , 1999 . it was the first advertising for the cracker jack brand on television in 15 years . . toys and prizes . cracker jack originally included a small '' mystery '' novelty item referred to as a '' toy surprise '' in each box . the tagline for cracker jack was originally '' candy-coated popcorn , peanuts and a prize '' , but has since become '' caramel-coated popcorn & peanuts '' under frito-lay . prizes were included in every box of cracker jack beginning in 1912 . one of the first prizes was in 1914 , when the company produced the first of two cracker jack baseball card issues , which featured players from both major leagues as well as players from the short-lived federal league . early '' toy surprises '' included rings , plastic figurines , booklets , stickers , temporary tattoos , and decoder rings . books have been written cataloging the prizes , and a substantial collector 's market exists . until 1937 , cracker jack toy prizes were made in japan . they were designed by carey cloud from 1938 . many metal toys were also made by tootsietoy , who also made monopoly game markers . during world war ii prizes were made of paper . the 1961 movie breakfast at tiffany 's the lead couple goes to tiffany & co . where they have a ring from a box of cracker jack engraved . the prizes attained pop-culture status with the catch-phrase '' came in a cracker jack box , '' particularly when applied sarcastically to engagement and wedding rings of dubious investment value . the pop singer meatloaf used the phrase '' ai n't no coupe de ville hiding at the bottom of a crackerjack box '' in his 1978 hit '' two out of three ai n't bad '' . under frito-lay , toy and trinket prizes were replaced with paper prizes displaying riddles and jokes , then temporary tattoos . in 2013 , some prizes became codes for people to play '' nostalgic '' games on the cracker jack app through google play for android-powered devices . the announcement was made in 2016 that these gameplays would replace tangible prizes .