Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal

history . creation . james brindley was the chief engineer of the canal , which was part of his '' grand cross '' plan for waterways connecting the major ports at hull ( via the trent ) , liverpool ( via the mersey ) , bristol ( via the severn ) and london ( via the thames ) . the act of parliament authorising the canal was passed on 14 may 1766 . this created '' the company of proprietors of the staffordshire and worcestershire canal navigation '' , which was empowered to raise an initial £70,000 ( equivalent to £ in , to improve the river severn immediately below stourport as far as diglis , to improve navigation to and from the canal . at stourport there were four basins , linked by broad locks , that allowed broad-beamed severn trows to enter them from the river . goods could then be trans-shipped from the canal narrow boats to the trows for onward shipment to bristol . . competition . trade declined when the newer worcester and birmingham canal was opened in 1815 , providing a more direct route between birmingham and bristol . to remain competitive , the company increased the hours when locks could be used , and by 1830 they were available 24 hours a day . another setback occurred when the birmingham and liverpool junction canal opened its new route to chester and merseyside , meeting the canal at autherley junction . this took much of the traffic from the section to great haywood . faced with a high volume of trade using the stretch between aldersley and autherley junctions , the company levied very high tolls . in order to resolve the situation the birmingham canal company and the birmingham and liverpool junction company jointly promoted an act of parliament to authorise a short canal that would have left the birmingham canal at a higher level than the junction , crossed the staffordshire and worcestershire by an aqueduct , and then dropped down by a series of locks to join the birmingham and liverpool junction canal north of autherley junction . the canal company decided to reduce its tolls rather than lose the trade altogether . further concessions were obtained by the other two canal companies by threats to resurrect the plans on two subsequent occasions . . decline . despite the competition , and later competition from the railways , the canal company paid dividends to its shareholders until nationalisation , c . hadfield , canals of the west midlands 1969 edn ) , 277 281 . although profits fell steadily from the 1860s . it remained independent until the transport act 1947 nationalised britain 's canals on 1 january 1948 . in its latter years the major trade was in coal from cannock to a power station at stourport . the power station closed in 1949 , and after that , the only commercial traffic was on the stretch between autherley and aldersley junctions . . restoration . in 1959 the british transport commission planned to close the canal but it was saved by a volunteer group , the staffordshire and worcestershire canal society . in 1968 the canal was reclassified as a cruiseway , and the following year all of it was declared a conservation area . this has resulted in historical buildings and structures being retained and improved sympathetically . . course . a strategic link . the staffordshire and worcestershire canal links two of southern britain 's largest river catchments : the trent catchment , which drains most of the north and east of the english midlands , as well as parts of the west midlands , and flows ultimately into the north sea via the humber estuary , the severn catchment , which drains a large area of north and central wales , as well as much of the west midlands , and drains ultimately into the celtic sea via the bristol channel . the canal was a major north–south route for the west of england , linking other canals to create a network running : via the trent and mersey canal , to stoke-on-trent , to the northwest of england ( lancashire and cheshire ) and to the east midlands , via the bcn main line and the stourbridge canal to the black country and birmingham , via the shropshire union canal to chester and north wales . the canal essentially follows river valleys , shadowing the course of tributaries , to break through the watershed between the trent and severn north-west of wolverhampton , at the aldersley gap , a minor glacial feature turned to advantage by brindley . within the trent catchment . the northern starting point of the canal at great haywood , its junction with the trent and mersey canal , is only about from the confluence of the river sow with the trent . the canal runs west through tixall wide and along the sow valley , closely following the river , to weeping cross , on the south east edge of stafford , the confluence of the river penk with the sow . the canal then swings at right angles to the south , taking up the course of the penk . it then runs via acton trussell and penkridge to calf heath , where it is joined by the now-derelict hatherton canal . continuing south via coven , it begins to bear away from the penk , which has its source at perton , well to the west of the canal . the canal enters north-west wolverhampton . here it is joined , in rapid succession , by the shropshire union canal at autherley junction and the bcn main line at aldersley junction . within the severn catchment . south of aldersley , the canal begins to shadow the river smestow , part of the severn catchment . the smestow actually crosses the canal via the dunstall water bridge , a small aqueduct planned by brindley to preserve the flow of the river , before dropping into the valley and running alongside it . skirting wolverhampton between the steep hillsides of compton and tettenhall , through the smestow valley local nature reserve , the canal reaches wightwick . here it bears south , cutting across a wide bend in the course of the smestow . descending sharply through the impressive bratch locks , the canal rejoins the river smestow just south of wombourne . from here it follows the river very closely to its confluence with the stour near prestwood . the confluence of smestow and stour is paralleled closely by the junction of the staffordshire and worcestershire with the stourbridge canal , which descends through the stour valley to stourton . southward from this point , the canal is cut through very steep sandstone banks and passes through a tunnel at dunsley all the way closely following the river while slicing across its many meanders . running through kinver , caunsall , cookley and wolverley , it serves a series of wharves in the old industrial town of kidderminster . finally it reaches its end in a complex of wharves and basins in the canal town of stourport-on-severn , where it descends steeply to the river through two sets of locks . gallery . image : staffsworcester105.jpg bridge 105 : a changeline bridge near milford . image : hatherton junction.jpg hatherton junction , the meeting of the hatherton canal ( behind camera ) and the staffordshire and worcestershire canal ( left and right ) at calf heath , staffordshire . image : pendeford rockin'.jpg pendeford rockin ' or 'the narrows ' , here the canal is a narrow cutting through an outcrop of keuper sandstone either side of the forster bridge at pendeford . image : autherley junction toll houses.jpg toll houses at autherley junction , where the shropshire union canal terminates and meets the canal . image : aldersley junction and wolverhampton bottom lock.jpg aldersley junction : the bottom lock of the wolverhampton flight of the bcn main line is visible through the roving bridge image : smestow brook 06 dunstall water bridge.jpg the dunstall water bridge carries the smestow brook over the canal . image : smestow brook 07 dunstall water bridge.jpg the dunstall water bridge viewed from the canal side . image : staffsworcs meccano bridge.jpg the '' meccano bridge '' , a steel truss structure carrying the wolverhampton railway walk ( the former wombourne branch line ) over the canal in smestow valley local nature reserve , wolverhampton . image : staffsworcs bratch locks.jpg part of the bratch locks at wombourne . image : staffsworcs bratch toll.jpg toll house and upper bridge at the bratch locks . image : staffsworcs hinksford wharf.jpg hinksford wharf , one of several important mooring places on this section of the canal . image : staffsworcs hinksford bridge pumping station.jpg bridge and pumping station at hinksford . image : staffsworcs ashwood marina.jpg marina in the canal basin at ashwood , staffordshire . image : staffsworcs stour aqueduct.jpg sandstone aqueduct , carrying the canal over the river stour , near prestwood . image : staffsworcs lake at prestwood.jpg lake off the canal , near prestwood , north of stourton . image : staffsworcs sandstone banks.jpg steep cutting and workings in sandstone , north of stourton . image : staffsworcs stourton junction.jpg stourton junction : the stourbridge canal descends through locks to meet the staffordshire and worcestershire . image : staffsworcs stewpony toll house.jpg the old toll house at stewponey lock . image : staffsworcs dunsley tunnel.jpg west portal of the dunsley tunnel , between stourton and kinver . image : staffsworcs stourport basin.jpg upper basin at stourport-on-severn . the area around the basin underwent major restoration 2007-2009 . image : staffsworcs severn junction 01.jpg broad lock connecting the canal with the river severn at stourport . image : staffsworcs severn junction 02.jpg narrow staircase locks connecting the canal with the river severn at stourport . . linked canals . the canal is linked ( in order , from the severn ) to : stourbridge canal at stourton junction bcn main line at aldersley junction shropshire union canal at autherley junction hatherton canal , ( currently derelict but with proposals for restoration ) at hatherton junction the canal today forms part of the stourport ring , which is one of the popular cruising rings for leisure boating . it is also part of the four counties ring . see also . thomas dadford . references . further reading . . external links . the staffordshire and worcestershire canal society photograph of the river trent aqueduct near to great haywood