Goodnight Moon

publication history . illustrator clement hurd said in 1983 that initially the book was to be published using the pseudonym '' memory ambrose '' for brown , with his illustrations credited to '' hurricane jones '' . hurd , clement . '' remembering margaret wise brown . '' horn book magazine vol . 59 ( 5 ) . october 1983 . 553-560 . 552 . goodnight moon had poor initial sales : only 6,000 copies were sold upon initial release in fall 1947 . anne carroll moore , the influential children 's librarian at the new york public library ( nypl ) , regarded it as '' overly sentimental '' . the nypl and other libraries did not acquire it at first . meagan flynn . '' who could hate 'goodnight moon ' ? this powerful new york librarian . '' the washington post . via san francisco chronicle . january 14 , 2020 . during the post-world war ii baby boom years , it slowly became a bestseller . annual sales grew from about 1,500 copies in 1953 to almost 20,000 in 1970 ; by 1990 , the total number of copies sold exceeded 4 million . , the book sells about 800,000 copies annually adcock , joe . '' turning a tiny book into a musical ? no problem , '' seattle post-intelligencer ( january 11 , 2007 ) . and by 2017 had cumulatively sold an estimated 48 million copies . goodnight moon has been translated into french , spanish , dutch , chinese , japanese , catalan , hebrew , brazilian portuguese , russian , swedish , korean , hmong , and german . brown , who died in 1952 , bequeathed the royalties to the book ( among many others ) to albert clarke , who was the nine-year-old son of a neighbor when brown died . clarke , who squandered the millions of dollars the book earned him , believed that brown was his mother , a claim others dismiss . in 2005 , publisher harpercollins digitally altered the photograph of illustrator hurd , which had been on the book for at least twenty years , to remove a cigarette . its editor-in-chief for children 's books , kate jackson , said , '' it is potentially a harmful message to very young children . '' harpercollins had the reluctant permission of hurd 's son , thacher hurd , but the younger hurd said the photo of hurd with his arm and fingers extended , holding nothing , '' looks slightly absurd to me '' . harpercollins has said it will likely replace the picture with a different , unaltered photo of hurd in future editions . other editions . in addition to several octavo and duodecimo paperback editions , goodnight moon is available as a board book and in '' jumbo '' edition designed for use with large groups . 1991 , us , harperfestival , pub date 30 september 1991 , board book 1997 , us , harpercollins , pub date 28 february 1997 , hardback 50th anniversary edition 2007 , us , harpercollins , pub date 23 january 2007 , board book 60th anniversary edition in 2008 , thacher hurd used his father 's artwork from goodnight moon to produce goodnight moon 123 : a counting book . in 2010 , harpercollins used artwork from the book to produce goodnight moon 's abc : an alphabet book . in 2015 , loud crow interactive inc . released a goodnight moon interactive app . synopsis . the text is a rhyming poem , describing an anthropomorphic bunny 's bedtime ritual of saying '' good night '' to various inanimate and living objects in the bunny 's bedroom : a red balloon , a pair of socks , the bunny 's dollhouse , a bowl of mush , and two kittens , among others ; despite the kittens , a mouse is present in each spread . the book begins at 7:00 pm , and ends at 8:10 pm , with each spread being spaced 10 minutes apart , as measured by the two clocks in the room , and reflected in the rising moon . the illustrations alternate between 2-page black-and-white spreads of objects and 2-page color spreads of the room , like the other books in the series ; this was a common cost-saving technique at the time . . allusions and references . goodnight moon contains a number of references to brown and hurd 's the runaway bunny , and to traditional children 's literature . for example , the room of goodnight moon generally resembles the next-to-last spread of the runaway bunny , where the little bunny becomes a little boy and runs into a house , and the mother bunny becomes the little boy 's mother ; shared details include the fireplace and the painting by the fireplace of '' the cow jumping over the moon '' , though other details differ ( the colors of the walls and floor are switched , for instance ) . the painting is itself a reference to the nursery rhyme '' hey diddle diddle '' , where a cow jumps over the moon however , when reprinted in goodnight moon , the udder was reduced to an anatomical blur to avoid the controversy that e.b . white 's stuart little had undergone when published in 1945 . marcus , leonard s . making of goodnight moon ( new york : harpertrophy , 1997 ) , p . 21 . the painting of three bears , sitting in chairs , alludes to '' goldilocks and the three bears '' ( originally '' the story of the three bears '' ) , and itself has a copy of the cow jumping over the moon painting . the other painting in the room , which is never explicitly mentioned in the text , portrays a bunny fly-fishing for another bunny , using a carrot as bait . this picture is also a reference to the runaway bunny , where it is the first colored spread , when the mother says that if the little bunny becomes a fish , she will become a fisherman and fish for him . the top shelf of the bookshelf , below the runaway bunny painting , holds an open copy of the runaway bunny , and there is a copy of goodnight moon on the nightstand . a telephone is mentioned early in the book . the primacy of the reference to the telephone indicates that the bunny is in his mother 's room and his mother 's bed . pearson , claudia . have a carrot : oedipal theory and symbolism in margaret wise brown 's runaway bunny trilogy . look again press ( 2010 ) . . literary significance and reception . in a 2007 online poll , the national education association listed the book as one of its '' teachers ' top 100 books for children '' . in 2012 it was ranked number four among the '' top 100 picture books '' in a survey published by school library journal . from the time of its publication in 1947 and until 1972 , the book was '' banned '' by the new york public library due to the then head children 's librarian anne carroll moore 's hatred of the book . moore was considered a top taste-maker and arbiter of children 's books not only in the new york public library , but for libraries nationwide in the united states , even well past her official retirement . the book was stocked on the library 's shelves only in 1972 , at the time of the 25th anniversary of its publication . it did not appear on the nypl 's 2020 list of the 10 most-checked-out books in the library 's history . author susan cooper writes that the book is possibly the only '' realistic story '' to gain the universal affection of a fairy-tale , although she also noted that it is actually a '' deceptively simple ritual '' rather than a story . writer ellen handler spitz suggests that goodnight moon teaches '' young children that life can be trusted , that life has stability , reliability , and durability . '' spitz , ellen handler . inside picture books ( yale university press , 2000 ) , p . 34 . . video adaptation . on july 15 , 1999 , goodnight moon was adapted into a 26-minute animated television special , which debuted on hbo family in december of that year , and was released on vhs on april 15 , 2000 , and dvd in 2005 , in the united states . the special features an animated short of goodnight moon , narrated by susan sarandon , along with six other animated segments of children 's bedtime stories and lullabies with live-action clips of children reflecting on a series of bedtime topics in between , a reprise of goodnight moon at the end , and the everly brothers ' '' all i have to do is dream '' playing over the closing credits . here are the other tales and lullabies featured in the video : lullaby : '' hit the road to dreamland '' sung by tony bennett ( this lullaby plays in the opening credits , right before goodnight moon . ) lullaby : '' hush , little baby '' sung by lauryn hill story : there 's a nightmare in my closet narrated by billy crystal story : tar beach narrated by natalie cole lullaby : '' brahms ' lullaby '' sung by aaron neville lullaby : '' twinkle , twinkle , little star '' sung by patti labelle . in popular culture . the first episode of the warner bros . animated series animaniacs included a spoof of goodnight moon named '' nighty-night toon '' . the goodnight moon game , by briar patch , is a memory game for very young children . it won a 1998 parents ' choice gold award and a 1999 oppenheim toy portfolio platinum award . in 2010 , collegehumor posted five science fiction spoofs of well-known children 's stories , including a mashup of goodnight moon and frank herbert 's novel dune , entitled goodnight dune . '' five sci-fi children 's books '' . college humor . a parody written by david milgrim and published under the pseudonym “ ann droyd ” in october 2011 , goodnight ipad : a parody for the next generation “ shows a very different homelife 50 years later , with mobile devices , social networks , and non-stop streaming media . ” the university of minnesota press published the 2015 book goodnight loon , full of minnesota northwoods language . the original text 's bunny is replaced by the university 's mascot , goldy gopher . mad magazine published a parody of the book starring batman , titled '' goodnight , batcave '' . references .