1999 in literature

events . may 1 – andrew motion is appointed poet laureate of the united kingdom for ten years . june 19 – stephen king is hit by a van while taking a walk . he is hospitalized for three weeks and only resumes writing his next book , on writing , in july . september 7 – black diamond , designed by schmidt hammer lassen architects , is inaugurated as an extension to the royal danish library in copenhagen . unknown date – persephone books is founded in bloomsbury , london , by nicola beauman , to reprint mid-20th century fiction and non-fiction , mainly by women . . new books . fiction . isabel allende – daughter of fortune ( hija de la fortuna ) aaron allston solo command starfighters of adumar laurie halse anderson – speak max barry – syrup greg bear – darwin 's radio raymond benson high time to kill the world is not enough maeve binchy – tara road françois bloemhof – klipgooi ben bova – return to mars terry brooks – star wars : episode i – the phantom menace thomas brussig – am kürzeren ende der sonnenallee bonnie burnard – a good house stephen chbosky – the perks of being a wallflower tracy chevalier – girl with a pearl earring j . m . coetzee – disgrace matt cohen – elizabeth and after bernard cornwell sharpe 's fortress stonehenge : a novel of 2000 bc douglas coupland – miss wyoming robert crais – l.a . requiem michael crichton – timeline august derleth ( editor ) – new horizons marc dugain – la chambre des officiers ( the officers ' ward ) frederic s . durbin – dragonfly bret easton ellis – glamorama per olov enquist – the visit of the royal physician ( livläkarens besök ) steve erickson – the sea came in at midnight sebastian faulks – charlotte gray helen fielding – bridget jones : the edge of reason amanda filipacchi – vapor anna gavalda – je voudrais que quelqu'un m'attende quelque part john grisham – the testament ha jin ( 哈金 ) – waiting joanne harris – chocolat thomas harris – hannibal ernest hemingway – true at first light carl hiaasen – sick puppy stewart home – cunt michel houellebecq – atomised nancy huston – the mark of the angel jerry b . jenkins and tim lahaye – soul harvest k . w . jeter – hard merchandise lisa jewell – ralph 's party stephen king : the girl who loved tom gordon hearts in atlantis lászló krasznahorkai – war and war jhumpa lahiri – interpreter of maladies ( short stories ) joe r . lansdale veil 's visit : a taste of hap and leonard freezer burn john le carré – single and single jonathan lethem – motherless brooklyn ray loriga – tokio ya no nos quiere frank mccourt -'tis david macfarlane – summer gone alistair macleod – no great mischief juliet marillier – daughter of the forest alan moore and eddie campbell – from hell ( graphic novel ) jeffrey moore – prisoner in a red-rose chain erwin mortier – marcel chuck palahniuk invisible monsters survivor tony parsons – man and boy terry pratchett – the fifth elephant kathy reichs – death du jour matthew reilly – temple jennifer roberson – lady of sherwood louis sachar – holes r . a . salvatore – vector prime margit sandemo – skattejakten neal shusterman – downsiders michael slade – burnt bones susan sontag – in america ahdaf soueif – the map of love michael stackpole – isard 's revenge matthew stadler – allan stein danielle steel – irresistible forces neal stephenson – cryptonomicon francine stock – a foreign country remy sylado – ca bau kan ( the courtesan ) koushun takami ( 高見 広春 ) – battle royale rose tremain – music and silence miloš urban – sedmikostelí ( the seven churches ) andrew vachss – choice of evil jane vandenburgh – 'the physics of sunset vernor vinge – a deepness in the sky jeanette winterson – the world and other places timothy zahn – the icarus hunt roger zelazny and jane lindskold – lord demon . children and young people . elizabeth arnold – spin of the sunwheel susan cooper – king of shadows julia donaldson ( with axel scheffler ) – the gruffalo nick earls – 48 shades of brown mem fox - sleepy bears barbara diamond goldin – journeys with elijah : eight tales of the prophet gerald hausman ( with loretta hausman and barry moser ) – dogs of myth : tales from around the world satoshi kitamura – me and my cat ? adeline yen mah – chinese cinderella ( autobiography ) robert l . millet ( with james c . christensen ) – parables and other teaching stories john nickle – the ant bully andre norton ( with martin h . greenberg ) – catfantastic v iona opie – here comes mother goose jerry pinkney – the little match girl jerry pinkney – the ugly duckling louise rennison – angus , thongs and full-frontal snogging j . k . rowling – harry potter and the prisoner of azkaban lemony snicket – the reptile room jacqueline wilson – the illustrated mum . drama . jon fosse – dream of autumn david mamet – boston marriage frank mcguinness – dolly west 's kitchen lars norén – 7:3 mark o'rowe – howie the rookie éric-emmanuel schmitt – hôtel des deux mondes zlatko topčić – refugees august wilson – king hedley ii . poetry . iona opie – here comes mother goose dejan stojanović – sunce sebe gleda ( the sun watches itself ) belgrade : književna reč . . non-fiction . thomas berry – the great work : our way into the future david cairns – berlioz : volume 2 , servitude and greatness 1832–1869 wayson choy – paper shadows : a chinatown childhood the dalai lama – ancient wisdom , modern world samuel r . delany – times square red , times square blue laurence des cars – les préraphaélites : un modernisme à l'anglaise freeman dyson – the sun , the genome and the internet koenraad elst – update on the aryan invasion debate nicholas goodrick-clarke – paracelsus : essential readings . john steele gordon – the great game : the emergence of wall street as a world power : 1653–2000 brian greene – the elegant universe deborah harkness – john dee 's conversations with angels : cabala , alchemy , and the end of nature peter jennings and todd brewster – the century s.t . joshi – sixty years of arkham house winona laduke – all our relations : native struggles for land and life bruce lincoln – theorizing myth : narrative , ideology , and scholarship jamie oliver – the naked chef w . g . sebald – luftkrieg und literatur ( air war and literature , translated as on the natural history of destruction ) david southwell – conspiracy theories dejan stojanović – razgovori ( conversations ) belgrade : književna reč . jean-pierre vernant – the universe , the gods , and men . deaths . january 11 – naomi mitchison , scottish novelist and poet ( born 1897 ) january 16 – dadie rylands ( george rylands ) , english shakespearean scholar ( born 1902 ) february 8 – iris murdoch , irish-born novelist and philosopher ( born 1919 ) february 20 – sarah kane , english playwright ( suicide , born 1971 ) hattenstone , simon . the guardian ( london ) 1 july 2000 . february 22 – william bronk , american poet ( born 1918 ) february 24 – andre dubus , american short story writer , essayist and autobiographer ( born 1936 ) march 4 – karel van het reve , dutch writer ( born 1921 ) march 5 – john figueroa , jamaican poet ( born 1920 ) march 8 – adolfo bioy casares , argentine author ( born 1914 ) march 13 – garson kanin , american playwright and screenwriter ( born 1912 ) march 28 – jim turner , american editor ( born 1945 ) april 13 – knut hauge , norwegian novelist , dramatist and children 's writer ( born 1911 ) may 8 – soeman hs , indonesian novelist ( born 1904 ) may 10 – shel silverstein , american children 's poet ( born 1930 ) june 14 – j . f . powers , american writer ( born 1917 ) july 2 – mario puzo , american writer ( born 1920 ) september 22 – marion zimmer bradley , american writer ( born 1930 ) october 3 – heinz g . konsalik , german novelist ( born 1921 ) october 19 penelope mortimer , welsh-born english novelist and biographer ( born 1918 ) nathalie sarraute , russian-born french writer and lawyer ( born 1900 ) e . j . scovell , english poet ( born 1907 ) november 11 – jacobo timerman , soviet-born argentinian journalist and publisher ( born 1923 ) november 18 – paul bowles , american novelist ( born 1910 ) december 2 – matt cohen , canadian novelist ( born 1942 ) december 8 – rupert hart-davis , english editor and publisher ( born 1907 ) december 12 – joseph heller , american novelist ( born 1923 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : günter grass camões prize : sophia de mello breyner . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : hsu-ming teo , love and vertigo c . j . dennis prize for poetry : gig ryan , pure and applied kenneth slessor prize for poetry : lee cataldi , race against time miles franklin award : murray bail , eucalyptus . canada . giller prize : bonnie burnard , a good house see 1999 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : michael poole , romancing mary jane . france . prix femina : maryline desbiolles , prix goncourt : jean echenoz , prix décembre : claude askolovitch , prix médicis french : michel del castillo , prix médicis non-fiction : christian oster , prix médicis international : bjorn larsson , . united kingdom . booker prize : j . m . coetzee , disgrace carnegie medal for children 's literature : aidan chambers , postcards from no man 's land james tait black memorial prize for fiction : timothy mo , renegade , or halo2 james tait black memorial prize for biography : kathryn hughes , george eliot : the last victorian cholmondeley award : vicki feaver , geoffrey hill , elma mitchell , sheenagh pugh eric gregory award : ross cogan , matthew hollis , helen ivory , andrew pidoux , owen sheers , dan wyke orange prize for fiction : suzanne berne , a crime in the neighborhood samuel johnson prize ( first award ) : antony beevor , stalingrad 1999 whitbread awards : seamus heaney , beowulf . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : daisy fried , she did n't mean to do it aiken taylor award for modern american poetry : george garrett arthur rense prize awarded to james mcmichael by the american academy of arts and letters bernard f . connors prize for poetry : j . d . mcclatchy , '' tattoos '' compton crook award : james stoddard , the high house frost medal : barbara guest hugo award for best novel : connie willis , to say nothing of the dog national book award for fiction : to waiting by ha jin national book critics circle award : to motherless brooklyn by jonathan lethem nebula award : octavia e . butler , parable of the talents newbery medal for children 's literature : louis sachar , holes pen/faulkner award for fiction : to the hours by michael cunningham pulitzer prize for drama : margaret edson , wit pulitzer prize for fiction : michael cunningham , the hours pulitzer prize for poetry : mark strand , blizzard of one wallace stevens award : jackson mac low whiting awards : : fiction : ehud havazelet , ben marcus , yxta maya murray , zz packer : nonfiction : gordon grice , margaret talbot : plays : naomi iizuka : poetry : michael haskell , terrance hayes , martha zweig . elsewhere . finlandia prize : 1999 kristina carlson , maan ääreen international dublin literary award : andrew miller , ingenious pain alfaguara prize : manuel vicent , son de mar premio nadal : gustavo martín zarzo , las historias de marta y fernando viareggio prize : ernesto franco , vite senza fine . notes .