1979 in music

specific locations . 1979 in british music 1979 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1979 in country music 1979 in heavy metal music 1979 in hip hop music 1979 in jazz . events . january–february . january 1 bill graham closes san francisco 's winterland ballroom following a new year 's eve performance by the blues brothers and the grateful dead . during a new year 's eve concert in cleveland , ohio , bruce springsteen is injured when a firecracker is thrown onstage from the audience . january 4 – the star-club in hamburg , germany , known for its connections to the early days of the beatles , reopened . january 6 – abc 's american bandstand featured the debut of the '' y.m.c.a . dance '' using the hand gestures forming the letters ymca during a broadcast with the village people . january 9 – the music for unicef concert in held in new york city at the united nations , starring the bee gees . highlights are aired the following evening on nbc . january 13 – singer donny hathaway dies after falling 15 stories from his hotel room in new york city . according to hathaway 's record company , atlantic , the singer had been having some psychological problems . january 15 – mca records purchases abc records for a reported 20 million . february 2 – sex pistols bassist sid vicious is found dead from an overdose , a day after being released on bail from rikers island prison . february 7 the clash kicked off their first concert of their first american tour at the berkeley community theatre outside san francisco . bo diddley opened the show . stephen stills becomes the first major rock artist to record digitally , laying down four songs at the record plant in los angeles . february 10 – rod stewart 's '' do ya think i 'm sexy '' hit no . 1 on the billboard magazine charts , and stayed there for 4 weeks . february 11 – 43 million viewers watch '' elvis ! '' on abc , a made-for-tv movie starring kurt russell as elvis . february 14 – following her 1972 sex reassignment surgery , musician wendy carlos legally changes her name from walter . she reveals this information in an interview in the may 1979 issue of playboy magazine . february 15 minnie riperton appears on the grammys as a presenter with stephen bishop . the 21st annual grammy awards are presented in los angeles , hosted by john denver . the bee gees collect 4 grammys for the saturday night fever soundtrack , including album of the year , while billy joel 's '' just the way you are '' wins both record of the year and song of the year . a taste of honey win best new artist . february 23 – dire straits begin their first u.s . tour in boston . february 24 friedrich cerha 's completion of alban berg 's opera lulu is premiered at the opera garnier in paris . singer johnnie wilder , jr . of heatwave is paralyzed from the neck down in a car accident in his hometown of dayton , ohio . february 26 – b.b . king becomes the first blues artist to tour the soviet union , kicking off a one-month tour there . march–april . march 2–4 – weather report , the cbs jazz all-stars , the trio of doom , fania all-stars , stephen stills , billy swan , bonnie bramlett , mike finnegan , kris kristofferson , rita coolidge and billy joel , plus cuban acts irakere , pacho alonso , elena burke , los papines , tata güines and orquesta aragón play at the historic three-day havana jam festival at the karl marx theater , in havana , cuba . march 5 – mca records dissolves abc records . march 10 – james brown performs at the grand ole opry . march 15 – elvis costello gets into a heated argument with members of stephen stills ' touring entourage at a holiday inn in columbus , ohio . after costello makes disparaging remarks about america , he is punched by bonnie bramlett . costello suffers a wave of negative press coverage after the incident is made public . march 21 – the pretenders sign a contract with sire records . march 27 – eric clapton marries patti boyd , ex-wife of clapton 's friend george harrison . march 31 – the eurovision song contest , the biggest music festival in the world , takes place for the first time in a country outside europe – israel . the show is broadcast live from jerusalem to europe and a few countries in asia . the big winner of this night is israel for the second time in a row . the winning song is '' hallelujah '' sung by the group milk and honey , including gali atari . a few months after winning the song had been translated into more than 82 languages , and broke a new record by entering the guinness book of records as the most translated song in the world . april 2 – kate bush begins the tour of life she becomes the first artist to use a wireless microphone , enabling her to sing and dance at the same time . april 6 – rod stewart marries alana stewart . april 7 – 110,000 people attend the california music festival at the l.a . memorial coliseum . performers include aerosmith , the boomtown rats , cheap trick , ted nugent and van halen . april 12 – mickey thomas replaces marty balin as the lead singer of jefferson starship . april 13 – during a concert by van halen in spokane , washington , david lee roth collapses from exhaustion . a local doctor treats him for a stomach virus and advises him to '' calm down '' . april 22 – the new barbarians and the rolling stones perform two concerts in oshawa , ontario to benefit the cnib , as part of keith richards ' 1978 sentence for heroin possession . april 24 – the new barbarians open their us tour at ann arbor , michigan . april 27 – ozzy osbourne is fired as lead singer of black sabbath . he is replaced in may by ronnie james dio . may–august . may 1 – elton john becomes the first pop music star to perform in israel . may 2 – the who play their first concert following the death of drummer keith moon . the band performs with new drummer kenney jones at london 's rainbow theatre . may 4 – release as a single of gary numan 's '' are '' friends '' electric ? '' with tubeway army ; it becomes the first synth-pop single to reach number one in the uk singles chart . may 8 – iron maiden , samson , and angel witch share a bill at the music machine in camden , london . critic geoff barton coins the term '' new wave of british heavy metal '' in a review of the show for sounds magazine . may 12 – disco occupies eight of the top ten spots of the billboard hot 100 chart , for two weeks . the charts are led by peaches and herb 's r & b ballad single '' reunited '' . may 19 – three of the four ex-beatles perform on the same stage , as paul mccartney , george harrison and ringo starr jam with eric clapton , ginger baker , mick jagger and others at a wedding reception for clapton at his surrey home . may 21 – elton john plays the first of eight concerts in the soviet union , making him the first western solo pop artist to tour there . june 1 – alternative tentacles record label established by dead kennedys frontman jello biafra . june 8 – marianne faithfull marries ben brierly of the vibrators . june 9 – the bee gees tie bing crosby , elvis presley , and the beatles with a record six consecutive number-one singles in the u.s . in less than a single calendar year with '' love you inside out '' . june 16 – donna summer becomes the first female to have the 1 single '' hot stuff '' and album bad girls for a second time . june 28 – bill haley makes his final studio recordings at muscle shoals , alabama . june 30 – donna summer becomes the first female artist to have 2 of the top 3 songs , hot stuff at 1 & bad girls at 3 , on the billboard hot 100 chart . they will stay in the top 3 together for 4 weeks . in fact , all of the top 5 songs that week are entirely by women , both in billboard and in cashbox . july – emi 's first non-classical digital recording , of uk jazz-funk duo morrissey–mullen covering the rose royce hit '' love do n't live here anymore '' , is recorded at abbey road studios and later released as a limited edition vinyl ep . july 1 – the walkman goes on sale in japan . july 7 – the bee gees play to a sold-out crowd at los angeles ' dodger stadium as part of their spirits having flown tour . july 10 – chuck berry is sentenced to four months in prison for tax evasion by a los angeles judge . july 12 – '' disco demolition night '' , an anti-disco promotional event held by a chicago rock station at comiskey park involving exploding disco records with a bomb , causes a near-riot between games during a baseball major league doubleheader , forcing the cancellation of the second game . july 14 – donna summer , for a third time in an eight-month period , scores a 1 single with '' bad girls '' , ( staying atop the charts for five weeks ) ; and 1 album of the same name , which also tops the billboard 200 for six weeks . july 21 – with bad girls ( both single and album ) , donna summer 's success continues as she becomes the first female artist to sit on top of 3 major billboard charts : the billboard hot 100 , the hot soul singles chart , and the billboard 200 . july 21 – disco dominates the billboard hot 100 chart , with the first six spots ( beginning with donna summer 's '' bad girls ) , and seven of the chart 's top ten songs ending that week . july 28 – aerosmith and ted nugent headline the world series of rock at cleveland stadium in cleveland , ohio . also on the bill are journey , thin lizzy , ac/dc and the scorpions . following the concert , aerosmith guitarist joe perry quits the group after an argument with bandmates . july 31 – 250,000 turn out in central park for a free concert by james taylor in a campaign to restore sheep meadow . august – elton john and lyricist bernie taupin , having reunited after a three-year break , eventually record heir first compositions since then , to be released a year later as 21 at 33 . august 18 – nick lowe and carlene carter are married at carter 's los angeles home . august 24 – prince´s first hit single '' i wan na be your lover '' is released in the us , reaching number one on the rnb and number 11 on the hot 100 , selling more than one million copies in the us . august 25 – '' my sharona '' by the knack hits 1 on the billboard charts . this is the first time in over a year that a song hits 1 that is not either a disco song or a ballad , signalling the potential resurgence of rock . september–december . september 1 – inxs perform in public for the first time , at the oceanview hotel in umina , new south wales . september 2 – u2 enters the studio for the first time to record a locally released single . september 13 – abba begins abba : the tour in edmonton , alberta , leading off a month of dates in north america . september 16 – the sugarhill gang release rapper 's delight in the united states , the first rap single to become a top 40 hit on the billboard hot 100 . september 17 – ontario court of appeals rejects a government appeal against the previous year 's sentencing of keith richards , which allowed him to avoid jail time for his 1977 arrest in toronto for heroin possession . september 19–23 – musicians united for safe energy ( muse ) stages a series of five no nukes concerts at madison square garden . jackson browne , crosby , stills & nash , bruce springsteen , bonnie raitt , tom petty , james taylor and carly simon are among the participants . september 22 – the newmusic , a canadian weekly music and culture program , makes its début on citytv . september 27 – elton john collapses on stage at the universal amphitheatre in los angeles county , california while performing '' better off dead '' . he refuses to stop the show and resumes playing fifteen minutes later . october 10 – joe perry officially leaves aerosmith . november 3 – donna summer becomes the first female artist to have 5 top 10 hits in the same year . november 16 – infinity records is shut down and absorbed into parent company mca . november 17 – donna summer , for a second time , has two songs ( '' dim all the lights '' , 2 , & '' no more tears ( enough is enough ) '' with barbra streisand , 3 ) in the top 3 of the billboard hot 100 , and the first female to have 5 top 5 hits in the same year . november 24 – with '' no more tears ( enough is enough ) '' hitting the top spot , donna summer becomes the first female artist to score 3 1 singles in a calendar year on the billboard hot 100 charts . november 26 – bill haley & his comets perform at the theatre royal , drury lane , london , in a command performance for queen elizabeth ii . this was haley 's final recorded performance of '' rock around the clock '' . november 30 – pink floyd releases the wall . it is one of rock 's most well-known concept albums and one of the list of best-selling albums . it is also the last album recorded with the line up of david gilmour , roger waters , nick mason and richard wright . december – iron maiden is signed by emi . they hire dennis stratton as a second guitarist . december 3 – in cincinnati , a stampede for seats at riverfront coliseum during a who concert kills 11 fans and injures 26 others . band members were not informed of the deaths until after the show . december 26 – iron maiden drummer doug sampson is replaced by ex-samson drummer clive burr . december 26-29 – the concerts for the people of kampuchea are held over four nights at the hammersmith odeon in london to raise funds for victims of war in cambodia . queen , the who , the clash , wings , elvis costello and members of led zeppelin all take part . december 31 – the eighth annual new year 's rockin ' eve special airs on abc , with appearances by the oak ridge boys , village people , chic , blondie and barry manilow . also in 1979 . the welsh philharmonia becomes the orchestra of welsh national opera . michael schenker leaves scorpions during their tour in france and is replaced by matthias jabs . stevie wonder uses digital audio recording technology in recording his album journey through the secret life of plants . disco reigns supreme this year , with several number-one hits from the bee gees and donna summer . several artists who were not regarded as disco acts , scored major successes by releasing disco-oriented singles or albums , including new wave band blondie with their first us number-one single '' heart of glass '' , rod stewart with '' do ya think i 'm sexy ? '' , and symphonic rock band electric light orchestra with their uk no . 1 lp discovery . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1979 . bands disbanded . see musical groups disestablished in 1979 . albums released . january . . published popular music . '' do n't cry out loud '' w . carole bayer sager m . peter allen '' the facts of life '' w.m . alan thicke , gloria loring , and al burton , from the tv series of the same name '' i 'd rather leave while i 'm in love '' w.m . carole bayer sager & peter allen '' knots landing theme '' m . jerrold immel '' the rainbow connection '' w.m . kenny ascher & paul williams , from the film the muppet movie '' sultans of swing '' w.m . mark knopfler . classical music . arno babadjanian – third string quartet milton babbitt an elizabethan sextette , for six female voices images , for saxophone and tape paraphrases , for ten instruments osvaldas balakauskas – symphony no . 2 pascal bentoiu – symphony no . 5 , op . 26 luciano berio – scena harrison birtwistle – … agm … , for sixteen voices and three instrumental ensembles john cage hymns and variations , for twelve amplified voices roaratorio for tape george crumb apparition for soprano and amplified piano makrokosmos volume iv for amplified piano ( four hands ) star-child ( 1977 , revised 1979 ) for soprano , antiphonal children 's voices , male speaking choir , bell ringers , and large orchestra mario davidovsky – pennplay for sixteen players peter maxwell davies black pentecost , for mezzo-soprano , baritone , and orchestra , op . 82 kirkwall shopping songs , for young voices and instruments , op . 85 nocturne , for alto flute solo , op . 84 quiet memory of bob jennings , for violin , viola , and cello , woo 135 salome , concert suite from the ballet , op . 80b solstice of light , cantata for tenor , satb chorus , and organ , op . 83 morton feldman string quartet no . 1 violin and orchestra hugh flynn – birds philip glass dance ( dances 1 , 3 and 5 , with lucinda childs and sol lewitt ) , for ensemble mad rush , for piano or electric organ alexander goehr babylon the great is fallen , cantata , op . 40 chaconne for organ , op . 34a das gesetz der quadrille , op . 41 sinfonia , op . 42 cristóbal halffter officium defunctuorum , for orchestra and chorus violin concerto no . 1 jacques hétu – bassoon concerto vagn holmboe violin concerto no . 2 notater for 3 trombones ( alto , tenor , baritone ) and tuba konstateringer for choir guitar sonata no . 1 guitar sonata no . 2 accordion sonata no . 1 bogtrykkemaskinen for violin and piano miloslav kabelac – metamorphoses ii , for piano and orchestra , op . 58 wojciech kilar – fanfare for mixed choir and orchestra hoary fog ( siwa mgła ) , for baritone and orchestra witold lutosławski – novelette for orchestra william lloyd webber – missa sanctae mariae magdalenae tomás marco aria de la batalla , for organ tartessos , for four percussionists richard meale – viridian , for orchestra paul moravec ave verum corpus , for satb chorus missa miserere , for satb chorus and orchestra pater noster , for satb chorus ștefan niculescu – sincronie for flute , oboe and bassoon allan pettersson – viola concerto steve reich octet variations for winds , strings and keyboards r . murray schafer beauty and the beast , from patria 3 , for alto with masks and string quartet felix 's girls , from patria 3 , for satb quartet or choir gamelan , from patria 3 , for satb , sasa , or tbtb solo quartet or choir hear me out from patria 3 , for four speaking voices music for wilderness lake , for twelve trombones and small rural lake ontario variations on a theme by jack behrens ( one variation ) , for piano , contribution to collective work by ontario composers peter sculthorpe four little pieces , for piano duet mangrove , for orchestra requiem , for cello alone denis smalley – the pulses of time , electronic music roger smalley – string quartet michael tippett – triple concerto for violin , viola , and cello anatol vieru concerto for violin , cello , and orchestra iosif si fratii sai , for eleven instruments and tape malcolm williamson – fanfarade , for orchestra charles wuorinen fortune , for clarinet , violin , cello , and piano joan 's , for flute , clarinet , violin , cello , and piano the magic art , instrumental masque , for chamber orchestra percussion duo , for mallet instruments and piano psalm 39 , for baritone and guitar string quartet no . 2 three songs , for tenor and piano iannis xenakis anémoessa , for satb chorus of 42 or 84 voices and orchestra dikhthas , for violin and piano palimpsest , for cor anglais , bass clarinet , bassoon , horn , percussion , piano , and string quintet . opera . peter maxwell davies cinderella , op . 87 the lighthouse , op . 86 hossein dehlavi – mana and mani libby larsen – the silver fox roger smalley – william derrincourt ( perth , 31 august ) . jazz . musical theatre . ai n't misbehavin ' ( music : fats waller , lyrics : various book : murray horwitz & richard maltby , jr . ) . london production opened at her majesty 's theatre on march 22 . carmelina ( book : alan jay lerner & joseph stein lyrics : alan jay lerner music : burton lane ) broadway production opened at the st . james theatre on april 8 and ran for 17 performances . starring georgia brown and cesare siepi evita ( music : andrew lloyd webber , lyrics and book : tim rice ) . broadway production opened at the broadway theatre on september 25 and ran for 1567 performances the king and i london revival opened at the palladium on june 12 and ran for 538 performances my old friends ( music , lyrics and book : mel mandel and norman sachs ) . off-broadway production opened at the orpheum theatre on january 12 and transferred to the 22 steps theatre on broadway on april 12 for a total run of 154 performances . oklahoma ! ( music : richard rodgers , lyrics and book : oscar hammerstein ii ) – broadway revival opened at the palace theatre on december 13 and ran for 310 performances peter pan ( music : mark charlap , lyrics and book : carolyn leigh with additional songs , music : jule styne and lyrics : betty comden & adolph green ) . broadway revival opened at the lunt-fontanne theatre on september 6 and ran for 551 performances . saravà ( music : mitch leigh , lyrics and book : n . richard nash ) . broadway production opened at the mark hellinger theatre on february 23 and ran for 140 performances sugar babies broadway revue opened at the mark hellinger theatre on october 8 and ran for 1208 performances . sweeney todd ( music and lyrics : stephen sondheim , book : hugh wheeler ) – broadway production opened at the uris theatre on march 1 and ran for 557 performances they 're playing our song ( music : marvin hamlisch , lyrics : carole bayer sager , book : neil simon ) . broadway production opened at the imperial theatre on february 11 and ran for 1082 performances tommy london production opened at queen 's theatre on february 6 and ran for 118 performances the venetian twins ( music : terence clarke , lyrics and book : nick enright ) . opened at the sydney opera house drama theatre on october 26 . whoopee ( music : walter donaldson , lyrics : gus kahn , book : william anthony mcguire ) . broadway revival opened at the anta theatre on february 14 and ran for 212 performances . musical films . all that jazz balada pro banditu hair metamorphoses the muppet movie the music machine very blue beard ( animation ) oolkatal radio on rock ' n ' roll high school roller boogie the rose schlager skatetown , u.s.a . births . january 1 brody dalle , australian singer-songwriter and guitarist koichi domoto , japanese singer-songwriter and actor january 5 – kathleen edwards , canadian singer/musician january 7 – aloe blacc , american musician , singer , songwriter , record producer , actor , businessman and philanthropist january 10 – kris kross , singer-songwriter ( kris kross ) january 11 – siti nurhaliza , malaysian singer january 16 – aaliyah , american singer , actress , and model ( d . 2001 ) january 20 linkin park ( linkin park ) will young , british singer february 1 jason isbell , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( drive-by truckers ) julie roberts , american country singer-songwriter february 10 – daryl palumbo , american musician who fronted bands such as glassjaw february 11 – brandy norwood , american singer , songwriter , record producer and actress february 12 – jade jones ( singer ) , british singer and chef , emma bunton 's partner february 14 – tsakane valentine maswanganyi , south african operatic and concert soprano february 15 – adam granduciel , american musician february 21 – jennifer love hewitt , american actress , television producer , director , singer/songwriter and author february 26 – corinne bailey rae , british singer , songwriter , record producer , and guitarist march 4 – merrill garbus , multi instrumentalist , singer-songwriter , activist , art pop musician ( tune-yards ) march 7 – amanda somerville , american singer-songwriter and vocal coach march 8 – tom chaplin , british singer ( keane ) march 9 – oscar isaac , guatemalan-american actor and musician ( sucker punch , the blinking underdogs , inside llewyn davis ) march 11 benji madden , american lead guitar for good charlotte joel madden , american lead vocals for good charlotte march 14 – jacques brautbar ( phantom planet ) march 18 – adam levine , american singer , songwriter , multi-instrumentalist , actor , and record producer . ( maroon 5 ) march 20 – sean garrett , american musical producer , musician , songwriter ( britney spears , beyoncé , ciara ) march 23 – ariel rechtshaid , american record producer , audio engineer , mixing engineer , multi-instrumentalist , and songwriter march 28 – shakib khan , bangladeshi film actor , producer , singer , film organiser and media personalities march 30 – norah jones , american singer-songwriter , pianoist april 1 – mikko franck , finnish violinist and conductor april 8 – alexi laiho , finnish guitarist , composer , and vocalist . april 10 – sophie ellis-bextor , british singer-songwriter-dancer , daughter of janet ellis april 11 danielle de niese , australian-american lyric soprano . chris gaylor , drummer ( the all-american rejects ) sebastien grainger ( death from above 1979 ) april 13 – tony lundon ( liberty x ) april 20 – quinn weng , taiwanese-canadian mezzo-soprano singer ( seraphim ) april 22 – daniel johns , australian musician , singer , and songwriter ( silverchair ) april 29 jo o'meara , english singer and actress ( s club 7 ) matt tong , drummer ( bloc party ) may 4 – lance bass , american singer , dancer , actor , film and television producer , and author ( ' n sync ) may 9 ara mina , filipino actress and singer andrew w.k . , american singer-songwriter , multi-instrumentalist , and music producer . may 14 – dan auerbach , american musician , singer-songwriter , and record producer ( the black keys , patrick carney ) may 21 – sonja vectomov , czech-finnish musical artist may 29 – scribe ( rapper ) , a new zealand hip hop rapper and recording artist of samoan descent june 5 – pete wentz , american musician , multi instrumentalist , writer , mental health advocate and songwriter ( fall out boy ) june 8 – derek trucks , guitarist , songwriter june 12 – robyn , swedish singer , songwriter and record producer june 17 – young maylay , american rapper , producer , and voice actor june 19 – robby de sá , south african musician , music producer and instrumentalist june 26 – ryan tedder , american singer , songwriter , multi-instrumentalist , and record producer . ( onerepublic ) ( hilary duff , taylor swift , selena gomez , jennifer lopez ) june 29 – abz love , singer ( 5ive ) july 4 – dumas , canadian singer-songwriter and guitarist july 5 – shane filan , irish singer and songwriter ( westlife ) july 6 – matthew barnson , american viola player and composer july 13 – ladyhawke ( musician ) , new zealand born singer , songwriter and multi instrumentalist july 15 – laura benanti , american actress and singer july 16 – ivan tásler july 17 – solé , american rapper july 25 – amy adams , singer july 26 – tamyra gray , singer august 13 – amiel daemion , american-australian pop singer , songwriter and actress . august 20 – jamie cullum , english jazz-pop singer-songwriter , pianist august 21 – kelis , american singer-songwriter and chef august 23 – ritchie neville , singer ( 5ive ) august 27 – jon siebels , guitarist ( eve 6 ) august 31 – yuvan shankar raja , film composer and singer september 3 – jason mccaslin , bass guitarist ( sum 41 ) september 6 – foxy brown , american rapper , model , and actress september 8 – pink , american singer-songwriter , dancer , musician and activist september 21 maija kovaļevska , latvian soprano opera singer jericho rosales , filipino entertainer september 22 – emilie autumn , american violinist , singer , poet , mental health advocate and songwriter september 24 – julia clarete , filipina singer , actress , performer , television personality , and former host of eat bulaga ! october 3 – josh klinghoffer , guitarist , ( red hot chili peppers ) october 9 – alex greenwald , vocals , rhythm guitar for phantom planet october 10 – mýa , american recording artist , songwriter , and actress . october 12 – jordan pundik , lead vocals for new found glory october 15 jaci velasquez , latin pop singer yoav ( musician ) , singer-songwriter of israeli-romanian descent , raised in south africa . october 18 – ne-yo , american singer , songwriter , record producer , dancer , television host/judge and actor . ( jennifer lopez , rihanna , world of dance ) october 24 – ben gillies , australian drummer ( silverchair ) october 25 – bat for lashes , english singer , songwriter and multi-instrumentalist november 9 – nicolas koeckert , violinist november 10 – chris joannou , bass guitar for silverchair november 22 – scott robinson , singer ( 5ive ) december 3 – daniel bedingfield , english-new zealand singer , songwriter and record producer . december 7 – sara bareilles , american singer-songwriter , actress and author . december 14 – sophie monk , australian singer , songwriter , actress , model and radio personality . december 15 – alex solowitz , 2gether december 26 – chris daughtry , american singer , songwriter , musician and actor december 30 – yelawolf , american rapper , singer-songwriter , musician , and producer december 31 – bob bryar , drummer ( my chemical romance ) unknown : ingrid michaelson , american singer-songwriter , actress and activist . deaths . january 5 – charles mingus , jazz musician , 56 january 13 donny hathaway , singer , 33 ( injuries from fall ) marjorie lawrence , operatic soprano , 71 february 2 – sid vicious , punk rocker , 21 march 4 – mike patto , rock singer , 36 ( cancer ) march 5 – alan crofoot , operatic tenor and host of mr piper , 49 ( suicide ) march 13 – harrison keller , us violinist and music teacher , 90 baker 's biographical dictionary of musicians , seventh edition , revised by nicolas slonimsky , schirmer books , new york , 1984 , page 1178 march 22 – walter legge , record producer , 72 march 23 – antonio brosa , violinist , 84 april 3 – ernst glaser , norwegian violinist , conductor and music teacher , 75 april 10 – nino rota , composer , 67 ( coronary thrombosis ) april 16 – maria caniglia , operatic soprano , 73 april 29 – julia perry , composer and conductor , 55 may 1 – bronislav gimpel , violinist , 68 may 9 – zoltán kelemen , operatic bass-baritone , 53 may 11 – lester flatt , bluegrass musician , 64 may 21 – blue mitchell , trumpeter , 49 june 5 – jack haley , actor , singer ( wizard of oz ) 80 june 21 – angus maclise , american drummer and songwriter ( velvet underground and theatre of eternal music ) , 41 ( hypoglycemia and pulmonary tuberculosis ) allmusic '' angus maclise '' june 29 – lowell george , singer , songwriter and guitarist , founder of little feat , 34 ( heart attack ) july 3 – louis durey , composer , 91 july 6 – van mccoy , singer , 35 ( heart attack ) july 12 – minnie riperton , singer , 31 ( breast cancer ) july 14 – pedro flores , composer , 85 july 16 – alfred deller , countertenor , 67 august 19 – dorsey burnette , rockabilly singer , 46 ( heart attack ) august 25 – stan kenton , bandleader , 67 september 2 – jacques février , pianist , 79 september 6 – guy bolton , english librettist , 94 september 22 – richard nibley , violinist , 66 september 27 gracie fields , actress and singer , 81 jimmy mcculloch , guitarist ( wings ) , 26 october 1 – roy harris , composer , 81 october 13 – rebecca helferich clarke , viola player and composer , 93 october 22 – nadia boulanger , french composer , conductor , and music teacher , 92 october 27 – germaine lubin , operatic soprano , 89 november 11 – dimitri tiomkin , film composer and conductor , 85 november 13 – freda betti , french mezzo-soprano opera singer , 55 november 17 – john glascock , rock bassist , 28 november 23 – judee sill , singer-songwriter , 35 november 30 – joyce grenfell , actress and singer-songwriter , 69 december 21 – nansi richards , harpist , 91 december 30 – richard rodgers , composer and songwriter , 77 . awards ceremonies . grammy awards of 1979 eurovision song contest 1979 japan music awards 21st japan record awards . see also . record labels established in 1979 1979 in music ( uk ) . references .