Barbara Frum

personal life . barbara frum was born barbara rosberg in niagara falls , new york , the oldest of three children of harold rosberg and florence hirschowitz rosberg . her family is jewish . frum 's father , who was born in kielce , poland , immigrated to canada as a child with his parents in 1913 , and was the proprietor of rosberg 's department store in niagara falls , ontario . frum 's mother was born in new york city , and moved to canada in 1935 , the year she got married . frum grew up in niagara falls , ontario . she studied history at the university of toronto , where she graduated with a ba in 1959 . in 1957 , she married toronto dentist murray frum , who later became a real-estate developer . they had two children and adopted a third , an aboriginal child , matthew . her daughter , linda frum , is a canadian senator and a member of the canada-israel committee , and her son , david frum became a political journalist and , after he moved to the united states , was a speechwriter for george w . bush . . career . after her graduation , frum undertook volunteer work in the community and began writing for the toronto star as a freelancer , specializing in social-issues stories . in 1971 , she joined cbc radio as one of the first hosts of as it happens , a newsmagazine program which used the telephone to conduct live interviews with newsmakers and other witnesses to news events , as well as quirky human-interest stories . frum 's skills as a tough , incisive and well-informed interviewer quickly made the program one of cbc radio 's most popular and enduring programs ( it still airs today , in virtually the same format ) , and she continued to host until 1981 . between october 1974 and july 1975 , she hosted her own self-titled talk show , first locally broadcast in toronto until may 1975 before the program moved to the national cbc network for seven shows in june and july 1975 . the shows featured both interviews with personalities and special segments devoted to isolated topics . in 1981 , cbc television created the journal , a newsmagazine series which would follow the national each night at 10:22 & nbsp ; p.m . , and frum and mary lou finlay were hired as the show 's hosts . on january 11 , 1982 , the journal debuted as a showcase for features which delved more deeply into the day 's news than the traditional newscast format of the national . the show included field reports , short documentaries , public forums , debates , business , sports , and arts and science news , but frum 's interviews were the show 's centrepiece , and made it one of canadian television 's most popular programs . after the first year , frum became the sole host of the program , although finlay continued to be associated with the program as a reporter and documentarian . frum interviewed many notable people , including british prime minister margaret thatcher and nelson mandela . she angered many when , on december 7 , 1989 on the journal , she refused to acknowledge that the école polytechnique massacre , by a killer who proclaimed as he shot and stabbed women , '' i hate feminists ! '' was an attack on women and feminism , saying : '' why do we diminish it by suggesting that it was an act against just one group ? '' frum was frequently parodied on codco by greg malone , whose portrayal involved the recurring catchphrase '' but are you bitter ? '' frum and malone ( in his frum drag ) also presented a gemini award together . frum was also the inspiration for the muppet '' barbara plum '' , host of '' the notebook '' , on canadian sesame street ( later reworked as sesame park ) . in the episode '' the headline hunter ! '' of the canadian animated series the raccoons , frum herself portrayed a reporter called '' barbara lafrum '' , who interviewed cyril sneer after his pigs told her of his unsavoury business practices . awards and honours . frum received four actra ( actra ) awards , won the national press club of canada award for outstanding contribution to canadian journalism in 1975 , and was named to the order of canada in 1979 . a library in toronto , called the barbara frum public library , is dedicated to her . death and legacy . frum died of chronic leukemia on march 26 , 1992 . her illness had been first diagnosed in 1974 , but only a small circle of family and friends knew about it . on the evening of her death , virtually the entire broadcasts of both the national and the journal were a tribute to her and a retrospective of her career . among the many tributes was an editorial cartoon depicting her at the gates of heaven with a reporter 's notebook , insisting on interviewing god . several other editorial cartoons simply depicted the journal ' s set with an empty anchor chair . following frum 's death , the national and the journal were merged into a new program called prime time news . the atrium in the cbc 's canadian broadcasting centre in toronto , which opened in 1993 , is named '' barbara frum atrium '' in her honour . the toronto public library branch located at 20 covington rd was named in her honour and opened shortly after her death . the building of the library was donated by murray frum as part of a redevelopment project , frum was in the foreground on the canadian stamp honouring cbc in 1999 , a television biography , the life and times of barbara frum , was broadcast on cbc in 2002 , and a day lily has been named the '' barbara frum day lily '' in recognition of her enthusiasm for gardening . frum 's daughter linda , a conservative author and journalist , wrote a best-selling biography of her mother in 1996 . she was appointed to the senate of canada as a conservative by prime minister stephen harper in august 2009 . frum 's son , david , is a political journalist and author of several books . he collaborated with others in coining the phrase '' axis of evil '' while a speechwriter for george w . bush . frum 's adopted son matthew , a first nations child whom the frums adopted in the 1960s during the sixties scoop , had problems as a teenager , and ultimately reclaimed his aboriginal roots and renewed contact with his birth parents . . references . external links . cbc digital archives - barbara frum : pioneering broadcaster order of canada citation av preservation trust - barbara frum : as it happens ( 1971-1981 ) images from the historic niagara digital collections at niagara falls ont . public library ontario 's small jewish communities , niagara falls frum at the canadian encyclopedia