Sten Sture the Elder

background . in contemporary sources he is alternatively referred to as sten gustavsson or herr sten ( lord sten ) ; the practice of using noble family names as part of a personal name was not yet in use in sweden at the time . he was born around 1440 , the son of gustav anundsson of the sture family and birgitta stensdotter bielke , half-sister of the future charles viii . the sture family was one of the high-ranking noble families of the time , though only distantly related to the royal house ; his closest royal ancestor was king sverker ii of sweden ( both through family of vinga and through family of aspenäs ) . sture 's father , gustav anundsson , was castellan of kalmar castle and a privy councillor , but died when the son was four . birgitta stensdotter remarried gustav karlsson of the gumsehuvud family , and the son was most likely raised in their home , first at kalmar castle and later at ekholmen castle . the 15th century in sweden was largely defined by the political struggles and civil wars between the unionists of the kalmar union , seeking to unite sweden with denmark and norway under the rule of the danish monarchs , with danish support , and the separatists seeking to re-establish sweden as an independent kingdom under a rival swedish monarch . due to his close family ties to the swedish king charles , the young sten sture became part of the swedish separatist political movement from an early age , and visited charles during his exile in danzig . he is mentioned as a knight in 1462 and as a privy councillor in 1466 , and took up residence on the family estate at räfsnäs north of mariefred . sture fought with bishop and regent kettil karlsson vasa during the uprising against the danish king christian i in 1464 , taking part in the decisive victory at haraker . he served as a military commander under king charles viii , defeating erik karlsson vasa 's uprising at uppbo in 1470 and later in the same year successfully beating back christian i 's forces at öresten . he married ingeborg tott , niece by marriage of magdalen of sweden , in 1467 ; she was a renaissance personality interested in theology and science and seems to have had some importance in the intellectual development during his reign . the marriage was childless . first regency . sture 's uncle , king charles viii named sture heir to charles ' personal domains before his death in 1470 , and left sture in charge of the crown lands , including the city of stockholm and stockholm castle . on the death of king charles on 15 may 1470 , sture immediately became the most powerful noble and political force in the country and was elected lord protector and regent of sweden ( riksföreståndare ) by the riksmöte in arboga on 1 may 1471 . sture consolidated his position through the victory of brunkeberg . at the battle of brunkeberg on 10 october 1471 , which was fought around brunkebergsåsen outside the northern gates of stockholm , his swedish separatist army triumphed against danish king christian i 's swedish unionist and danish forces , injuring christian and routing the unionist army . this victory elevated sture to the position of a national savior . the sculpture saint george and the dragon in storkyrkan in stockholm , commonly attributed to the german sculptor bernt notke , was raised to commemorate the battle . for a quarter of a century he ruled sweden making the regency almost an office in its own right . he was supported by the peasantry , the commercial interests of the mining district of bergslagen and the lower nobility , playing them out against the unionist high-ranked nobility and clergy and managing a difficult act of balance towards the danish demands of reunion . in a meeting in kalmar in 1483 , the high nobility confirmed the new danish king hans as the true king of sweden on condition of extensive privileges and guarantees granted to the high nobility , clergy and privy council , but sture nevertheless managed to hold on to the political power for the time being , refusing to give up his office as regent . sture 's reign saw the foundation of the first swedish university , uppsala university , founded by archbishop jakob ulvsson in 1477 with support from sture . in 1493 , the danish and norwegian king , hans ( also called john i ) , formed an alliance with ivan iii of russia against sten sture . from 1495 to 1497 , sten successfully repelled a russian invasion of finland . however , he subsequently fell out with the majority of the swedish nobility , most prominently svante nilsson , and the swedish privy council declared him to be deposed as regent on 8 march 1497 . second regency . in the ensuing war , sten was supported by peasant forces , but they were defeated at the battle of rotebro by hans of denmark ( also known as king john i of denmark and norway ) , who invaded sweden in july the same year . on 6 october , sten surrendered to king hans in stockholm and was reconciled with him . hans was crowned king of sweden , and sten was given the highest position of authority in sweden below the king . however , during the next rebellion against the danes in 1501 , he again took office as regent , leading the swedish struggle for independence until his death . in may 1502 , the unionist garrison in stockholm , led by queen christina , capitulated due to severe starvation after a drawn-out siege . in early 1503 his forces were in control of sweden apart from kalmar and the island of öland . sture used the capture of the queen for propaganda purposes , personally accompanying the queen to halmstad in denmark after a cease-fire had been negotiated by the hanseatic league , in october 1503 . death and aftermath . on his way back from denmark , sture fell ill and died on 14 december 1503 . bishop hemming gadh , who accompanied sture on the journey , alerted svante nilsson at stegeborg castle . sture 's widow , ingeborg tott , who at the time was in control of the stockholm garrison , was only presented with the news of her husband 's death once svante nilsson had reached stockholm . she was persuaded to turn over stockholm castle and received häme castle in finland as compensation . sture had no legitimate children from his marriage with ingeborg tott , only a daughter born out of wedlock , birgitta , who became a nun in vadstena abbey . the male line of the old sture family , the tre sjöblad family , died out with sten sture . his closest relatives and heirs were his deceased sister 's , the house of vasa , and his nephew erik johansson vasa , a knight and member of the privy council , inherited sture 's extensive personal domains in södermanland and uppland . erik johansson 's son , the future king gustav i of sweden had been born a few years before sten 's death . however , erik johansson was described by his contemporaries as a simpleminded and brutal man , prone to violent outbursts and on more than one occasion charged with manslaughter , and lacked the political skill of his uncle sten sture . regent sten was succeeded by his colleague from the privy council and former enemy svante nilsson , of the natt och dag family , as regent . svante nilsson 's son and successor , sten sture the younger , later chose to adapt the sture name for political purposes , despite only being distantly related . burial and monuments . to commemorate the victory at brunkeberg , sten sture ordered a wooden monument for storkyrkan in stockholm , saint george and the dragon , built in the late 1480s . saint george 's horse carries the coat of arms of the tre sjöblad family , sten sture 's coat of arms , and the monument is therefore interpreted as a symbol of his victory over denmark , the dragon . a bronze copy of the monument was placed on köpmantorget in stockholm in 1912 . sten sture was buried in the church of mariefred charterhouse , which he had helped establish and made significant contributions to during his reign . his remains were moved to strängnäs cathedral during the reign of gustav i , after the short-lived monastery was closed in 1526 , during the protestant reformation . a memorial outside the town church of mariefred marks the former site of the monastery . the present burial monument in the choir of strängnäs cathedral was ordered in 1774 by king gustav iii . sture became a prominent symbolic figure in the 19th century nationalist movement in sweden , together with the early 15th century rebel leader engelbrekt engelbrektsson and king gustav i who ended the kalmar union . a large stone monument to sten sture , by the sculptor carl milles ( 1875–1955 ) , was inaugurated in uppsala in 1925 . there are several places and buildings named after sten sture in the town of arboga in central sweden , where sten sture was elected in 1471 , due to the efforts of the local sture society in the late 19th century . stureparken was created for the 400th anniversary in 1871 , and an obelisk dedicated to the memory of the election of sten sture was erected in the park in 1890 . trivia . an underground restaurant in stockholm , close to the royal palace is named after sten sture . in 1792 it was a prison , where the murderer of king gustav iii of sweden was jailed before his execution . notes . references . . external links .