Dry cleaning

history . thomas l . jennings is the inventor and first to patent the commercial dry cleaning process known as '' dry scouring '' , on march 3 , 1821 ( patent number : us 3,306x ) . he was the first african-american to be granted a patent of any kind , although there were attempts to prevent him ; opponents claimed that the nature of the process was dangerous . an early adopter of commercial '' dry laundry '' using turpentine was jolly belin in paris in 1825 . modern dry cleaning 's use of non-water-based solvents to remove soil and stains from clothes was reported as early as 1855 . the potential for petroleum-based solvents was recognized by french dye-works operator jean baptiste jolly , who offered a new service that became known as nettoyage à sec—i.e . , dry cleaning . flammability concerns led william joseph stoddard , a dry cleaner from atlanta , to develop stoddard solvent ( white spirit ) as a slightly less flammable alternative to gasoline-based solvents . the use of highly flammable petroleum solvents caused many fires and explosions , resulting in government regulation of dry cleaners . after world war & nbsp ; i , dry cleaners began using chlorinated solvents . these solvents were much less flammable than petroleum solvents and had improved cleaning power . shift to tetrachloroethylene . by the mid-1930s , the dry cleaning industry had adopted tetrachloroethylene ( perchloroethylene ) , or pce for short , as the solvent . it has excellent cleaning power and is nonflammable and compatible with most garments . because it is stable , tetrachloroethylene is readily recycled . . infrastructure . dry cleaning businesses , from the perspective of the customer , are either plants or drop shops . a plant does on-site cleaning . a drop shop receives garments from customers , sends them to a large plant , and then has the cleaned garment returned to the shop for collection by the customer . the turnaround time is longer for a drop shop than for a local plant . however , running a plant requires more work for the business owner . since 2010 , in some markets , web apps have been used to schedule low-cost home delivery for dry cleaning . this cycle minimized the risk of fire or dangerous fumes created by the cleaning process . at this time , dry cleaning was carried out in two different machines—one for the cleaning process , and the second to remove the solvent from the garments . machines of this era were described as vented ; their drying exhausts were expelled to the atmosphere , the same as many modern tumble-dryer exhausts . this not only contributed to environmental contamination but also much potentially reusable pce was lost to the atmosphere . much stricter controls on solvent emissions have ensured that all dry cleaning machines in the western world are now fully enclosed , and no solvent fumes are vented to the atmosphere . in enclosed machines , solvent recovered during the drying process is returned condensed and distilled , so it can be reused to clean further loads or safely disposed of . the majority of modern enclosed machines also incorporate a computer-controlled drying sensor , which automatically senses when all detectable traces of pce have been removed . this system ensures that only small amounts of pce fumes are released at the end of the cycle . mechanism . image : cellulose sessel.svg thumb left 220 px structure of cellulose , the main constituent of cotton . the many oh groups bind water , leading to swelling of the fabric and leading to wrinkling , which is minimized when these materials are treated with tetrachloroethylene and other dry cleaning solvents . in terms of mechanism , dry cleaning selectively solubilizes stains on the article . the solvents are non-polar and tend to selectively extract compounds that cause stains . these stains would otherwise only dissolve in aqueous detergents mixtures at high temperatures , potentially damaging delicate fabrics . non-polar solvents are also good for some fabrics , especially natural fabrics , as the solvent does not interact with any polar groups within the fabric . water binds to these polar groups which results in the swelling and stretching of proteins within fibers during laundering . also , the binding of water molecules interferes with weak attractions within the fiber , resulting in the loss of the fiber 's original shape . after the laundry cycle , water molecules will dry off . however , the original shape of the fibers has already been distorted and this commonly results in shrinkage . non-polar solvents prevent this interaction , protecting more delicate fabrics . the usage of an effective solvent coupled with mechanical friction from tumbling effectively removes stains . process . a dry-cleaning machine is similar to a combination of a domestic washing machine and clothes dryer . garments are placed in the washing or extraction chamber ( referred to as the 'basket ' or 'drum ' ) , which constitutes the core of the machine . the washing chamber contains a horizontal , perforated drum that rotates within an outer shell . the shell holds the solvent while the rotating drum holds the garment load . the basket capacity is between about 10 and 40 & nbsp ; kg ( 22 to 88 & nbsp ; lb ) . during the wash cycle , the chamber is filled approximately one-third full of solvent and begins to rotate , agitating the clothing . the solvent temperature is maintained at 30 & nbsp ; degrees celsius ( 86 & nbsp ; degrees fahrenheit ) , as a higher temperature may damage it . during the wash cycle , the solvent in the chamber ( commonly known as the 'cage ' or 'tackle box ' ) is passed through a filtration chamber and then fed back into the 'cage ' . this is known as the cycle and is continued for the wash duration . the solvent is then removed and sent to a distillation unit consisting of a boiler and condenser . the condensed solvent is fed into a separator unit where any remaining water is separated from the solvent and then fed into the 'clean solvent ' tank . the ideal flow rate is roughly 8 liters of solvent per kilogram of garments per minute , depending on the size of the machine . garments are also checked for foreign objects . items such as plastic pens may dissolve in the solvent bath , damaging the textiles . some textile dyes are '' loose '' and will shed dye during solvent immersion . fragile items , such as feather bedspreads or tasseled rugs or hangings , may be enclosed in a loose mesh bag . the density of perchloroethylene is around 1.7 g/cm 3 at room temperature ( 70 % heavier than water ) , and the sheer weight of absorbed solvent may cause the textile to fail under normal force during the extraction cycle unless the mesh bag provides mechanical support . not all stains can be removed by dry cleaning . some need to be treated with spotting solvents — sometimes by steam jet or by soaking in special stain-remover liquids — before garments are washed or dry cleaned . also , garments stored in soiled condition for a long time are difficult to bring back to their original color and texture . a typical wash cycle lasts for 8–15 minutes depending on the type of garments and degree of soiling . during the first three minutes , solvent-soluble soils dissolve into the perchloroethylene and loose , insoluble soil comes off . it takes 10–12 minutes after the loose soil has come off to remove the ground-in insoluble soil from garments . machines using hydrocarbon solvents require a wash cycle of at least 25 & nbsp ; minutes because of the much slower rate of solvation of solvent-soluble soils . a dry cleaning surfactant '' soap '' may also be added . at the end of the wash cycle , the machine starts a rinse cycle where the garment load is rinsed with freshly distilled solvent dispensed from the solvent tank . this pure solvent rinse prevents discoloration caused by soil particles being absorbed back onto the garment surface from the 'dirty ' working solvent . after the rinse cycle , the machine begins the extraction process , which recovers the solvent for reuse . modern machines recover approximately 99.99 % of the solvent employed . the extraction cycle begins by draining the solvent from the washing chamber and accelerating the basket to 350–450 & nbsp ; rpm , causing much of the solvent to spin free of the fabric . until this time , the cleaning is done in normal temperature , as the solvent is never heated in dry cleaning process . when no more solvent can be spun out , the machine starts the drying cycle . during the drying cycle , the garments are tumbled in a stream of warm air ( 60–63 & nbsp ; °c/140–145 & nbsp ; °f ) that circulates through the basket , evaporating traces of solvent left after the spin cycle . the air temperature is controlled to prevent heat damage to the garments . the exhausted warm air from the machine then passes through a chiller unit where solvent vapors are condensed and returned to the distilled solvent tank . modern dry cleaning machines use a closed-loop system in which the chilled air is reheated and recirculated . this results in high solvent recovery rates and reduced air pollution . in the early days of dry cleaning , large amounts of perchlorethylene were vented to the atmosphere because it was regarded as cheap and believed to be harmless . after the drying cycle is complete , a deodorizing ( aeration ) cycle cools the garments and removes further traces of solvent , by circulating cool outside air over the garments and then through a vapor recovery filter made from activated carbon and polymer resins . after the aeration cycle , the garments are clean and ready for pressing and finishing . solvent processing . working solvent from the washing chamber passes through several filtration steps before it is returned to the washing chamber . the first step is a button trap , which prevents small objects such as lint , fasteners , buttons , and coins from entering the solvent pump . over time , a thin layer of filter cake ( called '' muck '' ) accumulates on the lint filter . the muck is removed regularly ( commonly once per day ) and then processed to recover solvent trapped in the muck . many machines use '' spin disk filters '' , which remove the muck from the filter by centrifugal force while it is back washed with solvent . after the lint filter , the solvent passes through an absorptive cartridge filter . this filter , which contains activated clays and charcoal , removes fine insoluble soil and non-volatile residues , along with dyes from the solvent . finally , the solvent passes through a polishing filter , which removes any soil not previously removed . the clean solvent is then returned to the working solvent tank . cooked powder residue is the name for the waste material generated by cooking down or distilling muck . it will contain solvent , powdered filter material ( diatomite ) , carbon , non-volatile residues , lint , dyes , grease , soils , and water . the waste sludge or solid residue from the still contains solvent , water , soils , carbon , and other non-volatile residues . used filters are another form of waste as is waste water . to enhance cleaning power , small amounts of detergent ( 0.5–1.5 % ) are added to the working solvent and are essential to its functionality . these detergents emulsify hydrophobic soils and keep soil from redepositing on garments . depending on the machine 's design , either an anionic or a cationic detergent is used . symbols . the international ginetex laundry symbol for dry cleaning is a circle . it may have the letter p inside it to indicate perchloroethylene solvent , or the letter f to indicate a flammable solvent ( feuergefährliches schwerbenzin ) . a bar underneath the circle indicates that only mild cleaning processes is recommended . a crossed-out empty circle indicates that dry cleaning is not permitted . file : professionelle reinigung.svg professional cleaning symbol file : professionelle reinigung ( f ) . svg dry clean , hydrocarbon solvent only ( hcs ) file : professionelle reinigung ( f ) s.svg gentle cleaning with hydrocarbon solvents file : professionelle reinigung ( f ) ss.svg very gentle cleaning with hydrocarbon solvents file : professionelle reinigung ( p ) . svg dry clean , tetrachloroethylene ( pce ) only file : professionelle reinigung ( p ) s.svg gentle cleaning with pce file : professionelle reinigung ( p ) ss.svg very gentle cleaning with pce file : nicht chemisch reinigen.svg do not dry clean image : tetrachloroethylene.svg thumb left 160 px tetrachloroethylene is the main solvent used in dry cleaning . solvents used . perchloroethylene . perchloroethylene ( pce , or tetrachloroethylene ) has been in use since the 1930s . pce is the most common solvent , the '' standard '' for cleaning performance . it is a highly effective cleaning solvent . it is thermally stable , recyclable , and has low toxicity . it can , however , cause color bleeding/loss , especially at higher temperatures . in some cases it may damage special trims , buttons , and beads on some garments . it is better for oil-based stains ( which account for about 10 % of stains ) than more common water-soluble stains ( coffee , wine , blood , etc . ) . the toxicity of tetrachloroethylene '' is moderate to low '' and '' reports of human injury are uncommon despite its wide usage in dry cleaning and degreasing '' . . hydrocarbons . hydrocarbons are represented by products such as exxon-mobil 's df-2000 or chevron phillips ' ecosolv , and pure dry . these petroleum-based solvents are less aggressive but also less effective than pce . although combustible , risk of fire or explosion can be minimized when used properly . hydrocarbons are however pollutants . hydrocarbons retain about 10-12 % of the market . trichloroethylene . trichloroethylene is more aggressive than pce but is very rarely used . with superior degreasing properties , it was often used for industrial workwear/overalls cleaning in the past . tce is classified as carcinogenic to humans by the united states environmental protection agency . epa releases final health assessment for tce september 2011 . accessed 2011-09-28 . . supercritical co 2 . supercritical co2 is an alternative to pce ; however , it is inferior in removing some forms of grime . additive surfactants improve the efficacy of co 2 . carbon dioxide is almost entirely nontoxic . the greenhouse gas potential is also lower than that of many organic solvents . the dry cleaning process involves charging a sealed chamber which is loaded with clothes using gaseous carbon dioxide from a storage vessel to approximately 200 to 300 psi . this step in the process is initiated as a precaution to avoid thermal shock to the cleaning chamber . liquid carbon dioxide is then pumped into the cleaning chamber from a separate storage vessel by a hydraulic , or electrically driven pump ( which preferably has dual pistons ) . the pump increases the pressure of the liquid carbon dioxide to approximately 900 to 1500 psi . a separate sub-cooler reduces the temperature of the carbon dioxide by 2 to 3 degrees kelvin below the boiling point in an effort to prevent cavitation which could lead to premature degradation of the pump . consumer reports rated supercritical co 2 superior to conventional methods , but the drycleaning and laundry institute commented on its '' fairly low cleaning ability '' in a 2007 report . drycleaning and laundry institute . '' the dli white paper : key information on industry solvents . '' the western cleaner & launderer , august 2007 . supercritical co 2 is , overall , a mild solvent which lowers its ability to aggressively attack stains . one deficiency with supercritical co 2 is that its electrical conductivity is low . as mentioned in the mechanisms section , dry cleaning utilizes both chemical and mechanical properties to remove stains . when solvent interacts with the fabric 's surface , the friction dislocates dirt . at the same time , the friction also builds up an electrical charge . fabrics are very poor conductors and so usually , this build-up is discharged through the solvent . this discharge does not occur in liquid carbon dioxide and the build-up of an electrical charge on the surface of the fabric attracts the dirt back on to the surface , which diminishes its cleaning efficiency . to compensate for the poor solubility and conductivity of supercritical carbon dioxide , research has focused on additives . for increased solubility , 2-propanol has shown increased cleaning effects for liquid carbon dioxide as it increases the ability of the solvent to dissolve polar compounds . machinery for use of supercritical co 2 is expensive—up to 90,000 more than a pce machine , making affordability difficult for small businesses . some cleaners with these machines keep traditional machines on-site for more heavily soiled textiles , but others find plant enzymes to be equally effective and more environmentally sustainable . other solvents : niche , emerging , etc . for decades , efforts have been made to replace pce . these alternatives have not proven economical thus far : stoddard solvent – flammable and explosive , 100 & nbsp ; °f/38 & nbsp ; °c flash point cfc-113 ( freon-113 ) , a cfc . now banned as ozone-unfriendly . decamethylcyclopentasiloxane ( '' liquid silicone '' ) , called d5 for short . it was popularized by greenearth cleaning . it is more expensive than pce . it degrades within days in the environment . dibutoxymethane ( solvonk4 ) is a bipolar solvent that removes water-based stains and oil-based stains . brominated solvents ( n-propyl bromide , fabrisolv , drysolv ) are solvents with higher kb-values than pce . this allows faster cleaning , but can damage some synthetic beads and sequins if not used correctly . healthwise , there are reported risks associated with npb such as numbness of nerves . '' hazard evaluation 1-bromopropane '' july 2003 . accessed 2014-jan-22 the exposure to the solvents in a typical dry cleaner is considered far below the levels required to cause any risk . environmentally , it is approved by the u.s . epa . it is among the more expensive solvents , but it is faster cleaning , lower temperatures , and quick dry times . see also . fabric restoration list of laundry topics wet cleaning . references . external links . hazard summary provided by the united states environmental protection agency . niosh safety and health topic : drycleaning