Tripe

types of tripe . beef tripe . beef tripe is made from the muscle wall ( the interior mucosal lining is removed ) of only the first three chambers of a cow 's stomach : the rumen ( blanket/flat/smooth tripe ) , the reticulum ( honeycomb and pocket tripe ) , and the omasum ( book/bible/leaf tripe ) . abomasum ( reed ) tripe is seen less frequently , owing to its glandular tissue content . . other animals . tripe refers to cow ( beef ) stomach , but includes stomach of any ruminant including cattle , sheep , deer , antelope , ox , giraffes , and their relatives . tripas , the related spanish word , also refers to culinary dishes produced from any animal with a stomach . in some cases , other names have been applied to the 'tripe ' of other animals . for example , tripe from pigs may be referred to as paunch , pig bag , or hog maw . washed tripe . washed tripe is more typically known as dressed tripe . to dress the tripe , the stomachs are cleaned and the fat trimmed off . it is then boiled and bleached , giving it the white color more commonly associated with tripe as seen on market stalls and in butchers ' shops . the task of dressing the tripe is usually carried out by a professional tripe dresser . dressed tripe was a popular , nutritious and cheap dish for the british working classes from victorian times until the latter half of the 20th century . while it is still popular in many parts of the world today , the number of tripe eaters , and consequently the number of tripe dressers , in the uk has rapidly declined . tripe has come to be regarded as a pet food , as the increased affluence of postwar britain has reduced the appeal of this once staple food . it remains a popular dish in many parts of continental europe such as spain , france and italy . in france , a very popular dish , sold in most supermarkets , is tripes à la mode de caen . in spain callos a la madrileña are served as tapas in many restaurants as well as in supermarkets . dishes prepared with tripe . tripe is eaten in many parts of the world . tripe soup is made in many varieties in the eastern european cuisine . tripe dishes include : andouille — french poached , boiled and smoked cold tripe sausage andouillette — french grilling sausage including beef tripe and pork babat — indonesian spicy beef tripe dish , could be fried with spices or served as soup as soto babat ( tripe soto ) bak kut teh — a chinese herbal soup popularly served in malaysia and singapore with pork tripe , meat and ribs . bao du — chinese quick-boiled beef or lamb tripe breakfast sausages — most commercially produced sausages in the united states contain pork and beef tripe as filler bumbar — a bosnian dish where the tripe is stuffed with other beef parts butifarra — colombian or catalan sausage caldume — a sicilian stew or soup callos a la madrileña — spanish tripe dish cooked with chorizo and paprika callos con garbanzos — spanish tripe dish cooked with chickpea , chorizo and paprika cau-cau — peruvian stew of cow tripe , potatoes , mint , and other spices and vegetables ( chakna — indian spicy stew of goat tripe and other animal parts ciorbă de burtă — romanian special soup with cream and garlic cow foot soup — belize — seasoned , tenderly cook cow tripe and foot , aromatic and ground vegetables with macaroni in a rich glutinous soup . cuajito - made from pig stomach eaten with boiled plantains from puerto rico . dobrada — portuguese tripe dish usually made with white butterbeans , carrots and chouriço served with white rice . dršťkovka ( dršťková polévka ) — czech goulash-like tripe soup fasulia bil karsha — libyan kidney bean soup with tripe fried tripe sandwich – popular in st . louis , missouri , usa držková — slovak tripe soup ( držková polievka ) dulot or dulet — eritrean and ethiopian tripe and entrail stir-fry , containing finely chopped tripe , liver and ground beef , lamb or goat fried in clarified and spiced butter , with garlic , parsley and berbere ebyenda or byenda — word for tripe in some bantu languages of uganda , tripe may be stewed , but is especially popular when cooked with matooke as a breakfast dish fileki or špek-fileki — croatian tripe soup flaczki or flaki — polish soup , with marjoram fuqi feipian or 夫妻肺片— spicy and '' numbing '' ( 麻 ) chinese cold dish made from various types of beef offal , nowadays mainly thinly sliced tendon , tripe and sometimes tongue gopchang jeongol - a spicy korean stew or casserole made by boiling beef tripe , vegetables , and seasonings in beef broth goto - filipino gruel with tripe . guatitas — ecuadorian and chilean tripe stew , often served with peanut sauce in ecuador gulai babat — indonesian minang tripe curry guru — zimbabwean name for tripe , normally eaten as relish with sadza haggis — scottish traditional dish made of a sheep 's stomach stuffed with oatmeal and the minced heart , liver and lungs of a sheep . the stomach is used only as a vessel for the stuffing and is not eaten . i̇şkembe — turkish tripe soup with garlic , lemon , and spices kare-kare — filipino oxtail-peanut stew which may include tripe kersha ( arabic egyptian : كرشة ) — egyptian tripe stew with chickpea and tomato sauce . '' kirxa '' - in malta this is popular traditional dish stewed in curry . khash — in armenia , this popular winter soup is made of boiled beef tendon and honeycomb tripe , and served with garlic and lavash bread . kista — assyrian cooked traditionally in a stew and stuffed with soft rice , part of a major dish known as pacha in assyrian . laray — curried tripe dish popular in afghanistan and in the northern region of pakistan . eaten with naan/roti . lampredotto — florence abomasum-tripe dish , often eaten in sandwiches with green sauce and hot sauce mala mogodu — south african cuisine — popular tripe dish , often eaten at dinner time as a stew with hot pap matumbo — kenyan cuisine — tripe dish , often eaten as a stew with various accompaniments mutura kenyan cuisine-tripe sausage , stuffed with blood , organ and other meat , roasted menudo — mexican tripe and hominy stew mondongo — latin american and caribbean tripe , vegetable , and herb soup mondonguito a-la italiana an italian influenced peruvian stew ( motsu — japanese tripe served either simmered or in nabemono , such as motsunabe mumbar beef or sheep tripe stuffed with rice , typical dish in adana in southern turkey niubie ( chinese : 牛瘪 ) a kind of chinese huoguo , popular in the qiandongnan prefecture of guizhou province in southwest china and traditionally eaten by the dong and miao peoples , the dish includes the stomach and small intestine of cattle . bile from the gall bladder and the half-digested contents of the stomach give the dish a unique , slightly bitter flavour . it can also be made with the offal of a goat , which is called yangbie ( chinese : 羊瘪 ) . pacal — hungarian spicy meal made of tripe , similar to pörkölt pacha — iraqi cuisine , tripe and intestines stuffed with garlic rice and meat packet and tripe— irish meal which is when tripe is boiled in water , then strained off and then simmered in a pot with milk , onions , salt and pepper . served hot with cottage bread/ bread rolls . popular in co.limerick pancitas — mexican stew similar to menudo , but made with sheep stomach pancita — peruvian spicy barbecue fried food made with beef tripe marinated with peppers and other ingredients papaitan — filipino goat or beef tripe and offal soup flavored with bile patsás ( greek : πατσάς ) — greek , tripe stew seasoned with red wine vinegar and garlic ( skordostoubi ) or thickened with avgolemono , widely believed to be a hangover remedy philadelphia pepper pot soup — american ( pennsylvania ) tripe soup with peppercorns phở — vietnamese noodle soup with many regional variations , some of which include tripe pickled tripe — pickled white honeycomb tripe once common in the northeastern united states pieds paquets , provençal dish , consists of stuffed sheep 's offal and sheep 's feet stewed together potted meat ṣakí or shaki — word for tripe in the yoruba language of nigeria , ṣakí is often included in various stews , along with other meat . sapu mhicha — leaf tripe bag stuffed with bone marrow and boiled and fried , from kathmandu , nepal saure kutteln — from south germany , made with beef tripe and vinegar or wine sekba — a chinese indonesian pork offals including tripes stewed in mild soy sauce-based soup . serobe — a botswana delicacy , mixed with intestines and in some occasions with beef meat shkembe ( shkembe chorba ) ( шкембе чорба / чкембе чорба in bulgarian ) — a kind of tripe soup , prepared in iran , bulgaria , romania , north macedonia , bosnia and herzegovina , serbia and turkey , schkæm is the persian word for stomach , sirabi is the iranian version of shkembe skembici — serbia , one of the oldest known dishes since 13th century , tripe in vegetable stew with herbs , served with boiled potato soto babat — indonesian spicy tripe soup tablier de sapeur , a speciality of lyon tkalia — moroccan spiced , seasoned in a sauce with vegetables and served on cous-cous tripice- croatia , stew made with tripe , boiled with potato and bacon added for flavour . tripes à la mode de caen — in normandy , this is a traditional stew made with tripe . it has a very codified recipe , preserved by the brotherhood of '' la tripière d'or '' a that organises a competition every year to elect the world 's best tripes à la mode de caen maker . tripe and beans — in jamaica , this is a thick , spicy stew made with tripe and vicia faba . tripe and drisheen — in cork , ireland tripe and onions — in northern england tripes in nigerian tomato sauce- tripe are cooked till tender and finished in spicy tomato sauce tripe taco — mexican sheep or calf tripe dish with tortillas tripoux — occitan sheep tripe dish traditional in rouergue trippa di moncalieri — in moncalieri city/piedmont/italy ( tripe sausage , that could be served in thin slices with few drops of olive oil , minced parsley , garlic and a pinch of black pepper , or used mainly for trippa alla savoiarda recipe ) trippa alla fiorentina — in italy ( fried with tomatoes and other vegetables ) trippa alla pisana - in pisa , italy : onion , celery , carrot , garlic fried in oil , with tomatoes and pancetta or guanciale , topped with parmigiano cheese trippa alla romana — in italy ( done with white wine and tomatoes ) trippa alla savoiarda — in piedmont/italy ( stewed with vegetables , white wine , sauce from roasted beef and served covered with grated parmigiano reggiano/grana padano cheese ) trippe alla veneta ( veneto , northeast italy ) tsitsarong bulaklak — filipino crunchy fried tripe ( literally '' flower '' crackling ) tuslama ( romanian ) / tuzlama ( turkish ) — tripe stew specific to south-eastern romania , a blend of romanian and turkish yakiniku and horumonyaki — japanese chargrilled , bite-sized vampi — slovenian tripe stew vajri khudi - east indians traditional variation of a vajri curry vette darmen — traditional , though now on the verge of being obsolete , west flemish dish , the tripe is seasoned and fried in a buttered pan . ojree — pakistani curry made from finely chopped and tenderized goat tripe osben — tunisian cow or sheep tripe filled with meat and vegetables and generally cooked with couscous laray — pakistan ( pushto ) - ( northern area ) , fried ( cow tripe ) with traditional spices . 2 . da laray pikaorae — square small pieces mixed with chickpea flour ( baisin ) with traditional spices and deep fried . obe ata pelu shaaki — nigerian stew made with large chunk of beef and goat tripe pepper soup with tripe — nigerian hot peppered liquid soup with bite-sized tripe 牛肚 / 金錢肚 ( mandarin : niudu/jinqiandu ; cantonese , ngautou/gumtsintou ) — chinese cuisine tripe with inner lining resembling ancient chinese coin with square hole , gives its name : '' coin stomach '' . the dish is usually served steamed with spring onion and garlic sauce , or just boiled in water served with sweet soya sauce with chilli and spring onions as a dipping sauce . tripas à moda do porto — tripe with white beans , in portuguese cuisine , a dish typical of the city of porto . it is called dobrada elsewhere in portugal . tripe soup — in jordan , this is a stew made with tripe and tomato sauce . tripe soup — in somalia , and djibouti known as calooley is a stew made with different sauces . related dishes . in spanish- and portuguese-speaking countries , the close cognate tripas tends to denote small intestines rather than stomach lining . dishes of this sort include : tacos de tripa & mdash ; mexican tacos filled with soft or crunchy fried small intestines another type of food made from the small intestines are chitterlings ( chitlins ) . beef tripe is also a common meat in kerala , india . beef tripe and tapioca ( kolliyum bottiyum ) is a traditional wedding eve dinner for christians in some parts of kerala . marketing . tripe marketing board promotes world tripe day on 24 october , because on that day in 1662 , samuel pepys wrote '' so home and dined there with my wife upon a most excellent dish of tripes of my own directing . '' . references . nl : pens