Rātana

symbols . the main symbol ( tohu ) of the church is a five-pointed star and crescent moon , the whetū mārama ( which means both '' star and moon '' and '' shining star '' ) , which is worn on the lapels of mōrehu ( the scattered remnant , rātana followers ) and at pivotal points on church buildings . the golden or blue crescent moon ( symbolising enlightenment ) can face different parts of the coloured star : blue represents te matua ( the father ) , white is te tama ( the son ) , red is te wairua tapu ( the holy spirit ) , purple is ngā anahera pono ( the faithful angels ) and gold/yellow is te māngai ( the mouthpiece ( of jehovah ) , ture wairua ) , although this colour is sometimes substituted for the colour pink , representing piriwiritua ( the campaigner ( of political matters ) , ture tangata ) . te whetū mārama represents the kingdom of light or māramatanga , standing firm against the forces of darkness ( mākutu ) . . ture wairua ( spiritual mission ) . on 8 november 1918 rātana saw a vision , which he regarded as divinely inspired , asking him to preach the gospel to the māori people , to destroy the power of the tohunga , and to cure the spirits and bodies of his people . until 1924 he preached to increasingly large numbers of māori and established a name for himself as the '' māori miracle man '' . at first , the movement was seen as a christian revival , but it soon moved away from mainstream churches . on 31 may 1925 , te haahi rātana ( the rātana church ) was established as a separate church and its founder was acknowledged as the bearer of te mangai or god 's word and wisdom . on 21 july 1925 , the constitution of the rātana church was accepted by the registrar-general and a list of 'apostles ' ( ministers ) who were authorised to conduct marriages was published in the new zealand gazette . hostile attitudes have caused the church to be guarded towards its teaching and founder . ture tangata ( secular movement ) . the rātana church is made up of the ture wairua ( spiritual laws ) and the ture tangata ( physical laws ) . the spiritual laws are itemised as the trinity ( in maori , te matua , te tama me te wairua tapu ) , and ngā anahera pono ( the holy and faithful angels ) and also adding te māngai ( god 's word and wisdom ) to prayers . its central book is the bible , although the blue book , written in māori and containing prayers and hymns ( many composed by rātana ) , is used in all church services . in order that these things should become manifest , a price was paid by the sons of tahupotiki wiremu rātana : te arepa , te omeka , piriwiritua , and hamuera . rātana said he would divide his body into four parts : in the west was te arepa , in the south was te omeka , in the north was piriwiritua , and in the east was hamuera . these names represented the four seats that maori were allowed to vote for . eruera tirikatene won southern maori as a ratana candidate in a 1932 by election . toko ratana won western maori as a ratana candidate in 1935 election . paraire karaka paikea and tiaki omana as ratana endorsed labour candidates won northern maori in 1938 and eastern maori in 1943 respectively . te mangai is spirit , and his kaupapa was the spiritual laws , which were supported and endorsed by his chosen people—the morehu . the morehu determined that they should support and endorse rātana . the right was given by ihoa ( jehovah ) . piriwiritua carried the kaupapa , which was to address the sicknesses of the land , the rātana movement . he needed maori to be united for the treaty to become entrenched into law . from the treaty comes the laws of man : two people but one land . image : ratana pa 11.jpg thumb 250px right te temepara tapu o ihoa at rātana pā , 2012 in 1924 a group including rātana journeyed to europe to unsuccessfully present a petition to george v and the league of nations on land confiscations and the treaty of waitangi . later trips were made to the u.s . and canada . these trips were not without controversy . the new zealand government acted to prevent the petition being presented to the monarch , and the visit to japan on the way back from europe created allegations of disloyalty and of flying the japanese flag over the church settlement of rātana pā . when the rātana temple ( te temepara tapu o ihoa ( the holy temple of jehovah ) ) which ratana saw as embodying in its architecture deep biblical truths ( especially the two magnificent bell towers ) was opened on 25 january 1928 by japanese bishop juji nakada ( with whom ratana and party had stayed in 1924 ) , rātana declared his spiritual work was complete and church apostles and officers would take on the work . he now turned more to political work for maori in new zealand . calling himself piri wiri tua ( the campaigner ) , he called the four seats in parliament reserved for māori the koata ( quarters ) of his body . this term is from the maori language and was applied to each of the four new zealand maori seats and to the rātana movement members of parliament ( mp ) who held them . koata ( political movement ) . as early as 1923 , rātana had declared an interest in party politics , and his eldest son haami tokouru rātana had stood for the western maori electorate as an independent candidate . now rātana was determined to capture the māori electorates to give a voice for his movement . in january 1928 , rātana called himself piri wiri tua and called on four followers to be the quarters of his body and rule the land . the '' first cut '' was paraire karaka paikea in the north , haami tokouru rātana in the west , pita moko in the east , and eruera tirikatene in the south . moko was later replaced by tiaki omana , in the '' second cut '' . the covenant signed by the men promised they would not rest , and their wives separately agreed that they would go barefoot and in rags to represent the rātana movement . all four went on to capture the maori seats between 1932 and 1943 . rātana candidates stood in the 1928 and 1931 general elections and in the 1930 by-election in western maori following the death of maui pomare , but they did not succeed . the first rātana movement mp was eruera tirikatene , elected in a by-election for southern maori in june 1932 . he was followed by haami tokouru rātana ( known as toko ) in western maori in the 1935 general election . in the 1938 election , the third māori electorate of northern maori was captured by paraire karaka paikea , and the last ( eastern maori ) was won by tiaki omana in the 1943 election . the rātana independent members of parliament were the first to represent a political party in which most party members were māori . major aims of the movement were statutory recognition of the treaty of waitangi , righting the confiscation grievances of the māori people , and equality in social welfare for māori . alliance with the labour party . following the formation of the first labour government in 1935 , the two rātana mps agreed to vote with labour . this alliance was formalised with the rātana movement joining the labour party in a meeting between rātana and prime minister michael savage on 22 april 1936 . the prime minister was given four symbolic gifts : a potato , a broken gold watch , a pounamu hei-tiki , and a huia feather . the potato represented loss of māori land and means of sustenance , the broken watch represented the broken promises of the treaty of waitangi , and the pounamu represented the mana of the māori people . if savage could restore these three , he would earn the right to wear the huia feather to signify his chiefly status . the gifts were regarded as so precious they were buried with savage at his state funeral in 1940 . the four māori electorates were held by rātana-affiliated members of labour for decades : until 1963 for the eastern maori electorate , 1980 for northern maori , and 1996 for western and southern maori electorates . rātana movement members of parliament have included tapihana paraire paikea , haami tokouru rātana , matiu rātana , iriaka rātana , koro wētere , paraone reweti , matiu rata , and whetu tirikatene-sullivan . mita ririnui , who was a list mp as of 2006 and who held the māori seat of waiariki from 1999 to 2005 , is a rātana minister . importance in new zealand politics . 250px in both the parliaments of 1946–1948 and of 1957–1960 , the formation of a labour government depended on the votes of the rātana movement members . not all labour party māori mps have been members of the rātana church , but the alliance with rātana allowed labour to hold on to all four māori electorates from the 1940s until 1996 . politicians usually attend the ratana marae to take part in celebrations marking t.w . ratana 's birthday . church leaders . tahupotiki wiremu rātana ( 1925–1939 ) haami tokouru rātana ( 1939–1944 ) matiu rātana ( 1944–1950 ) puhi o aotea ratahi ( 1950–1966 ) maata '' te reo '' hura ( 1966–1991 ) raniera te aou hou rātana ( 1991–1998 ) harerangi meihana ( 1998– )