Paula Yates

early life . born on 24 april 1959 '' paula yates '' . the telegraph ( 18 september 2000 ) . retrieved 3 october 2020 . in colwyn bay , wales , to english parents , yates was brought up in a show business family . her mother was elaine smith , a former showgirl actress and writer of erotic novels from blackpool , who used the stage name heller toren . up until 1997 , yates believed her biological father to be jess yates , who hosted the itv religious programme stars on sunday . jess yates and elaine smith were married from 1958 to 1975 . jess yates was 19 years older than his wife , and their marriage was unconventional . yates described her childhood as lonely and isolated ; her mother , she claimed , was absent for much of her upbringing . she attended a village primary school , rydal penrhos , and ysgol aberconwy . the yates family ran the deganwy castle hotel for a time , before moving to a house near conwy . after the break-up of her parents ' marriage in 1975 , yates lived mostly with her mother despite having a closer relationship with her father , and also had periods in malta and mallorca where she was a pupil at bellver international college , before returning to britain . career . in 1979 , yates began her career as a music journalist with a column called '' natural blonde '' in the record mirror , shortly after posing for penthouse magazine . she first came to prominence in the 1980s , as co-presenter ( with jools holland ) of the channel 4 pop music programme the tube . she also appeared alongside her friend jennifer saunders in 1987 for a spoof 'mockumentary ' on bananarama . in 1982 , she released a version of the nancy sinatra hit song '' these boots are made for walkin ' '' . after the birth of her daughters , yates wrote two books on motherhood . yates continued with her rock journalism , in addition to being presenter of the cutting-edge music show the tube . she became most notorious for her '' on the bed '' interviews on the show the big breakfast , produced by her husband , bob geldof . . personal life . yates met geldof in the early days of the boomtown rats . they became a couple in 1976 when she flew to paris to surprise him while the band was playing there . their first daughter , fifi trixibelle , was born on 31 march 1983 , fifi trixibelle geldof imdb listing named fifi after geldof 's aunt fifi , and trixibelle because yates wanted a belle in the family . after ten years together , they married on 31 august 1986 in las vegas , with simon le bon of duran duran acting as best man . the couple then had two more daughters , peaches geldof on 13 march 1989 , and pixie geldof on 17 september 1990 . yates first met michael hutchence in a 1985 interview on channel 4 's rock magazine programme the tube . during this appearance on the tube , yates was reportedly asked to leave hutchence alone by the road manager of inxs when she walked up to him and said , '' i 'm going to have that boy . '' yates was unmoved and began to show up at inxs gigs everywhere for the next few years , even bringing her daughter ( fifi geldof ) . yates maintained irregular contact with hutchence during the intervening nine years and their affair had been under way for some months before their big breakfast interview in october 1994 . in february 1995 , yates left geldof . geldof and yates divorced in may 1996 . yates 's daughter with hutchence , heavenly hiraani tiger lily hutchence ( known as 'tiger ' ) was born on 22 july 1996 . on 22 november 1997 , hutchence was found dead in a hotel room in sydney , and the official verdict into his death said that he committed suicide . yates wrote in her police statement that hutchence was '' frightened and could n't stand a minute more without his baby . '' during their phone conversations on the morning of his suicide , he had said , '' i do n't know how i 'll live without tiger . '' yates also wrote that geldof had threatened them repeatedly with , '' do n't forget , i am above the law '' . yates became distraught , refusing to accept the coroner 's verdict of suicide and insisting that it was a case of auto-erotic asphyxiation . she eventually sought psychiatry treatment . in december 1997 , a few weeks after hutchence 's death and while yates was fighting for custody of tiger , yates suffered another blow when a dna test result confirmed tabloid media reports that jess yates , who had died in april 1993 , was not yates 's biological father . a paternity test proved that the talent show host hughie green , who had died six months before hutchence , was her biological father . in june 1998 , geldof won full custody of the couple 's three daughters after yates attempted suicide . she met kingsley o'keke during her stay in treatment , but the pair broke up after a six-week romance . o'keke later sold his story to a tabloid newspaper . . death . on 17 september 2000 , on pixie 's 10th birthday , yates died at her home in notting hill at the age of 41 of a opioid overdose . the coroner ruled that it was not a suicide , but a result of '' foolish and incautious '' behaviour . yates was discovered in the presence of her then-four-year-old daughter , tiger . a friend disclosed during the inquest that yates had not taken illegal drugs for nearly two years , and the coroner , paul knapman , concluded that though the amount yates had taken would not have killed an addict , as '' an unsophisticated taker of heroin '' yates had no tolerance to the drug . soon after yates 's death , geldof assumed foster custody of tiger lily so that she could be brought up with her three older half-sisters , fifi , peaches and pixie . her aunt , tina hutchence , the sister of michael hutchence , was denied permission by the judge to apply for tiger lily to live with her in california . in 2007 , geldof adopted tiger lily and changed her surname to geldof . as of 2019 , tiger 's legal name is heavenly hiraani tiger lily hutchence geldof . on 7 april 2014 , yates 's second-oldest daughter , peaches , also died of a heroin overdose , aged 25 . one day before her death , she uploaded a picture to her instagram of herself as a young girl and her mother under the caption '' me and my mum . '' . books . paula yates was the author of several books , including : rock stars in their underpants ( 1980 ) a tail of two kitties ( 1983 ) blondes ( 1983 ) sex with paula yates ( 1986 ) the fun starts here ( 1990 ) the fun do n't stop : loads of rip-roaring activities for you and your toddler ( 1991 ) and the fun goes on : a practical guide to playing and learning with your pre-school child ( 1991 ) village people ( 1993 ) . references . works cited . . external links . national portrait gallery holdings with sitter paula yates