Bernard Lord

early life . lord was born in roberval , quebec , the youngest of four children of marie-émilie ( morin ) , a former teacher , and ralph frank lord , a pilot . his father was anglophone and his mother was francophone , and he was raised in a bilingual household in moncton , new brunswick , where he spent the rest of his early life . trichur , rita ( december 22 , 2012 ) . '' a wireless speaker with a political calling '' , the globe and mail , p . b3 . after graduating from high school , he earned a bachelor 's degree in social science with a major in economics , as well as a bachelor 's degree in common law , from the université de moncton . while lord attended the université de moncton , he had some electoral success being elected the president of the université de moncton student union ( feecum ) and served for three terms . lord married his wife diane in 1990 ; they have two children . one of his brothers , roger lord , is an internationally acclaimed concert pianist . election as leader . in 1997 , lord was elected leader of the pc party of new brunswick and then became the mla for the district of moncton east in a 1998 by-election . much of lord 's success came from the countless months he spent meeting party members across new brunswick , and in part because he was also flawlessly bilingual and able to draw a strong concentration of support in the moncton area , one of four cities in which members could vote . lord defeated norman betts , who was the perceived frontrunner , as well as margaret-ann blaney , who , with betts , would go on to serve in lord 's cabinet and cleveland allaby . premier . on june 7 , 1999 , lord 's pc party overcame an early deficit in the polls to pull out a landslide victory in the provincial general election , winning 44 of 55 seats in the legislature . at just 33 years of age , lord ( on june 21 ) became one of the youngest premiers in canadian history . using the successful tactics from the 1994 united states elections of republican congressional leader , newt gingrich , lord was elected on his '' 200 days of change '' platform , consisting of 20 promises of things he would do within the first 200 days of his mandate if he were elected premier . in 2002 , lord delivered what the media and others hailed as an electrifying speech at the national progressive conservative party of canada convention in edmonton , alberta , which started speculation that he might run for a job in federal politics , specifically , replacing joe clark as federal pc leader . a very strong movement of influential conservatives erupted after edmonton to lobby the premier into federal politics , everything from a website to a coast to coast organization shawn berry , '' tory youth leader in p.e.i . backs lord for federal leadership '' . nb telegraph-journal , a1 , september 9th 2002 was being set up to woo the premier to leave fredericton and head to ottawa . a short time later , lord shot down any notions that that might happen , choosing instead to remain focused on provincial politics and the 2003 new brunswick election . that election was not kind to lord , with the liberals using the issue of rising car insurance to catch the pc party off guard . the party was n't able to regain its footing until relatively late in the campaign , and barely held on to a majority over the liberal party led by shawn graham . lord was again courted for federal politics in late 2003 , when the pc party of canada and the canadian alliance merged into the conservative party of canada . in the end , lord opted to stay in new brunswick due to his young family and the fact that his departure would force his party into a minority government situation . in 2004 , lord 's government came under fire over a variety of unpopular stances , most notably changes to health care . these included closures of beds at hospitals in miramichi and dalhousie , and consolidation of four hospitals in the upper saint john river valley into one . the liberals , under leader shawn graham , led in public opinion polls as of the summer of 2004 and maintained that lead ; however , lord remained the most favoured leader to be premier of new brunswick for a time . on august 10 , 2006 , lord announced that on august 19 , he would be calling an election for september 18 . this election call was in response to the loss of a caucus member , peter mesheau , who announced his intention to resign to work in the private sector . the resignation would have caused lord to slip into a minority government and the subsequent by-election could have flipped the balance of power to the liberals . lord decided that instead of a by-election deciding the fate of his government , he would let the people choose . some observers saw lord 's election call as a bold move considering his popularity numbers had only recently started to surpass the liberal leader . in the head to head campaign that followed , lord lost the government to the liberals , who took 29 seats to 26 for the conservatives . the tories did manage to win the popular vote , besting the liberals 47.5 % to 47.2 % . lord left the premier 's office on october 3 , 2006 . on december 13 , 2006 , lord announced that he was resigning as pc leader , further he said he would resign his legislative seat in moncton east on january 31 , 2007 . . post-premier . after leaving politics , lord took a position as senior counsel with the law firm mccarthy tetrault , splitting time between their offices in montreal and ottawa while continuing to maintain his residence in fredericton . on december 3 , 2007 , lord was appointed by prime minister stephen harper as head of the bilingualism committee . he reviewed canada 's official language laws , and he made suggestions where improvements can be made . pm.gc.ca : '' prime minister announces bernard lord will lead cross-canada official languages consultations '' in december 2007 , lord was named as the president of the 2009 chl memorial cup selection-committee . in october 2008 , it was announced that lord would be appointed as president and ceo of the canadian wireless telecommunications association , a lobbyist group that represents cellular , messaging , mobile radio , fixed wireless and mobile satellite carriers , as well as companies that develop and produce products and services for the industry . lord was named in 2013 to the board of ontario 's public utility provider , ontario power generation , and he was appointed as board chair in march 2014 by the government of kathleen wynne . he was tasked with cutting expenses after an auditor 's report that came out late in the term of his predecessor , jake epp , criticized the agency for cost overruns and excessive executive wages and bonuses . on june 15 , 2016 , lord was named as the chief executive officer of medavie blue cross effective september 1 , 2016 . . honours . in 2007 , he was awarded the order of new brunswick grand officier de l'ordre de la pleiade ( la francophonie ) queen 's counsel , 2011