Closed-end fund

availability . closed-end funds are typically traded on the major global stock exchanges . in the united states the new york stock exchange is dominant although the nasdaq is in competition ; in the united kingdom the london stock exchange 's main market is home to the mainstream funds although aim supports many small funds especially the venture capital trusts ; in canada , the toronto stock exchange lists many closed-end funds . like their better-known open-ended cousins , closed-end funds are usually sponsored by a fund management company which will control how the fund is invested . they begin by soliciting money from investors in an initial offering , which may be public or limited . the investors are given shares corresponding to their initial investment . the fund managers pool the money and purchase securities or other assets . what exactly the fund manager can invest in depends on the fund 's charter , prospectus and the applicable government regulations . some funds invest in stocks , others in bonds , and some in very specific things ( for instance , tax-exempt bonds issued by the state of florida in the usa ) . distinguishing features . a closed-end fund differs from an open-end mutual fund in that : it is closed to new capital after it begins operating . its shares ( typically ) trade on stock exchanges rather than being redeemed directly by the fund . its shares can therefore be traded at any time during market opening hours . an open-end fund can usually be traded only at a time of day specified by the managers , and the dealing price will usually not be known in advance . it usually trades at a premium or discount to its net asset value . an open-end fund trades at its net asset value ( to which sales charges may be added ; and adjustments may be made for e.g . the frictional costs of purchasing or selling the underlying investments ) . in the united states , a closed-end company can own unlisted securities . another distinguishing feature of a closed-end fund is the common use of leverage ( gearing ) . in doing so , the fund manager hopes to earn a higher return with this additional invested capital . this additional capital can be raised by issuing auction rate securities , preferred stock , long-term debt , or reverse-repurchase agreements . a fund raises its initial equity through the sale of common stock . the amount of equity that belongs to a share of common stock is known as its net asset value ( nav ) . as the fund operates , nav increases with investment gains and decreases with losses . these gains or losses are amplified when the fund employs leverage . the amount of leverage a fund uses is expressed as a percent of total fund assets ( e.g . if it has a 25 % leverage ratio , that means that for each 100 of total assets under management , 75 is equity and 25 is debt ) . leverage affects both fund income , and capital gains and losses . the additional investments bought with the leverage increases gross income proportionally to the leverage used , but net income is reduced by the interest rate paid to lenders or preferred shareholders . however , capital gains or losses flow directly to the nav of the common stock . this increases the volatility of the nav of a leveraged fund , compared with its un-leveraged peer . for example , if an un-leveraged fund had a 10 % gain or loss , its 25 % leveraged peer would have an about 13.3 % gain or loss . if instead , the fund had a 40 % leverage ratio , the gain or loss would be about 16.7 % . in some cases , fund managers charge management fees based on the total managed assets of the fund , which includes leverage . this further reduces the income benefit of leverage to the common shareholder , while retaining the additional volatility . leveraged funds can seem to have higher expense ratios—a common way that investors compare funds—than their non-leveraged peers . some investment analysts advocate that expenses attributable to the use of leverage should be considered a reduction of investment income rather than an expense , and publish adjusted ratios . long-term debt arrangements and reverse repurchase agreements are two additional ways to raise additional capital for the fund . funds may use a combination of leveraging tactics or each individually . however , it is more common for the fund to use only one leveraging technique . since stock in closed-end funds is traded like other stock , an investor trading them will pay a brokerage commission similar to that paid when trading other stocks ( as opposed to commissions on open-ended mutual funds , where the commission will vary based on the share class chosen and the method of purchasing the fund ) . in other words , closed-end funds typically do not have sales-based share classes with different commission rates and annual fees . the main exception is loan-participation funds . initial offering . like a company going public , a closed-end fund will have an initial public offering of its shares at which it will sell , say , 10 million shares for 10 each . that will raise 100 million for the fund manager to invest . at that point , the fund 's 10 million shares will begin to trade on a secondary market , typically the nyse or the amex for american closed-end funds . any investor who subsequently wishes to buy or sell fund shares will do so on the secondary market . in normal circumstances , closed-end funds do not redeem their own shares . nor , typically , do they sell more shares after the ipo ( although they may issue preferred stock , in essence taking out a loan secured by the portfolio ) . in general , closed-end funds can not issue securities for services or property other than cash or securities . lemke , lins and smith , regulation of investment companies , §9.051 ( matthew bender , 2014 ed . ) . in india an investor can invest in closed-end funds only when it is offered as a new fund offering ( nfo ) . once the nfo period is over , new investors can not enter nor can the existing ones exit . . exchange-traded . closed-end fund shares are traded anytime between market opening and closing hours at whatever price the market will support . it may be possible to deal using advanced types of orders such as limit orders and stop orders . this is in contrast to some open-end funds which are only available for buying and selling at the close of business each day , at the calculated nav , and for which orders must be placed in advance , before the nav is known , and by simple buy or sell orders . some funds require that orders be placed hours or days in advance , in order to simplify their administration , make it easier to match buyers with sellers , and eliminate the possibility of arbitrage ( for example if the fund holds investments which are traded in other time zones ) . closed-end funds are traded on exchanges , and in that respect they are like exchange-traded funds ( etfs ) , but there are important differences between these two kinds of security . the price of a closed-end fund is completely determined by the valuation of the market , and this price often diverges substantially from the nav of the fund assets . in contrast , the market price of an etf trades in a narrow range very close to its net asset value , because the structure of etfs allows major market participants to redeem shares of an etf for a '' basket '' of the fund 's underlying assets . this feature could in theory lead to potential arbitrage profits if the market price of the etf were to diverge substantially from its nav . the market prices of closed-end funds are often 10 % to 20 % higher or lower than their nav , while the market price of an etf is typically within 1 % of its nav . since the market downturn of late 2008 , a number of fixed income etfs have traded at premiums of roughly 2 % to 3 % above their nav . discounts and premiums . as they are exchange-traded , the price of cefs will be different from the nav - an effect known as the closed-end fund puzzle . accessed on 31/10/11 in particular , fund shares often trade at what look to be irrational prices because secondary market prices are often very much out of line with underlying portfolio values . a cef can trade at a premium at some times , and a discount at other times . comparison with open-ended funds . with open-end funds , the value is precisely equal to the nav . so investing 1000 into the fund means buying shares that lay claim to 1000 worth of underlying assets ( apart from sales charges and the fund 's investment costs ) . but buying a closed-end fund trading at a premium might mean buying 900 worth of assets for 1000 . some advantages of closed-end funds over their open-ended cousins are financial . cefs do not have to deal with the expense of creating and redeeming shares , they tend to keep less cash in their portfolio , and they need not worry about market fluctuations to maintain their '' performance record '' . so if a stock drops irrationally , the closed-end fund may snap up a bargain , while open-ended funds might sell too early . also , if there is a market panic , investors may sell a particular stock or segment of stocks en masse . faced with a wave of sell orders and needing to raise money for redemptions , the manager of an open-ended fund may be forced to sell stocks he would rather keep , and keep stocks he would rather sell , because of liquidity concerns ( selling too much of any one stock causes the price to drop disproportionately ) . thus it may become overweight in the shares of lower perceived quality or underperforming companies for which there is little demand . but an investor pulling out of a closed-end fund must sell it on the market to another buyer , so the manager need not sell any of the underlying stock . the cef 's price will likely drop more than the market does ( severely punishing those who sell during the panic ) , but it is more likely to make a recovery when/if the stock ( s ) rebound . because a closed-end fund is listed on the market , it must obey certain rules , such as filing reports with the listing authority and holding annual stockholder meetings . examples . among the biggest , long-running cefs are : adams express company ( nyse : adx ) witan investment trust plc ( lse : wtan ) scottish mortgage investment trust ( lse : smt ) tri-continental corporation ( nyse : ty ) gabelli equity trust ( nyse : gab ) . see also . collective investment schemes for generic information . investment trust a united kingdom closed-ended collective investment mutual funds for united states information . listed investment company for australia . references . external links . sec – us sec description of investment company types aica - the active investment company alliance - trade association for listed/non-listed cefs / bdcs cefa – the closed-end fund association ( us ) cefa – the closed-end fund association member website ( us ) investment company institute – the us association of investment companies aitc – the uk association of investment trust companies australian stock exchange site – australian lics