1973 in sports

alpine skiing . alpine skiing world cup men 's overall season champion : gustav thöni , italy women 's overall season champion : annemarie pröll , austria . american football . january 14 − super bowl vii : the miami dolphins ( afc ) won 14–7 over the washington redskins ( nfc ) to complete the only perfect ( unbeaten and untied ) season in the history of the nfl location : los angeles memorial coliseum attendance : 90,182 mvp : jake scott , fs ( miami ) rose bowl ( 1972 season ) : the usc trojans won 42-17 over the ohio state buckeyes to win college football national championship o.j . simpson becomes the first player in nfl history to rush for more than 2,000 yards in a single season . association football . brazil – palmeiras wins the campeonato brasileiro fa cup – sunderland wins 1–0 over leeds united 1 january 1973 , edinburgh , scotland , edinburgh derby between hearts and hibernian played at tynecastle ends in a 7–0 victory for hibernian . philadelphia atoms defeat toronto metros to win the north american soccer league championship in their inaugural season . australian rules football . victorian football league richmond wins the 77th vfl premiership defeating carlton 16.20 ( 116 ) to 12.14 ( 86 ) in the grand final . brownlow medal awarded to keith greig ( north melbourne ) south australian national football league : 1 september : south adelaide kick only 1.4 ( 10 ) against sturt 's 14.24 ( 108 ) in the rain at unley oval , with the panthers ’ sole goal being the first score of the match after five minutes . it was the lowest score in the sa ( n ) fl between 1914 and 2003 . 29 september : glenelg 21.11 ( 137 ) defeat north adelaide 19.16 ( 130 ) for their second sanfl premiership in what is often regarded as the great-ever sanfl grand final 1973 wanfl season 29 september : subiaco break the longest premiership drought in wanfl history , beating west perth 10.12 ( 72 ) to 6.4 ( 40 ) for their first premiership since 1924 . bandy . 1973 bandy world championship is held in the soviet union and won by . baseball . 18 january – orlando cepeda signs with the boston red sox , making him the first player signed by a team specifically to be a designated hitter . the american league uses the designated hitter rule for the first time . ron blomberg is the first player to bat as a dh . world series – oakland athletics won 4 games to 3 over the new york mets . basketball . ncaa division i men 's basketball championship – ucla wins 87–66 over memphis state . bill walton of ucla scored 44 points in the championship game . nba finals – new york knicks won 4 games to 1 over the los angeles lakers aba finals – indiana pacers defeat kentucky colonels , 4 games to 3 . boxing . 22 january – george foreman beats joe frazier by a knockout in two rounds to lift the world 's heavyweight championship from frazier . it is hbo boxing 's first telecast . canadian football . grey cup – ottawa rough riders win 22–18 over the edmonton eskimos vanier cup – st . mary 's huskies win 14–6 over the mcgill redmen . cycling . tour de france – luis ocaña of spain uci road world championships – men 's road race – felice gimondi , of italy . dogsled racing . iditarod trail sled dog race – dick wilmarth won with lead dog : hotfoot . field hockey . men 's world cup in amstelveen , netherlands won by the netherlands . figure skating . world figure skating championships – men 's champion : ondrej nepela , czechoslovakia ladies ' champion : karen magnussen , canada pair skating champions : irina rodnina & alexander zaitsev , soviet union ice dancing champions : lyudmila pakhomova & alexandr gorshkov , soviet union . golf . men 's professional masters tournament – tommy aaron u.s . open – johnny miller – miller 's final round of 63 was a new major championship record which has been equaled several times since , it was n't until 2017 when that record was broken by branden grace at the open championship when he shot a 62 . british open – tom weiskopf pga championship – jack nicklaus pga tour money leader – jack nicklaus – 308,362 ryder cup – united states won 19–13 over great britain & ireland in team golf . men 's amateur british amateur – dick siderowf u.s . amateur – craig stadler women 's professional lpga championship – mary mills u.s . women 's open – susie berning lpga tour money leader – kathy whitworth – 82,864 . harness racing . united states pacing triple crown races – cane pace – smog little brown jug – melvin 's woe messenger stakes – valiant bret united states trotting triple crown races – hambletonian – flirth yonkers trot kentucky futurity australian inter dominion harness racing championship – pacers : hondo grattan trotters : precocious . horse racing . secretariat , ridden by jockey ron turcotte , becomes the first horse in 25 years to win all three united states triple crown races steeplechases cheltenham gold cup – the dikler grand national – red rum flat races australia – melbourne cup – gala supreme canada – queen 's plate – royal chocolate france – prix de l'arc de triomphe – rheingold ireland – irish derby stakes – weavers ' hall english triple crown races : 2,000 guineas stakes – mon fils the derby – morston st . leger stakes – peleid united states triple crown races : kentucky derby – secretariat preakness stakes – secretariat belmont stakes – secretariat . ice hockey . art ross trophy as the nhl 's leading scorer during the regular season : phil esposito , boston bruins hart memorial trophy for the nhl 's most valuable player : bobby clarke – philadelphia flyers stanley cup – montreal canadiens defeat the chicago blackhawks 4 games to 2 world hockey association – avco cup – new england whalers defeat the winnipeg jets 4 games to 1 for first league championship . world hockey championship – men 's champion : soviet union defeated sweden ncaa men 's ice hockey championship – university of wisconsin–madison badgers defeat university of denver pioneers 4–2 in boston . lacrosse . ncaa division i men 's championship – university of maryland terrapins defeated johns hopkins university bluejays 10-9 in 2 overtimes . motorsport . radiosport . seventh amateur radio direction finding european championship held in komló , hungary . first arrl 10 meter contest held in december . rugby league . captain morgan trophy 1973 new zealand rugby league season 1973 nswrfl season 1972–73 northern rugby football league season / 1973–74 northern rugby football league season . rugby union . 79th six nations championship series is a five-way tie with all teams winning two matches each . snooker . world snooker championship – ray reardon beats eddie charlton 38–32 . swimming . the first fina world championships held in belgrade , yugoslavia . tennis . grand slam in tennis men 's results : australian open – john newcombe french open – ilie năstase wimbledon – jan kodeš us open – john newcombe grand slam in tennis women 's results : australian open – margaret court french open – margaret court wimbledon – billie jean king us open – margaret court davis cup – australia wins 5–0 over the united states in world tennis . men and women players receive equal prize money at the us open 20 september – in the famed battle of the sexes at houston 's astrodome – billie jean king beat bobby riggs in 3straight sets . water polo . 1973 fina men 's world water polo championship held in belgrade and won by hungary . general sporting events . second all-africa games held in lagos , nigeria seventh summer universiade held in moscow , soviet union . awards . associated press male athlete of the year – o.j . simpson , national football league associated press female athlete of the year – billie jean king , tennis . references .