Hoverfly

description . the size of hoverflies varies depending on the species . some , such as members of the genus baccha , are small , elongated , and slender , while others , such as members of criorhina , are large , hairy , and yellow and black . as members of the diptera , all hoverflies have a single functional pair of wings ( the hind wings are reduced to halteres ) . many species are brightly colored , with spots , stripes , and bands of yellow or brown covering their bodies . due to this coloring , they are often mistaken for wasps or bees ; they exhibit batesian mimicry . despite this , hoverflies are harmless to humans . drone flies , e . tenax , are an example of a species of hoverfly who exhibit batesian mimicry . with a few exceptions , hoverflies are distinguished from other flies by having a spurious vein , located parallel to their fourth longitudinal wing vein . adults feed mainly on nectar and pollen . many species also hover around flowers , lending to their common name . bee flies of the family bombyliidae often mimic hymenoptera and hover around flowers , as well , rendering some bombyliid species hard to tell apart from syrphidae at first glance . hoverflies can , nevertheless , be distinguished in the field by anatomical features such as : the legs and mouthparts of hoverflies are usually not particularly long and thin ( some bombyliids have a long and needle-like proboscis , many have legs that are noticeably longer and thinner than in similar-sized syrphids ) their facial cuticle often has prominent bulges and/or beak- to knob-like projections ( most bee flies have an evenly curved or sloping face ) . the wings are often clear or have smooth gradients of tinting , and their veins merge posteriorly into a '' false edge '' that runs parallel to the wing 's true rear edge and extends along half or more of the wing length ( bombyliid wings lack a '' false rear edge '' and often have large dark areas with sharp boundaries , or complex patterns of spots ) . their abdomens and thoraces often have glossy cuticular body surfaces , abdominal colors are usually mainly due to cuticular pigments ( bee flies are usually very hairy , their abdominal colors are almost always due to pigmentation of hairs and not the underlying cuticle ) . reproduction and life cycle . unlike adults , the maggots of hoverflies feed on a variety of foods ; some are saprotrophs , eating decaying plant or animal matter , while others are insectivores , eating aphids , thrips , and other plant-sucking insects . predatory species are beneficial to farmers and gardeners , as aphids destroy crops , and hoverfly maggots are often used in biological control . this includes one of the most common widespread hoverfly species , syritta pipiens , whose larvae feed on aphids . certain species , such as lampetia equestris or eumerus tuberculatus , are responsible for pollination . an example of a well-known hoverfly maggot is the rat-tailed maggot , of the drone fly , eristalis tenax . it has a breathing siphon at its rear end , giving it its name . the species lives in stagnant water , such as sewage and lagoons . the maggots also have a commercial use , and are sometimes sold for ice fishing . dictionary of ichthyology ; brian w . coad and don e . mcallister at ww.briancoad.com on extremely rare occasions , hoverfly larvae have been known to cause accidental myiasis in humans . this occurs when the larvae are accidentally ingested from contaminated food . . evolution . the oldest known fossils of crown group syrphidae are from the eocene aged florissant formation , green river formation and baltic amber . however , the genus prosyrphus from the late cretaceous ( cenomanian ) aged burmese amber appears to represent a stem-group to the family . . distribution and habitat . hoverflies are a cosmopolitan family found in most biomes , except extreme deserts , tundra at extremely high latitudes , and antarctica . certain species are more common in certain areas than others ; for example , the american hoverfly , eupeodes americanus , is common in the nearctic realm , and the common hoverfly , melangyna viridiceps , is common in the australasian realm . about 6,000 species and 200 genera are in the family . while some hoverfly larvae are aquatic and are often found in stagnant water , those of species that prey upon aphids and other plant parasites are usually terrestrial , residing on leaves . adults are often found near flowers , their principal food source being nectar and pollen . some species are found in more unusual locations ; for example , members of the genus volucella can be found in bumblebee nests , while members of microdon are myrmecophiles , found in ant or termite nests . others can be found in decomposing vegetation . pollination . hoverflies are important pollinators of flowering plants in many ecosystems worldwide . syrphid flies are frequent flower visitors to a wide range of wild plants , as well as agricultural crops , and are often considered the second-most important group of pollinators after wild bees . however , relatively little research into fly pollinators has been conducted compared with bee species . bees are thought to be able to carry a greater volume of pollen on their bodies , but flies may be able to compensate for this by making a greater number of flower visits . like many pollinator groups , syrphid flies range from species that take a generalist approach to foraging by visiting a wide range of plant species through those that specialize in a narrow range of plants . although hoverflies are often considered mainly nonselective pollinators , some hoverflies species are highly selective and carry pollen from one plant species . cheilosia albitarsis is thought to only visit ranunculus repens . specific flower preferences differ among species , but syrphid fly species have repeatedly been shown to prefer white- and yellow-coloured flowers . nonvisual flower cues such as olfactory cues also help these flies to find flowers , especially those that are not yellow . many syrphid fly species have short , unspecialized mouth parts and tend to feed on flowers that are more open as the nectar and pollen can be easily accessed . also , a number of fascinating interactions occur between orchids and hoverflies . the orchid species epipactis veratrifolia mimics alarm pheromones of aphids which attracts pollinating hoverflies . another plant , the slipper orchid in southwest china , also achieves pollination by deceit by exploiting the innate yellow color preference of syrphids . . case study – new zealand . more than 40 species of syrphid flies are found in new zealand in a variety of habitats , including agricultural fields and alpine zones . two hoverfly species in switzerland are being investigated as potential biological control agents of hawkweeds in new zealand . native hoverfly species melanostoma fasciatum and melangyna novaezelandiae are common on agricultural fields in new zealand . coriander and tansy leaf are particularly attractive to many species of adults , which feed on their pollen . in organic paddocks , hoverflies were found to feed on an average of three and a maximum of six different pollens . m . fasciatum has a short proboscis , which restricts it to obtaining nectar from disk flowers . syrphid flies are also common visitors to flowers in alpine zones in new zealand . native flies ( allograpta and platycheirus ) in alpine zones show preferences for flower species based on their colour in alpine zones ; syrphid flies consistently choose yellow flowers over white regardless of species . however , syrphid flies are not as effective pollinators of alpine herb species as native solitary bees . . systematics . relationship with humans . larvae of many hoverfly species prey upon pest insects , including aphids and leafhoppers , which spread some diseases such as curly top , so they are seen in biocontrol as a natural means of reducing the levels of pests . gardeners , therefore , sometimes use companion plants to attract hoverflies . those reputed to do so include alyssum spp . , iberis umbellata , statice , buckwheat , chamomile , parsley , and yarrow . fredrik sjöberg 's book the fly trap concerns his enthusiasm for hoverflies on the island of runmarö in the baltic sea . the island is a hotspot for hoverflies and other insects ; sjöberg has collected 58 species of butterflies there , and ( in seven years of hunting ) 202 species of hoverflies , including 180 in his garden . . identification guides . stubbs , a.e . and falk , s.j . ( 2002 ) british hoverflies an illustrated identification guide . pub . 1983 with 469 pages , 12 col plates , b/w illus . british entomological and natural history society . 276 species are described with extensive keys to aid identification . it displays 190 species on colour plates . 2nd edition , pub . 2002 , includes new british species and name changes . it includes european species likely to appear in britain . additional black and white plates illustrate the male genitalia of the difficult genera cheilosia and sphaerophoria . vockeroth , j.r . a revision of the genera of the syrphini ( diptera : syrphidae ) memoirs of the entomological society of canada , no . 62:1-176 . keys subfamilies , tribes and genera on a world basis and under regions . van veen , m.p . ( 2004 ) '' hoverflies of northwest europe , identification keys to the syrphidae '' . knnv publishing , utrecht . regional lists . list of hoverfly species of great britain list of flower flies of new zealand list of the flower flies of north america . references . external links . hoverfly – index to scholarly articles all about hoverflies a website about dutch hoverflies hoverfly recording scheme – uk dipterists forum syrphidae species in europe and africa , with photos , range maps , checklists and literature diptera.info picture gallery . species lists . nearctic at nearctica.com west palaearctic including russia at faunaeur.org australasian/oceanian at bishopmuseum.org