Foss Dyke

route . the foss dyke joins the river trent at torksey . a branch leaves the main channel , passes under the a156 bridge , and immediately enters torksey lock , which is the only lock on the canal . it has six sets of gates , three sets facing lincoln , and three facing the river , which is tidal at this point , and so its level can be higher than the level of the canal . the gates allow the lock to be used at most states of the tide . a steel footbridge crosses the lock near the road , and both the footbridge and the lock are grade ii listed structures . the canal runs to the east , and then turns south , passing to the east of fenton and kettlethorpe . soon it is joined by the a57 , and turns east again . the road runs along the south bank , until saxilby is reached . ordnance survey , 1:50,000 map at saxilby , the manchester , sheffield and lincolnshire railway crosses the waterway , to run along the south bank all the way to lincoln . there was once a swing bridge beyond the railway bridge , which was removed in 1937 , although the foundations are still obvious . access over the canal at this point was reinstated in 1987 , when a footbridge was installed . the original bridge was manufactured in 1884 , and crossed the great northern railway at newark-on-trent for 103 years before it was put to a new use . the a57 crosses to the north bank soon after the railway bridge . the river till flows south and under the road to join the foss dyke , after which a new marina has been built at burton meadows . because the construction has breached the flood bank , it is protected by a flood gate . the canal crosses under the a46 on the outskirts of lincoln , and then over a drainage ditch , to run alongside the carholme golf club . the final bridge carries the b1273 brayford way over the canal as it enters brayford pool , once a busy commercial wharf in the centre of lincoln , but now a marina with the university of lincoln on the southern bank . the unnavigable river witham flows into the bottom end of the pool , and becomes the witham navigation when it flows out on its way to boston . . history . the foss dyke was long thought to have been constructed by the romans around 120 . pointers include an inscribed statuette of the god mars found in it at torksey , which is now in the british museum , but there is a lack of consensus among authors writing on the subject . the first record of it comes from symeon of durham , whose historia regium notes the following for the year 1121 : the canal is about long . it possibly follows an earlier line of the trent , which emptied into the wash prior to the end of the last ice age . together with the car dyke it formed part an important transport route from peterborough to york . it was reputedly used by the danes when they invaded england and by the normans to carry stone to build lincoln cathedral in the 11th century . following king henry i 's work discussed above , the canal deteriorated , until by the 17th century it was virtually impassable . katherine swynford , who lived in the area , is credited with having organized a protest to repair it , in 1375 . king james i transferred ownership to the corporation of lincoln . in 1671 , during the reign of charles ii , lincoln obtained an act which authorised improvements from boston to the trent . work was carried out on the foss dyke , but only the first of the witham , from brayford pool to high bridge , received attention . the work was carried out by samuel fortrey , a man with previous experience of draining the fens . he was required to bear some of the cost himself , in exchange for some of the profits . the work was completed in 1672 , and included a navigable sluice or lock at torksey , which had first been proposed by simon hill in 1632 . warehouses and wharves were built at brayford pool , but by 1717 , passage from torksey was again difficult . coal traffic averaged per year , bound for lincoln , but tolls were insufficient to finance repairs . the city of lincoln did not have the expertise to manage the waterway , and so leased it to richard ellison in 1741 , who had experience with the river don navigation . he paid £75 per year for a navigation which generated around £100 in toll receipts . he dredged it to provide of depth , and re-opened it in 1744 . two years later , the tolls were £595 , and continued to increase . under his son , the tolls were £2,367 in 1789 , while his grandson collected £5,159 in 1811 . navigation through lincoln and on to boston was hampered by the shallow draught available under the medieval high bridge , just below brayford pool . sir joseph banks , when proposing the construction of the horncastle canal knew that the problem needed addressing , and william jessop was commissioned to survey the witham and the foss dyke in 1791 , with particular reference to the junction between the two . he proposed a bypass to the south of the city , using the sincil dyke , or excavating the channel beneath the bridge , although he recognized that this solution was not ideal , due to the narrow width of the bridge hole , and the lack of a towing path through it . however , the city was keen to keep trade within its limits , and improvements to high bridge , which were completed by 1795 , were authorised as part of the horncastle canal act of 1792 . the witham navigation was soon needing repairs , and the commissioners asked john rennie for advice in 1802 . his report , published in 1803 , included recommendations to demolish high bridge so that a waterway wide could be built under a new bridge , and improvements to the foss dyke costing £12,260 . neither action was followed . the canal was difficult to maintain , because much of it ran through sand and quicksand . the situation was more complex , because it had been leased to the ellisons for three generations , and richard ellison iii was not keen to spend any money on it . income from tolls would have more than covered repairs , but there was little that could be done . a challenge to the legality of his lease was considered in the 1820s , but was not thought likely to succeed . he died in 1827 , and humphrey sibthorp , his niece 's husband , who was a proprietor on the river witham , took over responsibility for it . he asked isambard brunel to survey it , and although he did so in 1833 , no improvements were made . railways arrived in lincoln in 1848 . the wakefield , lincoln and boston railway had negotiated with the proprietors of the witham and foss dyke in 1846 , to guarantee them an income by leasing the waterways . richard ellison iv had agreed a lease for 894 years , at £9,570 per year , based on the average profit for the previous three years plus 5 per cent . the line was built by the great northern railway ( gnr ) , who took over the leases already agreed . the witham was affected more than the foss dyke , as the line followed its bank from lincoln to boston . the manchester , sheffield and lincolnshire railway ( mslr ) passed through saxilby to lincoln a little later . combined figures for the two waterways showed a drop in goods carried of two-thirds between 1848 and 1868 . cargoes of coal and wool were the first to transfer to the railways . however , the mslr , by then renamed the great central railway ( gcr ) , built a dock and transshipment warehouse at brayford in 1897 . the foss dyke carried in 1905 , and an average of between 1913 and 1917 , most of it general goods and agricultural produce . a series of takeovers and mergers resulted in its ownership changing several times , before it was nationalised , and became the responsibility of the british waterways board in 1948 . although its date of construction is unknown , the london and north eastern railway ( successors of both the gnr and the gcr ) built a small pumping station to the west of torksey lock . it contained a steam-powered beam engine , which was probably made by davy brothers of sheffield , and drove a double-acting bucket pump . it was situated close to the land drainage pumping station , which pumps into the tidal part of the foss dyke , draining some of low-lying land to the south of torksey . its job was to maintain the water levels in the navigation , but it was demolished in 1936 , and no traces of it remain . a new pumping station at a similar location was commissioned in 1974 . this forms part of the trent–witham–ancholme transfer scheme . a pumping station at short ferry on barlings eau pumps water through an pipeline to toft newton reservoir , on the upper reaches of the ancholme . the water is used to maintain the flow and level of the ancholme during the summer months and other dry periods . when there is insufficient water in barlings eau and the witham , torksey pumping station transfers water from the trent through a short pipeline into foss dyke . from there it flows for along the waterway to brayford pool and so into the witham , to supplement the water available for pumping . restoration . unlike many waterways , the foss dyke never closed , and continued to carry grain traffic until 1972 . however , the demise of general commercial traffic had left brayford pool in the centre of lincoln as a derelict body of water , full of debris such as rubbish and sunken boats . the local chamber of commerce sought to address the issue in 1965 , and formed brayford improvement committee . advice was sought from the inland waterways association , and eventually the brayford mere trust was constituted . they removed the wrecks from the pool , and have rebuilt the site , so that it offers facilities for visiting pleasure craft , now the major users of the waterway . a former lift bridge , which crossed the western entrance to the pool , was replaced in august 1996 by a new concrete flyover , as part of the redevelopment of the south bank , which included the opening of the university in the same year . to the west of lincoln , a new marina has been constructed at burton waters , as part of a housing development . construction of a footpath and cycleway beside the canal from lincoln to saxilby has been carried out by the lincolnshire waterways partnership , a joint initiative by lincolnshire , the environment agency and british waterways . for much of its route it runs along the top of the northern floodbank , but drops down to a new crossing of the a57 road and a new bridge across the river till near saxilby . the route was officially opened on 26 july 2011 . extending the path to torksey is a longer term aim . . points of interest . see also . canals of the united kingdom history of the british canal system list of roman canals . bibliography . . references . external links .