Maid Marian and Her Merry Men

plot elements . many of the plots featured , included or revolved around spoofing particular things , including films such as jurassic park and it came from outer space , and television programmes , including the crystal maze and the long-running televised fundraisers children in need and comic relief . there were also frequent references to other robin hood incarnations , most notably itv 's robin of sherwood ( and in particular that series ' clannad soundtrack is lampooned in the episode '' the whitish knight '' ) and the contemporary film adaptation robin hood : prince of thieves . the latter actually features howard lew lewis ( rabies ) among its cast - hence his doubly witty line in the episode '' they came from outer space , '' which episode also passingly satirises the film for casting the lead with an american accent ( kevin costner ) . main characters . protagonists . maid marian ( kate lonergan ) : a passionate and idealistic freedom fighter and de facto leader of the '' merry men '' ( though this is never recognised by anyone outside the group ) . she is by far the most intelligent of the gang , but often lets her idealism blind her to the realities of situations , most notably the rest of the gang 's incompetence . she also is n't very patient , but will always defend anyone who she feels is wronged . she often has mud in her hair . robin of kensington ( adam morris ) : an extremely vain tailor and a yuppie . came to be seen as the leader of marian 's gang by accident , and remains so because he sees it as a cool image to cultivate . his most significant contribution to the outlaws was nevertheless to insist that they all wear green '' to co-ordinate with the trees '' . barrington ( danny john-jules ) : the resident rasta merry man , who would often rap during the episodes ' songs . he sometimes acts as a kind of semi-omniscient narrator ( in a similar manner to alan-a-dale in more traditional versions ) . little ron ( mike edmonds ) : a very short , aggressive and violent merry man . known to face the wrong way in ambushes . a parody of little john . rabies ( howard lew lewis ) : another merry man , very strong , and very stupid , although with his heart in the right place . antagonists . king john ( forbes collins , who also played john 's brother , richard i of england , in the episode '' the whitish knight '' , and queen eleanor , guy of gisbourne 's mother , the joke being that all royals look alike ) : a violent and unstable monarch . he is narcissistic and insecure , and becomes very angry at the thought of being unpopular with the peasants . his brother , who was thought to be a wise ruler who would bring england back to a golden age , is identical . the sheriff of nottingham ( tony robinson ) : a devious plotter obsessed with collecting taxes . given the first name 'arnold ' in the episode '' keeping mum '' , ostensibly only to produce a later pun . while he is dedicated to stopping marian , they sometimes find themselves in sympathy with each other regarding the complete stupidity of everyone else . gary and graeme ( mark billingham and david lloyd ) : guards of the king 's castle , and the sheriff 's henchmen . they 're '' bestest mates '' and extremely affable , but in the tradition of clever villains with idiot sidekicks , not very clever most of the time . they are often very friendly with the merry men , who tend to return the sentiment - except when gary and graeme are doing what they 're paid for . graeme has a brother called kevin . graeme tends to enjoy things like torture and teasing the villagers more than gary does , though gary will challenge graeme for the chance to do executions . gary is shown as completely devoted to his job , to the point of obsession ; when sacked , he refused to leave the sheriff 's side and carried on as though he had not been fired . guy of gisbourne ( ramsay gilderdale ) : king john 's wet-behind-the-ears nephew , who has come to live with him at the insistence of his mother , the king 's older sister , queen eleanor . a village idiot , and mummy 's boy , guy is widely held in contempt by the heroes and villains alike . he is aged 27 but acts like a 4-year-old , has an imaginary friend and occasionally dresses in a tutu . king john does not want to be saddled with his nephew , but obeys his sister 's orders out of fear that she will '' do that nasty thing with the pencils '' to him , just as she used to when they were children . '' rotten '' rose scargill ( siobhan fogarty ) : rival to maid marian and both marian 's best friend and worst enemy . she 's robin hood 's biggest fan . secondary characters . gladys and snooker ( hilary mason and robin chandler ) : two villagers of worksop . gladys is an elderly ( and extremely stupid ) peasant , fond of telling stories and legends , and hanging out with barrington . she is worksop 's '' wise old woman '' , but admits to being underqualified . snooker ( who also gets called '' stinker '' ) is another extremely stupid peasant , who appears to be about 40 . named ostensibly for a single joke , his greatest claim to fame is apparently inventing a game involving a long stick , a table , and a number of coloured balls . together , they serve as the mouthpieces of the village , but are generally no more intelligent than the peasants they speak for . nettle ( kerry potter ) : a young female villager , who is definitely the equal of marian in intelligence . chickweed ( karen salt ) : a very young peasant girl . hayley ( carly britnell ) , another young intelligent female villager . she had a comet named after her after she vomited as it shot across the sky . ( '' hayley 's vomit '' . ) the beast of bolsover : a reference to the nickname of dennis skinner , then the labour party member of parliament for bolsover and member of the socialist campaign group . ( tony robinson is a well-known labour party supporter , and was elected to the labour party 's national executive committee in 2000 ) . eric '' the newt '' teasel : an archer , appearing in the episode '' robert the incredible chicken '' . from epping forest . cowpat : a pretty young village woman . she is a friend of rose , and one of robin 's many fans . she appeared in '' rotten rose ( part one ) '' . clough : a tall , red haired and bearded village man , from nottingham forest and sometimes seen about worksop . participated in the archery contest . the character name is a reference to brian clough , manager of english football team nottingham forest at the time . nigel pargetter : semi-regularly appearing but uncredited peasant ( actually martin wills o'toole ) who fell victim to a number of misfortunes , including being punched in the head several times , being crushed by a radiator during bloopy , and having a large cucumber lodged in his head by robin 's lookalike . named after a well-known character in long-running bbc radio 4 soap opera , the archers . '' little girl '' ( kellie bright ) : often found close to gladys in the first series . '' mad prisoner '' ( christopher nichol ) . music . the memorable music and songs for maid marian and her merry men were composed by nick russell-pavier and david chilton . each episode contained either one or two songs , which were mostly originals but were sometimes parodies . according to commentaries on the dvds , the actors were frequently dubbed in their singing voices , both by themselves and ( more often ) by professional singers in post-filming studio sessions . gary , graeme , guy and barrington almost always sing their own songs , however . series one : 1989 . how the band got together : '' mud '' ( sung by barrington ) robert the incredible chicken : '' the story so far '' ( sung by barrington ) ; '' the sheriff 's excuse '' ( sung by barrington ) a game called john : '' pancake day '' ( sung by barrington ) the miracle of st charlene : '' got ta get across '' ( sung by barrington , marian , robin , rabies and little ron ) the sharp end of a cow : '' popular '' ( sung by the peasants ) the whitish knight : '' the white knight / the whitish knight '' ( a take-off on the theme song to the tv series robin of sherwood ) . series two : 1990 . the beast of bolsover : '' ambush '' ( sung by barrington ) the worksop egg fairy : '' what is happening here ? '' ( sung by barrington ) ; '' bop for an egg '' ( sung by barrington ) little brown noses : '' against the law '' ( sung by barrington ) ; '' colin 's release song '' ( a take-off on band aid ; sung by marian , robin , barrington and rabies ) rabies in love : '' rabies in love '' ; '' wedding today '' ( sung by nettle and the peasants ) rotten rose ( part one ) : '' robin hood '' ( a take-off on bananarama ; sung by rose , gladys and cowpat ) rotten rose ( part two ) : '' rotten rose '' ( sung by barrington ) . series three : 1993 . the big baby : '' father bloopy '' ( sung by the sheriff , gary , graeme and the peasants ) ; '' do n't worry 'bout the pain '' ( sung by barrington , marian , robin and the peasants ) driving ambition : '' boring '' ( sung by barrington and the peasants - note line by marian '' stop miming '' ) ; '' take action '' ( sung by barrington , robin and rabies ) ; '' a friend like rose '' ( sung by marian and barrington ) keeping mum : '' pierced '' ( sung by the sheriff and the peasants ) ; '' call the dentist '' ( a take-off on the ghostbusters theme song ; sung by barrington and the peasants ) ; '' hurrah for the state of luxembourg '' ( sung a cappella by gary and graeme ) they came from outer space : '' only child '' ( sung by marian , barrington , rabies and little ron ) ; '' naked to the visible eye '' ( sung by barrington and the peasants ) robin and the beansprout : '' i wish they 'd put their heads outside '' ( sung by barrington , marian and little ron ) ; '' chop suey '' ( a take-off on elvis presley 's '' in the ghetto '' ; sung by robin ) the great mud harvest : '' white suit '' ( sung by robin and the peasants ) . christmas special : 1993 . maid marian and much the mini-mart manager 's son : '' much the mini-mart manager 's son '' ( sung by barrington ) ; '' deception '' ( a take-off on michael jackson ; sung by barrington and one of the show 's regular session musicians , appearing on-screen for the first time - note the line 'it 's not him that 's singing . ' ) . series four : 1994 . tunnel vision : '' double trouble '' ( sung by barrington and robin ) bouncy sheriff : '' friends or foes ? '' ( sung by rose , marian , the sheriff , gary , graeme and the peasants ) raining forks : '' vacation '' ( sung by the sheriff , king john , robin , barrington , gary , graeme and the peasants ) ; '' high forks night '' ( a take-off on the rolling stones ; sung by barrington , robin and guy ) the wise woman of worksop : '' here comes pixie paul '' ( a take-off on paul mccartney ; sung by rabies , barrington and little ron ) robin the bad : '' thicky stupid '' ( sung by robin ) ; '' a selection of amusing things '' ( sung by the sheriff and the peasants ) the nice sumatran : '' the king of england is a pig '' ( sung by the coronation choir ) ; '' party people party '' ( a take-off on lionel richie ; sung by barrington ) ; '' take my heart '' ( a take-off on frank sinatra ; sung by snooker ) voyage to the bottom of the forest : '' you 're so lazy '' ( sung by marian , robin , barrington and little ron ) ; '' the story of workflop '' ( sung by the sheriff , gary and graeme ) . awards . maid marian and her merry men won several awards , including the 1990 bafta for best children 's programme ( entertainment/drama ) . bafta award winners of 1990 at imdb . retrieved 17 december 2007 it was also nominated for the same award in 1991 , losing to press gang . bafta award winners - and nominees - of 1991 at imdb . retrieved 17 december 2007 the programme also won at least one award from the royal television society , as well as the prestigious '' prix jeunesse variety award '' at the international children 's programme festival in munich . locations . the programme was set in the very real nottinghamshire town of worksop , which , along with mansfield , is one of the two closest modern day towns to the major oak , although the whole show was shot in somerset . the outside scenes were filmed in woods near minehead at a place called porlock and the castle scenes were filmed in cleeve abbey in somerset . the beach at porlock features in some of the episodes including the whitish knight . episodes . video and dvd releases . video . series 1 was released in four volumes of 3 episodes each ( a couple of slight variations in cover design exist for each ) . in keeping with other bbc video releases of the time , such as blackadder , each volume was named after an episode : '' maid marian and her merry men : how the band got together '' featured episodes 1-3 ( bbcv 4424 ) . released : 5 november 1990 '' maid marian and her merry men : the miracle of st charlene '' featured episodes 4-6 ( bbcv 4425 ) . released : 5 november 1990 '' maid marian and her merry men re release : how the band got together '' featured episodes 1-3 ( bbcv 4424 ) . released : 8 february 1993 '' maid marian and her merry men re release : the miracle of st charlene '' featured episodes 4-6 ( bbcv 4425 ) . released : 8 february 1993 subsequent series were not released on video . dvd ( region 2 ) . the dvds were released after much online campaigning and a petition setup by fans circa 2002 . some of the signatures included cast members , although proof of this is now lost . series 1 - released on 20 march 2006 . eureka video press release for series 1 dvd . retrieved 5 march 2006 series 2 - released on 24 july 2006 . series 3 - released on 23 october 2006 . ( includes the 1993 christmas special '' much the mini-mart manager 's son '' ) series 4 - released on 19 february 2007 . series 1-4 box set - released on 22 september 2008 . comic books . written ( and adapted ) by tony robinson , illustrated by paul cemmick . published by the bbc and bbc books ltd . between 1989 and 1992 . maid marian and her merry men : how the band got together ( bbc books ( 2 november 1989 ) maid marian and her merry men : robert the incredible chicken ( bbc books ( 2 november 1989 ) maid marian and her merry men : the whitish knight ( bbc books ( 1 october 1990 ) maid marian and her merry men : the beast of bolsover ( bbc books ( 1 october 1990 ) maid marian and her merry men : the worksop egg fairy ( bbc books ( 3 october 1991 ) maid marian and her merry men : rabies in love ( bbc books ( 3 october 1991 ) maid marian and her merry men : it came from outer space ( bbc books ( 26 november 1992 ) maid marian and her merry men : driving ambition and keeping mum ( bbc books ( 26 november 1992 ) . other materials . the programme was adapted for a stage musical by tony robinson , mark billingham and david lloyd . it toured several british theatres . the theatre programme for the production at the bristol old vic featured new artwork by paul cemmick , showing tony robinson dreaming the production after being hit in the head by a football . the script for this production was later published in book format by longman literature in 1992 , as part of a series of bbc tv ( and radio ) plays to be used in classrooms at key stage 3 level ( roughly ages 11–14 ) . the book includes support material and activities for this purpose . maid marian and her merry men ( bbc/longman ( 6 august 1992 ) . see also . when things were rotten , 1975 sitcom based upon robin hood , created by mel brooks blackadder , 1983–1989 historical bbc sitcom featuring tony robinson as baldrick . references . external links . maid marian and her merry men at classickidstv.co.uk tony robinson - interviews in sherwood - about the maid marian series the hideout , largest maid marian site on the internet barrington 's programme guide maid marian fansite