Cyberpunk (role-playing game)

setting . cyberpunk exists within its own fictional timeline , which splits from the real world in 1990 . the timeline has been extended with each major edition of the game , from the first edition set in 2013 to cyberpunk red set in 2045 . major events have included the collapse of the global superpowers , and the rise of megacorporations that fight amongst themselves for dominance . food blights have caused disastrous famines , and by the late 1990s the middle east is a radioactive desert . bioengineering , against a backdrop of warfare , has resulted in the rapid development of cybernetic prosthetics and direct human-machine interfaces . with the lack of government and police , casual violence is endemic . many also suffer from '' technoshock '' , an inability to cope with a world of synthetic muscle tissue , organic circuits and designer drugs . the main location for cyberpunk is the fictional night city , situated on the west coast of the united states between los angeles and san francisco . with a population of five million people , it presents a stratified society of gang warfare , corporate rivalries and political machinations in which the players have to survive . . system . the rules of cyberpunk are built on r . talsorian 's interlock system . a core game mechanic is the concept of difficulty values , used to gauge whether a player succeeds or fails at any given task . a player takes the value of their most appropriate character attribute , adds the values of any relevant skills or modifiers , and then finally adds the value of a ten-sided die roll . in order to succeed , they must beat the difficulty value assigned to the task by the gamemaster . cyberpunk was one of the first tabletop games to use this concept . . character creation . as cyberpunks , the players embrace body modification , cybertech and bioengineering . they live by three tenets : style over substance . attitude is everything . always take it to the edge . ( break ) the rules . there are ten key roles , each with their own special abilities . these include charismatic musicians ( 'rockerboys ' ) , bodyguards and assassins ( 'solos ' ) , computer hackers ( 'netrunners ' ) , road warriors ( 'nomads ' ) , street experts ( 'fixers ' ) , investigative journalists and reporters ( 'medias ' ) , mechanics ( 'techs ' or 'techies ' ) , doctors ( 'medtechs ' ) , corporate executives , and police officers . a choice of rules are provided for character creation , either by assigning points to purchase skills or by rolling d10s for a more random outcome . a system called lifepath is provided to develop each character further , by generating goals , motivations , and events from their past . finally , they gain money , cyberware , weapons and other equipment , including fashion and lifestyle goods . further character development is skill-based rather than level-based ; for successful play , players are awarded points to be spent on improving their characters ' skill sets . combat . the combat system is called friday night firefight ( fnff ) , and emphasizes lethality . unlike other role-playing systems where characters amass higher hit points as they progress , allowing them to survive higher amounts of combat damage , the amount of damage a character can sustain in cyberpunk does not generally increase as the character develops . each round , characters are permitted to take one move action and one other action . there are rules governing the use of autofire , armor , and cover , including specific instructions for using people as shields . alternative ammunition types for weapons are available , for example a shotgun can be fired with buckshot instead of slugs . character skills can be used to improve both ranged and melee combat . additionally , there are rules covering other forms of damage such as drowning and asphyxiation , electrocution , and being set on fire . netrunning . there are also rules for cybernetic hacking , called netrunning . when characters '' jack in '' , they can interpret the net in several different ways , including as a classic dungeons & dragons maze , or perhaps as a star-filled galaxy . netrunners engage in the virtual world with interface plugs , cyberdecks , and the interface special ability . cyberdecks include slots to contain programs , selected ahead of time by netrunners to assist in tasks such as evasion , decryption and detection . combat and other actions in the net are fast , taking place second-by-second , as opposed to three second combat rounds in the physical world . the destruction of the global net in later editions of cyberpunk turns the attention of netrunners to local private networks . the effect on gameplay is that netrunning is no longer a remote activity ; netrunners are embedded within their team and , with equipment such as augmented reality , can alternate their actions between both physical and virtual space . closer integration with other activities was a game design choice to ensure all characters have a part to play during a hacking scene . . empathy and cyberpsychosis . the acquisition of cyberware—cyberweapons , cyberoptics and other implants—carries a humanity cost . every ten points of humanity cost causes the loss of an empathy point , the character attribute that measures how well they relate to other people . an empathy level of zero represents a complete loss of humanity , a state known as cyberpsychosis ; in the case of players , their character becomes a non-player character controlled by the gamemaster . . history . cyberpunk was designed by mike pondsmith as an attempt to replicate the gritty realism of 1980s cyberpunk science fiction . in particular , walter jon williams ' novel hardwired was an inspiration , and williams helped playtest the game . another key influence was the film blade runner . many also assume william gibson 's neuromancer was an influence ; however , pondsmith did not read the novel until a later date . other sources included the film streets of fire and the anime bubblegum crisis . first edition . the original version of cyberpunk was published in 1988 by r . talsorian games . the game components of the boxed set consist of a 44-page handbook , a 38-page sourcebook , a 20-page combat book , four pages of game aids and two ten-sided dice . a number of rules supplements were subsequently published in 1989 : rockerboy ( sourcebook for the rockerboy character class ) solo of fortune ( sourcebook for the solo character class ) hardwired , based on the walter jon williams novel near orbit , with rules for space travel this edition of the game retrospectively became known as cyberpunk 2013 . second edition : cyberpunk 2020 . in 1990 , r . talsorian games released the second edition of the game , titled cyberpunk 2020 , which featured updated rules for combat , netrunning , and character generation . the game 's timeline was also retconned to accommodate the german reunification in 1990 . it was released as a boxed set that contained a 222-page softcover book , and a 24-page reference guide and adventure . r . talsorian games released two revised versions : cyberpunk 2020 version 2.00 ( 1992 ) , and cyberpunk 2020 version 2.01 ( 1993 ) . a total of 28 rules supplements and sourcebooks , and 6 adventures were also published by r . talsorian games between 1993 and 1996 . in addition , atlas games published twelve adventures under license between 1991 and 1993 . six novels set in the cyberpunk 2020 world were also published between 1993 and 1994 . dream pod 9 released night 's edge in 1992 , taking the cyberpunk 2020 setting and adding a horror theme , including vampires and werewolves . dream pod 9 published ten other supplements and adventures in this setting between 1992 and 1995 . an alternate world sourcebook , cybergeneration , was published in 1993 ; it centers around teenagers with unusual , superhuman skills gained from a nanotech virus epidemic . the first version of cybergeneration required the cyberpunk 2020 rulebook , but a second version became a standalone game . third edition : cyberpunk v3.0 . cyberpunk v3.0 is set in the 2030s , and was published in 2005 . it takes cyberpunk into a transhumanist setting in the aftermath of a fourth corporate war . the global net has been corrupted and rendered unusable , as has much hardcopied data , throwing human history into doubt . six new subcultures have emerged , known as altcults ; one such group are the edgerunners , successors to the cyberpunks of previous editions . the third edition uses the fuzion game system , rather than interlock . both the change of setting and the artwork within the book received negative criticism . from 2007 to 2008 , two sourcebooks were published to accompany this edition . fourth edition : cyberpunk red . the fourth edition of cyberpunk , titled cyberpunk red , is set in 2045 , following the events of cyberpunk 2020 and serving as a prequel to the video game cyberpunk 2077 . the game is set after a fourth corporate war ; however , the events differ from cyberpunk v3.0 , which is considered to be a separate timeline . a simplified boxed set , the cyberpunk red jumpstart kit , was initially scheduled for release at gen con in august 2019 , with the core rulebook to be released alongside it . however , though the jumpstart kit was released as scheduled , the core rulebook 's release was tentatively delayed until june 2020 to allow r . talsorian games to work with cd projekt red to ensure that the lore of cyberpunk red aligned with that of cyberpunk 2077 . in may 2020 , r . talsorian games announced that the release date would be pushed back further due to the covid-19 pandemic , and that they hoped to release the core rulebook by '' summer 's end ; '' however , a status update published in september 2020 stated the game would be released '' when it 's ready '' and would not meet the end of summer goal . instead , a digital edition of the game was released november 14th , 2020 , and the physical rulebook on november 19th , 2020 . . other media . collectible card games . two different , independent collectible card games have been licensed and produced based on the cyberpunk setting . the first , called netrunner , was designed by richard garfield , and released by wizards of the coast in 1996 ( the game has since been re-released as android : netrunner but is no longer associated with the fictional cyberpunk universe ) . the second was called cyberpunk ccg , released in 2003 , designed by peter wacks and published by social games . miniature game . combat zone is a tabletop miniature wargame by r . talsorian games and monster fight club , due to be released in 2021 . . video games . in 2007 , mayhem studio released the 2d platformer cyberpunk : arasaka 's plot for the j2me platform . in 2020 , cd projekt red , the developer of the witcher series , released an open world action-adventure game cyberpunk 2077 . . reception . stewart wieck reviewed cyberpunk for white wolf 14 , rating it 3 overall , and stated that '' cyberpunk is a fine game set in an environment which is very conducive to role-playing . '' in the may 1989 edition of games international ( issue 5 ) , paul mason found the rules disorganized and lacked an index . he also found lots of typos , '' the sign of a rushed production . '' although mason found the concept behind the game '' quite appealing , '' he thought that the combat system , which was supposed to be an improvement on the usual non-descriptive hit point system , was too constricted by data tables to be very descriptive . he concluded by giving this game an average rating of 3 out of 5 , saying , '' all in all , cyberpunk does the job . if you want to run a game in this genre and you want a single source of rules and background , then this game will be adequate to the task . it does n't contain any ideas radically new to rolegaming , however , and so wo n't be much use to anyone else except inveterate collectors . '' in the september 1989 edition of dragon ( issue 149 ) , jim bambra liked the production values of the original edition , but found many typos in the various books as well as a missing encounter table . bambra found the setting '' does a superb job of capturing the flavor and atmosphere of a disturbingly plausible and realistic future . the development and presentation of the net is stunning and can be used as a basis for countless numbers of adventures . no other game has succeeded in portraying computer hacking in such a vibrant and absorbing way . '' he concluded that this was not for everyone : '' gamers brought up on heroic-fantasy or shiny science-fiction games may find the gritty realism of the cyberpunk game not to their liking . to decide if this is the game for you , read a few of the cyberpunk style novels . if you like them , don ’ t waste any time — rush out and buy the cyberpunk game . welcome to life on the edge . '' in the september 1992 edition of dragon ( issue 185 ) , allen varney found cyberpunk 2020 just as stylish as its first-edition predecessor , but he found even more typos in this edition than in the first edition . varney liked the new streamlined combat system , but criticized the duality of modern combat , where '' unarmored characters become pools of blood in 10 seconds of combat , but those in flak armor can shrug off submachine-gun fire . '' varney also felt that the netrunning system was much improved , calling the rules system '' elegant and original . '' varney thought the second edition 's biggest flaw was lack of an index , but he also criticized the dichotomy of a system where '' you can break into eurobank and embezzle five million bucks , but you better pay your phone bill on time or you ’ re in big trouble . '' he accused the game of being '' in the curious position of advocating rebellion , but only in socially acceptable ways . '' nonetheless , varney concluded that '' the cyberpunk game ’ s second edition surpasses its first edition on every count . with its smooth action , 'pure ' cyberpunk atmosphere , easily accessible setting , and medium-low complexity , this game tops my list as the field 's best route to dark near-future adventure . '' in a 1996 reader poll undertaken by arcane magazine to determine the 50 most popular roleplaying games of all time , cyberpunk was ranked 10th . editor paul pettengale commented : '' cyberpunk was the first of the 'straight ' cyberpunk rpgs , and is still the best . the difference between cyberpunk and other sci-fi is a matter of style and attitude . everything about the cyberpunk game , from the background to the rules system , is designed to create this vital atmosphere . cyberpunk is set in an unforgiving world where betrayal and double-crosses are common , trust is hard to find and paranoia is a useful survival trait . '' . other reviews . challenge 37 ( 1989 ) white wolf 24 ( dec./jan . , 1990 )