1964 in music

specific locations . 1964 in british music 1964 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1964 in country music 1964 in jazz . events . january 1 – top of the pops is broadcast for the first time , on bbc television in the u.k . january 3 – footage of the beatles performing a concert in bournemouth , england is shown on the jack paar show . january 10 – introducing . the beatles , the first album by the beatles to be released in the united states , comes out on chicago 's vee-jay records , preceding capitol records ' release of meet the beatles ! , scheduled for january 20 . january 13 – bob dylan 's the times they are a-changin ' is released on columbia records . january 15 – vee jay records files a lawsuit against capitol records and swan records over manufacturing and distribution rights to beatles albums . on april 9 , capitol records is granted an injunction restraining vee jay records from further manufacturing , distributing or advertising recordings by the beatles . january 18 – the beatles appear on the billboard magazine charts for the first time . january 25 – the late john f . kennedy becomes the first president credited with a top 10 album after dickie goodman releases john f . kennedy : the presidential years 1960–1963 . the following week a second album credited to the late president would also hit the top 10 , giving kennedy two posthumous albums simultaneously in the top 10 . february 1 – indiana governor matthew e . welsh declares the song '' louie louie '' by the kingsmen pornographic . he requests that the indiana broadcasters association ban the record . governor welsh claimed that hearing the song made his '' ears tingle . '' publisher max firetag offers 1,000 to anyone that can find anything '' suggestive '' in the song 's lyrics . february 7 – the beatles arrive in the united states and are greeted by thousands of screaming fans at new york 's kennedy airport . february 9 – the beatles perform on the ed sullivan show , which breaks television ratings records . february 12 – anna moffo collapses onstage at covent garden in the first act of rigoletto , and her part is taken over , after a delay of 45 minutes , by welsh soprano elizabeth vaughan . february 16 – the beatles appear on the ed sullivan show . february 22 – plácido domingo makes his international breakthrough at the première of ginastera 's don rodrigo in new york city . february 23 the beatles appear on the ed sullivan show . joão carlos martins suddenly breaks off a performance in the middle of the second movement of beethoven 's third piano concerto with the city of birmingham symphony orchestra at birmingham town hall due to an attack of appendicitis . march 1 capitol records is bombarded with requests for heavyweight boxing champion muhammad ali 's album , i am the greatest , following clay 's defeat of sonny liston on february 25 and his announcement two days later that he had converted to islam . ( on march 6 would come the announcement that he would adopt the name muhammad ali . ) american premiere of karlheinz stockhausen 's momente , by martina arroyo ( soprano ) , the crane collegiate singers of suny potsdam ( brock mcelheran , chorus master ) , and members of the buffalo philharmonic orchestra ( lukas foss , music director ) , conducted by the composer , in kleinhans music hall in buffalo , new york . march 6 – elvis presley 's 14th motion picture , kissin ' cousins is released to theaters . march 14 – billboard magazine reports that sales of beatles records make up 60 % of the entire singles market . march 16 – disc jockey alan freed is charged with tax evasion . march 21 – italy wins the 9th eurovision song contest , held in the tivoli gardens , copenhagen , with the song '' non ho l'età '' , sung by 16-year-old gigliola cinquetti . march 24 – john lennon 's first book , in his own write is published . march 27 – the beatles occupy the top six spots on the australian pop chart . march 28 – wax likenesses of the beatles are put on display in london 's madame tussauds wax museum . the beatles are the first pop stars to be displayed at the museum . april – drummer keith moon joins the who . april 4 – the beatles occupy all five top positions on billboard 's hot 100 with their singles '' ca n't buy me love '' , '' twist and shout '' , '' she loves you '' , '' i want to hold your hand '' , and '' please please me '' . april 11 – the beatles hold 14 positions on the billboard hot 100 chart . previously , the highest number of concurrent singles by one artist on the hot 100 was nine by elvis presley , december 19 , 1956 . april 16 – the rolling stones release their eponymous début album . may 2 – in the united states , the beatles ' second album climbs to the 1 spot on the lp charts in only its second week of release . may 12 – the 6th annual grammy awards are held in chicago , los angeles and new york . henry mancini wins the most awards with four , including both record of the year and song of the year for the song '' days of wine and roses '' . barbra streisand 's the barbra streisand album wins album of the year , while ward swingle of the swingle singers wins best new artist . may 20 – judy garland makes headlines after a disastrous concert in melbourne , australia june during a performance at the railway , pete townshend of the who accidentally breaks the head of his guitar on the low ceiling above the stage . this incident marks the start of auto-destructive art by destroying guitars and drums on stage . marianne faithfull 's singing career begins with the release of her single '' as tears go by '' written by members of the rolling stones . june 5 – the rolling stones start their first u.s . tour . july 3 – with their new manager peter meaden , the who release their first single '' zoot suit/i 'm the face '' under the name the high numbers in an attempt to appeal to a mod audience . it fails to reach the top 50 and the band reverts to calling themselves the who . july 6 – the beatles ' first film , a hard day 's night , is released . july 10 the album of a hard day 's night is released in the u.k . all tracks are written by lennon and mccartney . more than 300 people are injured in liverpool when a crowd of some 150,000 people welcome the beatles back to their home city . august 2 – the wreckage of the plane piloted by jim reeves is found near brentwood , tennessee , 42 hours after it crashed . there are no survivors . august 8 – bob dylan releases his fourth album , another side of bob dylan . august 17 – indiana university opera theater presents turandot at the new york world 's fair featuring newly retired metropolitan opera soprano margaret harshaw , a member of the voice faculty , in the title role . august 19 – the beatles start their second visit to , and first nationwide tour of , the united states with a concert at the cow palace in daly city , california , before more than 17,000 fans . august 22 – the supremes reach 1 on the billboard hot 100 chart with the first of five successive number one hits , '' where did our love go '' . august 26 – the kinks release their iconic single '' you really got me '' . september 8 – the american premiere of karlheinz stockhausen 's originale at judson hall in new york city is picketed by a group calling themselves action against cultural imperialism . september 16 – shindig ! premieres on abc . september 21 – the china conservatory of music is established in beijing . september 22 – fiddler on the roof opens on broadway . october – dr . robert moog demonstrates his prototype synthesizers . october 19 – simon & garfunkel release their debut album , wednesday morning , 3 a.m . , their first for columbia records , which is a total flop at this time . after release of their second album , sounds of silence , in 1966 , it hits 30 on the billboard charts . october 24 – the rolling stones start their second us tour . october 25 – the rolling stones perform on the ed sullivan show for the first time . october 29 – the t.a.m.i . show is filmed . october 31 – the supremes reach 1 on the billboard hot 100 chart with the second of five successive number one hits , '' baby love '' . november – a deal with u.k . impresario w . h . miller lands the anita kerr quartette on capitol records for north america . december 11 – sam cooke is killed under mysterious circumstances in los angeles , california . shortly thereafter , '' a change is gon na come '' , a song considered by many to be his best , is released . december 19 – the supremes reach 1 on the billboard hot 100 chart with the third of five successive number one hits , '' come see about me '' . december 24 – the beatles gain the christmas number one in the united kingdom for the second year running with i feel fine , which has topped the singles charts for the third week running . the beatles have now had six number ones in the u.k . alone . date unknown dalida is the first star to receive a platinum disc in europe . 11-year-old keith green becomes the youngest person ever to sign a contract with the american society of composers , authors and publishers ( ascap ) after publishing , recording and releasing the song '' the way i used to be '' . the national institute of kathak dance is established in new delhi . sonny and cher begin performing together as '' caesar and cleo '' . bands formed . see : category : musical groups established in 1964 . albums released . january . . compositions . gilbert amy alpha-beth , for flute , oboe , clarinet , bass clarinet , bassoon , and horn cahiers d'épigrammes , for piano eyvin andersen – concerto for violin and orchestra jurriaan andriessen – after the fall , incidental music louis andriessen a flower song ii , for oboe a flower song iii , for cello ittrospezione iii , for two pianos and three instrumental groups , sweet , for alto recorder malcolm arnold pieces ( 5 ) , for violin and piano , op . 84 sinfonietta no . 3 , for orchestra , op . 81 a sunshine overture , for orchestra , op . 83 water music , for winds and percussion , op . 82 milton babbitt ensembles for synthesizer , for four-track tape philomel , for soprano and four-track tape samuel barber chorale for ascension day , for chorus , brass , timpani , and organ ( ad lib . ) night flight , for orchestra , op.19a , luciano berio chemins i on sequenza ii , for harp and orchestra folk songs , for soprano and seven instruments rounds , for voice and harpsichord ( subsequently withdrawn ) traces , for soprano , mezzo-soprano , two actors , chorus , and orchestra ( subsequently withdrawn ) harrison birtwistle entr'actes and sappho fragments , for soprano , flute , oboe , violin , viola , harp , and percussion three movements with fanfares , for chamber orchestra rob du bois deuxième série de rondeaux , for piano four-hands and optional percussion just like a little sonata , for piano pastorale vi , for piano pastorale vii , for alto recorder quartet , for oboe , violin , violin , and cello ( revised version ) benjamin britten cadenza for haydn 's cello concerto in c major suite no . 1 for cello solo , op . 72 symphony for cello and orchestra , op . 68 ( revised version ) earle brown – corroboree , for three or two pianos carlos chávez concerto for four horns and orchestra ( revision ) fuga hagc , for violin , viola , cello , and contrabass resonancias , for orchestra tambuco , for six percussionists aaron copland down a country lane , for school orchestra emblems , for symphonic band music for a great city george crumb – four nocturnes ( night music ii ) for violin and piano luigi dallapiccola parole di san paolo , for mezzo-soprano or boy 's voice and 11 instruments quattro liriche di antonio machado , version for soprano and chamber orchestra mario davidovsky electronic study no . 3 synchronisms no . 2 for flute , clarinet , violin , cello and tape synchronisms no . 3 for cello and electronic sound peter maxwell davies little pieces ( 5 ) , for piano second fantasia on john taverner 's in nomine , for orchestra shakespeare music , for 11 instruments michel decoust – horizon remarquable ( lyrics by rené char ) david diamond the martyr for male choir ( revised version ) '' my papa 's waltz '' , for voice and piano '' prayer '' , for voice and piano string quartet no . 8 symphony no . 5 we two , song cycle , voice and piano andrzej dobrowolski – music for strings and four groups of wind instruments henri dutilleux – métaboles morton feldman the king of denmark , for percussion solo numbers , for flute , horn , trombone , tuba , percussion , celesta , piano , violin , and contrabass piano piece vertical thoughts iv , for piano wolfgang fortner epigramme , for piano minne , cantata for tenor and guitar zyklus , for cello and piano gara garayev symphony no . 3 roberto gerhard the anger of achilles , incidental music macbeth , incidental music alberto ginastera bomarzo cantata , for tenor or baritone , narrator , and chamber orchestra , op . 32 don rodrigo symphony , for soprano and orchestra , op . 31a alexander goehr five poems and an epigram of william blake , for chorus and trumpet , op . 17 pieces ( 3 ) , for piano , op . 18 karel goeyvaerts – stuk voor piano en tape fernando lopes graça canciones ( 4 ) , for voice and chamber orchestra ( revised version ) prelúdio , capricho e galope , for violin and piano ( second revision ) romances , for voice and piano sonnets ( 4 ) , for voice and piano string quartet no . 1 ferde grofé – world 's fair suite alois hába string quartet no . no.15 , op . 95 , in -tones suite , for bass clarinet solo , op . 96 roy harris epilogue to profiles in courage–jfk , for orchestra etudes for pedals , for organ fantasy , for organ , brass , and timpani horn of plenty , for orchestra jubilate for worship ( alleluia ) , for satb choir , brass , piano , and percussion salute to youth , for orchestra sonata , for cello and piano hans werner henze chor gefangener trojer , for chorus and orchestra ( revised version ) divertimenti , for two pianos der frieden , incidental music ein landarzt , opera in one-act ( revised from the 1951 radio opera version ) lieder von einer insel , for chamber chorus , trombone , two cellos , contrabass , chamber organ , percussion , and timpani sinfonische etüden ( 3 ) , for orchestra ( revised version ) tancredi , ballet , for orchestra zwischenspiele ( from der junge lord ) , for orchestra alan hovhaness bagatelles ( 4 ) , for string quartet , op . 30 floating world '' ukiyo '' , for orchestra , op . 209 haiku ( 3 ) , for piano , op . 113 meditation on zeami , for orchestra , op . 207 sonata , for flute solo , op . 118 sonata , for 2 oboes and organ , op . 130 ( revised version ) string quartet no.3 , op . 208 , no . 1 string quartet no . 4 , op . 208 , no . 2 variations and fugue , for orchestra , op . 18 kan ishii – otokonoko ga umareta , for chorus maki ishii – galgenlieder wojciech kilar – diphthongos for mixed choir and orchestra włodzimierz kotoński monochromia , for oboe solo pezzo , for flute and piano wind quintet györgy ligeti – fragment , for ten instruments ( revised version ) david lumsdaine – annotations of auschwitz ( cantata with words by peter porter ) witold lutosławski – string quartet bruno maderna aria da hyperion ' , for soprano , flute , and orchestra dimensioni iv , for flute , picccolo , alto flute , bass flute , and chamber orchestra yoritsune matsudaira chamber concerto , for harpsichord and harp concerto no . 1 for piano and orchestra toshirō mayuzumi campanology olympica , electronic music ongaku no tanjō , for orchestra raihai jokyoku , for orchestra olivier messiaen et exspecto resurrectionem mortuorum , for 34 wind instruments and 3 percussionists prélude , for piano darius milhaud adam , for soprano , 2 tenors , and 2 baritones , op . 411 adieu ( cantata ) , for voice , flute , viola , and harp , op . 410 l'amour chanté , for voice and piano , op . 409 concerto for harpsichord and orchestra , op . 407 septet , for 2 violins , 2 violas , 2 cellos , and contrabass , op . 408 i̇lhan mimaroğlu agony , for magnetic tape le tombeau d'edgar a . poe , for magnetic tape intermezzo , for magnetic tape bowery bum , for magnetic tape makoto moroi pieces ( 5 ) , for shakuhachi toccata , sarabande , and tarantella , for piano and two string orchestras bo nilsson – la bran , for chorus and orchestra luigi nono da un diario italiano , for two choruses la fabbrica illuminata , for mezzo-soprano and tape juan orrego-salas concerto , for winds , op . 53 sonata , for violin and piano , op . 9 ( revised version ) sonata a 4 ( edgewood sonata ) , for flute , oboe , harpsichord , and contrabass , op . 55 luis de pablo – escena , for satb choir , strings , and percussion arvo pärt collage über b-a-c-h , oboe , harpsichord , piano , and strings diagramme , for piano , op.11 musica sillabica , for 12 instruments , op . 12 quintettino , for wind quintet juan carlos paz concreción 1964 , for flute , clarinet , bassoon , horn , trumpet , trombone , and tuba galaxia 64 , for organ música para piano y orquesta krzysztof penderecki cantata in honorem almae matris universitatis iagellonicae sescentos abhinc annos fundatae , for 2 choruses , contrabassoon , brass , percussion , piano , and organ pieśń żałobna ku czci b . rutkowskiego , for chorus sonata , for cello and orchestra vincent persichetti cummings choruses ( 4 ) , for two voices and piano , op . 98 introit , for string orchestra , op . 96 winter cantata ( 11 haiku ) , for four-part women 's choir , flute , and marimba , op . 97 goffredo petrassi concerto for orchestra no . 7 sesto non-senso , for a cappella choir tre per sette , for piccolo ( + flute + alto flute ) , oboe ( + english horn ) , e clarinet ( + clarinet ) walter piston quartet for violin , viola , cello , and piano sextet for strings terry riley – in c hilding rosenberg – sönerna ( cain and abel ) , ballet , for orchestra ahmed adnan saygun – ten etudes on '' aksak '' rhythms , for piano r . murray schafer – statement in blue , for youth orchestra dieter schnebel compositio , for orchestra ( revised version ) concert sans orchestre ( réactions 2 ) , for piano and audience william schuman – amaryllis variations , for string trio dmitri shostakovich string quartet no . 9 in e-flat major , op . 117 string quartet no . 10 in a-flat major , op . 118 karlheinz stockhausen mikrophonie i mixtur for five orchestra groups , sine-wave generators , and ring modulation igor stravinsky elegy for j.f.k . , for baritone or mezzo-soprano and 3 clarinets fanfare for a new theatre , for two trumpets tōru takemitsu blue aurora for toshi ichiyanagi , theatre piece ichinotani monogatari , incidental music natsukashino san francisco , for tape james tenney – music for player piano mikis theodorakis – axion esti virgil thomson autumn , concertino for harp , strings , and percussion auvergnat folk songs ( 5 ) , for satb choir and orchestra the feast of love , for baritone and orchestra pilgrims and pioneers , for band when i survey the bright celestial sphere , for unison voices and organ or piano iannis xenakis eonta , for two trumpets , three trombones , and piano hiketides : les suppliates d'eschyle , for 50 female voices and 10 instruments or orchestra la monte young bowed mortar relays , action work , realization of composition 1960 no . 9 eat ( music for the film by andy warhol ) , for tape haircut ( music for the film by andy warhol ) , for tape kiss ( music for the film by andy warhol ) , for tape prelude to the tortoise , for voices , various instruments , and electronic drones sleep ( music for the film by andy warhol ) , for tape the tortoise droning selected pitches from the holy numbers for the two black tigers , the green tiger and the hermit , for voices , various instruments , and electronic drones the tortoise recalling the drone of the holy numbers as they were revealed in the dreams of the whirlwind and the obsidian gong and illuminated by the sawmill , the green sawtooth ocelot and the high-tension line stepdown transformer , for voices , various instruments , and electronic drones the well-tuned piano joji yuasa – projection esemplastic with white noise , electronic music bernd alois zimmermann monologue , for two pianos un petit rien , for small orchestra . opera . jurriaan andriessen – het zwarte blondje samuel barber – vanessa ( revised version ) benjamin britten – curlew river ( church parable ) alberto ginastera – don rodrigo , op . 31 bruno maderna – hyperion gian carlo menotti – martin 's lie joaquín rodrigo – el hijo fingido ( zarzuela ) robert ward – the lady from colorado . jazz . musical theater . hello , dolly ! ( jerry herman ) – broadway production opened at the st . james theatre on january 16 and ran for 2844 performances what makes sammy run ? – broadway production opened at the 54th street theater on february 27 and ran for 540 performances funny girl ( jule styne and bob merrill ) – broadway production opened at the winter garden theatre on march 26 and ran for 1348 performances anyone can whistle – broadway production opened at the majestic theatre on april 4 and ran for 9 performances fiddler on the roof ( jerry bock and sheldon harnick ) – broadway production opened at the imperial theatre on september 22 and ran for 3242 performances foxy book : ian mclellan hunter & ring lardner , jr . lyrics : johnny mercer music : robert emmett dolan . broadway production opened on february 16 and ran for 72 performances . starring bert lahr , larry blyden , cathryn damon and julienne marie . golden boy – broadway production opened at the majestic theatre on october 20 and ran for 569 performances she loves me – london production opened at the lyric theatre on april 29 and ran for 189 performances maggie may london production opened at the adelphi theatre on september 22 and ran for 501 performances robert and elizabeth – london production opened at the lyric theatre on october 20 and ran for 948 performances little me ( musical ) – london production opened at the cambridge theatre on november 18 and ran for 334 performances salad days ( julian slade ) – london revival . musical films . ayee milan ki bela , with music by shankar jaikishan dosti , starring sanjay khan , with music by laxmikant–pyarelal a hard day 's night starring the beatles mary poppins starring julie andrews , dick van dyke , glynis johns and david tomlinson my fair lady starring rex harrison and audrey hepburn robin and the 7 hoods starring frank sinatra , bing crosby , dean martin and sammy davis , jr . the umbrellas of cherbourg ( les parapluies de cherbourg ) the unsinkable molly brown starring debbie reynolds and harve presnell viva las vegas starring elvis presley and ann-margret . births . january 5 – grant young ( soul asylum ) january 10 – brad roberts ( crash test dummies ) january 11 – torstein aagaard-nilsen , composer january 15 – osmo tapio räihälä , composer january 18 – patrick esposito di napoli , canadian musician ( d . 1994 ) january 19 – ricardo arjona , guatemalan singer-songwriter january 29 – roddy frame ( aztec camera ) january 30 – marcel jacob , swedish rock bassist talisman ( d . 2009 ) january 31 – jeff hanneman , american rock guitarist ( slayer ) ( d . 2013 ) february 1 – jani lane , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( warrant and saints of the underground ) ( d . 2011 ) february 4 – noodles of the offspring february 5 – duff mckagan ( guns n ' roses velvet revolver february 23 john norum , europe guitarist eizo sakamoto , japanese musician , singer and songwriter ( anthem and animetal ) march 1 – clinton gregory , american musician march 11 – vinnie paul , drummer ( pantera , damageplan ) march 18 – rozalla , zambian singer march 19 – yoko kanno , composer march 20 – natacha atlas , belgian singer march 30 – tracy chapman , american singer-songwriter april 5 – princess erika , french singer april 7 – russell crowe , new zealand born , australian actor and singer april 11 – steve azar , american country music singer-songwriter april 12 – amy ray american musician ( indigo girls ) april 16 dave pirner ( soul asylum ) esbjörn svensson swedish jazz pianist ( d . 2008 ) april 17 – maynard james keenan ( tool ) april 18 – bez , british dancer april 24 – augusta read thomas , american composer april 25 andy bell , singer ( erasure ) kenji yamamoto , japanese video game composer april 30 – kent james , american singer-songwriter may 10 mark andre , french-born german composer orna datz , israeli singer , actress and television presenter may 14 – gordon duncan , bagpiper , low-whistle player and composer ( d . 2005 ) may 26 – lenny kravitz , american singer-songwriter , producer and guitarist may 30 wynonna judd , american country singer tom morello , american rock guitarist ( rage against the machine , audioslave , the nightwatchman ) may 31 darryl mcdaniels ( run-d.m.c . ) frost june 3 – kerry king , american rock guitarist ( slayer ) june 6 – jay bentley ( bad religion ) june 10 – jimmy chamberlin , american rock musician ( the smashing pumpkins ) june 13 – robbie merrill ( godsmack ) june 22 dicky barrett ( the mighty mighty bosstones ) mike edwards ( jesus jones ) june 29 – stedman pearson , british r & b singer ( five star ) june 19 – brian vander ark , american singer-songwriter , guitarist and actor ( the verve pipe ) july 9 – courtney love , american singer , songwriter , actress and visual artist ( hole , pagan babies ( band ) ) july 13 brent fischer , american composer , arranger , bandleader , bass guitarist and percussionist paul thorn , american singer-songwriter and guitarist july 17 – craig morgan , american singer-songwriter and guitarist july 19 – masahiko kondō , japanese singer july 20 – chris cornell ( soundgarden & audioslave ) ( d . 2017 ) july 22 – will calhoun ( living colour ) july 23 – nick menza , german drummer and songwriter ( megadeth and memorain ) july 27 – rex brown , american musician and author ( pantera ) july 31 c.c . catch , dutch-born german singer jim corr , irish singer and musician ( the corrs ) august 1 – adam duritz ( counting crows ) august 3 – lucky dube , south african reggae musician ( d . 2007 ) august 5 – adam yauch ( beastie boys ) ( d . 2012 ) august 6 – gary valenciano , filipino musician august 8 – jan josef liefers , german actor , producer , director and musician august 17 – colin james , canadian singer-songwriter september 2 - keanu reeves , canadian-american actor and musician . september 3 – junaid jamshed , pakistani singer-songwriter and guitarist ( vital signs ) ( d . 2016 in music 2016 ) september 7 – eazy-e ( nwa ) ( d . 1995 ) september 11 – victor wooten , american bassist september 23 – koshi inaba , japanese rock singer ( b ' z ) september 26 – nicki french , british singer september 27 – stephan jenkins , american rock singer ( third eye blind ) september 30 trey anastasio , american musician robby takac , goo goo dolls october 4 – francis magalona , filipino rapper ( d . 2009 ) october 5 – dave dededer , presidents of the united states of america october 6 – matthew sweet , rock musician october 7 – sam brown , singer , daughter of joe brown october 10 – neneh cherry , singer october 20 frederic chiu , pianist luciano , reggae singer jim sonefeld ( hootie & the blowfish ) october 22 – toby mckeehan , american musician october 23 – robert trujillo ( metallica ) october 30 – silvano monasterios , pianist and composer november 6 corey glover ( living colour ) greg graffin ( bad religion ) november 12 vic chesnutt , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( brute . and the undertow orchestra ) ( d . 2009 ) david ellefson , american bass player and songwriter ( megadeth , avian and f5 ) november 14 joseph simmons ( run-d.m.c . ) nic dalton ( the lemonheads ) november 16 – diana krall , canadian jazz pianist and singer november 24 – tony rambola ( godsmack ) november 25 – mark lanegan , american rock singer ( screaming trees ) december 8 – teri hatcher , american actress , voice-actress , writer , singer , youtuber , dancer and cheerleader december 9 – paul landers , german rock musician ( rammstein ) december 11 justin currie , scottish singer-songwriter and guitarist ( del amitri and the uncle devil show ) dave schools , american singer-songwriter , bass player and producer ( widespread panic , stockholm syndrome and j mascis + the fog ) cosy sheridan , american singer-songwriter december 13 – hide ( musician ) , japanese rock musician ( d . 1998 ) december 23 – eddie vedder , american rock singer ( pearl jam ) december 28 – malcolm gets , american actor and dancer date unknown kyaw kyaw naing , burmese traditional musician michael haussman , american artist , writer , producer and director of motion pictures , television advertisements and music videos nitin sawhney , british indian musician , producer and composer . deaths . january 7 – colin mcphee , canadian composer and musicologist , 63 january 9 – big boy goudie , jazz saxophonist , january 15 – jack teagarden , jazz trombonist and vocalist , 58 ( pneumonia/heart attack ) january 22 – marc blitzstein , composer , 58 january 27 – leib glantz , musicologist , 65 february 25 – johnny burke , lyricist , 55 march 8 – renata borgatti , italian pianist , 69 or 70 march 27 – emil reesen , danish composer , conductor and pianist , 76 april 4 – georgia caine , broadway star , 87 may 10 – carol haney , dancer and choreographer , 39 ( pneumonia ) may 24 – gali penchala narasimha rao , film composer june 10 – louis gruenberg , pianist and composer , 79 june 29 – eric dolphy , american jazz saxophonist , flautist and bass clarinettist , 36 ( diabetic coma ) july 1 – pierre monteux , french conductor , 89 july 10 – joe haymes , bandleader and arranger , 57 ( heart failure ) july 31 – jim reeves , american country singer , 40 ( plane crash ) august 9 – chucho monge , mexican songwriter , 53 august 14 – johnny burnette , rockabilly singer , 30 ( drowned ) september 14 – mary howe , composer and pianist , 82 september 20 – lazare lévy , french pianist and teacher , 82 september 28 nacio herb brown , songwriter and film/tv composer , 68 george dyson , english composer , 81 harpo marx , american comedian and musician , 75 october 10 eddie cantor , comedian , singer and songwriter , 72 heinrich neuhaus , soviet ( of german extraction ) pianist and teacher , 76 october 15 – cole porter , songwriter and composer , 73 october 29 – vasily agapkin , soviet composer november 5 – buddy cole , jazz pianist and orchestra leader , 45 ( heart attack ) november 30 – don redman , us arranger , bandleader and saxophonist december 2 – sam h . stept , russian-born us songwriter , pianist and conductor , 67 december 9 – edith sitwell , poet and collaborator of william walton december 11 alma mahler , songwriter and widow of gustav mahler sam cooke , singer , 33 ( shot ) december 14 – francisco canaro , uruguayan violinist and tango orchestra leader , 76 december 21 – theodor blumer , composer and conductor , 83 . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1964 . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1964 . see also . 1964 hot 100 no . 1 hits of 1964 , 1963 in music 1965 in music other 'years in music' . references .