Telecine

history of telecine . with the advent of popular broadcast television , producers realized they needed more than live television programming . by turning to film-originated material , they would have access to the wealth of films made for the cinema in addition to recorded television programming on film that could be aired at different times . however , the difference in frame rates between film ( generally 24 frames/s ) and television ( 30 or 25 frames/s , interlaced ) meant that simply playing a film into a television camera would result in flickering . originally the kinescope was used to record the image from a television display to film , synchronized to the tv scan rate . this could then be re-played directly into a video camera for re-display . pincus , edward and ascher , steven . ( 1984 ) . the filmmaker 's handbook . plume . p . 368-9 non-live programming could also be filmed using the same cameras , edited mechanically as normal , and then played back for tv . as the film was run at the same speed as the television , the flickering was eliminated . various displays , including projectors for these '' video rate films '' , slide projectors and film cameras were often combined into a '' film chain '' , allowing the broadcaster to cue up various forms of media and switch between them by moving a mirror or prism . color was supported by using a multi-tube video camera , prisms , and filters to separate the original color signal and feed the red , green and blue to individual tubes . however , this still left film shot at cinema frame rates as a problem . the obvious solution is to simply speed up the film to match the television frame rates , but this , at least in the case of ntsc , is rather obvious to the eye and ear . this problem is not difficult to fix , however ; the solution being to periodically play a selected frame twice . for ntsc , the difference in frame rates can be corrected by showing every fourth frame of film twice , although this does require the sound to be handled separately to avoid '' skipping '' effects . a more advanced technique is to use '' 2:3 pulldown '' , discussed below , which turns every second frame of the film into three fields of video , which results in a slightly smoother display . pal uses a similar system , '' 2:2 pulldown '' . however , during the analogue broadcasting period , the 24 frame per second film was shown at a slightly faster 25 frames per second rate , to match the pal video signal . this resulted in a fractionally higher audio soundtrack , and resulted in feature films having a slightly shorter duration , by being shown 1 frame per second faster . in recent decades , telecine has primarily been a film-to-storage process , as opposed to film-to-air . changes since the 1950s have primarily been in terms of equipment and physical formats ; the basic concept remains the same . home movies originally on film may be transferred to video tape using this technique , and it is not uncommon to find telecined dvds where the source was originally recorded on videotape , or shot on film and then edited on tape . movies and tv shows that were originally shot and edited on film , or digitally , are more commonly put on dvd at their native frame rate with flags that tell the dvd player to perform pulldown on-the-fly . frame rate differences . the most complex part of telecine is the synchronization of the mechanical film motion and the electronic video signal . every time the video ( tele ) part of the telecine samples the light electronically , the film ( cine ) part of the telecine must have a frame in perfect registration and ready to photograph . this is relatively easy when the film is photographed at the same frame rate as the video camera will sample , but when this is not true , a sophisticated procedure is required to change frame rate . to avoid the synchronization issues , higher-end establishments now use a scanning system rather than just a telecine system . this allows them to scan a distinct frame of digital video for each frame of film , providing higher quality than a telecine system would be able to achieve . similar issues occur when using vertical synchronization to prevent screen tearing , which is a different problem encountered when frame rates mismatch . 2:2 pulldown . in countries that use the pal or secam video standards , film destined for television is photographed at 25 frames per second . the pal video standard broadcasts at 25 frames per second , so the transfer from film to video is simple ; for every film frame , one video frame is captured . : image:2-2pulldown.svg theatrical features originally photographed at 24 frame/s are shown at 25 frame/s . while this is usually not noticed in the picture ( but may be more noticeable during action speed , especially if footage was filmed undercranked ) , the 4 % increase in playback speed causes a slightly noticeable increase in audio pitch by about 0.707 semitones , which is sometimes corrected using a pitch shifter , though pitch shifting is a recent innovation and supersedes an alternative method of telecine for 25 frame/s formats . 2:2 pulldown is also used to transfer shows and films , photographed at 30 frames per second , like friends and oklahoma ! ( 1955 ) , to ntsc video , which has ~59.94 & nbsp ; hz scanning rate . this requires playback speed to be slowed by a tenth of a percent . although the 4 % speed increase has been standard since the early days of pal and secam television , recently a new technique has gained popularity , and the resulting speed and pitch of the telecined presentation are identical to that of the original film . this pulldown method is sometimes used in order to convert 24 frame/s material to 25 frame/s . usually , this involves a film to pal transfer without the aforementioned 4 % speedup . for film at 24 frame/s , there are 24 frames of film for every 25 frames of pal video . in order to accommodate this mismatch in frame rate , 24 frames of film have to be distributed over 50 pal fields . this can be accomplished by inserting a pulldown field every 12 frames , thus effectively spreading 12 frames of film over 25 fields ( or '' 12.5 frames '' ) of pal video . the method used is 2:2:2:2:2:2:2:2:2:2:2:3 ( euro ) pulldown ( see below . this method was born out of a frustration with the faster , higher pitched soundtracks that traditionally accompanied films transferred for pal and secam audiences . a few motion pictures are beginning to be telecined this way . it is particularly suited for films where the soundtrack is of special importance . when a tv station in an ntsc region airs a film or show that uses a pal printing/version , but is being broadcast in the ntsc format , sometimes they do not perform the proper pal to ntsc pulldown conversion or it is done improperly . this causes the program to be sped-up slightly and/or sound higher-pitched , due to the faster rate of the pal 576 lines/50 & nbsp ; hz vs the ntsc 480 lines/~59.94 & nbsp ; hz format . mainframe entertainment used a novel process for its tv shows . they are rendered at exactly 25.000 frames per second ; then , for pal/secam distribution , ordinary 2:2 pulldown is applied , but for ntsc distribution , 199 fields out of every 1001 are repeated . this brings the refresh rate from 25 frames to exactly 60,000/1001 , or ~59.94 , fields per second , with no change whatsoever in speed , duration , or audio pitch . 2:3 pulldown . in the united states and other countries where television uses the ntsc frequency , video is broadcast at ~29.97 frame/s . for the film 's motion to be accurately rendered on the video signal , a telecine must use a technique called the 2:3 pulldown , also known as 3:2 pulldown , to convert from 24 to ~29.97 frame/s . the term '' pulldown '' comes from the mechanical process of '' pulling '' ( physically moving ) the film downward within the film portion of the transport mechanism , to advance it from one frame to the next at a repetitive rate ( nominally 24 frames/s ) . this is accomplished in two steps . the first step is to slow down the film motion by 1/1000 to 24,000/1001 ( ~23.976 ) frames/s . the difference in speed is imperceptible to the viewer . for a two-hour film , play time is extended by 7.2 seconds . if the total playback time must be kept exact , a single frame can be dropped every 1000 frames . the second step of the 2:3 pulldown is distributing cinema frames into video fields . at 23.976 frame/s , there are four frames of film for every five frames of 29.97 frame/s video : : \frac progressive scan dvd players additionally offer output at 480p by using these flags to duplicate frames rather than fields , or if the tv supports it , to play the disc back at the native 24p rate . ntsc dvds are often soft telecined , although lower-quality hard-telecined dvds exist . in the case of pal dvds using 2:2 pulldown , the difference between soft and hard telecine vanishes , and the two may be regarded as equal . in the case of pal dvds using 2:3 pulldown , either soft or hard telecining may be applied . blu-ray offers native 24 frame/s support , allowing 5:5 cadence on most modern televisions . image gallery . see also . 3d lut cintel , telecine equipment color motion picture film color suite da vinci systems for color grading and video editing systems digital intermediate display motion blur , factors causing motion blur on displays display resolution faroudja , inventors of reverse telecine technologies film-out film recorder film restoration gamma correction hard disk recorder image scanner keykode pandora international progressive segmented frame , a scheme designed to acquire , store , modify , and distribute progressive-scan video using interlaced equipment and media sound follower telecine ( piracy ) , an unauthorized copy of a film created with a telecine telerecording ( uk ) television test film . references . external links . discussion of telecine equipment by former bbc engineers demonstration of telecine process by telecine and archiving expert , tim emlem-english explanation of telecine methods