Quid pro quo

origins . the latin phrase quid pro quo originally implied that something had been substituted , as in this instead of that . early usage by english speakers followed the original latin meaning , with occurrences in the 1530s where the term referred to substituting one medicine for another , whether unintentionally or fraudulently . by the end of the same century , quid pro quo evolved into a more current use to describe equivalent exchanges . in 1654 , the expression quid pro quo was used to generally refer to something done for personal gain or with the expectation of reciprocity in the text the reign of king charles : an history disposed into annalls , with a somewhat positive connotation . it refers to the covenant with christ as something '' that prove not a nudum pactum , a naked contract , without quid pro quo . '' believers in christ have to do their part in return , namely '' foresake the devil and all his works '' . quid pro quo would go on to be used , by english speakers in legal and diplomatic contexts , as an exchange of equally valued goods or services and continues to be today . the latin phrase corresponding to the usage of quid pro quo in english is do ut des ( latin for '' i give , so that you may give '' ) . other languages continue to use do ut des for this purpose , while quid pro quo ( or its equivalent qui pro quo , as widely used in italian , french and spanish ) still keeps its original meaning of something being unwillingly mistaken , or erroneously told or understood , instead of something else . legal meanings . common law . in common law , quid pro quo indicates that an item or a service has been traded in return for something of value , usually when the propriety or equity of the transaction is in question . a contract must involve consideration : that is , the exchange of something of value for something else of value . for example , when buying an item of clothing or a gallon of milk , a pre-determined amount of money is exchanged for the product the customer is purchasing ; therefore , they have received something but have given up something of equal value in return . united kingdom . in the united kingdom , the one-sidedness of a contract is covered by the unfair contract terms act 1977 and various revisions and amendments to it ; a clause can be held void or the entire contract void if it is deemed unfair ( that is to say , one-sided and not a quid pro quo ) ; however this is a civil law and not a common law matter . political donors must be resident in the uk . there are fixed limits to how much they may donate ( £5000 in any single donation ) , and it must be recorded in the house of commons register of members ' interests or at the house of commons library ; the quid pro quo is strictly not allowed , that a donor can by his donation have some personal gain . this is overseen by the parliamentary commissioner for standards . there are also prohibitions on donations being given in the six weeks before the election for which it is being campaigned . it is also illegal for donors to support party political broadcasts , which are tightly regulated , free to air , and scheduled and allotted to the various parties according to a formula agreed by parliament and enacted with the communications act 2003 . united states . in the united states , if the exchange appears excessively one sided , courts in some jurisdictions may question whether a quid pro quo did actually exist and the contract may be held void . in cases of '' quid pro quo '' business contracts , the term takes on a negative connotation because major corporations may cross ethical boundaries in order to enter into these very valuable , mutually beneficial , agreements with other major big businesses . in these deals , large sums of money are often at play and can consequently lead to promises of exclusive partnerships indefinitely or promises of distortion of economic reports , for example . for example , in the u.s . , lobbying are legally entitled to support candidates that hold positions with which the donors agree , or which will benefit the donors . such conduct becomes bribery only when there is an identifiable exchange between the contribution and official acts , previous or subsequent , and the term quid pro quo denotes such an exchange . . sexual harassment . in united states labor law , workplace sexual harassment can take two forms ; either '' quid pro quo '' harassment or hostile work environment harassment . '' quid pro quo '' harassment takes place when a supervisor requires sex , sexual favors , or sexual contact from an employee/job candidate as a condition of their employment . only supervisors who have the authority to make tangible employment actions ( i.e . hire , fire , promote , etc . ) , can commit '' quid pro quo '' harassment . the supervising harasser must have '' immediate ( or successively higher ) authority over the employee . ” the power dynamic between a supervisor and subordinate/job candidate is such that a supervisor could use their position of authority to extract sexual relations based on the subordinate/job candidate 's need for employment . co-workers and non-decision making supervisors can not engage in '' quid pro quo '' harassment with other employees , but an employer could potentially be liable for the behavior of these employees under a hostile work environment claim . the harassing employee 's status as a supervisor is significant because if the individual is found to be a supervisor then the employing company can be held vicariously liable for the actions of that supervisor . under agency law , the employer is held responsible for the actions of the supervisor because they were in a position of power within the company at the time of the harassment . to establish a prima facie case of '' quid pro quo '' harassment , the plaintiff must prove that they were subjected to '' unwelcome sexual conduct '' , that submission to such conduct was explicitly or implicitly a term of their employment , and submission to or rejection of this conduct was used as a basis for an employment decision , as follows : unwelcome sexual conduct : a court will look at the employee 's conduct to determine whether the supervisor 's sexual advances were unwelcome . in meritor savings bank v . vinson , the court opined that voluntary sex between an employee and supervisor does not establish proof that a supervisor 's sexual advances were welcome . the court also stated that evidence of the subordinate employee 's provocative dress and publicly expressed sexual fantasies can be introduced as evidence if relevant . term of employment : a term or condition of employment means that the subordinate/job candidate must acquiesce to the sexual advances of the supervisor in order to maintain/be hired for the job . in essence , the sexual harassment becomes a part of their job . for example , a supervisor promises an employee a raise if she/he goes out on a date with the supervisor , or tells an employee he/she will be fired if the employee does n't sleep with him/her . tangible employment action : a tangible employment action must take place as a result of the employee 's submission or refusal of supervisor 's advances . in burlington industries , inc . v . ellerth , the court stated that tangible employment action amounted to “ a significant change in employment status , such as hiring , firing , failing to promote , reassignment with significantly different responsibilities , or a decision causing a significant change in benefits . ” it is important to note that only supervisors can make tangible employment actions , since they have the company 's authority to do so . the court also held that unfulfilled threats by a supervisor of an adverse employment decision are not sufficient to establish a '' quid pro quo , '' but were relevant for the purposes of a hostile work environment claim . additionally , the supreme court has held that constructive dismissal can count as a tangible employment action ( thus allowing a quid pro quo sexual harassment claim ) if the actions taken by a supervisor created a situation where a '' reasonable person . would have felt compelled to resign . '' once the plaintiff has established these three factors , the employer can not assert an affirmative defense ( such as the employer had a sexual harassment policy in place to prevent and properly respond to issues of sexual harassment ) , but can only dispute whether the unwelcome conduct did not in fact take place , the employee was not a supervisor , and that there was no tangible employment action involved . although these terms are popular among lawyers and scholars , neither '' hostile work environment '' nor '' quid pro quo '' are found in title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , which prohibits employers from discriminating on the basis of race , sex , color , national origin , and religion . the supreme court noted in burlington industries , inc . v . ellerth that these terms are useful in differentiating between cases where threats of harassment are '' carried out and those where they are not or absent altogether , '' but otherwise these terms serve a limited purpose . therefore , it is important to remember that sexual harassment can take place by a supervisor , and an employer can be potentially liable , even if that supervisor 's behavior does not fall within the criteria of a '' quid pro quo '' harassment claim . donald trump impeachment inquiry . quid pro quo was frequently mentioned during the first impeachment inquiry into u.s . president donald trump , in reference to the charge that his request for an investigation of hunter biden was a precondition for the delivery of congressionally authorized military aid during a call with ukrainian president volodymyr zelensky . . other meanings . for languages that come from latin such as italian , portuguese , spanish and french , quid pro quo is used to define a misunderstanding or blunder made by the substituting of one thing for another . the oxford english dictionary describes this alternative definition in english as '' now rare '' . the vocabolario treccani ( an authoritative dictionary published by the encyclopedia treccani ) , under the entry '' qui pro quo '' , states that the latter expression probably derives from the latin used in late medieval pharmaceutical compilations . this can be clearly seen from the work appearing precisely under this title , '' tractatus quid pro quo , '' ( treatise on what substitutes for what ) in the medical collection headed up by mesue cum expositione mondini super canones universales . ( venice : per joannem & gregorium de gregorijs fratres , 1497 ) , folios 334r-335r . some examples of what could be used in place of what in this list are : '' pro uva passa dactili '' ( in place of raisins , use dates ) ; '' pro mirto sumac '' ( in place of myrtle , use sumac ) ; '' pro fenugreco semen lini '' ( in place of fenugreek , use flaxseed ) , etc . this list was an essential resource in the medieval apothecary , especially for occasions when certain essential medicinal substances were not available . satirist ambrose bierce defined political influence as '' a visionary quo given in exchange for a substantial quid '' , making a pun on quid as a form of currency . quid is slang for pounds , the british currency , originating on this expression as in : if you want the quo you 'll need to give them some quid , which explains the plural without s , as in i gave them five hundred quid .