Black Knight (Monty Python)

overview . in the film , king arthur ( graham chapman ) , accompanied by his trusty squire patsy ( terry gilliam ) , is travelling through a forest when he enters a clearing and observes a fight taking place between a black knight ( john cleese ) and a green one ( also played by gilliam ) by a bridge over a small stream . as he watches , the black knight defeats the green one by throwing his sword straight through the eye slit of the green knight 's great helm ( during arthur 's battle with the black knight , the green knight 's body can be seen in a ditch beside the area ) . arthur then congratulates the black knight and offers him a place at his court at the round table , but the black knight only stands still , holding his sword vertically , and makes no response until arthur moves to cross the bridge . the black knight moves slightly to block arthur and declares '' none shall pass '' . king arthur , in a conciliatory manner , asserts his right to cross , but the black knight says arthur will die . arthur orders the black knight to move but he says , '' i move for no man '' . reluctantly , king arthur fights the black knight and , after a short battle , the knight 's left arm is severed , which squirts out copious amounts of blood . even at this , the knight refuses to stand aside , insisting '' tis but a scratch '' and that he has '' had worse '' , and fights on while holding his sword with his other arm . next , his right arm is cut off , but the knight still does not concede . as the knight is literally disarmed , arthur assumes the fight is over and kneels to pray . the black knight interrupts arthur 's prayer of thanks by kicking him in the side of the head and accusing him of cowardice . when arthur points out the black knight 's injuries , the knight insists , '' it 's just a flesh wound . '' in response to the continued kicks and insults , arthur chops off the black knight 's right leg . at this point , the knight still will not admit defeat , saying , '' right , i ’ ll do you for that '' , and attempts to ram his body into arthur 's by hopping on his left leg . arthur is annoyed at the black knight 's persistence and sarcastically asks the black knight if he is going to bleed on him to win . the black knight replies by saying '' i 'm invincible ! '' to which arthur retorts '' you 're a loony . '' with an air of resignation , arthur finally cuts off the left leg as well and sheathes his sword . with the black knight now reduced to a mere stump of a man , he says , '' all right , we 'll call it a draw . '' arthur then summons patsy and '' rides '' away , using coconuts to simulate the sound of a horse galloping , leaving the black knight 's limbless torso screaming threats at him ( '' oh . oh , i see . running away , eh ? you yellow bastards ! come back here and take what 's coming to ya ! i 'll bite your legs off ! '' ) . behind the scenes . according to the dvd audio commentary by cleese , michael palin , and eric idle , the sequence originated in a story told to cleese when he was attending an english class during his school days . two roman wrestlers were engaged in a particularly intense match and had been fighting for so long that the two combatants were doing little more than leaning into one another . it was only when one wrestler finally tapped out and pulled away from his opponent that he and the crowd realised the other man was , in fact , dead and had effectively won the match posthumously . the moral of the tale , according to cleese 's teacher , was '' if you never give up , you ca n't possibly lose '' – a statement that , cleese reflected , always struck him as being '' philosophically unsound '' . the story would have been a deformed ( or misremembered ) description of the death of the greek wrestler arrichion . cleese said that the scene would seem heartless and sadistic except for the fact that the black knight shows no pain and just keeps on fighting , or trying to , however badly he is wounded . also , as the scene progresses and arthur becomes increasingly annoyed , his dialogue lapses from medieval ( '' you are indeed brave , sir knight , but the fight is mine . '' ) to modern ( '' look , you stupid bastard , you 've got no arms left ! '' ) , and finally to just plain sarcastic ( '' what are you gon na do , bleed on me ? '' ) , while the black knight remains just as defiant ( '' i 'm invincible ! '' he yells with only one leg left , to which arthur simply replies '' you 're a loony . '' ) . this scene is one of the best-known of the entire film . a famous line of the scene , '' 't is but a scratch '' , is similar to a line the character mercutio speaks in shakespeare 's romeo and juliet , wherein he demurs , saying '' ay , ay , a scratch , a scratch , '' referring to his mortal wound , and the former has since become an expression used to comment on someone who ignores a fatal flaw or problem . the phrase '' 't is but a flesh wound '' , following a character entering '' with coconut shells tied to his feet '' notably appeared in an early episode of the goon show titled '' the giant bombardon '' , broadcast in 1954 ; the monty python group has acknowledged being influenced by the goons . . performance difficulty . the knight was , in fact , played by two actors : john cleese is in the knight 's armour until he is down to one leg . the knight is then played by a real one-legged man , a local by the name of richard burton , a blacksmith who lived near the film shoot ( not to be confused with richard burton , the welsh actor of the same name ) , because , according to the dvd commentary , cleese could not balance well on one leg . after the knight 's remaining leg is cut off , the quadruple-amputee that remains is again cleese . in the musical spamalot , the scene with the black knight was the most difficult to play on stage , according to eric idle . penn & teller created the illusion for the musical . interview with eric idle in humo 3691 , may 2011 . see also . pas d'armes . notes . external links . the original scene on youtube , via the official monty python channel