Julius Caesar Scaliger

biography . scaliger 's father , benedetto bordone , was a miniaturist and illuminator . richard s . westfall , galileo project biography . scaliger himself was known in his youth by the family name bordone , but later insisted that he was a scion of the house of scaliger , for a hundred and fifty years lords of verona . he was born in 1484 at the rocca di riva , on lake garda . there are two accounts of his life , his own and that of his critics . his own account . when he was twelve , his kinsman the emperor maximilian placed him among his pages . he remained for seventeen years in the service of the emperor , distinguishing himself as a soldier and as a captain . he studied art under albrecht dürer . in 1512 at the battle of ravenna , where his father and elder brother were killed , his conduct earned him order of the golden spur , augmented with the collar and the eagle of gold . he left the service of maximilian , and after a brief employment by another kinsman , the duke of ferrara , he decided to quit the military life , and in 1514 entered as a student at the university of bologna . he decided to take holy orders , expecting that he would become cardinal , and then pope , when he would wrest from the venetians his duchy of verona , which the republic had taken from his ancestors . he soon gave up this plan , but remained at the university until 1519 . the next six years he passed at the castle of vico nuovo , in piedmont , as a guest of the della rovere , at first dividing his time between military expeditions in the summer , and study , chiefly of medicine and natural history , in the winter , until a severe attack of rheumatic gout brought his military career to a close . henceforth his life was wholly devoted to study . in 1525 he accompanied antonio della rovera , bishop of agen , to that city as his physician . . later account . it was not until some time after his death that the enemies of his son first alleged that he was not of the family of la scala , but was the son of benedetto bordone , an illuminator or schoolmaster of verona ; that he was educated at padua , where he took the degree of m.d . ; and that the story of his life before arriving at agen was pure invention . it is supported by no other evidence than his own statements , some of which are inconsistent with well-ascertained facts . . life at agen . the remaining thirty-two years of his life were passed almost wholly at agen . on his death in 1558 he had a high scientific and literary reputation , though his books gave rise to disputes . he was charged with heresy in 1538 but was acquitted , one of the judges being his friend arnoul le ferron . scaliger died at agen in 1558 . works . in 1531 he printed his first oration against erasmus , in defence of cicero and the ciceronians ( oratio pro cicerone contra erasmum , paris 1531 ) , dismissing erasmus as a literary parasite , a mere corrector of texts . it is notable for its vigorous invective and , like his subsequent writings , its excellent latin . it has been said of it , however , that it misses the point of his opponent 's treatise ciceronianus . erasmus did not reply , thinking it was the work of a personal enemy , meander . scaliger then wrote a second oration ( published in 1536 ) , also full of invective . the orations were followed by a large amount of latin verse , which appeared in successive volumes in 1533 , 1534 , 1539 , 1546 and 1547 . this verse appeared in numerous editions , but was less appreciated by later critics . ( one of them , mark pattison , agreed with the judgment of pierre daniel huet , who said : '' par ses poésies brutes et informes scaliger a déshonoré le parnasse '' . ) he also published a brief tract on comic metres ( de comicis dimensionibus ) and a work de causis linguae latinae ( lyons 1540 ; geneva 1580 ; frankfurt 1623 ) , in which he analyzes the style of cicero and indicates 634 mistakes of lorenzo valla and his humanist predecessors , claimed to be the earliest latin grammar using scientific principles and method . he published no other purely literary works in his lifetime . his poetices libri septem ( '' seven books on poetics '' , lyons 1561 ; leyden 1581 ) appeared after his death . they contained many paradoxes and some elements of personal animosity ( especially in his reference to etienne dolet ) , but also contain acute criticism based on the poetics of aristotle , '' imperator noster ; omnium bonarum artium dictator perpetuus '' ( '' our emperor , dictator forever of all good qualities in the arts '' ) , an influential treatise in the history of literary criticism . like many of his generation scaliger prized virgil above homer . his praise of the tragedies of seneca over those of the greeks influenced both shakespeare and pierre corneille . scaliger intended to be judged primarily as a philosopher and a man of science and regarded classical studies as a means of relaxation . he was noted for his powers of observation and his tenacious memory . his scientific writings are all in the form of commentaries . it was not until he was seventy that ( with the exception of a brief tract on the de insomniis of hippocrates ) he felt that any of them were ready for publication . in 1556 he printed his dialogue on the de plantis attributed to aristotle , and in 1557 his exotericarum exercitationum ( '' exoteric exercises '' , or simply exercitationes ) on gerolamo cardano 's de subtilitate . his other scientific works , commentaries on theophrastus ' de causis plantarum and aristotle 's history of animals , he left in a more or less unfinished state , and they were not printed until after his death . his work shows no sign of the inductive reasoning attributed to the scientific method . unlike his contemporary konrad von gesner , he was not led by his botanical studies to a natural system of classification . he rejected the discoveries of copernicus . he was guided by aristotle in metaphysics and in natural history and by galen in medicine , but did not follow them uncritically . he is best known for his critical exotericarum exercitationes on cardan 's de subtilitate ( 1557 ) , a book approaching natural philosophy and which had a long popularity . julii caesaris scaligeri exotericarum exercitationum liber xv . de subtilitate ad hieronymum cardanum . francofurti . apud claudium marnium , & haeredes ioannes aubrii . m . & nbsp ; dc . & nbsp ; vii . & nbsp ; 1607 ( online version ) . the exercitationes display encyclopaedic knowledge and accurate observation ; but , as noted by gabriel naudé , they are not flawless . they had an influence upon natural history , philosophers and scientists such as lipsius , francis bacon , gottfried wilhelm leibniz and johannes kepler . herman h.j . lynge & sons , international antiquarian booksellers '' renaissance enlightenment – defending aristotle against cardano '' charles nisard wrote that scaliger 's object seems to be to deny all that cardan affirms and to affirm all that cardan denies . yet leibniz and sir william hamilton recognize him as the best modern exponent of the physics and metaphysics of aristotle . . family . a few days after his arrival at agen he fell in love with an orphan of thirteen , andiette de roques lobejac ; she was a distant relative of the aristocratic house of rochepozay ( also roche-pozay or roche-posay ) , the roman stamp : frame and facade in some forms of neo-classicism , robert m . adams , university of california press , 1974 , pg 60 associates of jacques auguste de thou , one of scaliger 's close friends and supporters . thuanus : the making of jacques-auguste de thou ( 1553–1617 ) , ingrid a . r . de smet , librairie droz s.a . , 2006 , pg 87 , 89 , 133 her friends objected to her marriage , as he was then undistinguished . by 1528 he was a successful physician and at forty-five he married andiette , who was then sixteen . the marriage lasted for twenty-nine years and produced fifteen children , including joseph justus scaliger . see also . distichs of cato nostradamus ( film ) . notes . references . . further reading . anthony grafton , julius caesar scaliger . in peter g . bietenholz ( ed . ) , contemporaries of erasmus . a biographical register of the renaissance and reformation , vol . 3 , toronto 2003 , pp . 212-214 vernon hall , jr . , in transactions of the american philosophical society , 1950 , n.s . , vol . 40 , part 2 , pp . 85-170 herbert jaumann , scaliger , julius caesar . in handbuch gelehrtenkultur der frühen neuzeit . band 1 : bio-bibliographisches repertorium , berlin 2004 , pp.586-588 kristian jensen , rhetorical philosophy and philosophical grammar . julius caesar scaliger 's theory of language . münchen 1990 paul lawrence rose , scaliger ( bordonius ) , julius caesar . in charles coulston gillispie ( ed . ) , , vol . 12 , new york 1975 , pp . 134-136 kuni sakamoto , julius caesar scaliger , renaissance reformer of aristotelianism : a study of his exotericae exercitationes . leiden 2016