Dawn Summers

appearances . television . dawn marie summers is first introduced as buffy 's ( sarah michelle gellar ) younger sister at the end of buffy season five premiere '' buffy vs . dracula '' , though buffy had been previously established as an only child . initially , the mystery of dawn 's sudden existence is not acknowledged in the series , with the other characters accepting her as a part of the status quo . four episodes later , buffy discovers dawn is , in fact , a mystical object known as the key ; a group of monks transformed the key into human form and sent it to the slayer for protection from the villainous glory ( clare kramer ) . the memories of buffy and her associates were altered , along with relevant records , so that they believed her to have always existed as buffy 's sister . she is shown to look up greatly to willow and tara and has a crush on xander . she also is friendly with spike , who is as protective of her as buffy herself . when dawn learns of her origin , she resorts to self-harm and runs away from home , until buffy assures her they are real sisters no matter what , securing it with a blood oath . her relationship with buffy , having been portrayed with a typical sister dynamic in the first half of the season , changes when she discovers what she is . the two become closer as dawn becomes buffy 's sole focus once she drops out from college to protect her , going as far as to warn her friends she is prepared to kill anyone who attempts to go near dawn in the finale . dawn suffers more pain when her mother ( kristine sutherland ) dies unexpectedly from a brain aneurysm , which leads to dawn resorting to black magic to try to bring her back from the grave , an action she immediately reverses upon realizing the consequences of her actions . it is eventually revealed that dawn 's purpose as the key is to open portals to alternate dimensions — a power the hell-god glory wishes to exploit to return home . when glory successfully uses dawn 's blood to break down the dimensional barriers , buffy sacrifices her own life ( realizing that their blood is now the same ) to end the apocalypse and save dawn ; buffy 's sacrifice also neutralizes the power of the key , giving dawn the opportunity of a normal life . the following season opening sees dawn struggle with abandonment issues , as well as her escalating kleptomania . having been devastated by her sister 's death , dawn is overjoyed when willow ( alyson hannigan ) casts a spell to bring her back to life . however , with buffy spiraling into a deep depression , dawn feels highly neglected and is often seen alone and seeking attention from her sister , as well as other members of the group . she later experiences her first kiss with a vampire named justin , whom she is reluctantly forced to stake ( her first vampire kill ) when he tries to turn her . dawn 's isolation from the other characters reaches its apex when she inadvertently makes a wish to the vengeance demon halfrek ( kali rocha ) , which results in trapping everyone who enters the summers house . halfrek herself is inadvertently trapped , and undoes the curse to free herself ; meanwhile , dawn 's kleptomania and feelings of neglect by her friends and family are exposed . buffy vows to mend their relationship and starts spending more time with her sister , whilst still trying to shield her from her life as a slayer , much to dawn 's disappointment , as she is eager to help buffy in her duties . while helping buffy battle demons in the season finale , dawn proves herself to be capable in a fight , finally earning her sister 's respect and a promise to train her . in the final season , dawn becomes more grown-up and a full-fledged member of the '' scooby gang '' — as witnessed in the first few episodes when she aids buffy and xander during willow 's absence , and is trained by buffy in combat . when buffy expresses her doubts about her first day as a guidance counselor at the newly rebuilt sunnydale high in the episode '' help '' , dawn assures her that she 'll be fine and that she 'll be a great counselor . falling victim to a love spell in the episode '' him '' , dawn displays dangerous behavior such as attacking people and trying to commit suicide to prove her '' love '' for classmate rj brooks . while home alone one night , dawn is forced to perform a solo exorcism to protect what she believes to be her mother from a demon , though it is revealed to be first evil attempting to cause dawn to doubt her bond with buffy , which she does for several episodes following this . dawn 's feelings of neglect begin to resurface as buffy spends time training the potentials now living in their home . after wrongly believing herself to be a potential slayer , xander ( nicholas brendon ) explains to dawn that being normal is perhaps the hardest burden of all , as nobody understands the pain of being overlooked — as he has been in dawn 's shoes . dawn then falls into a watcher-esque role offering the group answers from research , such as ways to communicate with the bringers and translating texts given to buffy in a 'slayer keepsake ' . when buffy tricks her into leaving town before the impending apocalypse , dawn adamantly returns to fight against the first , during which she battles alongside xander , and once again proves her value as a fighter by killing several turok-han and survives . dawn was intended to appear in the angel episode '' the girl in question '' , but michelle trachtenberg was unavailable for filming , so andrew wells ( played by tom lenk ) replaced her . '' the girl in question '' commentary . literature . in the canonical comic book continuation to the television series buffy the vampire slayer season eight ( 2007 & ndash ; 2011 ) , it is revealed that buffy and dawn 's relationship has been strained and conflicted since the events of '' chosen . '' dawn is revealed to have been cursed , apparently as a result of sleeping with a '' thricewise demon '' named kenny while a college student , and is a giant . throughout her affliction she spends a lot of time with xander , to whom she reveals she was cursed as a result of cheating on kenny with his roommate . while her personal issues are made to take a backseat with buffy , in battles , her gigantism shows some utility ; she is able to assist fighting amy in '' the long way home '' , and rampages through tokyo to distract their enemies in '' wolves at the gate '' . in '' time of your life , part one '' she shrinks to normal size again , but then turns into a centaur . xander surmises she will likely experience a third such transformation before she can return to normal . in '' living doll '' , the twenty-fifth issue of the series , dawn undergoes a transformation into a living doll and is kidnapped by a disturbed dollmaker for her 'protection ' . after her sister , andrew and willow track down kenny , he later appears to undo the curse , and the two have a heart-to-heart , where dawn apologises for her infidelity and explains she had been unprepared for the seriousness of her feelings for kenny . she subsequently spends some time bonding with buffy . dawn and xander 's growing friendship leads to them kissing , where they are discovered by buffy , in '' retreat '' . in the series ' final arc , buffy brings about the end of magic , following which xander and dawn decide to settle down in san francisco . they allow buffy to live with them until she finds her own place . season nine ( 2012 & ndash ; 13 ) begins with dawn and xander living an ordinary domestic life , with much less contact with buffy than before since she has moved out . they intend to capitalize on a world without magic and embark upon a life of normalcy . their relationship is seen to be going through some difficulties , such as when xander forgets dawn 's birthday . buffy also reflects that dawn is not on her mind much of late . in '' welcome to the team , '' dawn becomes sick with what appears to be a very serious flu . buffy also forgets about one of dawn 's allergies . in the concurrent second issue of spin-off series willow : wonderland , willow sees a worrying omen about dawn while in an alternate dimension . later in the buffy arc , dawn begins to die and the gang recognise it is due to magic leaving her body . buffy contacts faith for help , but ( as seen in angel & faith ) neither she nor angel can remember dawn . spike , however , heads straight from faith 's apartment in london to be by dawn 's side , and willow returns to california with her powers restored and attempts to prolong dawn 's life . in final arc '' the core '' , buffy , willow and xander head to the deeper well in england in hopes of finding enough magic to restore dawn . fearing for his memories , spike tries to record himself talking about dawn but the tapes all become static , indicating that everything dawn affected is also fading . dawn continues to rapidly fade until she disappears altogether . after the gang restart magic , they return to san francisco where willow is able to bring back dawn using buffy 's blood in conjunction with the spell which created her . willow expresses that something feels different as she brings dawn back , and xander is suspicious of dawn 's knowledge of very recent events . buffy tries to tell xander that he is being paranoid . in season ten ( 2014-2016 ) , xander continues to be suspicious of dawn , and insecure concerning their relationship . buffy compares their behavior to that of her parents prior to their divorce . it is revealed that when dawn was brought back she was reset emotionally . while she still remembers her relationship with xander she does not feel love for him anymore and recently re-experienced her grief for her mother 's death , among other traumas . concept and creation . the arrival of dawn summers is foreshadowed in cryptic dream sequences in both the season three finale '' graduation day , part two '' and the season four episode '' this year 's girl '' , in which a still-comatose faith says , while making a bed with buffy in her bedroom , '' little sis coming , i know . '' buffy replies , '' so much to do before she gets here . '' ( the first appearance of dawn is in buffy 's room ) in the season four finale , '' restless '' , tara warns buffy to '' be back before dawn . '' according to buffy creator joss whedon , the introduction of dawn in season five was partly so protagonist buffy summers could experience a '' really important , intense emotional relationship '' with someone other than a boyfriend . '' she 's as intense as she was in season two with angelus , but it 's about her sister , '' whedon says . '' to me that was really beautiful . '' trachtenberg says she was thrust into the role without knowing much about dawn 's personality ; she describes her initial meeting with joss whedon as '' alright , welcome to the cast , you 're a teenager , you 're a key , have fun . '' . characterization . in the beginning of season five dawn is portrayed as less mature than her age of fourteen . she is seen to be immature , sulky , and klutzy , often breaking objects , and she keeps a diary . buffy and joyce also infantilise her to some degree ; they are shown finding someone to babysit her , although they later become more relaxed about this as seen in '' no place like home '' . responding to fan complaints of dawn being whiny throughout season six , joss whedon says , '' i scratched my head . i was like , 'excuse me , she 's been abandoned by about six parental figures . the girl has huge issues . ' '' however , he acknowledges that he and the writers hit '' the same note for a while . we needed to make some changes . '' whedon has expressed regret over not being able to go further with dawn 's character in season seven , but , as he says , '' you get into a situation that you do like to stand alone but 'dawn goes on a date ' is not something that people would really sit for . '' author nikki stafford saw the season seven episode '' potential '' as an example of dawn 's growing maturity . she praises the character for taking charge and accepting the possibility she might be a potential slayer , and for quietly stepping back when she turns out to be wrong , without revealing how disappointed she really is . stafford states , '' dawn has come a long way from the annoying adolescent she was in season five , and the screechy , difficult teen she was in season six ( 'get out , get out , get out ! ' ) . she is a mature young woman , the same age as buffy was in season one , but she is handling her problems with even more grace and acceptance than her older sister did . '' . references .