Palearctic realm

history . in an 1858 paper for the proceedings of the linnean society , british zoologist philip sclater first identified six terrestrial zoogeographic realms of the world : palaearctic , aethiopian/afrotropic , indian/indomalayan , australasian , nearctic , and neotropical . the six indicated general groupings of fauna , based on shared biogeography and large-scale geographic barriers to migration . alfred wallace adopted sclater 's scheme for his book the geographical distribution of animals , published in 1876 . this is the same scheme that persists today , with relatively minor revisions , and the addition of two more realms : oceania and the antarctic realm . major ecological regions . the palearctic realm includes mostly subarctic climate and temperate climate ecoregions , which run across eurasia from western europe to the bering sea . euro-siberian region . the boreal and temperate euro-siberian region is the palearctic 's largest biogeography region , which transitions from tundra in the northern reaches of russia and scandinavia to the vast taiga , the boreal coniferous forests which run across the continent . south of the taiga are a belt of temperate broadleaf and mixed forests and temperate coniferous forests . this vast euro-siberian region is characterized by many shared plant and animal species , and has many affinities with the temperate and boreal regions of the nearctic realm of north america . eurasia and north america were often connected by the bering land bridge , and have very similar mammal and bird fauna , with many eurasian species having moved into north america , and fewer north american species having moved into eurasia . many zoologists consider the palearctic and nearctic to be a single holarctic realm . the palearctic and nearctic also share many plant species , which botanists call the arcto-tertiary geoflora . mediterranean basin . the lands bordering the mediterranean sea in southern europe , north africa , and western asia are home to the mediterranean basin ecoregions , which together constitute the world 's largest and most diverse mediterranean climate region of the world , with generally mild , rainy winters and hot , dry summers . the mediterranean basin 's mosaic of mediterranean forests , woodlands , and scrub are home to 13,000 endemic species . the mediterranean basin is also one of the world 's most endangered biogeographic regions ; only 4 % of the region 's original vegetation remains , and human activities , including overgrazing , deforestation , and conversion of lands for pasture , agriculture , and urbanization , have degraded much of the region . formerly the region was mostly covered with forests and woodlands , but heavy human use has reduced much of the region to the sclerophyll shrublands known as chaparral , matorral , maquis , or garrigue . conservation international has designated the mediterranean basin as one of the world 's biodiversity hotspots . sahara and arabian deserts . horse latitudes , including the atlantic coastal desert , sahara desert , and arabian desert , separates the palearctic and afrotropic ecoregions . this scheme includes these desert ecoregions in the palearctic realm ; other biogeographers identify the realm boundary as the transition zone between the desert ecoregions and the mediterranean basin ecoregions to the north , which places the deserts in the afrotropic , while others place the boundary through the middle of the desert . western and central asia . the caucasus mountains , which run between the black sea and the caspian sea , are a particularly rich mix of coniferous , broadleaf , and mixed forests , and include the temperate rain forests of the euxine-colchic deciduous forests ecoregion . central asia and the iranian plateau are home to dry steppe grasslands and desert basins , with montane forests , woodlands , and grasslands in the region 's high mountains and plateaux . in southern asia the boundary of the palearctic is largely altitudinal . the middle altitude foothills of the himalaya between about 2000–2500 m form the boundary between the palearctic and indomalaya ecoregions . east asia . china , korea and japan are more humid and temperate than adjacent siberia and central asia , and are home to rich temperate coniferous , broadleaf , and mixed forests , which are now mostly limited to mountainous areas , as the densely populated lowlands and river basins have been converted to intensive agricultural and urban use . east asia was not much affected by glaciation in the ice ages , and retained 96 percent of pliocene tree genera , while europe retained only 27 percent . in the subtropical region of southern china and southern edge of the himalayas , the palearctic temperate forests transition to the subtropical and tropical forests of indomalaya , creating a rich and diverse mix of plant and animal species . the mountains of southwest china are also designated as a biodiversity hotspot . in southeastern asia , high mountain ranges form tongues of palearctic flora and fauna in northern indochina and southern china . isolated small outposts ( sky islands ) occur as far south as central myanmar ( on nat ma taung , 3050 m ) , northernmost vietnam ( on fan si pan , 3140 m ) and the high mountains of taiwan . freshwater . the realm contains several important freshwater ecoregions as well , including the heavily developed rivers of europe , the rivers of russia , which flow into the arctic , baltic , black , and caspian seas , siberia 's lake baikal , the oldest and deepest lake on the planet , and japan 's ancient lake biwa . flora and fauna . one bird family , the accentors ( prunellidae ) , is endemic to the palearctic region . the holarctic has four other endemic bird families : the divers or loons ( gaviidae ) , grouse ( tetraoninae ) , auks ( alcidae ) , and waxwings ( bombycillidae ) . there are no endemic mammal orders in the region , but several families are endemic : calomyscidae ( mouse-like hamsters ) , prolagidae , and ailuridae ( red pandas ) . several mammal species originated in the palearctic and spread to the nearctic during the ice age , including the brown bear ( ursus arctos , known in north america as the grizzly ) , red deer ( cervus elaphus ) in europe and the closely related elk ( cervus canadensis ) in far eastern siberia , american bison ( bison bison ) , and reindeer ( rangifer tarandus , known in north america as the caribou ) . megafaunal extinctions . several large palearctic animals became extinct from the end of the pleistocene into historic times , including irish elk ( megaloceros giganteus ) , aurochs ( bos primigenius ) , woolly rhinoceros ( coelodonta antiquitatis ) , woolly mammoth ( mammuthus primigenius ) , north african elephant ( loxodonta africana pharaoensis ) , chinese elephant ( elephas maximus rubridens ) , cave bear ( ursus spelaeus ) , and european lion ( panthera leo europaea ) . palearctic terrestrial ecoregions . references . general references . amorosi , t . '' contributions to the zooarchaeology of iceland : some preliminary notes . '' in 'the anthropology of iceland ' ( eds . e.p . durrenberger & g . pálsson ) . iowa city : university of iowa press , pages 203–227 , 1989 . buckland , p.c . , et al . '' holt in eyjafjasveit , iceland : a paleoecological study of the impact of landnám . '' in acta archaeologica 61 : pp . & nbsp ; 252–271 . 1991 . url : url : url : edmund burke iii , “ the transformation of the middle eastern environment , 1500 b.c.e.-2000 c.e . ” in the environment and world history , ed . edmund burke iii and kenneth pomeranz . berkeley : university of california press . 2009 , 82–84 . external links . avionary 1500 bird species of the western and central palaearctic in 46 languages map of the ecozones