Traceability

measurement . the term measurement traceability is used to refer to an unbroken chain of comparisons relating an instrument 's measurements to a known standard . calibration to a traceable standard can be used to determine an instrument 's bias , precision , and accuracy . it may also be used to show a chain of custody - from current interpretation of evidence to the actual evidence in a legal context , or history of handling of any information . in many countries , national standards for weights and measures are maintained by a national metrological institute ( nmi ) which provides the highest level of standards for the calibration / measurement traceability infrastructure in that country . examples of government agencies include the national physical laboratory , uk ( npl ) the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) in the usa , the physikalisch-technische bundesanstalt ( ptb ) in germany , and the istituto nazionale di ricerca metrologica ( inrim ) in italy . as defined by nist , '' traceability of measurement requires the establishment of an unbroken chain of comparisons to stated references each with a stated uncertainty . '' a clock providing is traceable to a time standard such as coordinated universal time or international atomic time . the global positioning system is a source of traceable time . supply chain . in the supply chain , traceability may be both a regulatory and an ethical or environmental issue . moyer-lee , j . and m . prowse ( 2015 ) ‘ how traceability is restructuring malawi ’ s tobacco industry ’ development policy review 33:2 environmentally friendly retailers may choose to make information regarding their supply chain freely available to customers , illustrating the fact that the products they sell are manufactured in factories with safe working conditions , by workers that earn a fair wage , using methods that do not damage the environment . . materials . in regard to materials , traceability refers to the capability to associate a finished part with destructive test results performed on material from the same ingot with the same heat treatment , or to associate a finished part with results of a test performed on a sample from the same melt identified by the unique lot number of the material . destructive tests typically include chemical composition and mechanical strength tests . a heat number is usually marked on the part or raw material which identifies the ingot it came from , and a lot number may identify the group of parts that experienced the same heat treatment ( i.e . , were in the same oven at the same time ) . material traceability is important to the aerospace , nuclear , and process industry because they frequently make use of high strength materials that look identical to commercial low strength versions . in these industries , a part made of the wrong material is called '' counterfeit , '' even if the substitution was accidental . this same practice extends throughout industries using military hardware , including the fastener industry . . logistics . in logistics , traceability refers to the capability for tracing goods along the distribution chain on a batch number or series number basis . traceability is an important aspect for example in the automotive industry , where it makes recalls possible , or in the food industry where it contributes to food safety . the international standards organization epcglobal under gs1 has ratified the epcglobal network standards ( especially the epc information services epcis standard ) which codify the syntax and semantics for supply chain events and the secure method for selectively sharing supply chain events with trading partners . these standards for traceability have been used in successful deployments in many industries and there are now a wide range of products that are certified as being compatible with these standards . food processing . in food processing ( meat processing , fresh produce processing ) , the term traceability refers to the recording through means of barcodes or rfid tags & other tracking media , all movement of product and steps within the production process . one of the key reasons this is such a critical point is in instances where an issue of contamination arises , and a recall is required . where traceability has been closely adhered to , it is possible to identify , by precise date/time & exact location which goods must be recalled , and which are safe , potentially saving millions of dollars in the recall process . traceability within the food processing industry is also utilised to identify key high production & quality areas of a business , versus those of low return , and where points in the production process may be improved . in food processing software , traceability systems imply the use of a unique piece of data ( e.g . , order date/time or a serialized sequence number , generally through the use of a barcode / rfid ) which can be traced through the entire production flow , linking all sections of the business , including suppliers & future sales through the supply chain . messages and files at any point in the system can then be audited for correctness and completeness , using the traceability software to find the particular transaction and/or product within the supply chain . the european union 's general food law came into force in 2002 , making traceability compulsory for food and feed operators and requiring those businesses to implement traceability systems . the eu introduced its trade control and expert system , or traces , in april 2004 . the system provides a central database to track movement of animals within the eu and from third countries . general food law food safety australia has its national livestock identification system to keep track of livestock from birth to slaughterhouse . india has started taking initiatives for setting up traceability systems at government and corporate levels . grapenet , an initiative by agriculture and processed food products export development authority ( apeda ) , ministry of commerce , government of india is an example in this direction . grapenet is an internet based traceability software system for monitoring fresh grapes exported from india to the european union . grapenet is a first of its kind initiative in india that has put in place an end-to-end system for monitoring pesticide residue , achieve product standardization and facilitate tracing back from pallets to the farm of the indian grower , through the various stages of sampling , testing , certification and packing . grapenet won the national award ( gold ) , in the winners announced for the best e-governance initiatives undertaken in india in 2007 . grapenet was designed and developed by logicsoft , case study - hortinet – traceability system for horticulture products from india award-winning traceability solutions company , based in new delhi , india . the directorate generate foreign trade ( dgft ) , government of india , through its notification no.84 ( re-2008 ) /2004-2009 dated 04.02.2009 relating to amendment in foreign trade policy ( re2008 ) has mandated that export to the european union is permitted subject to registration with apeda , thereby making grapenet mandatory for all exports of fresh grapes from india to europe . uruguay has also designed a system called traceability & electronic information system of the beef industry . . forest products . within the context of supporting legal and sustainable forest supply chains , traceability has emerged in the last decade as a new tool to verify claims and assure buyers about the source of their materials . mostly led out of europe , and targeting countries where illegal logging has been a key problem ( flegt countries ) , timber tracking is now part of daily business for many enterprises and jurisdictions . full traceability offers advantages for multiple partners along the supply chain beyond certification systems , including : mechanism to comply with local and international policies and regulations . reducing the risk of illegal or non-compliant material entering the supply chains . providing coordination between authorities and relevant bodies . allowing automatic reconciliation of batches and volumes available . offering a method of stock control and monitoring . triggering real-time alerts of non-compliance . reducing likelihood of recording errors . improving effectiveness and efficiency . increasing transparency . promoting company integrity . a number of timber tracking companies are in operation to service global demand . enhanced traceability ensures that the supply chain data is 100 % accurate from the forest to the point of export . nowadays , there are techniques to predict geographical provenance of wood and contribute to the fight against illegal logging . . systems and software development . in systems and software development , the term traceability ( or requirements traceability ) refers to the ability to link product requirements back to stakeholders ' rationales and forward to corresponding design artifacts , code , and test cases . traceability supports numerous software engineering activities such as change impact analysis , compliance verification or traceback of code , regression test selection , and requirements validation . it is usually accomplished in the form of a matrix created for the verification and validation of the project . unfortunately , the practice of constructing and maintaining a traceability matrix ( rtm ) can be very arduous and over time the traces tend to erode into an inaccurate state unless date/time stamped . alternate automated approaches for generating traces using information retrieval methods have been developed . in transaction processing software , traceability implies use of a unique piece of data ( e.g . , order date/time or a serialized sequence number ) which can be traced through the entire software flow of all relevant application programs . messages and files at any point in the system can then be audited for correctness and completeness , using the traceability key to find the particular transaction . this is also sometimes referred to as the transaction footprint . health care . patient safety during healthcare service plays an important role in preventing delayed recovery or even mortality , by increasing and improving the quality of life of citizens , and is considered an indicator of the quality status of health services maintaining patient safety is a complex task and involves factors inherent to the environment and human actions . new technologies facilitate the traceability tools of patients and medications . this is particularly relevant for drugs that are considered high risk and cost . . the world health organization has recognized the importance of traceability for medical products of human origin ( mpho ) and urged member states '' to encourage the implementation of globally consistent coding systems to facilitate national and international traceability '' . null resolution wha63.22 . human organ and tissue transplantation . in : & nbsp ; sixty-third world health assembly , geneva , 17–21 may 2010 . volume 1 . resolutions and decisions . geneva : world health organization ; 2010 ( wha63/2010/rec/1 ) . & nbsp ; available from : & nbsp ; . security and crime-fighting . to prevent theft , and assist in locating stolen objects , goods may be marked indelibly or undetectably so that they may be determined to be stolen , and in some cases identified . for example , it is sometimes arranged that stolen banknotes are marked with indelible dye to show that they are stolen ; they can be identified by their unique serial numbers . announcing that cash machines were fitted with sprayers of smartwater , an invisible gel detectable for years , to mark thieves and their clothing when breaking into or tampering with the machine was found in a 2016 pilot scheme to reduce theft by 90 % . . see also . provenance . references . majcen n . , taylor p . ( editors ) , practical examples on traceability , measurement uncertainty and validation in chemistry , vol 1 ; , 2010 . firma list en bedrog est . 2006 . external links . national institute of standards and technology nist policy on traceability '' traceability '' from the global legal information network subject term index video which explains the relationship between calibration - traceability - accreditation with flow measuring devices technology tools in the health sector to control and improve the efficiency of their critical processes . de : rückführbarkeit