Kerogen

formation . kerogen is formed during sedimentary diagenesis from the degradation of living matter . the original organic matter can comprise lacustrine and marine algae and plankton and terrestrial higher-order plants . during diagenesis , large biopolymers from , e.g . , proteins , lipids , and carbohydrates in the original organic matter decompose partially or completely . this breakdown process can be viewed as the reverse of photosynthesis . tucker m.e . ( 1988 ) sedimentary petrology , an introduction , blackwell , london . p197 . these resulting units can then polycondense to form geopolymers . the formation of geopolymers in this way accounts for the large molecular weights and diverse chemical compositions associated with kerogen . the smallest units are the fulvic acids , the medium units are the humic acids , and the largest units are the humins . this polymerization usually happens alongside the formation and/or sedimentation of one or more mineral components resulting in a sedimentary rock like oil shale . when kerogen is contemporaneously deposited with geologic material , subsequent sedimentation and progressive burial or overburden provide elevated pressure and temperature owing to lithostatic and geothermal gradients in earth 's crust . resulting changes in the burial temperatures and pressures lead to further changes in kerogen composition including loss of hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , sulfur , and their associated functional groups , and subsequent isomerization and aromatization such changes are indicative of the thermal maturity state of kerogen . aromatization allows for molecular stacking in sheets , which in turn drives changes in physical characteristics of kerogen , such as increasing molecular density , vitrinite reflectance , and spore coloration ( yellow to orange to brown to black with increasing depth/thermal maturity ) . during the process of maturity ( geology ) , kerogen breaks down in high-temperature pyrolysis reactions to form lower-molecular-weight products including bitumen , oil , and gas . the extent of thermal maturation controls the nature of the product , with lower thermal maturities yielding mainly bitumen/oil and higher thermal maturities yielding gas . these generated species are partially expelled from the kerogen-rich source rock and in some cases can charge into a reservoir rock . kerogen takes on additional importance in unconventional resources , particularly shale . in these formations , oil and gas are produced directly from the kerogen-rich source rock ( i.e . the source rock is also the reservoir rock ) . much of the porosity in these shales is found to be hosted within the kerogen , rather than between mineral grains as occurs in conventional reservoir rocks . thus , kerogen controls much of the storage and transport of oil and gas in shale . composition . kerogen is a complex mixture of organic chemical compounds that make up the most abundant fraction of organic matter in sedimentary rocks . as kerogen is a mixture of organic materials , it is not defined by a single chemical formula . its chemical composition varies substantially between and even within sedimentary formations . for example , kerogen from the green river formation oil shale deposit of western north america contains elements in the proportions carbon 215 : hydrogen 330 : oxygen 12 : nitrogen 5 : sulfur 1 . kerogen is insoluble in normal organic solvents in part because of its high molecular mass of its component compounds . the soluble portion is known as asphalt . when heated to the right temperatures in the earth 's crust , ( oil window c . & nbsp ; 50–150 & nbsp ; °c , gas window c . & nbsp ; 150–200 & nbsp ; °c , both depending on how quickly the source rock is heated ) some types of kerogen release crude oil or natural gas , collectively known as hydrocarbons ( fossil fuels ) . when such kerogens are present in high concentration in rocks such as organic-rich mudrocks shale , they form possible source rocks . shales that are rich in kerogen but have not been heated to required temperature to generate hydrocarbons instead may form oil shale deposits . the chemical composition of kerogen has been analyzed by several forms of solid state spectroscopy . these experiments typically measure the speciations ( bonding environments ) of different types of atoms in kerogen . one technique is 13 c nmr spectroscopy , which measures carbon speciation . nmr experiments have found that carbon in kerogen can range from almost entirely aliphatic ( orbital hybridisation sp3 ) to almost entirely aromatic ( orbital hybridisation sp2 ) , with kerogens of higher thermal maturity typically having higher abundance of aromatic carbon . another technique is raman spectroscopy . raman scattering is characteristic of , and can be used to identify , specific vibrational modes and symmetries of molecular bonds . the first-order raman spectra of kerogen comprises two principal peaks ; a so-called g band ( '' graphitic '' ) attributed to in-plane vibrational modes of well-ordered sp 2 carbon and a so-called d band ( '' disordered '' ) from symmetric vibrational modes of sp 2 carbon associated with lattice defects and discontinuities . the relative spectral position ( raman shift ) and intensity of these carbon species is shown to correlate to thermal maturity , with kerogens of higher thermal maturity having higher abundance of graphitic/ordered aromatic carbons . complementary and consistent results have been obtained with infrared spectroscopy , which show that kerogen has higher fraction of aromatic carbon and shorter lengths of aliphatic chains at higher thermal maturities . these results can be explained by the preferential removal of aliphatic carbons by cracking reactions during pyrolysis , where the cracking typically occurs at weak c-c bonds beta to aromatic rings and results in the replacement of a long aliphatic chain with a methyl group . at higher maturities , when all labile aliphatic carbons have already been removed—in other words , when the kerogen has no remaining oil-generation potential—further increase in aromaticity can occur from the conversion of aliphatic bonds ( such as alicyclic rings ) to aromatic bonds . ir spectroscopy is sensitive to carbon-oxygen bonds such as quinones , ketones , and esters , so the technique can also be used to investigate oxygen speciation . it is found that the oxygen content of kerogen decreases during thermal maturation ( as has also been observed by elemental analysis ) , with relatively little observable change in oxygen speciation . similarly , sulfur speciation can be investigated with x-ray absorption near edge structure ( xanes ) spectroscopy , which is sensitive to sulfur-containing functional groups such as sulfides , thiophenes , and sulfoxides . sulfur content in kerogen generally decreases with thermal maturity , and sulfur speciation includes a mix of sulfides and thiophenes at low thermal maturities and is further enriched in thiophenes at high maturities . overall , changes in kerogen composition with respect to heteroatom chemistry occur predominantly at low thermal maturities ( bitumen and oil windows ) , while changes with respect to carbon chemistry occur predominantly at high thermal maturities ( oil and gas windows ) . microstructure . the microstructure of kerogen also evolves during thermal maturation , as has been inferred by scanning electron microscope ( sem ) imaging showing the presence of abundant internal pore networks within the lattice of thermally mature kerogen . analysis by gas sorption demonstrated that the internal specific surface area of kerogen increases by an order of magnitude ( ~ 40 to 400 m 2 /g ) during thermal maturation . x-ray and neutron diffraction studies have examined the spacing between carbon atoms in kerogen , revealing during thermal maturation a shortening of carbon-carbon distances in covalently bonded carbons ( related to the transition from primarily aliphatic to primarily aromatic bonding ) but a lengthening of carbon-carbon distances in carbons at greater bond separations ( related to the formation of kerogen-hosted porosity ) . this evolution is attributed to the formation of kerogen-hosted pores left behind as segments of the kerogen molecule are cracked off during thermal maturation . physical properties . these changes in composition and microstructure result in changes in the properties of kerogen . for example , the skeletal density of kerogen increases from approximately 1.1 g/ml at low thermal maturity to 1.7 g/ml at high thermal maturity . guidry , k . et al . ( 1995 ) development of laboratory and petrophysical techniques for evaluating shale reservoirs , final report , gas research institute report gri-95/0496 . this evolution is consistent with the change in carbon speciation from predominantly aliphatic ( similar to wax , density 2 g/ml ) with increasing thermal maturity . spatial heterogeneity . additional studies have explored the spatial heterogeneity of kerogen at small length scales . individual particles of kerogen arising from different inputs are identified and assigned as different macerals . this variation in starting material may lead to variations in composition between different kerogen particles , leading to spatial heterogeneity in kerogen composition at the micron length scale . heterogeneity between kerogen particles may also arise from local variations in catalysis of pyrolysis reactions due to the nature of the minerals surrounding different particles . measurements performed with atomic force microscopy coupled to infrared spectroscopy ( afm-ir ) and correlated with organic petrography have analyzed the evolution of the chemical composition and mechanical properties of individual macerals of kerogen with thermal maturation at the nanoscale . these results indicate that all macerals decrease in oxygen content and increase in aromaticity ( decrease in aliphalicity ) during thermal maturation , but some macerals undergo large changes while other macerals undergo relatively small changes . in addition , macerals that are richer in aromatic carbon are mechanically stiffer than macerals that are richer in aliphatic carbon , as expected because highly aromatic forms of carbon ( such as graphite ) are stiffer than highly aliphatic forms of carbon ( such as wax ) . types . labile kerogen breaks down to generate principally liquid hydrocarbons ( i.e . , oil ) , refractory kerogen breaks down to generate principally gaseous hydrocarbons , and inert kerogen generates no hydrocarbons but forms graphite . in organic petrography , the different components of kerogen can be identified by microscopic inspection and are classified as macerals . this classification was developed originally for coal ( a sedimentary rock that is rich in organic matter of terrestrial origin ) but is now applied to the study of other kerogen-rich sedimentary deposits . the van krevelen diagram is one method of classifying kerogen by 'types ' , where kerogens form distinct groups when the ratios of hydrogen to carbon and oxygen to carbon are compared . example of a van krevelen diagram . type i : algal/sapropelic . type i kerogens are characterized by high initial hydrogen-to-carbon ( h/c ) ratios and low initial oxygen-to-carbon ( o/c ) ratios . this kerogen is rich in lipid-derived material and is commonly , but not always , from algal organic matter in lacustrine ( freshwater ) environments . on a mass basis , rocks containing type i kerogen yield the largest quantity of hydrocarbons upon pyrolysis . hence , from the theoretical view , shales containing type i kerogen are the most promising deposits in terms of conventional oil retorting . hydrogen : carbon atomic ratio > 1.25 oxygen : carbon atomic ratio krause ff , 2009 . type iv : inert/residual . type iv kerogen comprises mostly inert organic matter in the form of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons . they have no potential to produce hydrocarbons . weber g . , green j . , ‘ 'guide to oil shale ' ’ . nationalconference of state legislatures . washington d.c . usa.p . 21 , 1981 . hydrogen : carbon atomic ratio nakamura , t . ( 2005 ) '' post-hydration thermal metamorphism of carbonaceous chondrites '' , journal of mineralogical and petrological sciences , volume 100 , page 268 , ( pdf ) retrieved 1 september 2007 such material is thought to have formed the terrestrial planets . kerogen materials have been detected also in interstellar medium around stars . papoular , r . ( 2001 ) '' the use of kerogen data in understanding the properties and evolution of interstellar carbonaceous dust '' , astronomy and astrophysics , volume 378 , pages 597–607 , ( pdf ) retrieved 1 september 2007 the curiosity rover has detected organic deposits similar to kerogen in mudstone samples in gale crater on mars using a revised drilling technique . the presence of benzene and propane also indicates the possible presence of kerogen-like materials , from which hydrocarbons are derived . . see also . . references . external links . european association of organic geochemists organic geochemistry ( journal ) animation illustrating kerogene formation ( approx t 50s ) '' oil and gas formation '' youtube clip by earthscience westernaustralia