The City of the Sun

synopsis . the book is presented as a dialogue between '' a grandmaster of the knights hospitaller and a genoese sea-captain '' . inspired by plato 's republic and the description of atlantis in timaeus , it describes a theocracy society where goods , women and children are held in common . it also resembles the city of adocentyn in the picatrix , an arabic grimoire of astrological magic . in the final part of the work , campanella prophesies & mdash ; in the veiled language of astrology & mdash ; that the spanish kings , in alliance with the pope , are destined to be the instruments of a divine plan : the final victory of the true faith and its diffusion in the whole world . while one could argue that campanella was simply thinking of the conquest of the new world , it seems that this prophecy should be interpreted in the light of a work written shortly before the city of the sun , the monarchy in spain , in which campanella exposes his vision of a unified , peaceful world governed by a theocracy monarchy . the city . protected and defended by seven circles of walls , constructed of palaces that serve as dwellings for the citizens , the city is located in a place with an ideal climate , conducive to physical health , and on the slope of a hillside because the air there is lighter and purer . one of the most significant aspects of this community is the distribution of work . once again campanella engages in an explicit polemic with aristotle , who had excluded artisans , peasants and those involved in manual labor from the category of full citizenship and from the highest levels of virtue . in the city of the sun no occupation is vile or base , and all are of equal dignity—in fact , those workers who are required to expend greater effort , such as artisans and builders , receive more praise . everyone must be acquainted with all lines of work , and then each person practices the one for which he shows the greatest aptitude . they have no servants , and no service is regarded as unworthy . the only thing that they consider to be despicable is idleness , and in this way they come to privilege the decent work and to overturn an absurd conception of nobility , linked to inactivity and vice . thanks to the equal division of labour , it is sufficient for each person to spend only four working time ; but it is essential that they all work , because the idleness of one would have repercussions on the profit and the effort of the others . the citizens possess nothing ; instead , everything is held in common , from food to houses , from the acquisition of knowledge to the exercise of activities , from honors to amusements , from women to children . there are “ officials ” in charge of the distribution of each thing , who keep an eye out and make sure that this happens justly , but no one can appropriate anything for himself . according to them , possession of a house or a family reinforces “ self-love ” , with all the dire consequences this generates . they live “ like philosophers in common ” because they are aware of the negative impact , not only on the social but also on the moral level , of an unequal distribution of goods . one of the most spectacular and imaginative aspects of the city of the sun , which immediately struck its readers , are the painted walls of the city . apart from enclosing and protecting the city , the walls are also the curtains of an extraordinary theater and the pages of an illustrated encyclopedia of knowledge . the walls of the palaces are painted with images of all the arts and sciences . starting with the wall that holds up the columns of the temple and gradually descending in large circles , following the order of the planets from mercury to saturn , we encounter illustrations of the heavens and the stars , of mathematical figures , of every country on earth and of all the marvels and secrets of the mineral , vegetable and animal worlds , until we arrive at mankind : on the internal wall of the sixth circle the mechanical arts and their inventors are represented . campanella was greatly interested in all ingenious discoveries , and in the city of the sun he provides many examples of curious inventions , such as vessels able to navigate without wind and without sails , and stirrups that make it possible to guide a horse using only one 's feet , leaving one 's hands free . on the external wall legislators are depicted ; and it is here , in “ a place of great honor ” —but along with moses , osiris , jove , mercury and muhammad—that the genoese sailor recognizes christ and the twelve apostles . knowledge is not enclosed in books kept in separate places such as libraries but is openly on show to everyone 's eyes . visualizing in this manner promotes a quicker , easier and more efficient form of learning , in that it is connected to the art of memory , which underlines the evocative and emotive power of images . from a tender age children run around in this theater of knowledge , appropriately guided and following correct itineraries , so that they learn joyously , as if playing a game , without effort or pain . in addition to the common ownership and the painted walls , another characteristic feature of the city of the sun , one that is more difficult and disconcerting and that campanella himself describes as “ hard and arduous ” , is the community of wives . this is the solution adopted by the citizens to the problem of generation . echoing the teaching of the pythagorean ocellus lucanus , campanella says that they are amazed that humans are preoccupied by the breeding of horses and dogs while neglecting their own . the act of generation entails a large responsibility of the part of the parents ; and if it is exercised in an incorrect manner , it can give rise to a long chain of suffering . moreover , there is a close connection between a person 's natural “ complexion ” or character , which is inborn and not afterwards modifiable , and moral virtue , which needs a suitable terrain in order to take root and prosper . generation should therefore respect precise norms and not be entrusted to chance nor to individual sentiments . the citizens distinguish between love and sex . affection between men and women , based on friendship and respect more than sexual attraction , is expressed in acts that are far removed from sexuality , such as exchanges of gifts , conversation and dancing . sexual generation , on the other hand , must obey strict rules regarding the physical and moral qualities of the parents and the choice of a propitious time for conception , determined by an astrologer . such a union is not the expression of a personal , emotional or passionate relationship , but rather is connected to the social responsibility of generation and to love for the collective community . the religious beliefs of the citizenry , even though they include fundamental principles of christianity ( such as the immortality of the soul and divine providence ) , form a natural religion that establishes a sort of osmosis between the city and the stars . the temple is open and not surrounded by walls . in one of his poems campanella promises : “ i shall make the heavens a temple and the stars an altar ” . le poesie , 1998 , p . 327 on the vault of the temple 's dome the stars are depicted together with their influence on earthly affairs . the altar , on which are placed a celestial and a terrestrial globe , is in the form of the sun . prayers are directed toward the heavens . the task of the twenty-four priests , who live in cells located in the highest part of the temple , is to observe the stars and , using astronomical instruments , to take account of all their movements . it is their job to indicate the times most favorable for generation and for agricultural labors , acting in this way as intermediaries between god and human beings . trento 1602 manuscript . in trento 's civic library , there is kept a 1602 manuscript of the city of the sun ( shelf mark bct1-1538 ) , discovered in 1943 by italian historian luigi firpo . it is considered the most ancient manuscript copy that has survived to present time . the text arrived at the library through the baron antonio mazzetti 's ( 1781–1841 ) bequest . he was a book collector and bibliophile and , as written in his will , he donated his book heritage to the civic library . the manuscript was restored in 1980 . it is made of parchment tied on paperboard . it consists of two codicological unities joined together years after their writing : the first is a venetian historical chronicle from 1297 to 1582 , followed by a list of '' hospedali di venezia '' ( '' hospitals in venice '' ) . at the bottom , it is sewed to a small-sized booklet independently enumerated : it 's a copy by anonymous author of '' the city of the sun '' . the transcription is meticulous and there only are a few insignificant mistakes . see also . new atlantis communism ideal city iambulus