Beatrice Wood

childhood . beatrice wood was born in san francisco , california , the daughter of wealthy socialites . after the san francisco earthquake of 1906 , the family moved to new york . despite her parents ' strong opposition , wood insisted on pursuing a career in the arts . eventually her parents agreed to let her study painting . because she was fluent in french , they sent her to paris , where she studied acting at the comédie-française and art at the prestigious académie julian . the onset of world war i forced wood to return to the united states . she continued acting with a french repertory company in new york city , performing more than sixty roles in two years . she worked for several years performing on the stage . internet broadway database : beatrice wood credits on broadway . dada and the avant-garde . wood 's involvement in the avant garde began with her introduction to marcel duchamp . he and his friend henri-pierre roché , a man fourteen years her senior , met her in new york in 1916 while she was visiting the composer edgard varèse , who was hospitalized with a broken leg . the three worked together to create the blind man and subsequently rongwrong , magazines that were two of the earliest manifestations of the dada art movement in the united states . the publication was intended to defend the submission of a urinal by duchamp who had submitted it under the name r . mutt to the first exhibition of the society of independent artists in april 1917 . wood wrote the oft-quoted statement that appeared in the publication as an unsigned editorial : '' as for plumbing , that is absurd . the only works of art america has given are her plumbing and her bridges . '' wood also submitted to the exhibition and her piece un peu d'eau dans du savon ' , which she had made alongside duchamp in his studio , was accepted and was displayed . the work was the image of a nude female figure rising from her bath , but because wood attached an actual piece of soap to what she called the '' tactical position '' , the work drew a great deal of attention and critical reaction . . roché , duchamp , and jules et jim . though she was most involved with roché , the two often spent time with duchamp , creating a kind of love triangle . since the late 20th century , biographies of wood have associated roché 's 1956 novel jules et jim ( and the 1962 film adaptation ) , with the relationship among duchamp , wood , and roché . other sources link their triangle to roché 's unfinished novel , victor . beatrice wood commented on this topic in her 1985 autobiography , i shock myself : roché lived in paris with his wife denise , and had by now written jules et jim . because the story concerns two young men who are close friends and a woman who loves them both , people have wondered how much was based on roché , marcel , and me . i can not say what memories or episodes inspired roché , but the characters bear only passing resemblance to those of us in real life ! jules et jim is properly associated with the triangle among roché , german writer franz hessel , and helen grund , who married hessel . bright lights film journal jules and jim . arensbergs and their circle . wood met the art patrons walter arensberg , who became her lifelong friends . from 1915 through 1920 , they held regular gatherings at their apartment at 33 west 67th street in manhattan in which artists , writers , and poets were invited to gather , where they were given drinks , hors d'oeuvres , and engaged in intellectual discussions . besides duchamp , roché , and her , the group included many other artists of the avant-garde : edgard varese , charles sheeler , joseph stella , man ray and francis picabia . wood 's relationship with these artists and others associated with the avant-garde movement of the early 20th century , earned her the designation as '' mama of dada '' . drawings . marcel duchamp encouraged her to draw , inviting her to use his studio as a place in which to work . she later illustrated her autobiography , i shock myself . she signed her early drawings '' bea '' , her name in french , but after taking up pottery , she signed most of her work as '' beato '' , her nickname . in 2014 , a series of her drawings were exhibited as part of the permanent collection of the santa barbara museum of art in santa barbara , california . sculpture . figures were an important part of the artist 's work during the 1930s and 40s . she explored both vessel forms and sculpture throughout her career . as her skills increased , wood consciously retained a naive , illustrative style to communicate her commentaries on life and love . she called these works her '' sophisticated primitives '' . this approach makes clear her love of all types of non-western folk and primitive art . garth clark , gilded vessel : the lustrous art and life of beatrice wood , guild publishing , 2001 . ceramics career . while on a trip to hear j . krishnamurti speak in the netherlands , wood bought a pair of baroque plates with a lusterware . she wanted to find a matching teapot to go along with it , but was unsuccessful . deciding to make the teapot herself , she enrolled in a ceramic class at hollywood high school . throughout her long career in ceramics , she never did make the matching teapot . this hobby turned into a passion which lasted another sixty years , and she studied with a number of leading ceramists including gertrude and otto natzler . ultimately , wood developed a signature style of glazing , an all-over , in-glaze luster that draws the metallic salts to the surface of the glaze by starving the kiln of oxygen . gilded vessel : the lustrous art and life of beatrice wood , garth clark , guild publishing , 2001 . ojai and longevity . in 1947 , beatrice wood felt her career was established enough for her to build a home . she settled in ojai , california in 1948 to be near the indian philosopher j . krishnamurti . she became a lifelong member of the theosophical society adyar . these associations greatly influenced her artistic philosophies . she also taught and lived on the same land as the happy valley school , now known as besant hill school . at the age of 90 , wood became a writer , having been encouraged to write by her friend anais nin , a french writer . her best-known book is her autobiography , i shock myself ( 1985 ) . when asked the secret to her longevity , she responded , '' i owe it all to art books , chocolates , and young men . '' . legacy and honors . in 1994 , the smithsonian institution named wood an '' esteemed american artist '' . wood left her home and studio to the happy valley foundation . in 2005 it was adapted and opened as the beatrice wood center for the arts . films inspired by wood . beatrice wood : mama of dada : this documentary , by film maker tom neff , was released as a 16 & nbsp ; mm film in los angeles , california on march 3 , 1993 , to coincide with wood 's 100th birthday . wood partially inspired the 101-year-old character of '' rose '' in james cameron 's epic 1997 film , titanic . according to cameron , bill paxton 's wife had loaned him a copy of i shock myself . as he started reading it , he realized that the first chapter describes almost literally the character i was already writing for '' old rose '' . when i met her beatrice wood she was charming , creative and devastatingly funny . of course , the film 's rose is only a refraction of beatrice , combined with many fictional elements . titanic : james cameron 's illustrated screenplay , overleaf for page 7 , harper , 1998 according to her obituary in the ojai valley news , wood awarded the fifth annual beatrice wood film award to cameron . , la weekly . diaries . beatrice wood kept daily journals for 85 years . in 2011 , francis m . naumann and his wife , marie t . keller , edited a selection of her journals involving her life in the world of art . see francis m . naumann and marie t . keller , eds , '' my life in art : excerpts from the diaries of beatrice wood '' , in beatrice wood : career woman—drawings , paintings , vessels , and objects , exh . cat . , santa monica museum of art , september 10 , 2011march 3 , 2012 , pp . 72-131 . '' unearthing lost treasures in california '' , new york times , 13 march 2010 . sources . . . references . other . cameron , james . titanic : james cameron 's illustrated screenplay . new york , harper : 1998 . jeanne marie laskas . '' beatrice wood : breaking the mold '' , in we remember : women born at the turn of the century tell the stories of their lives in words and pictures . new york : william morrow and co . , 1999 . external links . images of tides in a man 's life , ceramic sculpture by wood at the smithsonian american art museum beatrice wood papers , 1894-1998 , bulk 1930-1990 . archives of american art , smithsonian institution beatrice wood papers . yale collection of american literature , beinecke rare book and manuscript library . beatrice wood center for the arts archives at new mexico museum of art oral history interview with beatrice wood , 1976 aug . 26 , archives of american art , smithsonian institution biography , philadelphia museum of art ] beatrice wood obit , national public radio american museum of ceramic art , beatrice wood ceramics , permanent collection macneill , bonnie . '' mama of dada beatrice wood dies at 105 '' , the ojai valley news . ( issue 44 , friday , march 13 , 1998 , p . a-1 ) . edward weston , r . m . schindler , anna zacsek , lloyd wright , lawrence tibbett , reginald pole , beatrice wood and their dramatic circles for much on wood 's early relationships with walter and louise arensberg , reginald pole , and lloyd wright and their dramatic circles .