Algeciras Conference

background . britain and france 's entente cordiale of 1904 had defined diplomatic cooperation between them and recognized british authority over egypt and french control in morocco ( with some spanish concessions ) . germany saw this development putting an end to the rivalry between britain and france , which would further isolate germany in european affairs . on 31 march 1905 , germany 's kaiser wilhelm ii visited tangier , and delivered a sabre-rattling speech calling for an international conference to ensure morocco 's independence , with war the alternative . historian heather jones argues that germany 's use of warlike rhetoric was a deliberate diplomatic ploy : : another german strategy was to stage dramatic gestures , and dangerously play up the threat of war , in the belief that this would impress upon other european powers the importance of consultation with germany on imperial issues : the fact that france had not considered it necessary to make a bilateral agreement with germany over morocco rankled , especially given germany was deeply insecure about its newly acquired great power status . hence germany opted for an increase in belligerent rhetoric and , theatrically , kaiser wilhelm ii dramatically interrupted a mediterranean cruise to visit tangier , where he declared germany 's support for the sultan 's independence and integrity of his kingdom , turning morocco overnight into an international 'crisis . ' heather jones , '' algeciras revisited : european crisis and conference diplomacy , 16 january-7 april 1906 . '' ( eui workingpaper mwp 2009/1 , 2009 ) , p 5 online german diplomats believed they could convince us president theodore roosevelt to challenge french intervention in morocco . roosevelt , then mediating the russo-japanese war and aware of the u.s . senate 's stance to avoid involvement in european affairs , was disinclined to become involved in the moroccan crisis . however , with the situation in june 1905 worsening to the point of war between germany and france ( and possibly britain ) , in july roosevelt persuaded the french to attend a january peace conference in algeciras . germany had hoped that the conference would weaken the entente cordiale . wilhelm ii had thought he could form an alliance with france if most of their demands were met . he also thought that better relations with russia were possible , because the revolution of 1905 and russo-japanese war had put them in a weak , ally-hungry position . however , germany was somewhat excluded in the initial decisions , and britain 's foreign secretary sir edward grey showed britain 's support of france in the conference via meetings with french ambassador jules cambon , which made the entente cordiale actually grow stronger . following their failed attempt to isolate britain , germany furthered the growing anglo-german naval race with passage of the third naval law in 1906 . the overall contribution towards the outbreak of the first world war can then seen to be the separation of germany and her allies ( triple alliance ) and britain , france and russia , which , the following year , would become the triple entente . the next major event to thicken the tension between the two would be the bosnian crisis . margaret macmillan , the war that ended peace : the road to 1914 ( 2012 ) pp 378 -- 398 . . moroccan delegation . sultan abdelaziz of morocco was represented by muhammad al-muqri and muhammad torres . al-muqri expressed frustration at the translation situation , commenting : '' we 're sitting here like statues ; we ca n't understand a thing of what is said . '' the moroccan delegation had no choice but to use si kaddour benghabrit , an algerian translator present at the conference in the service of france . another difficulty the moroccans faced was the difficulty of contacting the sultan , who should have been informed of every detail of what transpired at the conference . the researcher bazegh abdessamad wrote : '' no decision could be made—whether affirmative or negative—without his instruction and ordinance . the representatives of the us and european nations could easily contact their capitals to consult their respective governments , while fes had no telephone or telegraph , nor was it served by any rail or paved road that would allow them to inform the sultan of developments at the conference . '' . outcome . the final act of the conference of algeciras , signed on 7 april 1906 , covered the organisation of morocco 's police and customs , regulations concerning the repression of the smuggling of armaments and concessions to the european bankers from a new bank al-maghrib , issuing banknotes backed by gold , with a 40-year term . the new state bank was to act as morocco 's central bank , with a strict cap on the spending of the sherifian empire , and administrators appointed by the national banks , which guaranteed the loans : the german empire , united kingdom , france and spain . spanish coinage continued to circulate . the right of europeans to own land was established , whilst taxes were to be levied towards public works . the sultan of morocco retained control of a police force in the six port cities , which was to be composed entirely of moroccan muslims ( budgeted at an average salary of a mere 1000 pesetas a year ) but now to be instructed by french and spanish officers , who would oversee the paymaster ( the amin ) , regulate discipline and be able to be recalled and replaced by their governments . the inspector-general in charge would be swiss and reside in tangiers . at the last moment , the moroccan delegates found that they were unable to sign the final act , but a decree of sultan abdelaziz of morocco on 18 june finally ratified it . attendees at the conference . germany – joseph de radowitz and christian , count of tattenbach austro-hungary – rudolph , count of welsersheimb and leopold , count bolesta-koziebrodzki belgium – baron maurice joostens and conrad , count of buisseret steenbecque spain – don juan pérez-caballero y ferrer us – henry white and samuel r gummere france – paul révoil and eugène regnault , si kaddour benghabrit great britain – arthur nicolson italy – emilio , marquis visconti-venosta and giulio malmusi morocco – el hadj muhammad torres and el hadj muhammad al-muqri netherlands – jonkheer hannibal testa portugal – antónio maria tovar de lemos pereira ( count of tovar ) and francisco roberto da silva ferrão de carvalho martens ( count of martens ferrão ) russia – arthur cassini and basile de bacheracht sweden – robert sager . see also . international relations of the great powers ( 1814–1919 ) entente cordiale 1904 first moroccan crisis march 1905–may 1906 bombardment of casablanca ( 1907 ) hafidiya second moroccan crisis 1911 causes of world war i . references . . further reading . anderson , eugene n . the first moroccan crisis , 1904-1906 ( 1930 ) eastman , anthony f . '' the algeciras conference , 1906 . '' the southern quarterly 1 ( january 1969 ) :185-205 online esthus , raymond a , theodore roosevelt and the international rivalries ( 1970 ) pp 88–111 geiss , immanuel . german foreign policy 1871 – 1914 ( 1976 ) 133-36 . jones , heather . '' algeciras revisited : european crisis and conference diplomacy , 16 january-7 april 1906 . '' ( eui workingpaper mwp 2009/1 , 2009 ) . online macmillan , margaret . the war that ended peace : the road to 1914 ( 2012 ) pp 378 -- 398 . external links .