Bruxism

signs and symptoms . most people who brux are unaware of the problem , either because there are no symptoms , or because the symptoms are not understood to be associated with a clenching and grinding problem . the symptoms of sleep bruxism are usually most intense immediately after waking , and then slowly abate , and the symptoms of a grinding habit which occurs mainly while awake tend to worsen through the day , and may not be present on waking . bruxism may cause a variety of signs and symptoms , including : excessive tooth wear , particularly attrition , which flattens the occlusal ( biting ) surface , but also possibly other types of tooth wear such as abfraction , where notches form around the neck of the teeth at the gumline . tooth fractures , and repeated failure of dental restorations ( fillings , crowns , etc . ) . hypersensitive teeth , ( e.g . dental pain when drinking a cold liquid ) caused by wearing away of the thickness of insulating layers of dentin and enamel around the dental pulp . inflammation of the periodontal ligament of teeth , which may make them sore to bite on , and possibly also a degree of loosening of the teeth . a grinding or tapping noise during sleep , sometimes detected by a partner or a parent . noises are rarely associated with awake bruxism . other parafunctional activity which may occur together with bruxism : cheek biting ( which may manifest as morsicatio buccarum and/or linea alba ) , and/or lip biting . a burning sensation on the tongue ( see : glossodynia ) , possibly related to a coexistent '' tongue thrusting '' parafunctional activity . indentations of the teeth in the tongue ( '' crenated tongue '' or '' scalloped tongue '' ) . hypertrophy of the muscles of mastication ( increase in the size of the muscles that move the jaw ) , particularly the masseter muscle . tenderness , pain or fatigue of the muscles of mastication , which may get worse during chewing or other jaw movement . trismus ( restricted mouth opening ) . pain or tenderness of the temporomandibular joints , which may manifest as preauricular pain ( in front of the ear ) , or pain referred to the ear ( otalgia ) . clicking of the temporomandibular joints . headaches , particularly pain in the temples , caused by muscle pain associated with the temporalis muscle . bruxism is usually detected because of the effects of the process ( most commonly tooth wear and pain ) , rather than the process itself . the large forces that can be generated during bruxism can have detrimental effects on the components of masticatory system , namely the teeth , the periodontium and the articulation of the mandible with the skull ( the temporomandibular joints ) . the muscles of mastication that act to move the jaw can also be affected since they are being utilized over and above of normal function . . tooth wear . many publications list tooth wear as a consequence of bruxism , but some report a lack of a positive relationship between tooth wear and bruxism . tooth wear caused by tooth-to-tooth contact is termed attrition . this is the most usual type of tooth wear that occurs in bruxism , and affects the occlusal surface ( the biting surface ) of the teeth . the exact location and pattern of attrition depends on how the bruxism occurs , e.g . , when the canines and incisors of the opposing arches are moved against each other laterally , by the action of the medial pterygoid muscles , this can lead to the wearing down of the incisal edges of the teeth . to grind the front teeth , most people need to posture their mandible forwards , unless there is an existing edge to edge , class iii incisal relationship . people with bruxism may also grind their posterior teeth ( back teeth ) , which wears down the cusps of the occlusal surface . once tooth wear progresses through the enamel layer , the exposed dentin layer is softer and more vulnerable to wear and caries . if enough of the tooth is worn away or decayed , the tooth will effectively be weakened , and may fracture under the increased forces that occur in bruxism . abfraction is another type of tooth wear that is postulated to occur with bruxism , although some still argue whether this type of tooth wear is a reality . abfraction cavities are said to occur usually on the facial aspect of teeth , in the cervical region as v-shaped defects caused by flexing of the tooth under occlusal forces . it is argued that similar lesions can be caused by long-term forceful toothbrushing . however , the fact that the cavities are v-shaped does not suggest that the damage is caused by toothbrush abrasion , and that some abfraction cavities occur below the level of the gumline , i.e . , in an area shielded from toothbrush abrasion , supports the validity of this mechanism of tooth wear . in addition to attrition , erosion is said to synergistically contribute to tooth wear in some bruxists , according to some sources . . tooth mobility . the view that occlusal trauma ( as may occur during bruxism ) is a causative factor in gingivitis and periodontitis is not widely accepted . it is thought that the periodontal ligament may respond to increased occlusal ( biting ) forces by resorbing some of the bone of the alveolar crest , which may result in increased tooth mobility , however these changes are reversible if the occlusal force is reduced . tooth movement that occurs during occlusal loading is sometimes termed fremitus . it is generally accepted that increased occlusal forces are able to increase the rate of progression of pre-existing periodontal disease ( gum disease ) , however the main stay treatment is plaque control rather than elaborate occlusal adjustments . it is also generally accepted that periodontal disease is a far more common cause of tooth mobility and pathological tooth migration than any influence of bruxism , although bruxism may much less commonly be involved in both . . pain . most people with bruxism will experience no pain . the presence or degree of pain does not necessarily correlate with the severity of grinding or clenching . the pain in the muscles of mastication caused by bruxism can be likened to muscle pain after exercise . the pain may be felt over the angle of the jaw ( masseter ) or in the temple ( temporalis ) , and may be described as a headache or an aching jaw . most ( but not all ) bruxism includes clenching force provided by masseter and temporalis muscle groups ; but some bruxers clench and grind front teeth only , which involves minimal action of the masseter and temporalis muscles . the temporomandibular joints themselves may also become painful , which is usually felt just in front of the ear , or inside the ear itself . clicking of the jaw joint may also develop . the forces exerted on the teeth are more than the periodontal ligament is biologically designed to handle , and so inflammation may result . a tooth may become sore to bite on , and further , tooth wear may reduce the insulating width of enamel and dentin that protects the pulp of the tooth and result in hypersensitivity , e.g . to cold stimuli . the relationship of bruxism with temporomandibular joint dysfunction ( tmd , or temporomandibular pain dysfunction syndrome ) is debated . many suggest that sleep bruxism can be a causative or contributory factor to pain symptoms in tmd . indeed , the symptoms of tmd overlap with those of bruxism . others suggest that there is no strong association between tmd and bruxism . a systematic review investigating the possible relationship concluded that when self-reported bruxism is used to diagnose bruxism , there is a positive association with tmd pain , and when stricter diagnostic criteria for bruxism are used , the association with tmd symptoms is much lower . in severe , chronic cases , bruxism can lead to myofascial pain and arthritis of the temporomandibular joints . causes . the muscles of mastication ( the temporalis , masseter , medial and lateral pterygoid muscles ) are paired on either side and work together to move the mandible , which hinges and slides around its dual articulation with the skull at the temporomandibular joints . some of the muscles work to elevate the mandible ( close the mouth ) , and others also are involved in lateral ( side to side ) , protrusive or retractive movements . mastication ( chewing ) is a complex neuromuscular activity that can be controlled either by subconscious processes or by conscious processes . in individuals without bruxism or other parafunctional activities , during wakefulness the jaw is generally at rest and the teeth are not in contact , except while speaking , swallowing or chewing . it is estimated that the teeth are in contact for less than 20 minutes per day , mostly during chewing and swallowing . normally during sleep , the voluntary muscles are inactive due to physiologic motor paralysis , and the jaw is usually open . some bruxism activity is rhythmic with bite force pulses of tenths of a second ( like chewing ) , and some have longer bite force pulses of 1 to 30 seconds ( clenching ) . some individuals clench without significant lateral movements . bruxism can also be regarded as a disorder of repetitive , unconscious contraction of muscles . this typically involves the masseter muscle and the anterior portion of the temporalis ( the large outer muscles that clench ) , and the lateral pterygoids , relatively small bilateral muscles that act together to perform sideways grinding . the cause of bruxism is largely unknown , but it is generally accepted to have multiple possible causes .