Shoreham-by-Sea

history . old shoreham dates back to pre-roman times . st nicolas ' church , inland by the river adur , is partly anglo-saxon the name of the town has an old english origin . the town and port of new shoreham was established by the norman conquest towards the end of the 11th century . st mary de haura church ( st mary of the haven ) was built in the decade following 1103 ( the domesday book was dated 1086 ) , and around this time the town was laid out on a grid pattern that , in essence , still survives in the town centre . the present church is approximately half the size of the original structure – the former nave was already in ruins by the time of the civil war although sizeable remnants of the original west façade survive in the churchyard to this day . muslim scholar muhammad al-idrisi , writing c.1153 , described shoreham as '' a fine and cultivated city containing buildings and flourishing activity '' . the rapid growth of the neighbouring towns of brighton , hove and worthing – and in particular the arrival of the railway in 1840 – prepared the way for shoreham 's rise as a victorian sea port , with several shipyards and an active coasting trade . shoreham harbour remains in commercial operation today . shoreham beach . shoreham beach , to the south of the town , is a slate spit deposited over millennia by longshore drift . this blocks the southerly flow of the river adur which turns east at this point to discharge into the english channel further along the coast at a point that has varied considerably over time . during the 17th and 18th centuries , the mouth of the river shifted eastwards which restricted trade to the port ; by 1810 it was almost opposite aldrington church . in 1816 , work had been completed to fix the position of the river in its present position , flowing into the sea between two piers . once the harbour mouth was stabilised it was defended by shoreham fort which was built in 1857 . converted railway carriages became summer homes around the start of the 20th century , and 'bungalow town ' , as it was then known , became home to the early british film industry . francis l . lyndhurst , founded the sunny south film company , which made its first commercial movie on shoreham beach in 1912 and built a film studio there . shoreham beach officially became part of shoreham-by-sea in 1910 . much of the housing in the area was cleared for defence reasons during the second world war and most of what remained after the war is now long gone , having been replaced by modern houses , some of which are extremely expensive , architect designed constructions . bbc – ww2 people 's war : evacuation of shoreham beach the church of the good shepherd , built in 1913 , still stands . along the adur mud flats adjacent to shoreham beach sits ( and at high tides floats ) a large collection of houseboats made from converted barges , tugs , mine sweepers , motor torpedo boats etc . the seaside shingle bank of shoreham beach extends further east past the harbour mouth , forming the southern boundary of the commercial harbour in southwick , portslade and hove . the monarch 's way long-distance footpath , commemorating the flight of charles ii to france after the battle of worcester , follows the beach westwards from hove past portslade and southwick , terminating by the harbour mouth 's east breakwater . landscape and wildlife . with the river adur , the downs and the sea nearby the area supports a diverse wildlife flora and fauna . the mudflats support wading birds and gulls , including the ringed plover which attempts to breed on the coastal shingle . the pied wagtail is common in the town in the winter months . insects include dragonflies over the flood plains of the river . the south and west facing downs attract at least 33 species of butterfly including a nationally important population of the chalkhill blue butterfly on mill hill . the underlying rock is chalk on the downs , with alluvium in the old river channels . the adur district has a variety of habitats in a small area , including natural chalk downs and butterfly meadows , freshwater and reed beds , salt marsh and estuary , brackish water lagoons , woodland , shingle seashore , chalk platform undersea and large expanses of sand . the town is the end-point of the monarch 's way , a long-distance footpath , based on the escape route taken by king charles ii in 1651 after being defeated by cromwell in the battle of worcester . . transport . brighton city airport lies to the west of the main town and has been in private ownership since 2006 . it is the uk 's oldest licensed airport still in operation and has a shoreham airport inter-war period . the terminal has been a filming location for an episode of agatha christie 's poirot , '' lord edgware dies '' , a crimewatch show format ( 2000 , itv meridian ) , bbc tenko series episode , the da vinci code film scenes and the film woman in gold . the town is served by shoreham-by-sea railway station , located on the west coastway line . local bus services are provided by the brighton & hove bus company , stagecoach south and a local town route is operated by compass travel . shoreham tollbridge crosses the river adur in the west of the town . this bridge is a grade ii listed building and was the last sussex toll bridge in use . the bridge was part of the a27 road until it was closed to traffic in 1968 . the structure is now too weak to carry vehicles and underwent extensive restoration , then was ceremonially re-opened for pedestrians on 23 october 2008 , by prince andrew , duke of york . adur ferry bridge in the south of the town ( replacing the old shoreham footbridge ) crosses the river adur to shoreham beach . it was opened to the public by the duke of gloucester on 13 november 2013 . . sport and leisure . shoreham-by-sea has a non-league football club , shoreham fc , who play at middle road stadium with a 2000 capacity , and a rugby union club , shoreham rfc , who play at buckingham park . southdown golf club was founded in 1902 , but ceased to operate in the 1940s . “ southdown golf club ” , '' golf ’ s missing links '' . the town centre hosts monthly farmers ' and artisans ' markets in east street on the second and fourth saturday of the month , respectively . airshow crash . most years , in late summer , shoreham airport hosts the royal air forces association ( rafa ) shoreham airshow . on 22 august 2015 , a hawker hunter jet fighter taking part in the airshow crashed onto the busy a27 road just outside the airport , killing eleven people and injuring several others . . notable people . writer brian behan lived on a boat moored in the town in the late 1960s . playwright charles bennett was born in shoreham-by-sea in 1899 . mark benson , former england cricketer and now a cricket umpire , was born in shoreham-by-sea in 1958 . havergal brian , english composer , moved from london to shoreham-by-sea in 1958 . he wrote twenty symphonies there over the next ten years . paul chaloner , shoutcaster in the esports community , was born in shoreham in 1971 . raymond o . faulkner , philologist and compiler of the standard hieroglyphic dictionary , was born in shoreham in 1894 . vanessa howard , a horror and exploitation film actress , was born in shoreham-by-sea in 1948 . mel hopkins , a former footballer with tottenham hotspur , brighton and hove albion and wales retired to shoreham beach . artist alison lapper lives in shoreham . bert longstaff , professional footballer who played for shoreham f.c . and made over 400 appearances for brighton & hove albion . broadcaster mike mendoza lives on shoreham beach . comedian max miller , lived in kingston lane for a period of time as indicated by a plaque on the building called ashcroft . fiona mont , who was dubbed '' britain 's most wanted woman '' in 2000 . it was claimed she was smuggled out of the country in a light aircraft from shoreham airport in 1999 . kjetil mørland of the band absent elk lives in shoreham-by-sea . prof hugh nicol , bacteriologist and agricultural chemist . cecil pashley , aviation pioneer . phyllis pearsall , painter , writer and creator of the a to z map of london lived on shoreham beach before her death in 1996 . harry ricardo founded ricardo consulting engineers in shoreham-by-sea , where it still has its main offices . captain henry roberts ( 1725–1796 ) was a native of shoreham , where he raised his six children . he sailed with captain james cook on the second and third voyages and acted as cartographer . david ryall , actor , was born in the town in 1935 . leo sayer , british singer and recording artist , was born in 1948 in shoreham-by-sea . hubert scott-paine , ( the boss of r . j . mitchell at supermarine , who designed the spitfire aircraft ) , was born in 1890 in shoreham and had a yacht in stowe 's yard , before moving to southampton . gemma spofforth , olympic swimmer , was born in shoreham-by-sea . michael standing , a professional footballer , was born in shoreham-by-sea in 1981 . marcus tudgay , footballer , was born in shoreham-by-sea . darren tulett , football presenter on french television judy upton , playwright , was born in shoreham-by-sea in 1966 and has written several plays associated with brighton . nicholas van hoogstraten , notorious british property tycoon , was born in shoreham-by-sea in 1946 and was educated at a local jesuit school . ted walker , writer , was married in shoreham . many works describe the shoreham coastline and adur estuary . nathaniel woodard , the founder of lancing college and the woodard schools , became the curate-in-charge of st . mary 's , new shoreham in 1846 and his experience there inspired him to start creating schools to improve the level of middle class education . he also greatly developed the use of choral music in the church . amon henry wilds , english architect , moved to old shoreham in 1857 . twin towns . shoreham ( along with the other urban districts of adur ) is twinned with żywiec , poland riom , france