Chuck Barris

early life . barris was born to a jewish family in philadelphia , pennsylvania , on june 3 , 1929 , the son of edith ( née cohen ) and nathaniel barris , a dentist . his uncle was singer , songwriter and actor harry barris . he graduated in 1953 from drexel university where he was a columnist for the student newspaper , the triangle . career . barris got his start in television as a page and later staffer at nbc in new york city . following his stint at nbc , barris worked as a standards-and-practices person at the television music show american bandstand for abc . barris produced pop music for records and television , and wrote '' palisades park , ” which was recorded by freddy cannon and peaked at no . 3 on the billboard hot 100 for two weeks ( june 23–30 , 1962 ) to become the biggest hit of cannon 's career . palisades park – mr . freddy '' boom boom '' cannon , epinions.com . retrieved october 28 , 2008 . barris also wrote or co-wrote some of the music that appeared on his game shows . barris was promoted to the daytime programming division at abc in los angeles and was responsible for determining which game shows abc would air . barris told his bosses the game show concepts being pitched were worse than his own ideas . they suggested that barris quit his programming job and become a producer . barris formed his production company chuck barris productions on june 14 , 1965 . his first success came in 1965 with the dating game , which aired on abc . this show was hosted by jim lange and featured three contestants who competed for a date with a person blocked from their view . the contestants ' sexy banter and its '' flower power '' -motif studio set were a revolution for the game show genre . the show ran until 1980 and was twice revived , later in the 1980s and 1990s . the next year barris began the newlywed game , originally created by nick nicholson and e . roger muir , also for abc . the combination of the newlywed couples ' humorous candor and host bob eubanks 's sly questioning made the show another hit for barris . the show is the longest lasting of any developed by his company , broadcast until 1985 , for a total of 19 full years on both '' first run '' network tv and syndication . game show network airs a current version with sherri shepherd . interviewed on the npr program wait wait . do n't tell me ! on august 1 , 2009 , barris said that the newlywed game was the easiest program he had developed : '' all i needed was four couples , eight questions , and a washer-dryer . '' barris created several other short-lived game shows for abc in the 1960s and for syndication in the 1970s , all of which revolved around a common theme : the game play normally derived its interest ( and often , humor ) from the excitement , vulnerability , embarrassment , or anger of the contestants or participants in the game . barris also made several attempts through the years at non-game formats , such as abc 's operation : entertainment , a variety show staged at military bases akin to uso shows ; a cbs revival of your hit parade ; and the bobby vinton show , a canada-based syndicated variety show for singer bobby vinton ( produced in conjunction with chris bearde and allan blye ) . the last was his most successful program other than a game show . the gong show . the somewhat shy barris rarely appeared on camera , though he once dashed onto the set of the new treasure hunt to throw a pie at emcee geoff edwards . however , barris became a public figure in 1976 when he produced and served as the host of the talent show spoof the gong show , which he packaged in partnership with television producer chris bearde . the show 's cult following has endured , though it ran only two seasons on nbc ( 1976–78 ) and four in syndication ( 1976–80 ) . as with some of barris ' other projects ( including the newlywed game ) , it was at one point possible to see the gong show twice daily , a relatively uncommon feat in the years prior to cable tv 's expansion into the commercial market . the original host of the nbc show was john barbour , who misunderstood the show 's concept and considered it a straight talent show , as opposed to barris ' parody concept . barris dropped barbour at the last minute ; in order to save the show , barris followed the advice of an nbc executive who suggested that he should host his own show . barris ' jokey , bumbling personality ; his accentuated hand-clapping between sentences ( which eventually had the studio audience joining in with him ) ; and his catchphrases ( he would usually go into commercial break with , '' we 'll be right back with more er & nbsp ; . stuff & nbsp ; . '' , occasionally paired with shifting his head to reveal the ubiquitous sign behind the stage reading simply '' stuff '' , and '' this is me saying 'bye ' '' was one of his favorite closing lines ) were the antithesis of the smooth tv host ( such as gary owens , who hosted the syndicated version in its first season ) . barris joined in with the eccentricity of the format , using unusual props , dressing in colorful and somewhat unusual clothing ( such as strange hats pulled over his head , if not his eyes ) , he became yet another performer of the show , and for many viewers , quite a cult hero . dubbed '' chuckie baby '' by his fans , barris was a perfect fit with the show 's goofy , sometimes wild amateur performers and its panel of three judges ( including regulars jamie farr , jaye p . morgan , and arte johnson ) . in addition , there was a growing '' cast of characters '' , including an nbc stage carpenter who played '' father ed , '' a priest who would get flustered when his cue cards were deliberately turned upside-down ; stand-up comedian dean heiser , who as '' the unknown comic '' wore a paper bag over his head ( with cut-outs for his eyes , mouth , and even a box of kleenex ) , and '' gene gene the dancing machine '' ( gene patton ) , arguably the most popular member of the '' cast '' , the show 's stagehand , who would show up and dance whenever the band played the song '' jumpin ' at the woodside '' . in the early 1980s , patton was even pointed out by tour guides of incoming nbc tours as his onscreen character , while at the same time adhering to his more typical off-camera work duties . one gong show episode consisted of every act appearing singing the song '' feelings '' , which was popular at the time . one of its most infamous incidents came on the nbc version in 1978 , when barris presented an onstage act consisting of two teenage girls , slowly and suggestively sucking popsicles . another incident , which most missed originally , was when during a '' gene gene , the dancing machine '' segment , jaye p . morgan opened her blouse to reveal her bare breasts . in 1980 , barris starred in and directed the gong show movie . the film was a major failure at the box office . its storyline and approach , though including a number of gong show segments , was actually quite less '' zany '' ( another favorite barris phrase ) than most audiences may have expected . the gong show has had four subsequent revivals , one under barris ' title ( with don bleu ) in 1988–89 , one on the game show network in 2000 called extreme gong and another with current format owner sony pictures television ( with dave attell ) in 2008 . a fourth version , produced by will arnett and hosted by fictional british celebrity '' tommy maitland '' ( mike myers ) , aired on abc beginning in 2017 . comebacks and setbacks . barris continued strongly until the mid-1970s , when abc cancelled the dating and newlywed games . this left barris with only one show , his weekly syndicated effort the new treasure hunt . but the success of the gong show in 1976 encouraged him to revive the dating and newlywed games , as well as adding the 1.98 beauty show to his syndication empire . he also hosted a short lived primetime variety hour for nbc from february to april 1978 , called the chuck barris rah-rah show , essentially a non-competitive knock-off of gong . the empire crumbled again amid the burnout of another of his creations , the 1979–80 three 's a crowd ( in which three sets of wives and secretaries competed to see who knew more about their husbands/bosses ) . this show provoked protests from enraged feminist and socially conservative groups ( two otherwise diametrically opposed viewpoints ) , who charged that the show deliberately exploited adultery , to advocate it as a social norm . most stations dropped this show months before the season was over as a response to those criticisms . at the same time , newlywed lost the sponsorships of ford and procter & gamble and earned the resentment of jackie autry , whose husband and business partner gene autry owned the show 's los angeles outlet and production base , ktla , because of its supposedly highly prurient content . so strong were the feelings of the autrys that newlywed came close to being expelled from the ktla facilities , but the show was discontinued by the syndicator before any action occurred . gong show and dating game also ended otherwise successful syndicated runs in 1980 because of the three 's a crowd and newlywed controversies , likely because stations were fearful of community and advertiser retribution on account of barris ' reputation . during the winter of 1980 , barris attempted to rebuild by bringing back another game show that was not an original of his , camouflage , in which contestants answered questions for the chance to locate a '' hidden object '' ( such as a toaster ) concealed within a cartoon-type drawing . although a noncontroversial format , it lasted only a short time in syndication . by september 1980 , for the first time in his company 's history , barris had no shows in production . after a year 's inactivity , barris revived treasure hunt again in 1981 in partnership with the original 1950s version 's producer , budd granoff , who had become his business partner ( the show itself was created by its original host , jan murray ) . unlike with the 1970s version of treasure hunt , barris did not have direct involvement with the production of the show itself . this revival , a five-day-a-week strip , lasted only one year . barris , by this time living in france , came back again in 1984 and formed barris industries . he formed a distributor arm called bel-air program sales ( later barris program sales ) and an ad-sales barter called clarion communications ( later barris advertising sales ) . after a week-long trial of the newlywed game on abc in 1984 ( with dating game emcee jim lange ) , barris produced the daily newlywed game ( titled the new newlywed game ) in syndication from 1985 to 1989 , with original host eubanks ( and in 1988 , comedian paul rodriguez ) . the dating game returned to syndication the next year for a three-year run ( the first year hosted by elaine joyce , and the next two hosted by jeff macgregor ) . the gong show would also return for one season in 1988 , now hosted by '' true '' don bleu . all of those shows ( except for the one-week trial run of newlywed on abc ) aired in syndication , not on the networks . chuck barris sold his shares of barris industries , inc . in 1987 to burt sugarman and left to move back to france and was no longer directly involved in his media company . in 1988 , barris industries acquired the guber-peters company . on september 7 , 1989 , barris industries was renamed as the guber-peters entertainment company . barris industries has new name . after the shows ' runs ended , sony corporation acquired guber-peters entertainment ( formerly barris industries ) for 200 million on september 29 , 1989 , a day after sony corporation of japan acquired sony pictures entertainment . the sale was completed on november 9 , 1989 after sony 's acquisition of columbia pictures entertainment a day earlier . sony revived dating and newlywed from 1996 to 1999 . sony also revived the gong show in 1998 , this time as extreme gong , a game show network ( gsn ) original production . three 's a crowd would be revived as all new three 's a crowd , which , like extreme gong , was a gsn original . a few years after extreme gong ended , sony planned to revive the show again under its classic name and format for the wb television network , but this version was never realized . sony and mtv networks ' comedy central collaborated on a fourth gong show revival as the gong show with dave attell in 2008 ; this did sell and aired on comedy central from july to september 2008 . one more attempt at reviving an old game show that was not his own originally resulted in an unsold pilot of the 1950s-era game dollar a second , hosted by bob eubanks . it had at least one showing on gsn , and has since become part of the collector/trader 's circuit . two more unsold pilots were called bamboozle and comedy courtroom . barris published della : a memoir of my daughter in 2010 about the death of his only child , who died in 1998 after a long struggle with drug addiction . cia career claims . in 1984 barris wrote an autobiography , confessions of a dangerous mind . in the book he states that he worked for the central intelligence agency ( cia ) as an assassin in the 1960s and the 1970s . a 2002 feature film version , directed by george clooney and starring sam rockwell , depicts barris killing 33 people . barris wrote a sequel to confessions of a dangerous mind in 2004 called bad grass never dies . the cia denied barris ever worked for them in any capacity . after the release of the movie , cia spokesman paul nowack said barris ' assertions that he worked for the spy agency “ are ridiculous . it 's absolutely not true . '' stein , joel ( january 13 , 2003 ) . '' lying to tell the truth '' . time . accessed september 2 , 2008 . in an interview on nbc 's today show in 1984 , barris admitted to having made the story up . '' no , i was never a cia hit man . i never did those things . i once applied for the cia , and while i was going through the process i got a job and went on television . but i had always wondered what would have happened if i had done both . '' www.buzzerblog.com/2017/03/22/rip-chuck-barris/ in an interview in 2010 with the television academy foundation , he was asked if he had ever disclosed the truth to anyone , including his wife . '' no , never , '' barris said . '' i 'll never say , one way or the other . '' '' was chuck barris a cia assassin ? '' there 's a possibility , '' 'dangerous mind ' producer says '' . hollywood reporter . accessed september 28 , 2020 . '' chuck barris on '' confessions of a dangerous mind '' - emmytvlegends.org '' . television . accessed september 28 , 2020 . . personal life and death . barris ' first wife was lyn levy , the niece of one of the founders of cbs . their marriage lasted from 1957 to 1976 , ending in divorce . together they had a daughter , della , who frequently appeared on the gong show , usually introducing her father . della died of an alcohol and cocaine overdose in 1998 at the age of 36 . at the time of her death , she was also hiv positive . in 1980 , barris married robin altman , 23 years his junior . that marriage also ended in divorce , in 1999 . the following year , he married mary clagett . barris was diagnosed with lung cancer in the 1990s . after undergoing surgery to remove part of his lung , he contracted an infection and spent a month in intensive care . barris died on march 21 , 2017 , of natural causes at the age of 87 at his home in palisades , new york , where he lived with clagett . . shows . the 1.98 beauty show bamboozle ( unsold pilot ) the bobby vinton show camouflage the chuck barris rah-rah show comedy courtroom ( unsold pilot ) cop out ( unsold pilot ) the dating game dollar a second ( unsold pilot ) dream girl of '67 the mama cass television show ( abc special , 1969 ) the family game the game game the gong show how 's your mother-in-law ? leave it to the women the newlywed game operation : entertainment the parent game people pickers ( unsold pilot ) three 's a crowd treasure hunt ( u.s . game show ) your hit parade ( cbs , 1974 ) . discography . barris composed music and released them on the following 45 rpm records . songs with an asterisk ( ) are songs not composed by barris , yet featured on the recordings : too rich / i know a child ( capitol records ) baja california / donnie ( dot records ) why me oh lord / sometimes it just does n't pay to get up ( mca records ) barris also composed the following songs ( with performer , who performed the music first , listed on each ) . the first two songs were released on '' swan '' 45 & nbsp ; rpm records , and the third released on a '' decca '' lp record : summertime guy ( eddie rambeau ; an instrumental version of this song was used as the theme for the newlywed game ) palisades park ( freddy cannon ) love sickness ( milton delugg ) in 1973 , barris released an lp of television game show music , chuck barris presents themes from tv game shows ( friends records ) . all tracks are instrumentals and are arranged by tom scott , mike barone , and dale oehler . the tracks for the lp , as listed from the back of the lp jacket , are as follows : side 1 '' dating game theme '' ( january/cbp music , inc . bmi chuck barris/david mook ) '' dating game closing theme '' ( little rosie ) '' newlywed game theme '' '' treasure hunt theme '' '' true grit & nbsp ; - winners theme '' ( bernstein ) famous music ascap '' treasure hunt losers theme '' '' people pickers theme '' ( pretty maidens ) side 2 '' operation entertainment theme '' ( road of love ) '' family game theme '' ( too rich ) '' cop-out theme '' ( little russian song ) '' mother-in-law theme '' ( mother trucker ) '' parent game theme '' ( baja california ) '' dream girl theme '' ( hunk of love ) . books . you and me , babe ( 1974 ) confessions of a dangerous mind ( 1984 ) the game show king ( 1993 ) bad grass never dies ( 2004 ) the big question ( 2007 ) who killed art deco ? ( 2009 ) della : a memoir of my daughter ( 2010 ) . cds . confessions of a dangerous singer ( domo records , 2003 ) confessions of a dangerous mind ( domo records , 2003 ) . references . external links .