Great Bookham

history . according to a charter c.675 , the original of which is lost but which exists in a later form , there were granted to the abbey twenty dwellings at bocham cum effingham . this was confirmed by four saxon kings ; king offa of mercia and of the nations roundabout in 787 ; king athelstan who was '' king and ruler of the whole island of britain '' in 933 confirmed the privileges to the monastery ; king edgar , '' emperor of all britain '' in 967 confirmed '' twelve mansiones '' in bocham , and king edward the confessor , king of the english , in 1062 confirmed twenty mansae at bocham cum effingham , driteham and pechingeorde . great bookham lay within the anglo-saxon administrative district of effingham half hundred . the domesday book 1086 , which was a survey for taxation purposes , makes the first known distinction between the parishes of great and little bookham , if it is assumed that there was no separate parish at the time of the charter of edward the confessor in 1062 . driteham and pechingeorde are both referred to in the domesday book and appear to have been absorbed into the manors of effingham and effingham east court . great bookham appears in domesday book as bocheham . st nicolas church history it was held by st peter 's abbey , chertsey . its domesday assets were : 13 hides ; 1 church , 1 mill worth 10s , 20 ploughs , of meadow , woodland and herbage worth 110 hogs . it rendered ( in total ) : £15 . it seems probable , as the number of cottages in bookham and effingham remained constant , that the later charters must have been copies of earlier charters which were not revised to accord with the actual number of cottages at any one time . jane austen , whose godfather and cousin rev . samuel cooke was vicar of great bookham ( 1769-1820 ) , is said to have spent time in bookham whilst writing several of her novels in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . its location is consistent with the geographical details in emma . c . s . lewis studied privately with william t . kirkpatrick in great bookham between september 1914 and april 1917 . pink floyd bass player and singer roger waters was born in great bookham in 1943 . polesden lacey . a regency villa on the southern edge of the village , polesden lacey has been the site of a house since at least 1336 . the current house dates from the 17th century , and was bequeathed by its last owner , the hon . mrs greville , a legendary edwardian hostess , to the national trust in 1942 . when the grevilles purchased the property in 1906 , they extensively remodelled the house with the help of mewes and davis , architects of the ritz hotel , london . there are large walled and formal gardens , an orchard and croquet lawn , as well as extensive farmland . the property and its estate are open to the public , and is one of the national trust 's most visited properties . the house is also the national trust 's southern region head office . the future king george vi and his bride spent part of their honeymoon at polesden lacey , as guests of mrs greville . the poet and playwright richard brinsley sheridan was a previous owner of the property from 1804 . bookham grove . to the south side of the high street stands bookham grove manor , built in the early 18th century , once owned by the dawnay family . it is now converted into apartments , with coach houses built in its now grounds . the manor 's original large estate covered the surrounding roads up to dorking road , and groveside , and had grounds to the front , running down to the guildford road . when the land was sold for development in 1947 , the shops and car park were built in the grounds to the front of the house . another surviving part of the estate is the stables , on the corner of dorking road . eastwick park . eastwick park , a beautiful manor in the village , was lost in 1958 . the house stood within the area of roads now known as the 'eastwick area ' , and its very large private estate included great bookham commons , which were saved by the village and given to the national trust . after ceasing to be used as a private house , the manor was used by the canadian military in world war ii , and was also a school called southey hall , before being demolished for redevelopment . the original gates to the house stand just west of eastwick park avenue on lower road . geography . to the west of the bookhams lies the village of effingham ; further west on the road to guildford lie the similar villages of east and west horsley and east and west clandon . to the north-east lie fetcham and leatherhead , north of which the area becomes increasingly urban heading towards central london , which is only away . to the south-east , across the north downs , are the village of westhumble and the market town of dorking . today . the village has a short high street at its centre , which has two butchers , a family-run fishmongers and two traditional greengrocers . the beautiful rayleigh house at the top of the high street , originally built as the victoria temperance hotel by mary chrystie , now contains henshaws estate agents and a healthcare practice . three public houses are in great bookham : the anchor , the royal oak , the old crown and one in little bookham , ye olde windsor castle . a loose association with the latter is that the ranger of windsor great park was often appointed from the area by king henry viii which was more than five times larger , stretching as far as guildford . the old barn hall is the main community centre , regularly used for staging amateur dramatics productions and hosting parties and receptions . there are two successful primary schools in the village , which makes the area sought after with families : eastwick junior school in eastwick drive and the dawnay school in griffin way . there are three infant schools in great bookham : the polesden lacey school in oakfield close , eastwick infant school in eastwick drive , and the dawnay infant school in griffin way . sport and leisure . great bookham has a non-league football club bookham f.c . who play at the chrystie recreation ground in the surrey elite intermediate football league . the club was founded before the first world war . bookham football club history . bookham commons . bookham commons includes the two commons in great bookham and little bookham . great bookham common was bought by local residents in 1923 to save the oak woodlands , then given to the national trust . little bookham common was given to the trust in 1924 by mr h . willock-pollen , then banks common in 1925 by mr r . calburn . the london natural history society has been surveying bookham commons for more than fifty years , making it one of the best recorded sites for wildlife in southeast england . the common land consist of grassland ( wet , low-lying meadows ) , woodland , scrub and twelve ponds . the ponds are home to all three british species of newt , including the rare great crested newt . the five largest ponds are man-made , formed for fish production in the 17th century . emergency services . great bookham is served by these emergency services : surrey police . leatherhead police station is only used for minor issues now ; everything else is handled from dorking police station . south east coast ambulance service as of 1 july 2006 , is the local nhs ambulance services trust . the surrey ambulance service , sussex , and kent ambulance services have all merged , and have now ceased to exist . surrey fire & rescue service , actually in fetcham , but called leatherhead fire station . 1 x water tender ladder 1 x water carrier . see also . list of places of worship in mole valley . references . . external links . bookham community association old photo