Big Rock Candy Mountain

history . the song was first recorded by mcclintock , also known by his '' hobo '' name of haywire mac . mcclintock claimed credit for writing the song , though it was likely partially based on other ballads , including '' an invitation to lubberland '' and '' the appleknocker 's lament '' . other popular itinerant songs of the day such as '' hobo 's paradise '' , '' hobo heaven '' , '' sweet potato mountains '' and '' little streams of whiskey '' likely served as inspiration , as they mention concepts similar to those in '' big rock candy mountain '' . before recording the song , mcclintock cleaned it up considerably from the version he sang as a street busker in the 1890s . originally the song described a child being recruited into hobo life by tales of the '' big rock candy mountain '' . in later years , when mcclintock appeared in court as part of a copyright dispute , he cited the original words of the song , the last stanza of which was : : ” the punk rolled up his big blue eyes : and said to the jocker , '' sandy , : i 've hiked and hiked and wandered too , : but i ai n't seen any candy . : i 've hiked and hiked till my feet are sore : and i 'll be damned if i hike any more : to be buggered sore like a hobo 's whore : in the big rock candy mountains . '' in the released version this verse did not appear . the song was not popularized until 1939 , when it peaked at 1 on billboard ( magazine ) country music charts . but it achieved more widespread popularity in 1949 when a sanitized version intended for children was re-recorded by burl ives . it has been recorded by many artists throughout the world , but a version recorded in 1960 by dorsey burnette to date was the biggest success for the song in the post-1954 '' rock era '' , having reached no . 102 on billboard 's chart . sanitized versions have been popular , especially with children 's musicians ; in these , the '' cigarette trees '' become peppermint trees , and the '' streams of alcohol '' trickling down the rocks become streams of lemonade . the lake of gin is not mentioned , and the lake of whiskey becomes a lake of soda pop . the 2008 extended adaptation for children by gil mclachlan tells the story as a child 's dream , the last stanza being : : in the big rock candy mountains you 're going on a holiday : your birthday comes around once a week and it ’ s christmas every day : you never have to clean your room or put your toys away : there 's a little white horse you can ride of course : you can jump so high you can touch the sky : in the big rock candy mountains . editions . folklorist john greenway published the song in his american folksongs of protest ( 1953 ) , redacting only the second to last line . bowdlerized versions are included in irwin silber 's songs of the great american west ( 1967 ) and alan lomax 's the penguin book of american folk songs ( 1964 ) . a folk version of the song is included in the gordon '' inferno '' collection in the library of congress , under the title '' the appleknocker 's lament '' . . recordings . immediately after harry mcclintock 's record , in november 1928 , ernie hare covered the song as '' hobo jack turner '' . vernon dalhart and company recorded this as the big rock candy mountains , on edison diamond disc no . 52472-l , in february 1929 . this version is now available on cylinder record , released in november 2016 by the vulcan cylinder record company . a version of the song was recorded by pete seeger for folkways records in 1957 ( track 2 , side 2 in the american favorite ballads , vol . 1 lp ) . bing crosby included the song in a medley on his album 101 gang songs ( 1961 ) the new christy minstrels did a version of the song , which was included in a special compilation by columbia records of children 's songs . the song was used in the 1987 film ironweed and sung by tom waits . in 1990 the london uk-based leftist big band the happy end recorded an upbeat version for their album the world turned upside down . lisa loeb sang a clean version of the song on her 2004 children 's album catch the moon . in his 2004 album the nifty mervous thrifty , muck sticky made a cover of this song . a version of the song was recorded by the restarts , a punk band from london , england . in 2014 , the okee dokee brothers recorded a more family-friendly version of the song for their album through the woods , replacing references to alcohol and whiskey with chocolate and marmalade , for example . . other renditions . the song was used in a 2005 burger king commercial , although the lyrics are changed to reference the burger king tendercrisp . in the commercial almost all of the promises of the song are shown in detail . darius rucker appears as the cowboy singing the song . brooke burke also appears as a cowgirl . comedian sarah silverman sang a version on the sarah silverman program in the episode '' there 's no place like homeless '' . the song was sung by harry dean stanton in his role as roman grant in the hbo series big love . singer-songwriter bruce hornsby has occasionally used the song as an intro to his song '' candy mountain run '' in live performances natalie maines of the dixie chicks sang a version of the song on the 2016 episode '' gal of constant sorrow '' of the television show the simpsons , with references to characters on the show . it was used in the uk tv series '' budgie '' in the 1971 episode '' some mother 's sons '' . soundtrack appearances . the children-friendly version of the song was used in the rankin bass stop-motion tv special , the easter bunny is comin ' to town . the original harry mcclintock recording was included in the soundtrack for the 2000 film o brother , where art thou ? . a performance of the song by john hartford appears on the down from the mountain concert and soundtrack in 2000 . a recording of the song was used as background music in a 2010 l.l.bean commercial for the outdoor apparel maker . a recording of the song by brie larson appears on the soundtrack to the 2015 drama film room , based on the room ( novel ) by emma donoghue . sung by characters in the opening scenes of the 2003 movie runaway jury . a burl ives version of the song appears in season four of better call saul . a recording of the song opens and closes series 1 , episode 2 of the tv drama budgie - some mothers ’ sons ( 1971 ) - london weekend television . a burl ives version is used during a final scene of the van helsing series s1 e8 ‘ little thing ’ and also for the final / closing credits of that episode . references to the song . physical locations . a cluster of brightly colored hills just north of marysvale , utah , near the fishlake national forest , is named the '' big rock candy mountain '' . in 1928 , after the song had been released , some utah residents jokingly placed a sign at the base of the hills labeling it the '' big rock candy mountain '' , along with a sign next to a nearby spring proclaiming it '' lemonade springs '' . the big rock candy mountain resort currently sits at the base of the hills offering lodging and an assortment of high adventure activities through big rock adventure . the resort is also a major hub on the infamous paiute atv trail . other rock formations in the united states have also borrowed the name of the song ; the largest exposed rock in the south platte rock climbing area of colorado is also called '' big rock candy mountain '' because of its colored stripes resembling a candy cane . additionally , one of the peaks in the capitol state forest in washington state is named '' big rock candy mountain '' . in literature . in 1943 , wallace stegner published an autobiographical novel titled the big rock candy mountain . he published a further autobiographical work in 1992 entitled where the bluebird sings to the lemonade springs , a reference to a line in the song . in 1945 , george orwell referenced the song in the book animal farm with an animal version of heaven named sugarcandy mountain . in william kennedy 's 1979 novel '' ironweed , '' the character rudy sings lines from the song to his fellow bums in a flophouse . in glen cook 's 1982 novel shadowline , first in the starfishers trilogy , a planet named the big rock candy mountain is the location for several scenes . the song is discussed in depth in the book the areas of my expertise by john hodgman , and performed by jonathan coulton in the audiobook . in 2005 , lucius shepard referenced the song in the story 'over yonder ' . in mur lafferty 's heaven novella series , the big rock candy mountain is portrayed as the hobo afterlife . in the 2014 valiant comics series the delinquents , the big rock candy mountain is presented as a mesa , atop which is the '' lost treasure of the hobos '' , a giant cornucopia . in kyle stark 's 2017 rock candy mountain comic book , the big rock candy mountain is the main character 's final destination . in film and television . the 1963 famous studios screen song , hobo 's holiday , features the adult lyrics which appear on screen with a bouncing ball . the 1977 rankin-bass special the easter bunny is comin ' to town . in 1987 , photographer robert frank directed a screenplay by rudy wurlitzer entitled candy mountain that references the song . the 2000 film o brother , where art thou ? uses this song in the opening credits . the theme song to the 2008-2010 tv series the marvelous misadventures of flapjack is a version of the song with modified lyrics , referring to '' a place called candied island '' instead of '' big rock candy mountain '' . the series itself echoes the song , as it features two hobo-like characters searching for the fabled paradise of candied island . during the first dream sequence in the 2011 horror film twixt , the lyrics of the song are sung with an alternate melody . in the 2003 film runaway jury , an adaptation of a john grisham legal thriller , jacob wood has to learn the words of the song for his son 's birthday . this does not occur in the novel . in the 2015 film room , ma ( brie larson ) sings a version of the song to her son jack ( jacob tremblay ) . in the syfy channel series van helsing , sam sings bits of the song in the episode '' little thing '' and the burl ives rendition is played over the closing credits of several episodes . a version of the song by burl ives is played in the season 4 episode '' something stupid '' of amc 's crime drama better call saul . throughout ducktales ( 2017 tv series ) episode glomtales , scrooge mcduck and his family are traveling to rock candy mountain to find the hobo king 's treasure . in music . in the 1970s , '' big rock candy mountain '' and other songs were made into an environmental fairytale , published on an lp intended for children . it is the story of a goose , a crawdad , a family of rats , a whangdoodle , and two hobos who journey to the fabled mountain in search of a home . there they find pollution pete , cement sam , and a construction crew damming the rivers , cutting down forests , and turning the mountain into suburbia . the animals steal shovels , paint them with glow-in-the-dark paint , and use them to scare away the crew so that the mountain can be returned to its pristine state . in 1987 , scottish indie pop band the motorcycle boy released an original song with the same title as a single . in 1990 , jane wiedlin recorded an unrelated song with the same title on her album tangled . the song '' candy mountain cave '' , from the online video charlie the unicorn , parodies this song ( to the tune of the '' clarinet polka '' ) . in 1978 , country singer mel tillis released the single '' ai n't no california '' , which includes the line , '' ai n't no big rock candy mountain . '' in 2014 , folk-punk singer jesse stewart makes reference in his song '' marauder '' where he asks , '' well , where ? oh where ? is the big rock candy mountain . '' . references . further reading .