Athina Onassis

biography . onassis was born at american hospital of paris in neuilly-sur-seine , france , to christina onassis ( 1950–1988 ) and her fourth husband , thierry roussel , a french pharmaceutical heir . her parents were married from 1984 to 1987 . michelle green & cathy nolan , '' thierry roussel tells his story - of love for two women and little athina '' , people.com , march 20 , 1989 they divorced after roussel had two children with his mistress , swedish model marianne '' gaby '' landhage . christina onassis died of pulmonary edema in november 1988 , when athina was three years old . after her mother 's death , she was raised by roussel and landhage , whom roussel later married . for her early education , onassis attended a school in lussy-sur-morges , switzerland , where the roussels lived . following a preparatory course in brussels , belgium , she passed her baccalauréat exam in the summer of 2003 . gage , nicholas : '' the last onassis . '' vanity fair , issue 537 . may 2005 onassis has three half-siblings , via her father 's relationship with landhage : erik christopher roussel ( born july 1985 ) , sandrine roussel ( born may 1987 ) , and johanna roussel ( born july 1991 ) . equestrian career . onassis is a competitive show jumper in select events of the global champions tour . she began riding as a child , and finished second in an event in jerez , spain in 2001 . she later chose to compete as a greek citizen for the avlona riding club in athens , under the name '' athina onassis '' . in november 2012 , onassis suffered a spinal injury in a fall from her horse , but represented greece in the 2013 european show jumping championships and the 2014 world championships . onassis is also a patroness of the global champions tour . letter from athina onassis de miranda , global champions tour official website the athina onassis international horse show , a show jumping competition , was established in 2007 in são paulo and moved to rio de janeiro in 2009 . athina onassis international horse show in 2014 , the competition moved to pampelonne beach in saint-tropez , france . equnews , march 31 , 2014 , '' 2014 athina onassis horse show to be held in saint-tropez '' onassis and her former husband were joint owners of ad sport horses , a horse breeding and training business based in fleurus , belgium . in february 2014 , onassis paid 12 million for a estate and barn in wellington , florida . she sold the estate in april 2017 for 12.75 million . . marriage . onassis began dating brazilian professional showjumper and two-time olympic medalist álvaro de miranda neto in march 2003 and moved to são paulo . she bought a duplex overlooking ibirapuera park for 8.6 million . watson , jeremy ; '' o what a wedding . and in jackie 's dress too '' scotsman.com news ; december 4 , 2005 miranda and onassis were married on 3 december 2005 . most guests attending the lavish ceremony were brazilian vips or friends from the equestrian community . the bride 's father and stepmother were not present . smith , helena ; '' another onassis wedding - another drama '' ; the guardian december 2 , 2005 zahar , cristina ; '' billionaire onassis heiress weds brazilian equestrian champ '' ; reuters/the washington post.com ; december 5 , 2005 the couple reportedly asked for their guests to donate to charity . silverman , stephen : '' athina onassis weds brazilian horseman '' , people magazine , 3 december 2005 following her marriage , onassis assumed the name of athina onassis . in 2016 , the couple legally separated , following miranda 's alleged infidelity . divorce negotiations began almost immediately , with onassis hiring high-profile divorce lawyer robert stephan cohen . the divorce caused complicated legal issues in the courts of antwerp , belgium , where onassis had been living . miranda challenged the prenuptial agreement and demanded alimony payments , and there were custody disputes over jointly owned horses . the divorce was finally settled in november 2017 . . wealth . athina onassis is the sole heiress of christina onassis , who inherited 55 % of aristotle onassis 's fortune . the remaining 45 % of aristotle 's fortune ( minus 26 million settled upon jacqueline kennedy onassis ) was left to the alexander s . onassis foundation , established in honor of alexander onassis , athina 's late uncle , who had died in 1973 . when athina onassis was seven years old , the new york times cited a report from the associated press , naming onassis one of the year 's new billionaires , and even though she is often credited as a '' billionaire heiress '' throughout the media , the true extent of her wealth remains unknown . there have been several estimates of her inheritance , including the island of skorpios , which was later sold to trusts connected with ekaterina rybolovleva , with some accounts claiming that onassis 's net worth is less than 1 billion . . disputes over onassis estate . onassis 's mother christina never trusted thierry roussel completely , which led the family to arrange for a board of administrators to control the family 's money until athina came of age . the trustees christina selected to manage the estate were stelio papadimitriou , paul ioannidis , apostolos zabelas , and theodore gabrielides . stelio papadimitriou 's obituary during athina 's childhood and adolescence , all expenditures made on her behalf by her father ( using money from the inheritance ) had to be approved by the board , which led to her father threatening to move back to france , where the estate would have had to pay much higher income tax . in 1999 , a vaduz court ordered the management of athina 's inheritance to be transferred to the kpmg fides auditing firm in lucerne , switzerland . at that time , aged 13 , onassis stated that she felt '' great aversion to anything greek '' . in one of her few interviews , published in oggi , an italian magazine , she later stated that she blamed '' all the problems '' on the onassis name . similarly , her stepmother , gaby landhage , stated on 20/20 , an american television show , that athina had told her '' if she could burn all the onassis money , she would do it . '' '' hostage to fortune '' ; smh.com ; january 25 , 2003 on her 18th birthday , athina took control of her mother 's inheritance . after her 21st birthday in 2006 , her lawyers unsuccessfully fought to instate her as president of the onassis foundation , as the board claimed she was unqualified and denied that she was an heir to the estate of aristotle onassis . the foundation estate at onassis.gr smith , helena : '' legal row taints special day for onassis heiress athina '' , the uk guardian , 28 january 2006 invoking her grandfather 's legacy in memory of alexander onassis , the board 's representatives stated that she had no connection with the greek culture , religion , language or shared experience , that she never went to college and had no work experience . . references . further reading . mantheakis , alexis : '' athina onassis in the eye of the storm '' ( e-book amazon kindle,2012 : in paperback createspace . in greek '' αθηνά στο ματι του κυκλώνα '' ( periplous publications , , in french- '' athena onassis , dans l'oeil du cyclone '' ( editions favre ) , in portuguese - '' athina onassis , no olho do furacao , a historia de jovem mais rica do mundo '' ( alves , brazil gage , nicholas : '' the last onassis '' , vanity fair , may 2005 klein , edward : '' the battle over the golden child '' , vanity fair , november 1997 martin , thomas : the richest girl in the world : athina onassis roussel : the onassis family legacy , ami books inc . , 2003 . laurent favre athina veut sacrifier skorpios , l'illustré 2nd feb 2005 rovira , ashley : '' athina onassis in 38 points '' ( scribd , 18 december 2018 , attribution-noncommercial-noderivs 3.0 unported )