Mickey Finn (drugs)

exploited environments . drink spiking is common practice by predators at drinking establishments who often lace alcoholic drinks with sedative drugs . . history of the term . michael '' mickey '' finn . the mickey finn is most likely named after the manager and bartender of the lone star saloon and palm garden restaurant , which operated in chicago from 1896 to 1903 , on south state street in the chicago loop neighborhood . the saloon 's exact location is usually said to be on the west side of south state street , just north of congress parkway . the entire west side of south state street between congress and van buren is now occupied by chicago public library 's central library ( also known as the harold washington library at 400 south state street ) . the december 16–17 , 1903 chicago tribune articles give the address as 527 state street ( corner of state and harmon court ) , however , which is now the 1100 block of south state street . the 500 block of south state street now is between congress street and harrison street , which may be the reason for the confusion of the saloon 's location . refer to '' new map of chicago showing street car lines in colors and street numbers in even hundreds '' ( chicago : rufus blanchard , 1897 ) for the 1903 chicago street names and numbering . the area on state street centered between van buren street ( to the north ) to harrison street ( to the south ) was known as '' whiskey row '' from the late 1880s to the early 1910s . just south of harrison street was a block known as '' hell 's half mile '' . the area of state street south of harrison was also known as '' satan 's mile '' . in december 1903 , several chicago newspapers document that a michael '' mickey '' finn managed the lone star saloon and was accused of using knockout drops to incapacitate and rob some of his customers . . quoting from the article , '' michael finn , owner of saloon at corner of state street and harmon court now east 11 street . two former habitués—mrs . mary thornton and isabelle fyffe—told that he gave 'knock-out drops ' to customers suspected of having money and afterwards robbed them . '' mary thornton is quoted , '' i worked for finn a year and a half and in that time i saw a dozen men given 'dope ' by finn and his bartender . the work was done in two little rooms adjoining the palm garden in back of the saloon '' . . quoting from the article , '' lone star saloon , 527 state street now 1100 block of south state street , managed by micky finn , closed by order of mayor harrison . '' . . the inter-ocean was another chicago newspaper in 1903 . moreover , the first known written example of the term , according to the oxford english dictionary ( oed ) , is in 1915 , which was 12 years after his trial and lends credence to this theory . the first popular account of mickey finn was given by herbert asbury in his 1940 book gem of the prairie : an informal history of the chicago underworld . his cited sources are chicago newspapers and the 1903 court testimony of lone star prostitute '' gold tooth '' mary thornton . before his days as a saloon proprietor , mickey finn was known as a pickpocket and thief who often preyed on drunken bar patrons . the act of serving a mickey finn special was a coordinated robbery orchestrated by finn . first , finn or one of his employees ( including '' house girls '' ) would slip chloral hydrate into the unsuspecting patron 's drink . the incapacitated patron would be escorted or carried into a back room by one of finn 's associates , who would then rob him and dump him in an alley . the victim would wake up the next morning in a nearby alley and would remember little or nothing of what had happened . finn 's saloon was ordered to be closed on december 16 , 1903 . he was apparently arrested again in 1918 , this time for running an illegal bar in south chicago . . '' mickey finn was arrested last night and lodged in the south chicago police station . mickey also known as mike runs a hut at 115th street and the calumet river . he and his housekeeper millie schober and twenty customers were swooped down on by the police and all taken to the station . a wagon load of beer and booze was confiscated . mickey and the woman were charged with running a disorderly house and selling liquor without formal authorization . '' . chicago restaurant poisonings . on june 22 , 1918 , four people were arrested and over one hundred waiters taken into custody over the apparent widespread practice of poisoning by waiters in chicago . guests who tipped poorly were given '' mickey finn powder '' in their food or drinks . '' evidence against the waiters was obtained by a detective agency employed by the hotel sherman after several guests had become ill suspiciously.large quantities were found in a drawer behind the bar at the waiters ' union headquarters . chemical analysis showed that it contained antimony potassium tartrate , also called '' emetic tartar '' ; which in addition to causing vomiting , headaches , dizziness and depression , can be lethal in large quantities . two bartenders were arrested for selling the powder at the bar at the waiters ' union headquarters , and w . & nbsp ; stuart wood and his wife were arrested for manufacturing the powder . wood sold packets of it for 20 cents . and referred to it as '' mickey finn powder '' in a letter to union bartender john millian . . '' friend johnny : am enclosing two dozen packets of the mickey finn powder.also find enclosed a couple hundred circulars.these circulars are not for use in chicago.whenever you have a man that is leaving chicago talk mickey finn to him and give him a few of these circulars . a follow-up article mentions the pursuit of a man named jean crones , who was believed to be responsible for poisoning over 100 people at a chicago university club banquet at which three people died . . . . tracing usage of the phrase '' mickey finn '' . the oed gives a chronology of the term , starting in 1915 : the 1915 citation is from a photograph of a saloon in the december 26 edition of the los angeles examiner . in the photograph is a sign that reads : '' try a michael finn cocktail '' . the first listed reference as a knock-out drop in the oed : '' wish i had a drink and a mike finn for him '' , is from a march 11 , 1924 article in the new york evening journal . a description of a mickey finn is given in the january 18 , 1927 issue of the bismarck tribune , '' a mickey finn is an up-to-date variant on the knock-out drops of pre-war days '' . in the september 3 , 1927 issue of the chicago tribune , the phrase appears in an article on the use of ethylene for artificial ripening of fruit , '' applied to a human , ethylene is an anaesthetic as the old-time mickey finn in a lumber-jack saloon '' . in john o'hara 's 1934 novel appointment in samarra , a disgruntled headwaiter remarks of a poor tipper , '' i 'd like to give him a mickey finn . '' in the animated superman movie showdown ( 1942 ) , a gangster ( who dresses like superman to rob people and businesses ) pockets 5 from his take . the mob boss sees this , hits him and takes it . the superman impersonator says '' gee boss , it was only a fin '' . the mob boss replies '' next time it will be a mickey finn '' . in the 1946 film three little pirates , starring slapstick comedy group the three stooges , moe offers to give a castle guard a mickey finn . in an episode of i love lucy , fred recommends ricky '' slip lucy a 'mickey ' '' ( however , fred says it is not actually a mickey ) as he does to ethel when she 's bothering him . in david niven 's book bring on the empty horses ( 1975 ) , he writes of clark gable 's gate man slipping '' an old-fashioned mickey finn '' into his drink and driving him home '' semi-conscious . '' in the 1976 columbo episode '' a matter of honor '' ( episode 35 ) , columbo says , on examining a drugs cabinet : '' chloral hydrate ? i 'll tell you i do n't know much about drugs but that 's the stuff they put in a mickey finn . that 's an american expression ; knockout drops . '' ( end of the 56th minute ) in the 1977 musical annie , the term '' mickey finn '' is used in the song '' it 's the hard knock life '' to provoke another character . in the 1979 episode of happy days , '' king richard 's big knight '' , a college bully slips richie a mikey finn , causing him to completely lose his inhibitions . in the 1981 song '' the friends of mr cairo '' on the album of the same name the lyric runs : '' that night , the double crosser got it right / pretending he was really dim / he slipped to sam a double gin ( mickey finn ) / he woke , the boys had gone , but not his gun / they 'd left a note to lead him on / the chase to find the maltese falcon '' in the seventh episode of the second ( 1991 ) season of seinfeld , '' the revenge '' , george costanza tries to 'slip a mickey ' in the drink of his former boss . on the original airing ( january 23 , 1993 , season 5 , episode 15 ) of empty nest , '' the fracas in vegas '' , harry and charlie , while on a las vegas trip , were conned by 2 women who slipped them '' mickeys '' to steal all their belongings . in erykah badu 's song '' certainly '' from the 1997 album baduizm , she sings '' you tried to get a little tricky , turned my back and then you slipped me a mickey . '' in the 2008 song royal flush by australian hip-hop trio '' bliss n eso '' , eso raps '' . like a boring board meeting and i slip myself a mickey in the 2011 video game l.a . noire , a character in the game uses the name micky finn to describe what someone slipped them in their cocktails . in a 2013 episode of the big bang theory , '' the raiders minimization '' , during an unexpected video chat by sheldon , amy recalls how a lone curly fry in sheldon 's regular fries led him to believe someone was trying to '' slip him a mickie '' . in the 2020 david fincher movie mank , herman mankiewicz ( played by gary oldman ) is drugged by drinking a bottle sent by orson welles . he says '' you sly thing , you slipped me a mickey '' . see also . date rape drug gray death . references . further reading . . external links . chicago city of the century - supports chicago bartender origin the phrase finder — thorough history of the phrase the straight dope — supporting the knockout explanation word detective — supporting the noxious substance explanation , but acknowledging common usage as knockout drug .