Kernavė

architecture . the church . left next to the present-day church is the churchyard of the old churches . the foundations of the church built in 1739 have been excavated . this wooden church was moved in 1935 to krivonys . a concrete monument with a cross erected in 1930 during the celebrations of the 500th anniversary of vytautas death serves as a reminder of the vytautas church built in 1420 . in the grounds of the ancient churches , from the 15th to the 19th century , the people of kernavė were buried . two chapels stand nearby . the wooden chapel is an example of folk architecture . it is believed that it was built at the end of the 13th century on the kernavelė estate , and moved to the kernavė church . at the end of the 19th century the church used it as a storehouse . in 1920 a new church was built , and the chapel staffed to decay , since it was no longer part of the church . in 1959 it was repaired , and in 1993–1994 restored . the building belongs to the kernavė parish . it is used to display exhibits of wooden church sculpture . thumb the brick chapel from the 19th century houses the mausoleum of the romer family . it was built in 1851–1856 by the landowner stanisław romer . the chapel is built of brick and plaster , and is an example of late classicism . it is small and has an octagonal plan , which is unusual for classicism . inside , there is an opening in the floor which leads to the crypt . coffins were bricked into its niches . inside the chapel the altar 's mensa , built of stones , has survived . along the side walls there are black benches . memorial plaques with the coat of arms and names of the members of the riomeriai family are attached to the walls . after the world war i the chapel was neglected . it was repaired in 1959 and 1987 . at the present time the chapel belongs to the kernavė parish . both chapels are situated in the kernavė archaeological and historical reservation . the present-day church was built between 1910 and 1920 . neo-gothic elements are dominant in the architecture . during the 1980s , on the initiative of monsignor česlovas krivaitis , the churchyard was repaired , new gates were built and the altar and interior were restored . the churchyard is decorated with stations of the cross , arranged by the artist jadvyga grisiūtė . in the churchyard there are two monuments built to commemorate the 600th anniversary of christianisation and the 700th anniversary of the first mention in written sources of the name of kernavė . the first monument depicts a hearth and a sword , the transition from paganism to christianity ; the second , a knight with a sword standing between the city gates , the main part of the town coat of arms . millstones are incorporated into the structures of both monuments . the grave of the priest , writer and promoter of the history of kernavė , nikodemas švogžlys-milžinas is near the monument commemorating the 700th anniversary of kernavė . in the church there are several valuable pieces of art . the altar , two paintings , two sculptures , a small altar , three glasses and the bell are listed . the neo-baroque altar is in the side nave . in its center is the painting maria , on its sides are columns and sculptures of st . peter and saint paul . another five smaller sculptures depict st . mary , two angels and two saints . all the sculptures belong to the baroque style . the polychromatic architectural details of the altar are imitation marble , their features are bronze . thumb thumb the painting marija škaplierinė ( canvas , oil , metal , is on the altar in the central nave . it was painted in 1816 and depicts the mother and child , god the father , and the holy spirit ( a dove ) . the painting the holy family ( canvas , oil , comes from the 18th century . the painting shows the mother and child and a lamb . in the background is st . joseph ; above are angels . the composition is asymmetric , and has several lines of perspective . other pieces of art include a small altar from the early 19th century , two glasses from the beginning of the 19th century , one glass from the beginning of the 18th century , and a bell from the 17th century . the bell is made of brass , in diameter , cast in vilnius in 1667 . in the 1980s , thanks to the efforts of monsignor ceslovas krivaitis , a non-traditional presbytery was constructed , and the surroundings were cleaned up . left in the presbytery is an exhibition of the way of life of parishioners , and historic and holy relics . in 1987 a museum of sacramental relics was opened in the old presbytery building . at the parish hall the pre-war sculpture of the iron wolf has been rebuilt . the cultural activities of the church contribute much to the general historical and cultural life of kernavė . a wide pavement leads from the town centre to the church . the state kernavė archaeological historical museum and the district office have moved into the cultural center ( architect a . alekna ) . primary school . the kernavė primary school , is a two-story building built in 1929 . here , on 28 december 1930 , the teacher j . šiaučiūnas opened the first exhibition of the museum . he devoted his life to educational and cultural work at this school until his deportation on 14 june 1941 by soviets . he died in siberia on 17 october 1943 . in 1998 the school was repaired and restored . in 1998 , by decision of the board of the širvintos district , the kernavė primary school was given the name of juozas šiaučiūnas . in 1999 the school , and in the year 2000 the kernavė museum , celebrated the 70th anniversaries of their foundation . the old architecture of kernavė is best preserved in vilnius and kriveikiškio streets . in the central part of the town , the buildings are mainly from the postwar period . to the south of the town is the archaeological and historical reservation . tourism information . image : lt-2005-50litų-kernavė-b.png thumb litas commemorative coin dedicated to kernavė left tourists can find the latest information about events and surrounding tourist attractions at kernavė tourist information bureau . listing of tourist information centres in lithuania '' , accessed 9 december 2007 . in summer kernavė comes to life . celebrations and folk festivals are organized . archaeological expeditions have been held for more than 20 years , in which lithuanian and foreign archaeologists , students , and school children take part . kernavė is also known for its traditional rasa festivals . as early as 1967 a group of university students held the very first rasa festival , which later became a tradition . for several decades it was not only a way to clean the soul , but also to protest against the humiliation of national consciousness and the forced implantation of soviet traditions . attempts to prohibit this festival were not successful . kernavė is known for national celebrations of mindaugas coronation day on 6 july . on that day a festival is held , where medieval authentic crafts , war games and folk music are presented . the craftsmen come from around the baltics and neighboring countries . see also . history of lithuania trakai voruta . references . further reading . reconstruction of piliakalniai lithuanian description of piliakalnis ( in pdf ) atlas of piliakalniai in lithuania . external links . state cultural reserve of kernavė kernavė pictures at flickr kernavė park kernavė kernave on facebook