Battle of Legnica

historical disputations . as with many historical battles , the exact details of force composition , tactics , and the actual course of the battle are lacking and sometimes contradictory . the general historical view is that it was a crushing defeat for the polish and moravian forces where they suffered heavy casualties . one of the mongol leaders , kadan , was frequently confused with ögedei 's grandson kaidu by medieval chroniclers , and thus kaidu has often been mistakenly listed as leading the mongol forces at legnica . james chambers . the devil 's horsemen : the mongol invasion of europe . atheneum . new york . 1979 . . background . the mongols considered the cumans to have submitted to their authority , but the cumans fled westward and sought asylum within the kingdom of hungary . after king béla iv of hungary rejected batu khan 's ultimatum to surrender the cumans , subutai began planning the mongol invasion of europe . batu and subutai were to lead two armies to attack hungary itself , while a third under baidar , orda khan and kadan would attack poland as a feint to occupy northern european forces which might come to hungary 's aid . orda 's forces devastated northern poland and the southwestern border of lithuania . baidar and kadan ravaged the southern part of poland : first they sacked sandomierz ; then on 3 march they defeated a polish army in the battle of tursko ; then on 18 march they defeated another polish army at chmielnik ; on 24 march they seized and burned kraków , and a few days later they tried unsuccessfully to capture the silesian capital of wrocław . while deciding whether or not to besiege wrocław , baidar and kadan received reports that king wenceslaus i of bohemia was two days away with an army over twice chambers , p . 99 the size of henry 's . the mongols turned from wrocław to intercept henry 's forces before the european armies could meet . the mongols caught up with henry near legnica at legnickie pole ( polish for '' field of legnica '' ) , also known as wahlstatt . composition . mongols . the mongol diversionary force , a detachment ( no less than one and no more than two tumens ) from the army of subutai , demonstrated the advantages of the tactical mobility and speed of horseback archers . the mongol tactics were essentially a long series of feigned attacks and faked withdrawals from widely dispersed groups , which were designed to inflict a constant slow drain by ranged fire , disrupt the enemy formation and draw larger numbers away from the main body into ambush and flank attacks . these were standard mongol tactics used in virtually all of their major battles ; they were made possible by continual training and superb battlefield communication , which used a system of flags . the mongol commander found the highest ground at the battle site , seized it and used it to communicate to his noyans and lesser commanders their orders for troop movement . the mongol system was a stark contrast to the european systems , in which knights advanced with basically no communication with supporting forces . the numbers involved are difficult to judge . european accounts vary as to mongol numbers—some suggest more than 100,000 at legnica alone . these are gross overestimates , given that this number is far larger than the entire mongol force in all of europe , as well as not taking into account the weaknesses of 13th-century mongol logistical support in western eurasia . current estimates suggest the mongol force numbered , at most , 25,000 cavalry . the historia tatarorum by the franciscan c . de bridia monachi suggests a mongol force of 10,000 troops , which would have been reduced to around 8,000 after casualties suffered earlier in the campaign , at the battle of chmielnik , battle of tursko , and the battle of tarczek . a contemporary european account , the ystoria mongalorum , supports these numbers , placing the mongol force that invaded poland at 10,000 horsemen . . polish states and allies . according to james chambers , henry 's force numbered at most 25,000 troops , most likely less , and had a large number of untrained and poorly equipped men , sometimes with no weapons other than the tools of their trade . chambers , p . 97 lesser trained forces included an army from opole under duke mieszko ii the fat ; moravians led by boleslav , son of the margrave of moravia děpolt iii ; conscripts from greater poland ; and volunteer bavarian miners from not long before established town of goldberg ( złotoryja ) . henry 's better trained troops were his own gathered in his silesian realm , mercenaries , and very small contingents of french knights templar and other foreign volunteers . historian marek cetwiński estimates the allied force to have been 2,000 strong , while gerard labuda estimates 7,000–8,000 soldiers in the christian army . a contingent of teutonic knights of indeterminate number is traditionally believed to have joined the allied army . however , recent analysis of the 15th-century annals of jan długosz by labuda suggests that the german crusaders may have been added to the text after chronicler długosz had completed the work . a legend that the prussian landmeister of the teutonic knights , poppo von osterna , was killed during the battle is false , as he died at legnica years later while visiting his wife 's nunnery . william urban . the teutonic knights : a military history . greenhill books . london . 2003 . the hospitallers have also been said to have participated in this battle , but this too seems to be a fabrication added in later accounts ; neither jan długosz 's accounts nor the letter sent to the king of france from the templar master of france , ponce d'aubon , mention them . burzyński , p.22 peter jackson further points out that the only military order that fought at legnica was the templars . jackson , p . 205 the templar contribution was very small , estimated around 68–88 well-trained , well-armed soldiers ; burzyński , p . 24 their letter to the king of france gives their losses as three brother knights , two sergeants and 500 'men'—according to their use of the term , probably peasants working their estates and thus neither better armed or trained than the rest of the army 's infantry . the battle . henry divided his forces into four sections : the bavarian miners led by boleslav of moravia ; the conscripts from greater poland along with some cracovians led by sulisław , the brother of the killed palatine of kraków ; the army of opole under mieszko ; and , under henry 's personal command , the silesians , moravians , and templars . according to chambers ' description of the battle , the silesian cavalry initiated combat with the vanguard ( mangudai ) of the mongol army . after the silesians were repelled , the cavalry of greater poland , led by sulisław , and the cavalry of opole then attacked the mongols . the mongol vanguard retreated , inducing the allied cavalry to pursue , thereby separating them from the polish infantry . although the mangudai fled , mongol light cavalry flanked the polish forces . a smokescreen was used to hide the mongol movements and confuse the europeans . while the mongol light cavalry attacked from the flanks and the heavy cavalry attacked from the front , mongol archers peppered the polish forces with arrows . erik hildinger indicates that the levies of boleslav led the attack , instead of the silesians . he adds that after the polish cavalry began their pursuit during the mongols ' feigned retreat , a rider shouted '' run ! run ! '' ( in polish ) to the polish forces , confusing mieszko , who ordered his opole contingent to retreat from the battle . this withdrawal led henry to order his own reserves and cavalry into the fight . erik hildinger . '' mongol invasions : battle of liegnitz '' . thehistorynet.com , originally published military history magazine , june 1997 . accessed 2 september 2008 . the mongols had much success in the battle by feigning their retreat . after the polish knights detached from the main body of allied forces in pursuit of the fleeing mongols , the invaders were able to separate the knights from the infantry and defeat them one by one . the annals of jan długosz also describes the battle , although it was written in the 15th century , not when it actually occurred . the army of henry ii was almost destroyed—henry and boleslav of moravia were killed and estimates of casualties range from 2,000 to 40,000 , essentially the entire army . ponce d'aubon reported to king louis ix of france that the military order lost 500 people , both in legnica and subsequent raids on three templar villages and two '' towers '' john man – genghis khan , p.298 among them nine brothers , three knights , and two sergeants . this number likely included civilians of the villages . mongol casualties are unknown ; a perfect execution of their standard tactics would have minimized losses , but the mongols endured sufficient casualties to dissuade them from attacking the bohemian army . the mongols cut the right ear off of each fallen european in order to count the dead ; supposedly they filled nine sackfuls , though this has as much validity as european accounts of the numbers of mongols . norman davies . europe : a history . harpercollins . new york . 1998 . henry was struck down and beheaded while attempting to flee the battlefield with three bodyguards , and the mongols paraded his head on a spear before the town of legnica . conclusion . wenceslaus i of bohemia , who had been a day 's march away , fell back to gather reinforcements from thuringia and saxony upon learning of the defeat . he was overtaken by the mongol vanguard at kłodzko . however , his force was far larger and more powerful than the host at legnica , and the mongol detachment was routed by the bohemian cavalry . as baidar and kadan 's orders had been to serve as a diversion , they stayed to keep the bohemian forces tied up , avoiding confrontation with the larger army while splitting up into bands and sacking minor towns and villages . eventually , they turned away from bohemia and poland and headed southward to join batu and subutai , who had defeated the magyars at the battle of mohi . after batu khan returned from mongolia , his relations with his cousins were so poor that not until the election of möngke khan as khagan did he again consider turning westward to europe . however , he died in 1255 before those plans could be put into motion . under the rule of his brother berke , the golden horde was preoccupied with the conflict with their cousins in the ilkhanate , led by hulagu khan , whom berke khan despised for the battle of baghdad and the murder of caliph al-musta'sim . larger invasions of poland , devoted primarily to looting , would be launched later . led by burundai , the mongols second mongol invasion of poland . they raided again under the leadership of tulabuga and nogai khan , accompanied by vassal troops from ruthenia , successfully in 1286 and unsuccessfully in 1287 . although the mongols repeatedly expressed desire to conquer central europe in ultimatums up to the 1270s , poland and hungary stayed outside of the golden horde 's sphere of influence . the russian lands to their east remained under the rule of the golden horde for the next two centuries . the battle of legnica is commemorated on the tomb of the unknown soldier , warsaw , with the inscription '' legnica 9 iv 1241 '' . see also . battle of the kalka river battle of mohi golden horde mongol empire mongols ögedei khan puresh subutai . footnotes . further reading . . external links . the annals of jan dlugosz – sample text written by jan dlugosz between 1455 and 1480 . mongol invasion of europe in 1241 templariusze w walce z najazdem mongolskim na polskę w 1241 roku- edmund burzyński 's article on the templar participation ( see pages 22–24 for an english summary ) battle of liegnitz 9 april 1241 marco e luca website video : mongol invasion of europe templariusze w walce z najazdem mongolskim na polskę w 1241 roku- edmund burzyński 's article on the templar participation ( see pages 22–24 for an english summary )