James the Great

in the new testament . the son of zebedee and salome , james is styled '' the greater '' to distinguish him from the apostle james the less , with greater meaning older or taller , rather than more important . he was the brother of john the apostle . james is described as one of the first disciples to join jesus . the synoptic gospels state that james and john were with their father by the seashore when jesus called them to follow him . james was one of only three apostles whom jesus selected to bear witness to his transfiguration . , , . james and john ( or , in another tradition , their mother ) asked jesus to grant them seats on his right and left in his glory . jesus rebuked them , and the other apostles were annoyed with them . james and his brother wanted to call down fire on a samaritan town , but were rebuked by jesus . the acts of the apostles records that '' herod the king '' ( traditionally identified with herod agrippa ) had james executed by the sword . nixon suggests that this may have been caused by james 's fiery temper , r . e . nixon , '' boanerges '' , in j . d . douglas ( ed . ) , the new bible dictionary ( london : the inter-varsity fellowship , 1963 ) , 1354 , in which he and his brother earned the nickname boanerges or '' sons of thunder '' . f . f . bruce contrasts this story to that of the liberation of saint peter , and notes that '' james should die while peter should escape '' is a '' mystery of divine providence '' . f . f . bruce , '' commentary on the book of the acts '' ( grand rapids : eerdmans , 1964 ) , 251 . . veneration . in the catholic tradition , saint james is the patron saint of spain and , according to legend , his remains are held in santiago de compostela in galicia . this name santiago is the local evolution of latin genitive sancti iacobi , '' ( church or sanctuary ) of saint james '' ( evolved into a personal name in spanish , and also in portuguese -tiago- , with its derivatives diego/diogo ) . the traditional pilgrimage to the grave of the saint , known as the '' way of st . james '' , has been the most popular pilgrimage for western european catholics from the early middle ages onwards , although its modern revival and popularity stems from walter starkie 's 1957 book , the road to santiago . the pilgrims of st . james . new york , e . p . dutton , 1957 , oclc 28087235 ; reprinted by the univ . of california press in 1965 ( oclc 477436336 ) and published in spanish translation in 1958 with the somewhat different title of el camino de santiago : las peregrinaciones al sepulcro del apóstol , trans . amando lázaro ros , madrid , aguilar , 1958 , oclc 432856567 . both the english original and the translation have been republished . officially 327,378 pilgrims registered in 2018 as having completed the final 100 & nbsp ; km walk ( 200 & nbsp ; km by bicycle ) to santiago to qualify for a compostela . when 25 july falls on a sunday , it is a '' holy year '' ( an año santo jacobeo ) and a special east door is opened for entrance into santiago cathedral . jubilee years follow a 6-5-6-11 pattern ( except when the last year of a century is n't a leap year , which can yield a gap of 7 or 12 years ) . in the 2004 holy year , 179,944 pilgrims received a compostela . in the 2010 holy year the number had risen to 272,412 . the next holy year will be 2021 . the feast day of st . james is celebrated on 25 july on the liturgical calendars of the roman catholic , anglican , lutheran and certain protestant churches . he is commemorated on 30 april in the orthodox christian liturgical calendar ( for those churches which follow the traditional julian calendar , 30 april currently falls on 13 may of the modern gregorian calendar ) . the national day of galicia is also celebrated on 25 july , being st james its patron saint . jerusalem . the site of martyrdom is located within the cathedral of st . james , jerusalem in the armenian quarter of jerusalem . the chapel of st . james the great , located to the left of the sanctuary , is the traditional place where he was martyred , when king agrippa ordered him to be beheaded ( acts 12:1–2 ) . his head is buried under the altar , marked by a piece of red marble and surrounded by six votive lamps . . spain . mission in spain and burial at compostela . the 12th-century historia compostelana commissioned by bishop diego gelmírez provides a summary of the legend of st . james , as it was believed at compostela at that time . two propositions are central to it : first , that st . james preached the gospel in spain , as well as in the holy land ; second , that after his martyrdom at the hands of herod agrippa , his disciples carried his body by sea to iberia , where they landed at padrón on the coast of galicia , then took it inland for burial at santiago de compostela . the translation of his relics from judea to galicia in the northwest of iberia was done , in legend , by a series of miracle happenings : decapitated in jerusalem with a sword by herod agrippa himself , his body was taken up by angels , and sailed in a rudderless , unattended boat to iria flavia in iberia , where a massive rock closed around his relics , which were later removed to compostela . according to ancient local tradition , on 2 january ad 40 , the virgin mary appeared to james on the bank of the ebro river at caesaraugusta , while he was preaching the gospel in spain . she appeared upon a pillar , nuestra señora del pilar , and that pillar is conserved and venerated within the present basilica of our lady of the pillar , in zaragoza , spain . following that apparition , st . james returned to judea , where he was beheaded by king herod agrippa i in the year 44 . the tradition at compostela placed the discovery of the relics of the saint in the time of king alfonso ii ( 791–842 ) and of bishop theodemir of iria . these traditions were the basis for the pilgrimage route that began to be established in the 9th century , and the shrine dedicated to james at santiago de compostela , in galicia in spain , became the most famous pilgrimage site in the christian world . the way of st . james is a network of routes that cross western europe and arrive at santiago through northern spain . eventually james became the patron saint of spain . controversy . james suffered martyrdom in ad 44 . according to the tradition of the early church , he had not yet left jerusalem at this time . clement of alexandria , stromata , vi ; apollonius , quoted by eusebius of caesarea , ecclesiastical history v.xviii ) an argument supporting this assertion is based on the epistle to the romans , written after ad 44 , in which paul expressed his intention to avoid '' building on someone else 's foundation '' by visiting spain , suggesting that he knew of no previous evangelisation in hispania . the suggestion began to be made from the 9th century that , as well as evangelizing in iberia , james ' body was brought to and is buried in compostela . no earlier tradition places the burial of st . james in spain . a rival tradition places the relics of the apostle in the church of saturnin at toulouse ; if any physical relics were ever involved , they might plausibly have been divided between the two . the tradition of saint james ' burial in compostela was not unanimously accepted , and numerous modern scholars , following louis duchesne and t . e . kendrick , '' saint james in spain '' , london , 1960 reject it . ( according to kendrick , even if one admits the existence of miracles , james ' presence in spain is impossible . ) the catholic encyclopedia ( 1908 ) registered several '' difficulties '' or bases for doubts of this tradition , beyond the late appearance of the legend : the bollandists , however , defended it . ( their acta sanctorum , july , vi and vii , gives further sources . ) a belief in the authenticity of the relics at compostela was also asserted by pope leo xiii , in his 1884 bull omnipotens deus . medieval '' santiago matamoros '' legend . an even later tradition states that he miraculously appeared to fight for the christian army during the legendary battle of clavijo , and was henceforth called santiago matamoros ( saint james the moor-slayer ) . santiago y cierra españa ( '' st . james and strike for spain '' ) was the traditional battle cry of medieval spanish ( christian ) armies . miguel de cervantes has don quixote explaining that '' the great knight of the russet cross was given by god to spain as patron and protector '' . don quixote , 2nd section , chapter 58 a similar miracle is related to san millán . the possibility that a cult of james was instituted to supplant the galician cult of priscillian ( executed in 385 ) who was widely venerated across the north of iberia as a martyr ( at the hands of the local bishops , rather than as a heretic ) should not be overlooked . this was cautiously raised by henry chadwick in his book on priscillian ; it is not the traditional roman catholic view . the catholic encyclopedia of 1908 , however , is quite cautious about the origins of the cult ( see above at controversy ) . emblem . james ' emblem was the scallop shell ( or '' cockle shell '' ) , and pilgrims to his shrine often wore that symbol on their hats or clothes . the french term for a scallop is coquille st . jacques , which means '' cockle ( or mollusk ) of st . jacob '' . the german word for a scallop is jakobsmuschel , which means '' jacob 's mussel ( or clam ) '' ; the dutch word is jacobsschelp , meaning '' jacob 's shell '' . in danish and with the same meaning as in dutch the word is ibskal , ib being a danish version of the name jakob and skal meaning shell . military order of santiago . the military order of santiago , named after saint tiago or saint james , was founded in spain in the 12th century to fight the moors . later , as in other orders of chivalry , the membership became a mark of honor . latter-day saints . the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( lds church ) teaches that in 1829 john the baptist and later the apostles james , peter and john appeared as heavenly messengers to joseph smith and oliver cowdery and conferred upon them both , and thus restored , the aaronic and the melchizedek priesthood authority of apostolic succession to them and thus exclusively on earth to their organization . doctrine and covenants 27:12 . . in islam . the quranic account of the disciples of jesus does not include their names , numbers , or any detailed accounts of their lives . muslim exegesis , however , more or less agrees with the new testament list and says that the disciples included peter , philip , thomas , bartholomew , matthew , andrew , james , jude , john and simon the zealot . . see also . apocryphon of james ( also known as the secret book of james ) camino de santiago cathedral of st . james ( disambiguation ) hand of st james the apostle jacob military order of saint james of the sword our lady of the pillar , a marian/angelic apparition that james had according to tradition peter of rates portal : catholicism/patron archive/july 25 santiago matamoros , lit . '' saint james the moor-slayer '' st . james ' church ( disambiguation ) . references . external links . '' st . james the great , apostle '' , butler 's lives of the saints the life , miracles and martyrdom of st . james the great : apostle and martyr of the christian church the way of st . james guide for the pilgrimage to santiago de compostela following st . james 's footsteps . r . a . fletcher , saint james 's catapult : the life and times of diego gelmírez of santiago de compostela oxford university press , 1984 : chapter 3 , '' the early history of the cult of st . james '' apostle james the brother of st john the theologian orthodox icon and synaxarion history st . james the greater , apostle at the christian iconography web site st . james the greater ] from caxton 's translation of the golden legend the patron saint of spain , celebrated in santiago in july santiago barreiro ( 2020 ) doi:10.1080/17546559.2019.1705373 , journal of medieval iberian studies , 12:1 , 70-83