Johnnie Johnson (musician)

career . johnson was born in fairmont , west virginia , united states . he began playing the piano in 1928 . he joined the united states marine corps during world war ii and became a member of bobby troup 's all-serviceman jazz orchestra , the barracudas . after his service , he moved to detroit and then chicago , where he sat in with many notable artists , including muddy waters and little walter . he moved to st . louis , missouri in 1952 and immediately assembled a jazz and blues group , the sir john trio , with the drummer ebby hardy and the saxophonist alvin bennett . the three had a regular engagement at the cosmopolitan club , in east st . louis . on new year 's eve 1952 , bennett had a stroke and could not perform . johnson , searching for a last-minute replacement , called a young man named chuck berry , the only musician johnson knew who , because of his inexperience , would likely not be playing on new year 's eve . although then a limited guitarist , berry added vocals and showmanship to the group . bennett was not able to play after his stroke , so johnson hired berry as a permanent member of the trio . berry took one of their tunes , a reworking of bob wills 's version of '' ida red '' , to chess records in 1955 . the chess brothers liked the song , and soon the trio were in chicago recording '' maybellene '' and '' wee wee hours '' – a song johnson had been playing as an instrumental for years , for which berry quickly wrote some lyrics . '' maybellene '' got berry and johnson onto the billboard charts in 1955 . berry got signed as a solo act , and johnson and hardy became part of berry 's band . said johnson , '' i figured we could get better jobs with chuck running the band . he had a car and rubber wheels beat rubber heels any day . '' over the next 20 years , the two collaborated on many of berry 's songs , including '' school days '' , '' roll over beethoven '' , '' carol '' , and '' nadine '' . the song '' johnny b . goode '' was reportedly a tribute to johnson , with the title referring to johnson 's behavior when he was drinking . berry and johnson played and toured together on & off , until 1973 . although never on his payroll after 1973 , johnson played occasionally with berry until he sued berry over songwriting credits & royalties . johnson was known to have a serious drinking problem . in berry 's autobiography , he wrote that he had declared there would be no drinking in the car while the band was on the road . johnson and his bandmates complied with the request by putting their heads out the window . johnson denied the story but said he did drink on the road . johnson quit drinking in 1991 , after nearly suffering a stroke on stage with eric clapton . aside from songwriting and performing with chuck berry , johnson made many significant contributions to blues & rock and roll . johnson was the leader of albert king 's rhythm section during king 's most prolific and musically significant period . johnson also served as one of the cornerstones of the st . louis blues scene . in the early and mid 80s he was a member of the sounds of the city , with larry thurston , bassist gus thornton , and guitarist tom maloney . johnnie performed all over st louis with tommy bankhead , oliver sain , and many significant blues artists throughout their lives . johnson received little recognition until the chuck berry concert documentary hail ! hail ! rock ' n ' roll was released in 1987 . johnnie stood out in the performances in the film . the experience forged a permanent bond between him , keith richards , eric clapton , and steve jordan . although johnson had been supporting himself as a bus driver in st . louis , the exposure and experience of the film helped him return to headlining . he recorded his first solo album , blue hand johnnie , that year . having worked steadily in st . louis , johnnie now returned to performing all over the world . he performed with the kentucky headhunters on occasion and was featured in both the dumas walker and walk softly on this heart of mine videos . eric clapton hired him as a featured artist for his annual royal albert hall blues shows . keith richards employed johnnie in the xpensive winos . johnson toured worldwide as a solo artist , and released records produced by keith richards , jimmy vivino , and al kooper . he later performed with richards , clapton , buddy guy , john lee hooker , bo diddley and george thorogood on thorogood 's 1995 live album live : let 's work together . in 1996 and 1997 , johnson toured with bob weir 's band , ratdog , playing 67 shows . in 1997 , johnson , raymond cantrell , and stevie lee dodge made up the st . charles blues trio . in 1998 , johnson told doug donnelly of monroenews.com that '' johnny b . goode '' was a tribute to him . '' i played no part in nothing of johnny b . goode , '' johnson said . '' on other songs , chuck and i worked together , but not that one . we were playing one night , i think it was chicago , and he played it . afterward , he told me it was a tribute to me . he did it on his own . i did n't know nothing about it . it was never discussed . '' a biography of johnson , father of rock and roll : the story of johnnie b . goode johnson , by travis fitzpatrick , was published in 1999 . the book was entered into the annual pulitzer prize competition by congressman john conyers and garnered johnson more recognition . johnson received a pioneer award from the rhythm and blues foundation in 2000 . johnson 's final album , johnnie be eighty . and still bad ! , was recorded in st . louis in late 2004 , consisting of all original songs written with the producer , jeff alexander , a first for johnson . the album was released the same week he died in april 2005 and contains the biographical beach weather and lucky four . in 2005 , he played piano on styx 's re-recording of '' blue collar man '' , entitled '' blue collar man 2120 '' , for their album big bang theory . it was recorded at chess studios , at 2120 s . michigan avenue in chicago , on the 46th anniversary of the recording of '' johnnie b . goode '' at the same studio . johnson died at the age of 80 from a kidney ailment and pneumonia in st . louis on april 13 , 2005 . he was interred in the jefferson barracks national cemetery . legacy . in november 2000 , johnson sued berry , alleging he deserved co-composer credits ( and royalties ) for dozens of songs , including '' no particular place to go '' , '' sweet little sixteen '' , and '' roll over beethoven '' , which credit berry alone . the case was eventually dismissed because too many years had passed since the songs in dispute were written . in 2001 , he was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame , in the category sidemen , after a campaign by the businessman george turek ; johnson 's biographer , travis fitzpatrick ; and the guitarist keith richards , of the rolling stones . johnson has a star on the st . louis walk of fame . johnson was the subject of a homespun tapes piano instructional video , the blues/rock piano of johnnie johnson : sessions with a keyboard legend . originally released in 1999 ( a dvd was issued in 2005 ) , the video is hosted by david bennett cohen , along with johnson 's band , featuring guitarist jimmy vivino . the johnnie johnson blues & jazz festival is held annually in fairmont west virginia , only a few blocks from where johnson was born . discography . 1959 : organ in hi-fi ( riviera records - r0044/str044 ) , ( instrumental ) 1987 : blue hand johnnie ( evidence music ) , with oliver sain 1991 : johnnie b . bad ( elektra ) , with eric clapton , keith richards and bernard fowler 1991 : rockin ' eighty-eights ( modern blues recordings ) , with jimmy vaughan and clayton love not to be confused with jimmie vaughan 1993 : that 'll work ( elektra ) , with the kentucky headhunters and jimmy hall 1995 : johnnie be back ( musicmasters ) , with buddy guy , al kooper , john sebastian and max weinberg 1997 : johnnie b . live ( father of rock and roll music ) , with jimmy vivino and al kooper 1999 : father of rock and roll ( father of rock and roll music ) , cd accompanying the book father of rock and roll : the story of johnnie b . goode johnson , featuring new recordings of johnson and berry songs 2005 : johnnie be eighty.and still bad ! ( cousin moe music ) , produced by jeff alexander , with rich mcdonough ( guitar ) , gus thornton ( bass ) , joe pastor ( drums ) , larry thurston ( vocals ) and victor '' big daddy '' johnson ( vocals ) 2015 : meet me in bluesland ( alligator ) , with the kentucky headhunters . singles . 1994 : '' sunday blues '' ( with the kentucky headhunters ) . see also . music of west virginia st . louis blues ( music ) . references . external links . johnnie johnson . rock and roll hall of fame . johnnie johnson blues & jazz society , fairmont , west virginia . st . louis walk of fame . keith richards remembers johnnie . johnnie johnson : the movie . website for the documentary johnnie be good .