Liriodendron

description . liriodendron trees are easily recognized by their leaf , which are distinctive , having four lobes in most cases and a cross-cut notched or straight apex . leaf size varies from 8–22 & nbsp ; cm long and 6–25 & nbsp ; cm wide . the tulip tree is often a large tree , 18–60 m high and 60–120 & nbsp ; cm in diameter . the tree is known to reach the height of 191.8 feet ( 58.49 meters ) , in groves where they compete for sunlight , somewhat less if growing in an open field . its trunk is usually columnar , with a long , branch-free bole forming a compact , rather than open , conical crown of slender branches . it has deep roots that spread widely . michigan trees leaves are slightly larger in l . chinense , compared to l . tulipifera , but with considerable overlap between the species ; the petiole is 4–18 & nbsp ; cm long . leaves on young trees tend to be more deeply lobed and larger in size than those on mature trees . in autumn , the leaves turn yellow , or brown and yellow . both species grow rapidly in rich , moist soils of temperate climates . they hybridize easily . flowers are 3–10 & nbsp ; cm in diameter and have nine tepals — three green outer sepals and six inner petals which are yellow-green with an orange flare at the base . they start forming after around 15 years and are superficially similar to a tulip in shape , hence the tree 's name . flowers of l . tulipifera have a faint cucumber odor . the stamens and pistils are arranged spirally around a central spike or gynaecium ; the stamens fall off , and the pistils become the samaras . the fruit is a cone-like aggregate of samaras 4–9 & nbsp ; cm long , each of which has a roughly tetrahedral seed with one edge attached to the central conical spike and the other edge attached to the wing . distribution . liriodendron trees are also easily recognized by their general shape , with the higher branches sweeping together in one direction , and they are also recognizable by their height , as the taller ones usually protrude above the canopy of oaks , maples , and other trees—more markedly with the american species . appalachian cove forests often contain several tulip trees of height and girth not seen in other species of eastern hardwoods . in the appalachian cove forests , trees 150 to 165 & nbsp ; ft in height are common , and trees from 166 to nearly 180 & nbsp ; ft are also found . more liriodendron over 170 & nbsp ; ft in height have been measured by the eastern native tree society than for any other eastern species . the current tallest tulip tree on record has reached 191.9 & nbsp ; ft , the tallest native angiosperm tree known in north america . the tulip tree is rivaled in eastern forests only by white pine , loblolly pine , and eastern hemlock . reports of tulip trees over 200 & nbsp ; ft have been made , but none of the measurements has been confirmed by the eastern native tree society . most reflect measurement errors attributable to not accurately locating the highest crown point relative to the base of the tree—a common error made by the users employing only clinometers/hypsometers when measuring height . maximum circumferences for the species are between 24 and 30 & nbsp ; ft at breast height , although a few historical specimens may have been slightly larger . the great smoky mountains national park has the greatest population of tulip trees 20 & nbsp ; ft and over in circumference . the largest-volume tulip tree known anywhere is the sag branch giant , which has a trunk and limb volume approaching . fossils . liriodendrons have been reported as fossils from the late cretaceous and early tertiary of north america and central asia . they are known widely as tertiary-age fossils in europe and well outside their present range in asia and north america , showing a once-circumpolar northern distribution . like many '' arcto-tertiary '' genera , liriodendron apparently became extinct in europe due to large-scale glaciation and aridity of climate during glacial phases . ( the name should not be confused with lepidodendron , an important group of long-extinct pteridophytes in the phylum lycopodiophyta common as paleozoic coal-age fossils ) . cultivation and use . liriodendron trees prefer a temperate climate , sun or part shade , and deep , fertile , well-drained and slightly acidic soil . propagation is by seed or grafting . plants grown from seed may take more than eight years to flower . grafted plants flower depending on the age of the scion plant . the wood of the north american species ( called poplar or tulipwood ) is fine grained and stable . it is easy to work and commonly used for cabinet and furniture framing , i.e . internal structural members and subsurfaces for veneering . additionally , much inexpensive furniture , described for sales purposes simply as '' hardwood '' , is in fact primarily stained poplar . in the literature of american furniture manufacturers from the first half of the 20th century , it is often referred to as '' gum wood '' . the wood is only moderately rot-resistant and is not commonly used in shipbuilding , but has found some recent use in light-craft construction . the wood is readily available , and when air dried , has a density around . the name canoewood probably refers to the tree 's use for construction of dugout canoes by eastern native americans , for which its fine grain and large trunk size is eminently suited . tulip tree leaves are eaten by the caterpillars of some lepidoptera , for example the eastern tiger swallowtail ( papilio glaucus ) . species and cultivars . liriodendron chinense liriodendron tulipifera 'ardis ' is a small-leaf , compact cultivar 'aureomarginatum ' is variegated with yellow-margined leaves 'fastigiatum ' grows with an erect or columnar habit ( fastigiate ) 'florida ' strain — a fast-growing early bloomer , leaves have round lobes 'glen gold ' bears yellow-gold colored leaves 'mediopictum ' is a variegated cultivar with gold-centered leaves 'chapel hill ' and 'doc deforce 's delight ' are hybrids of the above two species . references . external links . hunt , d . ( ed ) . 1998 . magnolias and their allies . international dendrology society & magnolia society . parks , c.r . , wendel , j.f . , sewell , m.m . , & qiu , y.-l . ( 1994 ) . the significance of allozyme variation and introgression in the liriodendron tulipifera complex ( magnoliaceae ) . am . j . bot . 81 ( 7 ) : 878-889 abstract and first page parks , c.r . , miller , n.g . , wendel , j.f . and mcdougal , k.m . ( 1983 ) . genetic diversity within the genus liriodendron ( magnoliaceae ) . annals of the missouri botanical garden 70 ( 4 ) : 658-666 abstract and first page collingwood , g.h . , brush , w.d . ( 1984 ) knowing your trees . american forestry association . ( l.o.c . card no . 78-52994 ) :286-287 moriaty , william . the tulip tree in central florida liriodendron chinense liriodendron chinense trunk and flowers kew : plants : tulip trees , liriodendron tulipifera & liriodendron chinense flora of china draft account of magnoliaceae ( site currently down ; see google cache ) liriodendron tulipifera images at bioimages.vanderbilt.edu botanicas trees & shrubs , random house , sydney , 2005 world ’ s largest tulip tree in perry county , ky usda plants tulip popular forestry about com yellow poplar - identifying yellow poplar in north american trees penn state yellow popular usda forest service yellow popular