1966 in music

specific locations . 1966 in british music 1966 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1966 in country music 1966 in jazz . events . january 8 – shindig ! is broadcast for the last time on abc , with musical guests the kinks and the who ; 2 days earlier , the birthday of elvis presley is celebrated in the final thursday episode of the series . january 14 – young english singer david jones changes his last name to bowie to avoid being confused with davy jones of the monkees . january 17 – simon & garfunkel release the album sounds of silence in the us . february 2 – the first edition of go-set magazine is published in melbourne , australia . founded by former monash university students phillip frazer and tony schauble , the new weekly is the first independent periodical in australia devoted entirely to popular music and youth culture . the inaugural 24-page issue has a cover feature on tom jones , stories on the groop , singer pat carroll and dj ken sparkes and a feature on mod fashion by designer prue acton . february 6 – the animals appear a fifth time on the ed sullivan show to perform their iconic vietnam-anthem hit '' we got ta get out of this place '' . february 17 – brian wilson starts recording '' good vibrations '' with the wrecking crew , continuing for several months and marking a beginning to the famed smile sessions . february 19 – jefferson airplane and big brother and the holding company with janis joplin perform at the fillmore . february 25 – the yardbirds release the single '' shapes of things '' / '' mister , you 're a better man than i '' , heralding the dawn of the psychedelic era in british rock . '' shapes '' will peak at no . 3 in the uk and no . 10 in canada and the us , where it remains on the charts throughout the spring of 1966 , making its final hot 100 appearance mid-june . march 4 – the beatles ' john lennon is quoted in the london evening standard newspaper as saying that '' we 're more popular than jesus now . '' in august , following publication of this remark in datebook , there are beatles protests and record burnings in the southern us 's bible belt . march 5 – the 11th eurovision song contest is staged in the villa louvigny , luxembourg . udo jürgens , having represented austria in the last two contests ( sixth in 1964 ; fourth in 1965 ) , finally scores a first for the country , with '' merci chérie '' , which he co-wrote . march 6 – in the uk , 5,000 fans of the beatles sign a petition urging british prime minister harold wilson to reopen liverpool 's cavern club . march 14 – the byrds release the psychedelic single '' eight miles high '' in the us . it is banned in several states due to allegations that the lyrics advocate drug use , yet reaches no.14 on the billboard 100 charts . march 15 – the 8th annual grammy awards are held in new york , hosted by jerry lewis . roger miller wins the most awards with five . frank sinatra 's september of my years wins album of the year , herb alpert & the tijuana brass ' version of '' a taste of honey '' wins record of the year and tony bennett 's version of '' the shadow of your smile '' wins song of the year . tom jones wins best new artist . april – herb alpert & the tijuana brass set a world record by placing five albums simultaneously on billboard 's pop album chart , with four of them the top 10 . their music outsells the beatles by a margin of two-to-one – over 13 million recordings . they win 4 grammys this year . april 11 – first public performance in the metropolitan opera house , of giacomo puccini 's la fanciulla del west , though the official opening of the new opera house will not take place until september 16 . april 12 – in los angeles , california , jan berry , of jan and dean , crashes his corvette into a truck that is parked on whittier boulevard . berry slips into a two-month-long coma and suffers total physical paralysis for over a year as well as extensive brain damage . april 23 – for the first time since its january 18 , 1964 , issue , the billboard hot 100 chart fails to have an artist from the uk with a top 10 single , ending a streak of 117 consecutive weeks . may 1 – the beatles , the rolling stones and the who perform at the nmes poll winners ' show at the empire pool ( wembley ) in london . this will be the beatles ' last conventional live concert in britain . the show is videotaped for later broadcast but the beatles ' and the stones ' segments are omitted because of union conflicts . may 6 – the first issue of džuboks , the first sfry magazine dedicated to rock music and the first rock magazine in a socialist country , is released . may 7 – the rolling stones release '' paint it , black '' in the us ( may 13 in the uk ) ; this becomes the first number one hit single in the us and uk to feature a sitar ( played by brian jones ) . may 16 – legendary album pet sounds by the beach boys is released in the us . may 17 – bob dylan and the hawks ( later the band ) perform at the free trade hall , manchester , england . dylan is booed by the audience because of his decision to tour with an electric band , the boos culminating in the famous '' judas '' shout . may 30 – them , fronted by van morrison , begin a three-week stint as the headliner act at the whisky a go go in hollywood . on the last night june 18 , they are joined on stage by that week 's opening act the doors . van and jim morrison sing '' gloria '' together . june 6 – 25-year-old claudette frady-orbison , while motorcycle riding with her husband roy orbison , is killed when her motorcycle is struck by a pickup truck in gallatin , tennessee . june 18 – at a drunken gig at the queen 's college , oxford in england , bassist/producer paul samwell-smith quits the yardbirds and star session guitarist jimmy page agrees to take over on bass . june 20 – bob dylan 's album blonde on blonde is released in the us . june 27 – frank zappa and the mothers of invention 's debut album , freak out ! , is released in the us . it is an initial failure , but gains a massive cult following in subsequent years . july 2 – the beatles become the first musical group to perform at the nippon budokan hall in tokyo . the performance ignites protests from local citizens who feel that it is inappropriate for a rock and roll band to play at budokan . july 29 – bob dylan is injured in a motorcycle accident near his home in woodstock , new york . he is not seen in public for over a year . july 31 – the '' supergroup '' cream , a trio featuring eric clapton ( guitar ) , ginger baker ( drums ) and jack bruce ( bass guitar , lead vocals ) performs its first official concert at the windsor ( uk ) jazz & blues festival . august 1 – '' midsummer serenades : a mozart festival '' is held – the first mostly mozart festival . august 5 – the beatles release their album revolver in the uk , expanding the year 's psychedelic sound . august 11 – john lennon holds a press conference in chicago , illinois , to apologize for his remarks the previous march . '' i suppose if i had said television was more popular than jesus , i would have gotten away with it . i 'm sorry i opened my mouth . i 'm not anti-god , anti-christ , or anti-religion . i was not knocking it . i was not saying we are greater or better . '' august 17 – the moscow radio symphony orchestra becomes the first major overseas orchestra to perform at the proms . august 24 – american rock band the doors record their self-titled debut album . august 25 – the yardbirds ' lead guitarist jeff beck takes ill in san francisco and jimmy page , who has been playing bass , takes over on lead guitar for the band 's concert at the carousel ballroom . august 29 the beatles perform their last official concert at candlestick park in san francisco , california . the last number they play is little richard 's '' long tall sally '' . nbc airs the last episode of hullabaloo , with elvis presley performing '' aud lang slyne '' ( the episode previously aired in april ) . september 12 – the first episode of the monkees television series is broadcast on nbc in the us . september 16 the metropolitan opera house ( lincoln center ) opens in new york city with the première of samuel barber 's opera antony and cleopatra . the opera is rejected by the critics . eric burdon records a solo album after leaving the animals and appears on the show ready , steady , go , singing '' help me girl '' , a uk 14 solo hit . also on the show are otis redding and chris farlowe . september 23 – the yardbirds debut their twin lead guitar lineup , featuring jeff beck and jimmy page , at the royal albert hall in london , opening for the the rolling stones 1966 uk tour . also on the bill are ike & tina turner , peter jay and the jaywalkers and long john baldry . september 24 – jimi hendrix arrives in london to record with producer/manager chas chandler . october 8 – wor-fm in new york city becomes the first fm rock music station , under the leadership of dj murray the k . october 22 – with their album the supremes a ' go-go , the supremes become the first all-female group to reach number one on the us billboard 200 . november 9 – john lennon meets yoko ono when he attends a preview of her art exhibition at the indica gallery in london . november 15 – japanese band the tigers make their first television appearance , changing their name from '' the funnys '' for the occasion . november 24 – the beatles begin recording sessions for their sgt . pepper 's lonely hearts club band album at abbey road studios in london . november 30 – the yardbirds officially announce that jeff beck has left the band , leaving jimmy page as sole guitarist in the group , within which page would plant the seeds of led zeppelin . december 6 – a smile vocal overdub session by the beach boys for the song '' cabin essence '' becomes the scene of a climactic argument between member mike love and third-party lyricist van dyke parks , causing him to gradually distance away from the project . december 9 the who release their second album a quick one with a nine-minute '' mini-opera '' '' a quick one while he 's away '' . the move release their debut single '' night of fear '' . december 16 – the jimi hendrix experience release their first single in the uk , '' hey joe '' . december 17 – david oppenheim films brian wilson at his home performing his composition '' surf 's up '' . the footage will later be used for cbs 's inside pop : the rock revolution to be aired the next april . december 23-30 – the ufo club opens in london , featuring psychedelic bands pink floyd and soft machine ; and the films of andy warhol and kenneth anger . 1966 dates unknown dalida receives , for a second time , the music hall bravos . charley pride is signed by rca . the ccmix ( centre for automatic and mathematical music ) is founded in paris by iannis xenakis . modern assyrian music takes off when albert rouel tamras releases his first records in baghdad in 1966 on the bashirphone label . conductor herbert kegel marries soprano celestina casapietra . pungmul music is recognized as an important intangible cultural property in south korea , under the title , '' twelve movements of farmers ' music '' ) . bands formed . see : category : musical groups established in 1966 . bands disbanded . see : category : musical groups disestablished in 1966 . albums released . january . . compositions . gilbert amy cycle , for percussion sextet trajectoires , for violin and orchestra malcolm arnold – fantasy for solo flute jean barraqué – chant après chant for soprano , piano , and six percussionists george crumb – eleven echoes of autumn ( echoes i ) for violin , alto flute , clarinet , and piano mario davidovsky junctures for flute , clarinet , and violin synchronisms no . 4 for chorus and tape erhard karkoschka – quattrologe , for string quartet john serry , sr . – concerto for free bass accordion roger sessions – symphony no . 6 dmitri shostakovich – string quartet no.11 in f minor , op . 122 karlheinz stockhausen – adieu ( für wolfgang sebastian meyer ) , for wind quintet , nr . 21 solo , for a melody instrument with feedback , nr . 19 telemusik , electronic and concrete music , nr . 20 robert ward – fiesta processional . opera . samuel barber – antony and cleopatra vittorio giannini – servant of two masters jorge peña hen – la cenicienta ( cinderella ) universia chile ( august 14 , 2004 ) . '' en la universidad de chile estrenan documental 'jorge peña hen : su música y los niños ' '' mark kopytman – casa mare peter westergaard – mr and mrs discobbolos grace williams – the parlour . jazz . musical theater . the apple tree – broadway production breakfast at tiffany 's – broadway-bound production ( closed in previews ) cabaret ( john kander & fred ebb ) – broadway production ( 1,165-performances ) funny girl ( jule styne and bob merrill ) – london production i do ! i do ! – broadway production it 's a bird.it 's a plane.it 's superman – broadway production the mad show – off-broadway production mame – broadway production the penny friend – off-broadway production sweet charity ( music : cy coleman lyrics : dorothy fields book : neil simon ) – broadway production wait a minim ! – off-broadway production . musical films . a funny thing happened on the way to the forum alibaba aur 40 chor , with music by usha khanna bhimanjaneya yuddham , with music by t . v . raju dancing the sirtaki dus lakh fiebre de juventud , starring enrique guzmán the glass bottom boat starring doris day hold on ! starring herman 's hermits mera saaya nichigeki kayama yuzo sho yori–utau wakadaisho , starring yūzō kayama ( concert film ) paradise , hawaiian style starring elvis presley stop the world – i want to get off the big t.n.t . show ( concert film ) . musical television . brigadoon starring robert goulet and sally ann howes . births . january 1 – crazy legs , puerto rico breakdancer ( rock steady crew ) january 3 – martin galway , northern irish composer january 4 – deana carter , american country singer-songwriter , musician january 5 – kate schellenbach , american punk rock drummer ( luscious jackson ) and television producer january 6 sharon cuneta , filipina singer and tv personality a . r . rahman , indian composer , singer-songwriter , music producer , musician and philanthropist january 7 – ehab tawfik , egyptian singer january 8 – andrew wood , singer ( mother love bone ) ( d . 1990 ) january 14 – marco hietala , finnish rock bassist ( nightwish ) january 16 – maxine jones , american singer-songwriter and actress ( en vogue ) january 17 – shabba ranks , dancehall artist january 20 tracii guns , american guitarist wes king , guitarist , singer january 21 – wendy james , british rock singer ( transvision vamp ) january 25 – samvel yervinyan , armenian violinist and composer january 30 – hans tutschku , german composer february 2 – robert deleo ( stone temple pilots and army of anyone february 6 – rick astley , english singer-songwriter and radio personality february 9 – rachel bolan ( skid row ) february 11 – tenor saw , dancehall artist ( d . 1988 ) february 12 – paul crook , american guitarist ( anthrax ) february 26 – najwa karam , lebanese singer march 2 – howard bernstein , producer march 3 tone-loc , rapper mikal blue , english music producer , songwriter , engineer and mixer , collabotor with colbie caillat march 4 – grand puba , american rapper ( brand nubian ) march 7 – atsushi sakurai , japanese singer ( buck-tick ) march 10 – edie brickell , singer-songwriter march 12 – david daniels , countertenor march 18 – jerry cantrell , alice in chains march 19 – anja rupel , singer march 21 – dj premier , record producer march 25 – jeff healey , canadian guitarist ( died 2008 ) april 2 – garnett silk , reggae singer ( died 1994 ) april 11 – lisa stansfield , singer april 13 – marc ford ( the black crowes ) april 15 – samantha fox , british model and singer april 18 – ana voog , singer-songwriter april 21 – michael franti , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( the beatnigs and the disposable heroes of hiphoprisy ) april 28 – too short , rapper may 1 – anne fletcher , american film director and choreographer may 8 blag dahlia , american musician , producer and author marta sánchez , vocalist and entertainer may 10 – wade domínguez , american actor , model , singer and dancer ( d . 1998 ) may 11 – christoph schneider , german rock musician ( rammstein ) may 12 – bebel gilberto , brazilian popular singer may 13 alison goldfrapp , english musician and record producer ( goldfrapp ) darius rucker ( hootie & the blowfish ) jeffrey scott holland , american artist and musician may 14 – raphael saadiq , singer-songwriter and record producer may 16 – janet jackson , african american singer-songwriter , dancer and actress may 19 – neil campbell , scottish-born experimental musician may 22 – johnny gill , african american r & b singer-songwriter ( new edition ) may 24 – ella guru , american painter and musician may 26 – tommy stewart ( godsmack ) may 27 – titi dj , indonesian pop singer may 28 – theo bleckmann , german vocalist and composer may 30 – stephen malkmus , american rock singer ( pavement ) june 4 – cecilia bartoli , operatic mezzo-soprano june 6 aadesh shrivastava , composer and singer sean yseult , american bass player ( white zombie and the cramps ) june 8 jens kidman , swedish musician doris pearson , r & b singer ( five star ) june 14 – matt freeman , bassist ( rancid ) june 15 – roberto carnevale , italian musician june 22 – schooly d , american rapper june 24 – hope sandoval , american singer-songwriter ( mazzy star and hope sandoval & the warm inventions ) june 26 – jürgen reil , german drummer ( kreator ) june 28 – bobby bare , jr . , american musician july 7 – gundula krause , german violinist july 9 – gayle and gillian blakeney , australian actresses and singers july 11 – melanie appleby , mel and kim ( d . 1990 ) july 12 taiji , japanese bass player and songwriter ( loudness and x japan ) ( d . 2011 ) misato watanabe , japanese singer july 13 – gerald levert , american singer ( d . 2006 ) july 14 – tanya donelly , american musician july 15 – jason bonham , drummer july 17 lou barlow , american guitarist and songwriter ( deep wound , dinosaur jr . , sebadoh and the folk implosion ) keith elam , rapper & producer july 20 – stone gossard , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( pearl jam , mother love bone , brad , temple of the dog and green river ) july 29 – martina mcbride , american country singer august 11 – juan maria solare , composer august 16 – emanuel kiriakou , american songwriter , producer , record executive , music publisher and multi-instrumentalist , august 19 lilian garcia , american singer and wrestling ring announcer lee ann womack , singer august 20 – dimebag darrell , american rock guitarist ( pantera ) ( d . 2004 ) august 22 – gza/genius , rapper august 25 derek sherinian , american keyboardist terminator x , dj august 26 – shirley manson , scottish rock musician ( garbage ) september 2 – yu hayami , japanese pop idol singer september 4 – yanka dyagileva , russian singer september 5 – terry ellis ( en vogue ) september 8 – carola häggkvist , swedish pop singer september 10 – robin goodridge ( bush ) september 12 – ben folds , singer-songwriter september 17 – doug e . fresh , american rapper , record producer and beatboxer september 20 – nuno bettencourt ( extreme ) september 22 – moustafa amar , egyptian pop star october 2 – mousse t . , dj october 12 – brian kennedy , irish musician and author october 15 – eric benét , gospel singer october 18 – tim cross , sponge october 19 – sinitta , singer and actress october 23 – skúli sverrisson , icelandic composer and bassist october 31 annabella lwin , vocalist ( bow wow wow ) ad-rock , beastie boys november 6 – paul gilbert , american musician november 11 – peaches , born merrill nisker , canadian electronic musician and performance artist november 14 – charles hazlewood , english orchestral conductor november 16 – christian lorenz , keyboard player november 17 jeff buckley , singer-songwriter ( died 1997 ) soup the chemist , born christopher jose cooper , pioneering american christian hip hop rapper kate ceberano , australian singer and actress november 20 – kevin gilbert ( musician ) , american singer , composer and instrumentalist november 23 – charlie grover ( sponge ) november 24 – joseph simmons , run d.m.c . november 25 – stacy lattisaw , singer december 4 – masta ace , rapper december 8 – sinéad o'connor , irish singer-songwriter , priest , activist december 9 – michael foster , drummer for rock band firehouse december 12 pops fernandez , filipina singer and tv personality greg long , contemporary christian musician december 20 – chris robinson , vocalist ( the black crowes ) december 29 – dexter holland of the offspring . deaths . january 29 – pierre mercure , canadian bassoon player and composer , 39 february 9 – sophie tucker , blues singer , 82 february 10 – billy rose , impresario , 66 february 13 – marguerite long , pianist , 87 february 23 – billy kyle , jazz pianist , 51 march – mohamed el qasabgi , composer march 29 – jazz gillum , harmonica player , 61 ( shot ) march 30 – jelly d'arányi , violinist , 72 april 3 – russel crouse , librettist , 73 april 19 – javier solis , mexican ranchera & bolero singer , 34 ( complications following gall bladder surgery ) april 30 – richard fariña , folk singer , 29 ( motorcycle accident ) may 13 – henrik adam due , violinist , music teacher , 75 june 1 – papa jack laine , bandleader , 92 june 12 – hermann scherchen , conductor , 74 june 17 – johnny st . cyr , jazz musician , 76 july 3 – deems taylor , composer and music critic , 80 july 18 – bobby fuller , singer and guitarist , 23 ( possible suicide or murder ) july 31 – bud powell , jazz pianist , 41 august 2 – boyd raeburn , jazz musician , 52 ( heart attack ) august 2 or 3 – tristan klingsor , poet , painter and musician , 91 august 4 – helen tamiris , dancer and choreographer , 61 august 15 – jan kiepura , polish tenor and actor , 64 september 17 – fritz wunderlich , tenor , 35 ( fell downstairs ) september 26 – helen kane , singer , 62 september 28 – lucky millinder , us bandleader , 56 ( liver disease ) october 3 – dave lambert , jazz musician , 49 ( road accident ) october 7 johnny kidd , british singer , 30 ( car accident ) smiley lewis , r & b musician , 53 ( stomach cancer ) october 12 – arthur lourié , composer , 74 october 26 – alma cogan , english singer , 34 ( stomach cancer ) october 17 – karel hruška , operatic tenor , 75 october 29 – wellman braud , jazz musician , 75 november 1 alexis roland-manuel , composer , 75 dick roberts , guitar and banjo player , 69 november 2 – mississippi john hurt , blues musician , 73 or 74 november 6 – washboard sam , blues musician , 56 ( heart disease ) november 12 – quincy porter , composer , 69 november 28 – vittorio giannini , opera composer , 63 december 1 – carter stanley , bluegrass musician , half of the stanley brothers , 41 ( alcohol-related ) december 3 – kui lee , singer-songwriter , 34 ( gland cancer ) december 9 – yuri shaporin , composer , 79 december 12 – nellie briercliffe , singer and actress with the d'oyly carte company , 77 december 14 – shailendra , lyricist , 43 december 24 – gaspar cassadó , cellist and composer , 69 . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1966 . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1966 . leeds international piano competition . rafael orozco . van cliburn international piano competition . radu lupu . see also . hot 100 no . 1 hits of 1966 . references . whitburn , joel . billboard top 10 singles charts 1955–2000 ( 2001 )