Giovanni Pico della Mirandola

biography . family . giovanni was born at mirandola , near modena , the youngest son of gianfrancesco i pico , lord of mirandola and count of concordia , by his wife giulia , daughter of feltrino boiardo , count of scandiano . the family had long dwelt in the castle of mirandola ( duchy of modena ) , which had become independent in the fourteenth century and had received in 1414 from the holy roman emperor sigismund the fief of concordia . mirandola was a small autonomous county ( later , a duchy ) in emilia , near ferrara . the pico della mirandola were closely related to the sforza , gonzaga and este dynasties , and giovanni 's siblings wed the descendants of the hereditary rulers of corsica , ferrara , bologna , and forlì . born twenty-three years into his parents ' marriage , giovanni had two much older brothers , both of whom outlived him : count galeotto i continued the dynasty , while antonio became a general in the imperial army . the pico family would reign as dukes until mirandola , an ally of louis xiv of france , was conquered by his rival , joseph i , holy roman emperor , in 1708 and annexed to modena by duke rinaldo d'este , the exiled male line becoming extinct in 1747 . giovanni 's maternal family was singularly distinguished in the arts and scholarship of the italian renaissance . his cousin and contemporary was the poet matteo maria boiardo , who grew up under the influence of his own uncle , the florentine gaius maecenas and scholar-poet tito vespasiano strozzi . giovanni had a paradoxical relationship with his nephew gianfrancesco pico della mirandola , who was a great admirer of his uncle , yet published examen vanitatis doctrinae gentium ( 1520 ) in opposition to the '' ancient wisdom narrative '' espoused by giovanni , described by historian charles b . schmitt as an attempt '' to destroy what his uncle had built . '' hanegraff p.80 . education . a precocious child with an exceptional memory , giovanni was schooled in latin and possibly greek at a very early age . intended for the church by his mother , he was named a papal protonotary ( probably honorary ) at the age of ten and in 1477 he went to bologna to study canon law . at the sudden death of his mother three years later , pico renounced canon law and began to study philosophy at the university of ferrara . during a brief trip to florence , he met angelo poliziano , the courtly poet girolamo benivieni , and probably the young dominican friar girolamo savonarola . for the rest of his life he remained very close friends with all three . he may also have been a lover of poliziano . from 1480 to 1482 , he continued his studies at the university of padua , a major center of aristotelianism in italy . already proficient in latin and greek , he studied hebrew and arabic in padua with elia del medigo , a jewish averroist , and read aramaic manuscripts with him as well . del medigo also translated judaic manuscripts from hebrew into latin for pico , as he would continue to do for a number of years . pico also wrote sonnets in latin and italian which , because of the influence of savonarola , he destroyed at the end of his life . he spent the next four years either at home , or visiting humanism centres elsewhere in italy . in 1485 , he travelled to the university of paris , the most important centre in europe for scholastic philosophy and theology , and a hotbed of secular averroism . it was probably in paris that giovanni began his 900 theses and conceived the idea of defending them in public debate . 900 theses . during this time two life-changing events occurred . the first was when he returned to settle for a time in florence in november 1484 and met lorenzo de ' medici and marsilio ficino . it was an astrology auspicious day that ficino had chosen to publish his translations of the works of plato from greek into latin , under lorenzo 's enthusiastic patronage . pico appears to have charmed both men , and despite ficino 's philosophical differences , he was convinced of their saturnine affinity and the divine providence of his arrival . lorenzo would support and protect pico until his death in 1492 . soon after this stay in florence , pico was travelling on his way to rome where he intended to publish his 900 theses and prepare for a congress of scholars from all over europe to debate them . stopping in arezzo he became embroiled in a love affair with the wife of one of lorenzo de ' medici 's cousins , which almost cost him his life . giovanni attempted to run off with the woman , but he was caught , wounded and thrown into prison by her husband . he was released only upon the intervention of lorenzo himself . the incident is representative of pico 's often audacious temperament and of the loyalty and affection he nevertheless could inspire . pico spent several months in perugia and nearby fratta , recovering from his injuries . it was there , as he wrote to ficino , that '' divine providence . caused certain books to fall into my hands . they are chaldean books . of esdras , of zoroaster and of melchior , oracles of the magi , which contain a brief and dry interpretation of chaldean philosophy , but full of mystery . '' it was also in perugia that pico was introduced to the mystical hebrew kabbalah , which fascinated him , as did the late classical hermetic writers , such as hermes trismegistus . the kabbalah and hermetica were thought in pico 's time to be as ancient as the old testament . pico 's '' tutor '' in kabbalah was yohanan alemanno ( 1435/8-c . 1510 ) , who argued that the study and mastery of magic was to be regarded as the final stage of one 's intellectual and spiritual education . this contact , initiated as a result of christian interest in probing the ancient wisdom found in jewish mystical sources , resulted in unprecedented mutual influence between jewish and christian renaissance thought . the most original of pico 's 900 theses concerned the kabbalah . as a result , he became the founder of the tradition known as christian kabbalah , which went on to be a central part of early modern western esotericism . pico 's approach to different philosophies was one of extreme syncretism , placing them in parallel , it has been claimed , rather than attempting to describe a developmental history . hanegraaff p.59 pico based his ideas chiefly on plato , as did his teacher , marsilio ficino , but retained a deep respect for aristotle . although he was a product of the studia humanitatis , pico was constitutionally an eclectic , and in some respects he represented a reaction against the exaggerations of pure humanism , defending what he believed to be the best of the medieval and islamic commentators , such as averroes and avicenna , on aristotle in a famous long letter to ermolao barbaro in 1485 . it was always pico 's aim to reconcile the schools of plato and aristotle since he believed they used different words to express the same concepts . it was perhaps , for this reason , his friends called him '' princeps concordiae '' , or '' prince of harmony '' ( a pun on prince of concordia , one of his family 's holdings ) . paul oskar kristeller , eight philosophers of the italian renaissance . stanford university press ( stanford , california , 1964 . ) p . 62 . similarly , pico believed that an educated person should also study hebrew and talmudic sources , and the hermetics , because he thought they represented the same concept of god that is seen in the old testament , but in different words . he finished his '' oration on the dignity of man '' to accompany his 900 theses and traveled to rome to continue his plan to defend them . he had them published together in december 1486 as '' conclusiones philosophicae , cabalasticae et theologicae '' , and offered to pay the expenses of any scholars who came to rome to debate them publicly . he wanted the debate to begin on 6 january , which was , as historian steven farmer has observed , the feast of epiphany and '' symbolic date of the submission of the pagan gentes to christ in the persons of the magi '' . after emerging victorious at the culmination of the debate , pico planned not only on the symbolic acquiescence of the pagan sages , but also the conversion of jews as they realised that jesus was the true secret of their traditions . according to farmer , pico may have been expecting quite literally that '' his vatican debate would end with the four horsemen of the apocalypse crashing through the roman skies '' . hanegraaff p . 57 in february 1487 , pope innocent viii halted the proposed debate , and established a commission to review the orthodoxy of the 900 theses . although pico answered the charges against them , thirteen theses were condemned . pico agreed in writing to retract them , but he did not change his mind about their validity . eventually all 900 theses were condemned . he proceeded to write an apologia defending them , apologia j . pici mirandolani , concordiae comitis , published in 1489 , which he dedicated to his patron , lorenzo . when the pope was apprised of the circulation of this manuscript , he set up an inquisitorial tribunal , forcing pico to renounce the apologia , in addition to his condemned theses , which he agreed to do . the pope condemned 900 theses as : this was the first time that a printed book had been banned by the church , and nearly all copies were burned . pico fled to france in 1488 , where he was arrested by philip ii , duke of savoy , at the demand of the papal nuncios , and imprisoned at vincennes . through the intercession of several italian princes – all instigated by lorenzo de ' medici – king charles viii had him released , and the pope was persuaded to allow pico to move to florence and to live under lorenzo 's protection . but he was not cleared of the papal censures and restrictions until 1493 , after the accession of alexander vi ( rodrigo borgia ) to the papacy . the experience deeply shook pico . he reconciled with savonarola , who remained a very close friend . it was at pico 's persuasion that lorenzo invited savonarola to florence . but pico never renounced his syncretist convictions . he settled in a villa near fiesole prepared for him by lorenzo , where he wrote and published the heptaplus id est de dei creatoris opere ( 1489 ) and de ente et uno ( of being and unity , 1491 ) . it was here that he also wrote his other most celebrated work , the disputationes adversus astrologiam divinicatrium ( treatise against predictive astrology ) , which was not published until after his death . in it , pico acidly condemned the deterministic practices of the astrologers of his day . after the death of lorenzo de ' medici , in 1492 , pico moved to ferrara , although he continued to visit florence . in florence , political instability gave rise to the increasing influence of savonarola , whose reactionary opposition to renaissance expansion and style had already brought about conflict with the medici family ( they eventually were expelled from florence ) and would lead to the wholesale destruction of books and paintings . nevertheless , pico became a follower of savonarola . determined to become a monk , he dismissed his former interest in egyptian and chaldean texts , destroyed his own poetry and gave away his fortune . . death . in 1494 , at the age of 31 , pico died under mysterious circumstances along with his friend poliziano . ben-zaken , avner , '' defying authority , rejecting predestination and conquering nature '' , in reading hayy ibn-yaqzan : a cross-cultural history of autodidacticism ( johns hopkins university press , 2011 ) , 65–101 . it was rumoured that his own secretary had poisoned him because pico had become too close to savonarola . he was interred together with girolamo benivieni at san marco , and savonarola delivered the funeral oration . ficino wrote : in 2007 , the bodies of poliziano and pico were exhumed from the san_marco , _florence in florence to establish the causes of their deaths . medici writers exhumed in italy . bbc news , 28 february 2007 . accessed june 2013 . forensic tests showed that both poliziano and pico likely died of arsenic poisoning , possibly at the order of lorenzo 's successor , piero de ' medici . malcolm moore ( 7 february 2008 ) . '' medici philosopher 's mysterious death is solved '' the daily telegraph . london . accessed june 2013 . . writings . in the oratio de hominis dignitate ( oration on the dignity of man , 1486 ) , pico justified the importance of the human quest for knowledge within a neoplatonic framework . the oration also served as an introduction to pico 's 900 theses , which he believed to provide a complete and sufficient basis for the discovery of all knowledge , and hence a model for mankind 's ascent of the chain of being . the 900 theses are a good example of humanist syncretism , because pico combined platonism , neoplatonism , aristotelianism , hermeticism and kabbalah . they also included 72 theses describing what pico believed to be a complete system of physics . pico 's de animae immortalitate ( paris , 1541 ) , and other works , developed the doctrine that man 's possession of an immortal soul freed him from the hierarchical stasis . pico believed in universal reconciliation , as one of his 900 theses was '' a mortal sin of finite duration is not deserving of eternal but only of temporal punishment ; '' it was among the theses pronounced heretical by pope innocent viii in his bull of 4 august 1487 . '' apocatastasis '' . new schaff-herzog encyclopedia of religious knowledge , vol . i . in the oration he argues , in the words of pier cesare bori , that '' human vocation is a mystical vocation that has to be realized following a three stage way , which comprehends necessarily moral transformation , intellectual research and final perfection in the identity with the absolute reality . this paradigm is universal , because it can be retraced in every tradition . '' prof . pier cesare bori . '' the italian renaissance : an unfinished dawn ? : pico della mirandola '' . accessed 2007-12-05 . a portion of his disputationes adversus astrologiam divinatricem was published in bologna after his death . in this book pico presents arguments against the practice of astrology that have had enormous resonance for centuries , up to our own time . disputationes is influenced by the arguments against astrology espoused by one of his intellectual heroes , augustine of hippo , and also by the medieval philosophical tale ḥayy ibn yaqẓān by ibn tufail , which promoted autodidacticism as a philosophical program . see ben-zaken , avner , '' defying authority , rejecting predestination and conquering nature '' , in reading hayy ibn-yaqzan : a cross-cultural history of autodidacticism ( johns hopkins university press , 2011 ) , pp . 65–100 . pico 's antagonism to astrology seems to derive mainly from the conflict of astrology with christian notions of free will . but pico 's arguments moved beyond the objections of ficino , who was himself an astrologer . the manuscript was edited for publication after pico 's death by his nephew giovanni francesco pico della mirandola , an ardent follower of savonarola , and may possibly have been amended to be more forcefully critical . this might possibly explain the fact that ficino championed the manuscript and enthusiastically endorsed it before its publication . early in his career , pico wrote a commento sopra una canzone d'amore di girolamo benivieni , in which he revealed his plan to write a book entitled poetica theologia : butorac p.357 pico 's heptaplus , a mystico-allegorical exposition of the creation according to the seven biblical senses , elaborates on his idea that different religions and traditions describe the same god . the book is written in his characteristic apologetic and polemic style : on being and the one , has explanations of several passages in moses , plato and aristotle . it is an attempted reconciliation between platonic and aristotelian writings on the relative places of being and '' the one '' and a refutation of opposing arguments . he wrote in italian an imitation of plato 's symposium . his letters ( aureae ad familiares epistolae , paris , 1499 ) are important for the history of contemporary thought . the many editions of his entire works in the sixteenth century sufficiently prove his influence . another notorious text by giovanni pico della mirandola is de omnibus rebus et de quibusdam aliis , '' of all things that exist and a little more '' which is mentioned in some entries on thomas more 's utopia and makes fun of the title of lucretius ' de rerum natura . cultural references . the beardless young man in raphael 's fresco the school of athens ( 1509–11 ) is thought to be pico della mirandola ( or maybe francesco della rovere ) . christiane joost-gaugier described pico della mirandola as '' a major philosophical inspiration of the fresco 's program , especially insofar as he was the most outspoken proponent of the harmony of plato and aristotle . '' in james joyce 's ulysses , the precocious stephen dedalus recalls with disdain his boyhood ambitions , and apparently associates them with the career of mirandola : '' remember your epiphanies written on green oval leaves , deeply deep.copies to be sent if you died to all the great libraries of the world.pico della mirandola like . '' source : ebooks.adelaide.edu.au ( accessed : 15 september 2010 ) of minor interest is a passing reference to mirandola by h . p . lovecraft , in the story the case of charles dexter ward ( 1927 ) . mirandola is given as the source of the fearsome incantation used by unknown evil entities as some sort of evocation . however , this '' spell '' was first depicted ( as the key to a rather simple form of divination , not a great and terrible summoning ) by , and in all likelihood created by , heinrich cornelius agrippa von nettesheim in his three books of occult philosophy . this was written several decades after mirandola 's death and was the first written example of that '' spell '' , so it is almost impossible for mirandola to have been the source of those '' magic words '' . psychoanalyst otto rank , a rebellious disciple of sigmund freud , chose a substantial excerpt from mirandola 's oration on the dignity of man as the motto for his book art and artist : creative urge and personality development , including : '' . i created thee as a being neither celestial nor earthly . so that thou shouldst be thy own free moulder and overcomer . '' . rank , otto , art and artist : creative urge and personality development , alfred a . knopf , new york , 1932 . in umberto eco 's novel foucault 's pendulum the protagonist casaubon claims that the idea that the jews were privy to the enigma of the templars was '' a mistake of pico della mirandola '' caused by a spelling mistake he made between '' israelites '' and '' ismaelites . '' in irving stone 's novel about michelangelo , the agony and the ecstasy , book 3 , part 3 contains a paragraph 's description of mirandola as part of the scholarly circle that surrounded lorenzo di medici in florence . mirandola was described as a man who spoke 22 languages , was deeply read in philosophy , and someone who made no enemies . philosopher of social science rené girard mentions mirandola passingly in his book des choses cachées depuis la fondation du monde ( things hidden since the foundation of the world ) , girard writes in a disparaging tone , '' people will accuse us of playing at being pico della mirandola—the renaissance man—certainly a temptation to be resisted today , if we wish to be seen in a favourable light . '' ( p . & nbsp ; 141 , 1987 ) in roberto bolaño 's novel 2666 , the philosophy professor oscar amalfitano begins his three-columned list of philosophers with pico della mirandola . adjacent to mirandola , amalfitano writes hobbes , while beneath him he writes husserl ( p . & nbsp ; 207 , 2008 ) . in frédéric lenoir 's novel l'oracle della luna ( 2006 ) , the philosophy of pico della mirandola forms one of the major teachings acquired by the protagonist , giovanni , from his main spiritual master . the year is 1530 . the major mentions are : at the end of chapter 21 the sage – a fictitious character – says he has personally met pico della mirandola and discusses mirandola 's disagreement with the pope about the 900 theses ( with lenoir stating that only 7 of them had not been accepted ) and the philosopher 's later fate . in the words of the sage , the main goal of ficino and pico della mirandola was to acquire universal knowledge , free from prejudice and from linguistic and religious barriers ; at the end of chapter 24 , having discussed luther 's concept of free will , the sage wants the acquaint giovanni with mirandola 's ideas on this issue and lets him read '' de hominis dignitate '' ; giovanni peruses the book with great interest in chapter 25 ; at the beginning of chapter 26 , with giovanni having now read the oration on the dignity of man , the sage discusses two issues from the book with him . one is pico della mirandola 's attempt to form one unified and universal philosophy and the difficulties thereof . the other one is mirandola 's concept of free will . giovanni has learnt one passage from the book by heart , about god addressing man and telling him , that he has made him neither a heavenly nor an earthly creature and that man is the forger of his own fate . this passage is quoted in the novel . english composer gavin bryars makes use of the texts of pico della mirandola in his musical production ; most notably in pieces like '' glorious hill '' , for vocal quartet/mixed choir , '' pico 's flight '' , for soprano and orchestra , and '' incipit vita nova for alto and string trio . pico della mirandola appears as the character ikaros in jo walton 's novels the just city and the philosopher kings . also , he is one of the main characters in her novel lent . in the book dying for ideas ; the dangerous lives of the philosophers ( 2015 ) by romanian philosopher costica bradatan , mirandola 's life and work is taken as an early or even first example of taking human life as a project of 'self-fashioning ' , relating this to mirandola 's heretic idea of man being part of creation with 'an indefinite nature ' . see also . christian kabbalah contemporary italian renaissance philosophers : marsilio ficino , lodovico lazzarelli , giovanni mercurio da correggio hermetica ( philosophical writings attributed to hermes trismegistus ) hermeticism platonic academy ( florence ) renaissance humanism renaissance magic . references . footnotes . . sources and further reading . ben-zaken , avner , '' defying authority , rejecting predestination and conquering nature '' , in reading hayy ibn-yaqzan : a cross-cultural history of autodidacticism ( johns hopkins university press , 2011 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 65–100 . borchardt , frank l . '' the magus as renaissance man . '' sixteenth century journal ( 1990 ) : 57–76 . busi , g . , '' 'who does not wonder at this chameleon ? ' the kabbalistic library of giovanni pico della mirandola '' , in '' hebrew to latin , latin to hebrew . the mirroring of two cultures in the age of humanism . colloquium held at the warburg institute . london , october 18–19 , 2004 '' , edited by g . busi , berlin-torino : nino aragno editore , 2006 : 167–196 . busi , g . with s . m . bondoni and s . campanini ( eds . ) , the great parchment : flavius mithridates ' latin translation , the hebrew text , and an english version , the kabbalistic library of giovanni pico della mirandola – 1 . torino : nino aragno editore , 2004 . campanini , s . the book of bahir . flavius mithridates ' latin translation , the hebrew text , and an english version , with a foreword by g . busi , the kabbalistic library of giovanni pico della mirandola – 2 . torino : nino aragno editore , 2005 . campanini , saverio . '' talmud , philosophy , kabbalah : a passage from pico della mirandola 's apologia and its source . '' in the words of a wise man 's mouth are gracious . festschrift for günter stemberger on the occasion of his 65th birthday , edited by m . perani , 429–447 . berlin & new york : w . de gruyter verlag , 2005 . cassirer , ernst , paul oskar kristeller , and john herman randall , jr . the renaissance philosophy of man . chicago : the university of chicago press , 1948 . corazzol , giacomo ( ed . ) , menahem recanati , commentary on the daily prayers . the kabbalistic library of giovanni pico della mirandola – 3 . 2 volumes . torino : nino aragno editore , 2008 . dougherty , m . v . , ed . pico della mirandola . new essays . cambridge : cambridge university press , 2008 . avery dulles , princeps concordiae : pico della mirandola and the scholastic tradition—the harvard phi beta kappa prize essay for 1940 , cambridge , ma , 1941 . farmer , s . a . syncretism in the west : pico 's 900 theses ( 1486 ) : the evolution of traditional religious and philosophical systems . temple , az : medieval & renaissance texts & studies , 1998 . ( contains the latin text of the 900 theses , an english translation , and detailed commentary . ) gilbhard , thomas . '' paralipomena pichiana : a propos einer pico–bibliographie '' . in accademia . revue de la société marsile ficin vii ( 2005 ) : 81–94 . heiser , james d . , prisci theologi and the hermetic reformation in the fifteenth century , malone , tx : repristination press , 2011 . kristeller , paul oskar . eight philosophers of the italian renaissance . stanford , ca : stanford university press , 1964 . jurgan , susanne , campanini , saverio , the gate of heaven . flavius mithridates ' latin translation , the hebrew text , and an english version . edited with introduction and notes by s . jurgan and s . campanini with a text on pico by giulio busi , in the kabbalistic library of giovanni pico della mirandola 5 , nino aragno editore , torino 2012 . pater , walter . '' pico della mirandola . '' in the renaissance : studies in art and poetry , 24–40 . new york : the modern library , 1871 . quaquarelli , leonardo , and zita zanardi . pichiana . bibliografia delle edizioni e degli studi . firenze : olschki , 2005 ( studi pichiani 10 ) . robb , nesca a . , neoplatonism of the italian renaissance , new york : octagon books , inc . , 1968 . martigli , carlo a . , '' 999 l'ultimo custode '' , italia : castelvecchi , 2009 . giovanni pico della mirandola , '' apologia . l'autodifesa di pico di fronte al tribunale dell'inquisizione '' , a cura di paolo edoardo fornaciari , firenze , sismel – edizioni del galluzzo , 2010 ( : it : società internazionale per lo studio del medioevo latino ) . external links . the pico project at the university of bologna and brown university is a project to make accessible a complete resource for the reading and interpretation of the dignity of man . disputationes adversus astrologiam divinatricem syncretism in the west overview of the 900 theses , with some downloadable texts pico in english : a bibliography , the works of giovanni pico della mirandola ( 1463–1494 ) , with a list of studies and commentaries . edition of the complete translations by flavius mithridates on flavius mithridates ' hebrew-latin translations of kabbalah works for giovanni pico della mirandola biography pico della mirandola by richard hooker , 6 june 1999 . life of giovanni pico della mirandola