Michel Eugène Chevreul

biography . chevreul was born in the town of angers , france , where his father was a physician . chevreul 's birth certificate , kept in the registry book of angers , bears the signature of his father , grandfather , and a great-uncle , all of whom were surgeons . at around the age of seventeen chevreul went to paris and entered l.n . vauquelin 's chemical laboratory , afterwards becoming his assistant at the muséum national d'histoire naturelle ( national museum of natural history ) in the jardin des plantes . in 1813 chevreul was appointed professor of chemistry at the lycée charlemagne , and subsequently undertook the directorship of the gobelins manufactory , where he carried out his research on colour contrasts . ( in 1839 , he published the results of his research under the title de la loi du contraste simultané des couleurs ; it was translated into english and published in 1854 under the title the principles of harmony and contrast of colors . a new translation chevreul , m.e . , and margulis , dan on the law of simultaneous contrast of colors , mcw publishing , 2020 titled on the law of simultaneous contrast of colors , with commentary , additional chapters , and color graphics by dan margulis appeared in 2020 . ) in 1826 chevreul became a member of the academy of sciences , and in the same year was elected a foreign member of the royal society of london , whose copley medal he was awarded in 1857 . in 1829 , he was elected a foreign member of the royal swedish academy of sciences and a foreign honorary member of the american academy of arts and sciences in 1868 . image : chevreul by nadar 1886.jpg thumb left 195px chevreul in 1886 , by nadar chevreul succeeded his master , vauquelin , as professor of organic chemistry at the national museum of natural history in 1830 , and thirty-three years later assumed its directorship also ; this he relinquished in 1879 , though he still retained his professorship . a bronze medal was minted for the occasion of chevreul 's centenarian in 1886 , and it was celebrated as a national event . chevreul received letters of commendation from many heads of state and monarchs , including queen victoria . he had a series of recorded meetings with nadar , whose son paul nadar took photographs , resulting in the first photo-interview ever to appear in a magazine . '' l'art de vivre cent ans . trois entretiens avec monsieur chevreul . '' le journal illustré , paris , september 5 , 1886 it was a fitting tribute to a man who lived through the entire french revolution and lived to see the unveiling of the eiffel tower . chevreul began to study the effects of ageing on the human body shortly before his death at the age of 102 , which occurred in paris on 9 april 1889 . he was honoured with a public funeral . in 1901 a statue was erected to his memory in the museum with which he was connected for so many years . chevreul 's work . chevreul 's scientific work covered a wide range , but he is best known for the classical researches he carried out on animal fats , published in 1823 ( recherches sur les corps gras d'origine animale ) . these enabled him to elucidate the true nature of soap ; he was also able to discover the composition of stearin , a white substance found in the solid parts of most animal and vegetable fats , and olein , the liquid part of any fat , and to isolate stearic and oleic acids , the names of which he invented . this work led to important improvements in the processes of candle-manufacture . chevreul was a determined enemy of charlatanism in every form , and a complete sceptic as to the '' scientific '' psychical research or spiritualism which had begun in his time . his research on the '' magic pendulum '' , dowsing rods and table-turning is revolutionary . in an open letter to andré-marie ampère in 1833 , and his 1854 paper '' de la baguette '' , chevreul explains how human muscular reactions , totally involuntary and subconscious , are responsible for seemingly magical movements . in the end , chevreul discovered that once a person holding divining rods/magic pendulum became aware of the brain 's reaction , the movements stopped and could not be willingly reproduced . his was one of the earliest explanations of the ideomotor effect . in 1824 , chevreul was named director of the dye works at the gobelins manufactory in paris , in response to complaints about technical inadequacies . he found that some dyes were indeed deficient , but that the oft-criticized black dye was first-rate . yet fabrics dyed with this black were perceived as weak and reddish when surrounded by deep blues and/or purples . chevreul , m.e . , de la loi du contraste simultané des couleurs , chez pitois-levrault , paris , 1839 , avant-propos chevreul called this effect simultaneous contrast , defining it as the tendency for a color to appear to shift toward the complementary of its neighbor , both in terms of hue and darkness . chevreul , contraste simultané , §16 he explored the ramifications of the concept at book-length in 1839 , intending to form a comprehensive theory for all the visual arts . it offered design principles for tapestries , carpets , furniture , mosaics , churches , museums , apartments , formal gardens , theaters , maps , typography , framing , stained glass , women 's clothing , and even military uniforms . it is most noted , however , for its influence on impressionism and neo-impressionism painting , particularly the pointillism style developed by georges seurat and paul signac , which featured tiny juxtapositions of complementary colors . camille pissarro reported that he had interviewed seurat , who had described the style as a search for '' the modern synthesis with scientifically based means which will be founded on the theory of colors discovered by m . chevreul and in accordance with the experiments of maxwell and the measurements of ogden rood . '' letter to paul durand-ruel , 1886 chevreul stressed the importance of accurate portrayal of lighting in promoting realism , but added , '' it is almost always so that accurate , yet exaggerated coloring is found more pleasing than absolute fidelity to the scene . '' chevreul , contraste simultané , §311 vincent van gogh took the advice to heart , making lavish use of complementaries to intensify one another . van gogh wrote , '' this reciprocal heightening is what 's called the law of simultaneous contrast…if the complementary colors are taken at equal value , that is to say , at the same degree of brightness and light , their juxtaposition will raise both the one and the other to an intensity so violent that human eyes will scarcely be able to bear to look at it . '' letter to theo van gogh , 18 april 1885 chevreul was also influential in twentieth-century painting , especially that of robert delaunay , who was introduced to chevreul 's theories by his friend jean metzinger . catalogue de l'exposition « robert delaunay , de l ’ impressionnisme à l'abstraction » au centre georges pompidou , p . 94 delaunay 's style of mixing relatively large blocks of near-complementaries is today usually known as orphism . delaunay himself , however , preferred the name '' simultanism , '' a clear nod to chevreul . chevreul is also linked to what is sometimes called chevreul 's illusion , the bright edges that seem to exist between adjacent strips of identical colors having different intensities . see chevreul 's the laws of contrast of colour for more information . see page 4 and plate 1 of - english translation by john spanton . bibliography . for a list of chevreul 's scientific writings up to 1886 see by g . malloizel . - translated into english by charles martel as the principles of harmony and contrast of colours ( 1854 ) ( english translation ) . notes . references . . further reading . . external links . obituary in : chevreul on cyberlipid.org paper on chevreul 's life-long work on colour contrast by prof georges roque , paris chevreul 's ( 1861 ) exposé d ’ un moyen de définir et de nommer les couleurs . atlas . - digital facsimile from the linda hall library chevreul 's ( 1888 ) des couleurs et de lueurs applications aux arts industriels a l'aide des cercles chromatiques - digital facsimile from the linda hall library