Buddha (album)

background . blink-182 was formed in poway , california , a suburb outside of san diego , in august 1992 . after mark hoppus graduated from high school in ridgecrest , he relocated to san diego to work at a record store and attend college . hoppus , 2001 . pp . 8–9 tom delonge was kicked out of poway high for attending a basketball game drunk and was forced to attend another local school for one semester . at rancho bernardo high school , he befriended kerry key , also interested in punk music . key 's girlfriend , anne hoppus , introduced her brother mark to delonge on august 2 , 1992 . the two bonded instantly and played for hours in delonge 's garage , exchanging lyrics and co-writing songs—one of which became '' carousel '' . delonge recruited friend scott raynor for drums , whom he met at a rancho bernado battle of the bands competition . hoppus , 2001 . pp . & nbsp ; 10–11 raynor was by far the youngest member of the trio at 14 , and his event account differs significantly : he claims he and delonge formed the group after meeting at the battle of the bands and worked through a variety of bassists before meeting hoppus . the trio began to practice together in raynor 's bedroom , spending hours together writing music , attending punk shows and movies , and playing practical jokes . hoppus and delonge would alternate singing vocal parts . the trio first operated under a variety of names , including duck tape and figure 8 , until delonge rechristened the band '' blink '' . shooman , 2010 . pp . & nbsp ; 13-14 hoppus ' girlfriend was angered by her boyfriend 's constant attention for the band and demanded him to make a choice between the band and her , which resulted in hoppus leaving the band shortly after formation . hoppus , 2001 . pp . 13–15 shortly thereafter , delonge and raynor borrowed a four track recorder from friend and collaborator cam jones and were preparing to record a demo tape , with jones on bass . hoppus promptly broke up with his girlfriend and returned to the band . flyswatter—a combination of original songs and punk covers—was recorded in raynor 's bedroom in may 1993 . hoppus , 2001 . p . 16 southern california had a large punk population in the early 1990s , aided by an avid surfing , skating and snowboarding scene . in contrast to east coast punk music , the west coast wave of groups , blink included , typically introduced pop punk . '' new york is gloomy , dark and cold . it makes different music . the californian middle-class suburbs have nothing to be that bummed about , '' said delonge . shooman , 2010 . pp . 18–19 san diego at this time was '' hardly a hotbed of musical activity '' , but the band 's popularity grew as did california punk rock concurrently in the mainstream . the band 's first performance was at a local high school during lunch , and soon the trio graduated to san diego 's spirit club and influential local shop alley kat records . shooman , 2010 . pp . & nbsp ; 15-17 delonge called clubs constantly in san diego asking for a spot to play , as well as calling up local high schools convincing them that blink was a '' motivational band with a strong anti-drug message '' in hopes to play at an assembly or lunch . hoppus , 2001 . p . 21 the band soon became part of a circuit that also included the likes of ten foot pole and unwritten law , and they found their way onto the bill as the opening band for local acts at soma , a local all-ages venue which they longed to headline . the band 's equipment was piled into a blue station wagon for touring purposes and they first began to play shows outside san diego . hoppus , 2001 . pp . 24–27 . recording and production . buddha was financed by pat secor , hoppus ' boss at wherehouse music in san diego . secor wanted to start his own record label and offered to help pay for costs . '' he was like , hey , i 'll front you the money , and we 'll split the profits until you pay me back , '' recalled hoppus in 2001 . hoppus , 2001 . p . 24-25 the two had met when secor transferred from a north san diego location . the two became friends quickly , despite secor 's seniority of post . shooman , 2010 . p . 14-16 '' at that point they 'd played around enough to get their chops up so i took all the money i had in savings and we went into the studio for two days , '' said secor . the recording sessions at doubletime studios in santee , california took place in january 1994 , and were scheduled around work and school commitments . hoppus was sick at the time of recording . despite this , the band carried on and the demo was complete within two days . '' buddha was cut live then we added the vocals . two days and they were done – including the mix . it 's quite standard for a young punk band to do that , '' said engineer jeff forrest . shooman , 2010 . p . 17 despite this , the liner notes for the cassette claim it was recorded in twelve hours , while the later remaster of buddha contend it was recorded '' over three rainy nights . '' the trio were '' super stoked '' about a sound effects tape they found at the studio , and took time out to add in applause and laughter tracks because they deemed it humorous . hoppus and delonge took the songwriting for their first legitimate release very seriously . the two strove for perfection writing songs that they felt would be relatable . blink also recorded joke tracks , as they felt that , in addition to the serious songs , '' it was almost as important to make people laugh . '' delonge recalled that the band spent more time at the end of production on buddha trying to perfect the joke songs rather than their serious tracks . the band 's main influence on buddha , according to delonge , was the descendents . '' i was trying to emulate that band . really punchy guitars , fast , simple and formulaic nursery rhyme love songs , '' he said in 2012 . . packaging and release . the photographs in the original cassette release of buddha were photographs taken by friend of the band cam jones . kerry key , drummer for the iconoclasts and friend of the band , also is credited with artwork in the original cassette . to produce the artwork , hoppus and jones spent an afternoon together taking '' artsy '' photographs in and around raynor 's backyard . the cover art is a picture of a buddha statue , which was a present from hoppus ' stepfather that the bassist grabbed on the way to raynor 's for the photos . after developing the photos , they took them to a copy shop to run off color copies . afterwards , they cut , pasted and rearranged them until they found something suitable . the lyric sheets were handwritten and photocopied . hoppus and his family in ridgecrest would spend hours folding and combining pieces of artwork to compile the buddha cassette . when this was complete , hoppus would load the cassettes into his car and deliver them to local record stores around town . the demo tape , which was originally untitled , came to be known by the name buddha , and was released by filter records in 1994 . cassette copies of buddha were also sold at early blink concerts , alongside homemade t-shirts . . re-release . the rights to buddha and its associated recordings were the subject of a dispute between the band and secor in later years . according to secor , he and the band had a gentleman 's agreement : he would pay for the costs of recording and manufacturing the tape , and in exchange would receive half of all the profits from it . according to raynor , the oral agreement was that secor would invest 1,000 and when that money was recouped , the band would have complete ownership of the work product . secor helped the band sign to cargo music in 1994 using his connections at the label ; he felt that by helping the briskly growing band sign a deal he could build his own label , filter records , in the wake of blink 's success . according to secor , he attempted to contact the band to discuss the rights to the tape , but would only receive comments such as '' oh , let me call my manager and i 'll call you right back . '' secor asserted he should have the rights to the master tapes , having financed the entire production . he alleged that cargo music began calling him and making threats , and he could not afford to fight back and was unlikely to win since he had no written contract with the band . in 1996 , blink-182 signed a joint-venture deal with major label mca records , who secor also said began calling him . '' try going up against that , '' he remarked in 2001 . the band began to grow suspicious that secor was keeping all the money from selling copies of the buddha cassette , and contacted their lawyer , joe escalante of the vandals , who also owned independent record label kung fu records . they informed escalante that they believed '' someone 's bootlegging it , '' and requested his legal help to stop secor . in exchange for legal fees , blink-182 would allow kung fu records to re-release buddha on compact disc . the band had told secor not to sell any more copies of the cassette , but suspected that he was still doing so . escalante anonymously ordered a tape from secor , and secor sold it to him . blink-182 asserted that they were not receiving royalties for these sales . '' i paid off all of the royalties for the remaining stash of tapes that i had of buddha , '' said secor in 2001 . '' it was about 25 . the tapes sold for five bucks , and i gave them half of what their profit would be . i wanted to have a few to give to people and to have on hand . '' secor felt it was his right to sell his stock of the cassettes , since the band '' had been paid royalties for that already . '' kung fu re-released buddha on cd and cassette in november 1998 , and has since re-released the recording on vinyl and retains digital distribution . the remaster cleans and sharpens the sound of tracks , and contains a slightly different track listing . '' they 'd already sold 60,000 copies of cheshire cat , said escalante , '' and i thought , 'man , if i can sell just 10 % of that that would be great for the label , ' and of course it sold a lot more because they went on to be superstars . '' shooman , 2010 . pp . & nbsp ; 57–58 in 2001 the label had reportedly sold 300,000 copies of buddha . '' at this point it 's not even the money , '' secor said at the time . '' it 's the fact that there is no mention of my work anywhere ; no credit has been given to me . '' . reception . reviewing the 1998 re-release of buddha for allmusic , critic stephen thomas erlewine rated it three stars out of five , calling it a '' promising debut '' and '' a solid skatepunk record that illustrates the group 's flair for speedy , catchy hooks and irreverent humor . '' rolling stone viewed it , alongside proper debut album cheshire cat ( 1995 ) as '' slapped together lilting melodies and racing beats in an attempt to connect emo and skate punk , a sort of pop hardcore . '' brackett , nathan ( ed . ) ( 2004 ) . the new rolling stone album guide . new york : fireside , 904 pp . first edition , 2004 . '' this fast and furious beauty may have been recorded in two days , but it soon had the labels knocking at delonge and co ’ s door , '' said total guitar in 2012 . . track listing . personnel . ; blink mark hoppus – vocals , bass guitar tom delonge – vocals , guitar scott raynor – drums production pat secor – production jeff forrest – mixing engineer design kerry key – cover art cam jones – cover art grace walker – art direction ( reissue ) . chart positions . weekly charts . . see also . cheshire cat , the band 's 1995 debut album on cargo containing re-recordings of several tracks on buddha . references . . notes . external links . buddha at youtube ( streamed copy where licensed )