The Rite of Spring

influence and adaptations . the music historian donald jay grout has written : '' the sacre is undoubtedly the most famous composition of the early 20th century & nbsp ; . it had the effect of an explosion that so scattered the elements of musical language that they could never again be put together as before '' . the academic and critic jan smaczny , echoing bernstein , calls it one of the 20th century 's most influential compositions , providing '' endless stimulation for performers and listeners '' . taruskin writes that '' one of the marks of the rite 's unique status is the number of books that have been devoted to it—certainly a greater number than have been devoted to any other ballet , possibly to any other individual musical composition & nbsp ; . '' according to kelly the 1913 premiere might be considered '' the most important single moment in the history of 20th-century music '' , and its repercussions continue to reverberate in the 21st century . kelly , p . 258 ross has described the rite as a prophetic work , presaging the '' second avant-garde '' era in classical composition—music of the body rather than of the mind , in which '' melodies would follow the patterns of speech ; rhythms would match the energy of dance & nbsp ; . sonorities would have the hardness of life as it is really lived '' . ross , p . 76 among 20th-century composers most influenced by the rite is stravinsky 's near contemporary , edgard varèse , who had attended the 1913 premiere . varèse , according to ross , was particularly drawn to the '' cruel harmonies and stimulating rhythms '' of the rite , which he employed to full effect in his concert work amériques ( 1921 ) , scored for a massive orchestra with added sound effects including a lion 's roar and a wailing siren . ross , p . 137 aaron copland , to whom stravinsky was a particular inspiration in the former 's student days , considered the rite a masterpiece that had created '' the decade of the displaced accent and the polytonal chord '' . copland adopted stravinsky 's technique of composing in small sections which he then shuffled and rearranged , rather than working through from beginning to end . ross cites the music of copland 's ballet billy the kid as coming directly from the '' spring rounds '' section of the rite . ross , p . 275 for olivier messiaen the rite was of special significance ; he constantly analysed and expounded on the work , which gave him an enduring model for rhythmic drive and assembly of material . stravinsky was sceptical about over-intellectual analysis of the work . '' the man has found reasons for every note and that the clarinet line in page 3 is the inverted counterpoint of the horn in page 19 . i never thought about that '' , he allegedly replied to michel legrand when asked about pierre boulez 's take on the matter . michel legrand : '' i despise contemporary music '' . el país , 9 november 2016 after the premiere the writer léon vallas opined that stravinsky had written music 30 years ahead of its time , suitable to be heard in 1940 . coincidentally , it was in that year that walt disney released fantasia , an animated feature film using music from the rite and other classical compositions , conducted by stokowski . the rite segment of the film depicted the earth 's prehistory , with the creation of life , leading to the extinction of the dinosaurs as the finale . among those impressed by the film was gunther schuller , later a composer , conductor and jazz scholar . the rite of spring sequence , he says , overwhelmed him and determined his future career in music : '' i hope stravinsky appreciated that hundreds—perhaps thousands—of musicians were turned onto the rite of spring & nbsp ; . through fantasia , musicians who might otherwise never have heard the work , or at least not until many years later '' . in later life stravinsky claimed distaste for the adaptation , though as ross remarks , he said nothing critical at the time ; according to ross , the composer paul hindemith observed that '' igor appears to love it '' . ross , pp . 297–98 . recordings . before the first gramophone disc recordings of the rite were issued in 1929 , stravinsky had helped to produce a pianola version of the work for the london branch of the aeolian company . catalogue of music for the 'pianola ' & 'pianola ' piano , the aeolian company ltd , london , july 1924 , p . 88 . he also created a much more comprehensive arrangement for the pleyela , manufactured by the french piano company pleyel , with whom he signed two contracts in april and may 1921 , under which many of his early works were reproduced on this medium . white 1979 , pp . 619–20 original contracts at the paul sacher-stiftung , basel , microfilm nos . 390018 to 390021 . the pleyela version of the rite of spring was issued in 1921 ; the british pianolist rex lawson first recorded the work in this form in 1990 . hill , pp . 162–64 in 1929 stravinsky and monteux vied with each other to conduct the first orchestral gramophone recording of the rite . while stravinsky led walther straram in a recording for the columbia label , at the same time monteux was recording it for the hmv label . stokowski 's version followed in 1930 . stravinsky made two more recordings , in 1940 and 1960 . hill , pp . 118–19 according to the critic edward greenfield , stravinsky was not technically a great conductor but , greenfield says , in the 1960 recording with the columbia symphony orchestra the composer inspired a performance with '' extraordinary thrust and resilience '' . in conversations with robert craft , stravinsky reviewed several recordings of the rite made in the 1960s . he thought herbert von karajan 's 1963 recording with the berlin philharmonic , was good , but '' the performance is & nbsp ; . too polished , a pet savage rather than a real one '' . stravinsky thought that pierre boulez , with the orchestre national de france ( 1963 ) , was '' less good than i had hoped & nbsp ; . very bad tempi and some tasteless alterations '' . he praised a 1962 recording by the moscow state symphony orchestra for making the music sound russian , '' which is just right '' , but stravinsky 's concluding judgement was that none of these three performances was worth preserving . stravinsky and craft 1982 , pp . 88–89 as of 2013 there were well over 100 different recordings of the rite commercially available , and many more held in library sound archives . it has become one of the most recorded of all 20th century musical works . . editions . the first published score was the four-hand piano arrangement ( edition russe de musique , rv196 ) , dated 1913 . publication of the full orchestral score was prevented by the outbreak of war in august 1914 . after the revival of the work in 1920 stravinsky , who had not heard the music for seven years , made numerous revisions to the score , which was finally published in 1921 ( edition russe de musique , rv 197/197b . large and pocket scores ) . in 1922 ansermet , who was preparing to perform the work in berlin , sent to stravinsky a list of errors he had found in the published score . in 1926 , as part of his preparation for that year 's performance with the concertgebouw orchestra , stravinsky rewrote the '' evocation of the ancestors '' section and made substantial changes to the '' sacrificial dance '' . the extent of these revisions , together with ansermet 's recommendations , convinced stravinsky that a new edition was necessary , and this appeared in large and pocket form in 1929 . it did not , however , incorporate all of ansermet 's amendments and , confusingly , bore the date and rv code of the 1921 edition , making the new edition hard to identify . stravinsky continued to revise the work , and in 1943 rewrote the '' sacrificial dance '' . in 1948 boosey & hawkes issued a corrected version of the 1929 score ( b & h 16333 ) , although stravinsky 's substantial 1943 amendment of the '' sacrificial dance '' was not incorporated into the new version and remained unperformed , to the composer 's disappointment . he considered it '' much easier to play & nbsp ; . and superior in balance and sonority '' to the earlier versions . a less musical motive for the revisions and corrected editions was copyright law . the composer had left galaxy music corporation ( agents for editions russe de la musique , the original publisher ) for associated music publishers at the time , and orchestras would be reluctant to pay a second rental charge from two publishers to match the full work and the revised sacrificial dance ; moreover , the revised dance could only be published in america . the 1948 score provided copyright protection to the work in america , where it had lapsed , but boosey ( who acquired the editions russe catalogue ) did not have the rights to the revised finale . the 1929 score as revised in 1948 forms the basis of most modern performances of the rite . boosey & hawkes reissued their 1948 edition in 1965 , and produced a newly engraved edition ( b & h 19441 ) in 1967 . the firm also issued an unmodified reprint of the 1913 piano reduction in 1952 ( b & h 17271 ) and a revised piano version , incorporating the 1929 revisions , in 1967 . the paul sacher foundation , in association with boosey & hawkes , announced in may 2013 , as part of the rites centenary celebrations , their intention to publish the 1913 autograph score , as used in early performances . after being kept in russia for decades , the autograph score was acquired by boosey & hawkes in 1947 . the firm presented the score to stravinsky in 1962 , on his 80th birthday . after the composer 's death in 1971 the manuscript was acquired by the paul sacher foundation . as well as the autograph score , they have published the manuscript piano four-hands score . van den toorn , p . 36 ( note 30 ) in 2000 , kalmus music publishers brought out an edition where former philadelphia orchestra librarian clint nieweg made over 21,000 corrections to the score and parts . since then a published errata list has added some 310 more corrections , and this is considered to be the most accurate version of the work as of 2013 . . notes and references . notes . . citations . . sources . . further reading . . external links . '' 100 years on : igor stravinsky on the rite of spring by robert craft , the times literary supplement , 19 june 2013 multimedia web site & nbsp ; – keeping score : revolutions in music : stravinsky 's the rite of spring : iarchive : stravinskylesacreduprintemps performance of stravinsky 's four-hand piano arrangement of the rite of spring by jonathan biss and jeremy denk from the isabella stewart gardner museum in mp3 format the rite of spring : 'the work of a madman ' from the guardian bbc proms 2011 stravinsky 's rite of spring