Bishops' Bible

history . the bishop 's bible succeeded the great bible of 1539 , the first authorized bible in english , and the geneva bible of 1557–1560 . the thorough calvinism of the geneva bible ( more evident in the marginalia than in the translation itself ) offended the high church party of the church of england , to which almost all of its bishops subscribed . though most mainstream english clergy agreed with much of calvin 's theology , the majority did not approve of his prescribed church polity , presbyterianism , which sought to replace government of the church by bishops ( episcopalian ) with government by lay elders . however , they were aware that the great bible of 1539 — which was the only version then legally authorized for use in anglican worship — differed , in that much of the old testament and apocrypha was translated from the latin vulgate , rather than from the original hebrew , aramaic and greek . in an attempt to replace the objectionable geneva translation , they circulated one of their own , which became known as the '' bishops ' bible '' . the promoter of the exercise , and the leading figure in translating was matthew parker , archbishop of canterbury . it was at his instigation that the various sections translated by parker and his fellow bishops were followed by their initials in the early editions . for instance , at the end of the book of deuteronomy , we find the initials '' w.e . '' , which , according to a letter parker wrote to sir william cecil , stand for william alley , bishop of exeter . parker tells cecil that this system was '' to make the translators more diligent , as answerable for their doings . '' unhappily , parker failed to commission anyone to act as supervisory editor for the work completed by the various translators , and was too busy to do so himself , and accordingly translation practice varies greatly from book to book . hence , in most of the old testament ( as is standard in english versions ) the yahweh yhwh is represented by '' the lord '' , and the hebrew '' elohim '' is represented by '' god '' . but in the psalms the practice is the opposite way around . the books that parker himself worked on are fairly sparingly edited from the text of the great bible , while those undertaken by grindal of london emerged much closer to the geneva text . the bishops deputed to revise the apocrypha appear to have delivered very little , as the text in these books reproduce that of the great bible broadly the same . as the apocrypha of the great bible was translated from the latin vulgate , the bishops ' bible can not strictly claim to have been entirely translated from the original tongues . the bishops ' bible was first published in 1568 , but was then re-issued in an extensively revised form in 1572 . in the revision a number of switches were made to the new testament in the direction of more '' ecclesiastical '' language ( e.g . introducing the term '' charity '' into i corinthians 13 ) , but otherwise to bring the text more into line with that found in the geneva bible ; and in the old testament , the psalms from the great bible were printed alongside those in the new translation , which had proved impossible to sing . the new psalm translation was printed only once more ( in 1585 ) and otherwise dropped altogether ; while further incremental changes were made to the text of the new testament in subsequent editions . the bible had the authority of the royal warrant , and was the second version appointed to be read aloud in church services ( cf . great bible , king james bible ) . it failed to displace the geneva bible as a domestic bible to be read at home , but that was not its intended purpose . the intention was for it to be used in church as what would today be termed a '' pulpit bible '' . the version was more grandiloquent than the geneva bible . the first edition was exceptionally large and included 124 full-page illustrations . the second and subsequent editions were rather smaller , around the same size as the first printing of the king james bible , and mostly lacked illustrations other than frontispieces and maps . the text lacked most of the notes and cross-references in the geneva bible , which contained much controversial theology , but which were helpful to people among whom the bible was just beginning to circulate in the vernacular . the last edition of the complete bible was issued in 1602 , but the new testament was reissued until at least 1617 . william fulke published several parallel editions up to 1633 , with the new testament of the bishops ' bible alongside the douay-rheims bible , specifically to controvert the latter 's polemical annotations . the bishops ' bible or its new testament went through over 50 editions , whereas the geneva bible was reprinted more than 150 times . legacy . the translators of the king james bible were instructed to take the 1602 edition of the bishops ' bible as their basis , although several other existing translations were taken into account . after it was published in 1611 , the king james bible soon took the bishops ' bible 's place as the de facto standard of the church of england . later judgments of the bishops ' bible have not been favorable ; david daniell , in his important edition of william tyndale 's new testament , states that the bishops ' bible '' was , and is , not loved . where it reprints geneva it is acceptable , but most of the original work is incompetent , both in its scholarship and its verbosity '' . jack p . lewis , in his book the day after domesday : the making of the bishops ' bible , notes that unsympathetic reviews of this bible have been done . however , '' granting all the shortcomings eighteenth to twenty-first-century scholarship can find in the bishops ' bible , it was an important stage in moving english people from prohibited bible reading to being a bible-reading people . the revisers labored to give god 's book to god 's people in a language they could understand . the king james translators did not think they were making a bad translation into a good one , but were making a good one better . '' unlike tyndale 's translations and the geneva bible , the bishops ' bible has rarely been reprinted ; however , facsimiles are available . the most available reprinting of its new testament portion ( minus its marginal notes ) can be found in the fourth column of the new testament octapla edited by luther weigle , chairman of the translation committee that produced the revised standard version . the bishops ' bible is also known as the '' treacle bible '' , because of its translation of jeremiah 8:22 which reads '' is there not treacle at gilead ? '' , a rendering also found in several earlier versions as well such as the great bible . great bible , jeremiah ch . 8 in the authorized version of 1611 , '' treacle '' was changed to '' balm '' , in reference to the balm of gilead . see also . matthew bible great bible geneva bible . references . external links . the holie bible : conteynyng the olde testament and the newe , scan of the first edition ( 1568 ) at the internet archive . studylight version of the bishops bible text . ; from studylight , an incomplete version , lacking in the apocrypha , which existed in the original , but in the original spelling . bishops bible on studybible.info — includes the apocrypha . online version of sir frederic g . kenyon ’ s article in hastings ' dictionary of the bible , 1909