Ahmed Ressam

early life . the eldest of seven children , ressam was born in 1967 and grew up in a town west of algiers ; he graduated from high school in 1988 . in 1984 , ressam traveled to paris , france , for special medical treatments ; it was his first time out of algeria . ressam failed the exams to college and applied for jobs with police or security forces but was turned down . over the next four years he worked with his father in a coffee shop . he left algeria on september 5 , 1992 , due to the civil war in the country , entering france on a forged moroccan passport in the name of '' nassar ressam '' . he was arrested on immigration law in corsica , a territorial collectivity of france , in november 1993 , and france deported him to morocco on november 8 , 1993 . it banned him from returning for three years . morocco determined that he was not moroccan and returned him to france . faced with a march 1994 hearing , ressam flew to montreal , canada . . canada . ressam entered canada on february 20 , 1994 , using a fake , illegally altered french passport in the name of '' anjer tahar medjadi '' . canadian security intelligence service ( csis ) , security intelligence report concerning mohamed harkat , february 22 , 2008 when immigration officials at the montréal-mirabel international airport arrested him and confronted him about the altered passport , he divulged his real name and applied for refugee status . in his effort to obtain political asylum , he told the canadian authorities a false story about having been subjected to algerian abuse and torture . he was released pending a hearing , and approved for up to three years of welfare benefits . his application for refugee status was denied on june 6 , 1995 , and his appeal was denied . on may 4 , 1998 , a warrant was issued for his arrest by citizenship and immigration canada . at the time the warrant was issued , ressam was in afghanistan , attending a terrorist training camp . he evaded deportation thereafter by using a canadian passport he had obtained in march 1998 by submitting a baptismal certificate ; he used a stolen blank certificate , filling it in with the fake name , '' benni antoine noris . '' he supported himself by theft ( stealing tourists ' suitcases at hotels , pickpocketing , and shoplifting ) , and through welfare benefits of c 500 per month . he was arrested four times , but never jailed . by 1999 , ressam had a canadian criminal history for theft under c 5,000 , an outstanding canada-wide immigration arrest warrant , and a british columbia-wide arrest warrant for theft under c 5,000 . settling in the east end of montreal , he lived with other algerian immigrants in an apartment building on malicorne avenue , later identified as the local headquarters of a cell connected to the armed islamic group , which had connections to osama bin laden . he was recruited into al-qaeda . according to canadian security intelligence service officials , he was under surveillance as part of an investigation into a suspected terrorist ring from 1996 until he left the country . . terrorist training in afghanistan . ressam became friends with raouf hannachi , an al-qaeda member who served as the muezzin at montreal 's assuna mosque . '' the terrorist within , chapter 7 : joining jihad '' , seattle times , june 27 , 2002 , march 1 , 2010 hannachi returned to montreal from afghanistan toward the end of the summer of 1997 , where he had trained for jihad at khalden camp . he told ressam about the experience and jihad , encouraged him to train as well , and ultimately arranged a trip to the camp for him and his roommate mustapha labsi . on march 17 , 1998 , interested in joining jihad in algeria , ressam traveled using his fraudulent '' benni noris '' passport from montreal to karachi , pakistan . there , he contacted al-qaeda leader abu zubeida in peshawar , who was thought to supervise afghan terrorist training camps funded and organized by bin laden . abu zubeida arranged for ressam to be transported over the khyber pass into afghanistan in april . using the alias '' nabil '' , ressam attended three camps for islamic terrorists between march 1998 and february 1999 . at khalden camp , which generally hosted 50–100 trainees at any time , he trained in light weapons , handguns , small machine guns , rocket-propelled grenade launchers ( rpgs ) , explosives ( including tnt , c4 plastic explosives , and black plastic explosives , poisons ( including cyanide ) , poison gas , sabotage , target selection , urban warfare , tactics ( including assassinations ) , and security . trainees were from jordan , algeria , yemen , saudi arabia , chechnya , turkey , sweden , germany , and france . during the five to six months he was there , he met zacarias moussaoui , later associated with the 9/11 attacks in the united states . he trained for six weeks in how to manufacture advanced explosives and make electronic circuits at derunta training camp , outside jalalabad , afghanistan . abu zubeida , in contrast , testified before his combatant status review tribunal that khalden only trained fighters for '' defensive jihad '' . he said trainees were explicitly instructed to attack only military targets , that it was an offense against islam to kill or injure innocent civilians . he said ressam would not have been sent to khalden if he were thought to be someone who believed islam justified attacking civilians . a six-person terrorist cell that included ressam was created , and tasked with meeting in canada . they were to attack a u.s . airport or consulate before the end of 1999 . the cell was directed by abu jaffar in pakistan and abu doha in europe . . plot to bomb lax . ressam returned to montreal in february 1999 under the name '' benni noris '' , bringing 12,000 in cash he had obtained in afghanistan to fund the attack . he also brought in hexamine ( used as an explosive booster in the manufacture of explosives ) and glycol , and a notebook with instructions for making explosives . while in montreal , he shared an apartment with karim said atmani , an alleged forger for the armed islamic group of algeria . in april 1999 , french investigators asked canadian authorities to locate ressam for questioning , but the canadians were unable to locate him , as he was living under the name benni noris . in the summer of 1999 , informed by abu doha that the other members of his cell had been unable to reach canada due to immigration issues , he chose to continue without them . in august 1999 , he decided to bomb los angeles international airport , the third-busiest airport in the world at the time . he was familiar with it and also thought it would be a politically and economically sensitive target . he planned to conduct a rehearsal using a luggage cart , putting it in a place that was not suspicious , and observing how long it would take for airport security to notice it . he planned to execute his plan in a passenger waiting area , using one or two suitcases filled with explosives . in september 1999 , ressam purchased electronic equipment and components in order to build detonators , and made four timing devices . he recruited abdelmajid dahoumane , an old friend of his , to help him . in november , with dahoumane 's assistance , he bought urea and aluminum sulfate from nurseries , and mixed it together with nitric and sulphuric acid he stole from fertilizer manufacturers to create a tnt-like explosive substance . he had met mokhtar haouari in early 1994 , when he first arrived in canada . haouari was involved in fraudulent activity that included the theft and sale of stolen passports and creation of fraudulent credit cards , and ressam sold him some stolen identity cards . in early november he recruited haouari to assist him in what he described as '' some very important and dangerous business in the u.s . '' , by providing continued funding for his project , a credit card , and a fake id . in addition , haouari in turn recruited brooklyn , new york-based algerian illegal immigrant abdelghani meskini , a con man who he said was involved in bank fraud , to assist ressam . on november 17 , 1999 , ressam and dahoumane traveled from montreal , quebec , to vancouver , british columbia . they rented a small motel cottage at the 2400 kingsway motel , where they prepared the explosives for lax . they left behind an acid burn stain on a table and corroded plumbing . in december ressam called abu jaffar in afghanistan to ask whether osama bin laden wanted to take credit for the attack , but did not get an answer . he also called abu doha in london , told him that he wanted to return to algeria after the attack , and was assured he would receive money and documents . ressam arranged for the english-speaking meskini to wait for him in seattle . meskini would assist him by helping him rent a car and communicate in english , driving him , and giving him a cell phone and money withdrawn with a stolen bank debit card . . capture . ressam rented a dark green 1999 chrysler 300m luxury sedan , and on the evening of december 13 , ressam and dahoumane hid the explosives and all the related components in the wheel well in the car 's trunk . on december 14 , they left vancouver , traveling to victoria , british columbia . believing that he would draw less scrutiny alone , ressam sent dahoumane back to vancouver by bus . ressam took the m/v coho roro from victoria to port angeles , washington . he successfully passed through u.s . immigration and naturalization service checks in victoria , and boarded the last ferry of the day for the 90-minute crossing to the u.s . u.s . border security : looking north after the ferry docked in port angeles at 6 pm , ressam intended to be the last car to leave the ferry . although there had not been any intelligence reports suggesting threats , u.s . customs inspector diana dean decided to have a secondary customs search conducted of ressam 's car , saying later that ressam was acting '' hinky '' and asked him to get out of the car . '' the terrorist within , chapter 12 : the crossing '' , by hal bernton , mike carter , david heath , and james neff , the seattle times , july 2 , 2002 . eprint with publication date and eprint with author credits . '' foiling millennium attack was mostly luck '' , lisa myers , nbc news , april 29 , 2004 . eprint . at first , ressam was not cooperative . dean requested that he fill out a customs declaration form , which he did , identifying as a canadian citizen named benni noris . he had a passport , driver license , and credit cards all in the noris name , as well as another quebec driver license with the same date of birth , but in the name '' mario roig '' . royal canadian mounted police later advised that the mario roig driver license was a fake , and did not exist on their records . another customs inspector searched the car and found in the spare tire well : ten green plastic garbage bags with of a fine white powder ( which tests later identified as urea , used to manufacture explosives and fertilizer ) , two lozenge bottles filled with primary explosives hexamethylene triperoxide diamine ( hmtd ) and cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine ( rdx ) , two plastic bags with of a crystalline powder ( later shown to be aluminium sulfate , used primarily as a desiccant , to keep things dry ) , two 22-ounce olive jars with of golden-brown liquid ( later identified as secondary explosive ethylene glycol dinitrate ( egdn ) , an extremely explosive and volatile nitroglycerin equivalent that is twice as powerful as tnt ) , and four operational timing devices designed to detonate primary explosives , consisting of small black boxes containing circuit boards connected to casio watches and 9-volt battery connectors . as one of the customs inspectors escorted ressam from the car , he broke free and fled . inspectors chased him for five to six blocks and caught him as he tried to force his way into a car stopped at a traffic light . they took him into custody . he was arrested by the u.s . border patrol on charges of misrepresentation on entry and failure to be inspected , booked into the clallam county jail in clallam county , washington , and investigated by the u.s . federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) . customs officials searching him and the car also found the phone numbers of abu doha and meskini . library of congress , federal research division . '' asian criminal and terrorist activity in canada '' , july 2003 hirschkorn , phil , '' boyhood friend fingers defendant in y2k bomb plot '' , cnn , july 2 , 2001 , accessed february 28 , 2010 muriel , diana , '' al qaeda suspect faces u.s . trial '' , cnn , may 10 , 2002 , accessed february 28 , 2010 his fingerprints were analyzed by the royal canadian mounted police , who determined that he was '' ahmed ressam '' , rather than '' benni antoine noris '' . an explosives expert concluded that the materials in his car could have produced a blast 40x greater than that of a devastating car bomb . it was ultimately determined that he had intended to detonate the explosives at the los angeles international airport . . trial , sentencing , and appeals . indictment and trial ressam was indicted by a superseding indictment on january 20 , 2000 , for nine counts of criminal activity in connection with his attempt to bomb the los angeles international airport on december 31 , 1999 : 1 ) an act of terrorism transcending a national boundary ; 2 ) placing an explosive in proximity to a terminal ; 3 ) false identification documents ; 4 ) use of a fictitious name for admission to the u.s . ; 5 ) the felony of making a false statement to a u.s . customs official ; 6 ) smuggling ; 7 ) transportation of explosives ; 8 ) possession of an unregistered firearm ; and 9 ) carrying an explosive during the commission of a felony . following a 19-day trial in u.s . district court in los angeles , with approximately 120 witnesses , a jury found ressam guilty on all counts of his indictment on april 6 , 2001 . '' statement of attorney general john ashcroft ; conviction of ahmed ressam , '' u.s . department of justice , april 6 , 2001 , accessed february 15 , 2010 that same day , he was convicted in absentia in france , and sentenced to five years for conspiring to commit terrorist acts there . cooperation and sentencing ressam 's sentencing was delayed for four years , to give counter-terrorism analysts a chance to fully exploit him as an intelligence source . facing up to 130 years in prison , ressam began cooperating with investigators after his conviction . he entered into a june 23 , 2001 , cooperation agreement with the u.s . government . under the agreement , after he cooperated fully with the u.s . and other governments , the u.s . government would recommend a prison sentence taking his cooperation into consideration , though the recommendation would not under any circumstances be less than 27 years . ressam provided information to law enforcement officials of the u.s . and six other countries with regard to al-qaeda 's organization , recruitment , and training activities . he revealed that al-qaeda sleeper cells existed within the u.s . this information was included in the president 's daily brief delivered to president george w . bush on august 6 , 2001 , entitled bin ladin determined to strike in us . he testified in july 2001 against his accomplice and co-conspirator , haouari . in addition , ressam said that ahcene zemiri , a fellow algerian who was being held at guantanamo bay detention camp , was involved in the plot . zemiri 's combatant status review tribunal used this information to continue to hold zemiri as unlawful combatant , without charges . ressam 's accusations were used as the basis of 7 of the 12 unclassified allegations in the summary of evidence memo prepared for abu zubeida 's combatant status review tribunal . the globe and mail opined that the intelligence analysts ' reliance on ressam 's confessions was due to wanting unclassified allegations against abu zubeida to be based on evidence that was not gained through torture . abu zubaydah had been tortured while held by the cia before being transferred to military custody and guantanamo in september 2006 . none of the evidence gained through coercive interrogation could be admitted to court . ressam had trained with zacarias moussaoui at khalden camp and was able to identify him when asked . moussaoui was an al-qaeda member later implicated in the 9/11 plot . moussaoui had been arrested by the fbi on august 16 , 2001 . however , fbi agents were not successful in convincing their superiors of enough evidence against him to obtain a warrant to allow them to search moussaoui 's laptop and belongings . the 9/11 commission report opined that had ressam been asked about moussaoui , he would have broken that logjam . by november 28 , 2001 , ressam began to express reluctance about discussing some matters . by early 2003 , after having provided 65 hours of trial and deposition testimony and the names of 150 people involved in terrorism , he stopped cooperating . he began to recant his prior testimony . the seattle times described ressam 's sentencing hearing as the '' gripping climax '' to his journey through the u.s . court system . u.s . attorney john mckay argued ressam should get a 35-year sentence , because he had declined to cooperate in two cases , which would go unprosecuted . ressam 's lawyer argued that ressam should be given a sentence of less than 20 years , to reflect the value of his original cooperation , saying : '' it is a flat fact that law enforcement , the public , and public safety benefited in immeasurable ways from ressam 's decision to go to trial and later cooperate . '' ressam did not say anything during his sentencing hearing , but sent the judge a personal note , in which he apologized for planning to bomb the airport . on july 27 , 2005 , united states district court judge john coughenour sentenced ressam to 22 years in prison , plus 5 years of supervision after his release ; credited for good conduct , he could have been released after 14 years . according to the seattle times , the judge used the occasion of ressam 's sentencing to unleash a broadside against secret tribunals and other war on terrorism tactics that abandon 'the ideals that set our nation apart . ' '' the judge added : '' the tragedy of september 11 shook our sense of security and made us realize that we , too , are vulnerable to acts of terrorism . unfortunately , some believe that this threat renders our constitution obsolete . if that view is allowed to prevail , the terrorists will have won . in november 2006 , ressam wrote to judge coughenour , recanting his accusations against zemiri and saying he had not participated at all in the bombing plot . zemiri 's attorneys advised the military lawyers at guantanamo and incorporated this information in his habeas corpus case . zemiri was released without charge finally in january 2010 and repatriated to algeria , his country of citizenship . appeals and sentencing guidelines on january 16 , 2007 , a divided panel of the united states court of appeals for the ninth circuit in seattle reversed ressam 's conviction on one of the charges , due to the majority 's reading of the applicable law . the supreme court of the united states overturned the ninth circuit in an 8–1 decision on may 19 , 2008 , restoring the original convictions and sentence . on february 2 , 2010 , the ninth circuit court of appeals ruled that ressam 's 22-year sentence was too lenient , and did not fit in the then-mandatory sentencing guidelines , which indicated he should have received at least 65 years , and up to 130 years , in prison . finding that the trial court judge 's '' views appear too entrenched to allow for the appearance of fairness on remand , '' the appellate court ordered that ressam be re-sentenced by a different district court judge from the one who had handed down the original sentence . in march 2010 , ressam 's lawyer said he would file a petition for a rehearing before the ninth circuit court . '' millennium plotter appealing sentence decision '' , associated press , march 17 , 2010 , accessed march 18 , 2010 in october 2012 , he was re-sentenced to 37 years ' imprisonment . ressam is serving his sentence at adx florence , a maximum security prison in colorado . federal bureau of prisons , inmate locator : ahmed ressam , white male , 29638-086 , scheduled release 12/27/2032 . . references . external links . '' superseding indictment in u.s . v . ressam '' , january 20 , 2000 the terrorist within , seattle times intuition keeps law enforcement one step ahead , us customs today , february 2000 . nbc - '' mostly luck '' video from nbc nightly news lisa myers 2013