Tannenberg Memorial

concept and design . the memorial embraced the anglo/french concept of the unknown soldier . in doing so , the architects anticipated the concept of totenburgen ( fortresses of the dead ) housing mass graves of soldiers . this ideology was mooted in germany in the 1920s and 1930s . the architects imagined the memorial to be a new volkish '' community of the dead '' and incorporated the burial of 20 unknown german soldiers from the eastern front into the project concept . the great war and medieval memory : war , remembrance and medievalism in britain and germany , 1914-1940 . stefan goebel . , - p38 the memorial was built in a prominent place in a shape reminiscent of the castles of the teutonic knights . the monument 's location on a hilltop was accentuated by massive earthworks and landscaping designed to look as if nature alone had shaped the site . the design influenced other projects undertaken by architects and builders during the era . places of commemoration : search for identity and landscape design by joachim wolschke-bulmahn . , p 241 . opening and dedication . a gathering of thousands came to the dedication of the newly finished memorial on 18 september 1927 . the 80-year-old hindenburg was dressed in the uniform of a colonel-in-chief of a masurian regiment to which he 'd been appointed by the emperor ( who had since abdicated ) . his speech was deemed highly nationalistic and in keeping with the times for the weimar republic , but was not well received outside germany since it denied german responsibility for the war . an extract from the speech was later carved into a bronze plaque by the nazi regime and installed in one of the towers of the memorial . a line of veterans , ten kilometers long and resplendent in imperial uniforms , paid homage to hindenburg and the 20 unknown german soldiers from the 1914 battle who were interred at the memorial . . inn . the architects had also built an inn nearby in traditional east prussian style . the numbers of visitors did not meet expectations initially but during the nazi era the numbers were such that the inn required an extension . the nazi era . in august 1933 the nazis held a massive demonstration at the memorial to commemorate the anniversary of the battle . the polish government allowed 1,500 cars to transit through the polish corridor . among those attending were adolf hitler , hermann göring , franz von papen and erich koch , east prussia 's nazi gauleiter . a year later , the monument again came to prominence on the death of paul von hindenburg . hindenburg had requested a simple service and that he be interred next to his wife ( who had died in 1921 ) in hanover . however , hitler decided to seize the opportunity for propaganda and instructed albert speer to ensure that the day was spectacular . it began with the transportation of the deceased president in the dark of night , on a gun carriage , from hindenburg 's east prussian home neudeck . following a torch-lit route and escorted by infantry and cavalry , the cortège made its way to hohenstein . . modernisation of the memorial . following the interment of hindenburg , the memorial once again became a national shrine . to add to the theatre , the government of the reich again called upon the architectural firm of krüger in berlin and using the stonehenge parallel again ; above the entrance , a giant stone ( symbolically from königsberg ) was placed , with the field marshal 's name inscribed upon it . this stone was so large that railway bridges had to be strengthened to aid its transportation . two giant stone soldiers ( as if on guard ) were placed outside the tomb . a porphyry statue of the victor , by the east prussian friedrich bagdons , dominated the hall of honour above the tomb . the concourse grass was replaced with stone and around the memorial landscape were placed ( historically inaccurate ) interpretations of the aryan german presence in east prussia since the stone age . . the new crypt . image : bundesarchiv bild 183-c06886 , paul v . hindenburg.jpg thumb right generalfeldmarschall paul von hindenburg hindenburg was originally buried in the central yard or '' plaza '' of the monument on 7 august 1934 . on 2 october 1935 , the anniversary of hindenburg 's birthday , the president 's bronze coffin was relocated to a new , sombre chamber where he was joined by his wife gertrud , who was moved from the family plot in hanover . the new crypt , which was completed in the autumn of 1935 , was located directly below the south tower . to create an entrance to the crypt , hindenburg and the 20 unknown german soldiers from the 1914 battle were temporarily disinterred , and the level of the plaza was lowered by , with stone steps surrounding it on all sides . tannenberg : a monument of german pride , peter k . gessner , date unknown the unknown soldiers were re-interred in the side chapels . the gentlemanly knight versus the iron hun , geoffrey j . giles , may 2009 designed by the kruger brothers and carved by paul bronisch , the entrance to hindenburg 's crypt was dominated by two fourteen-foot sculptures of the eternal watch , known as the ewige wache , which were carved out of more than 120 tons of imported königsberg granite . the mausoleum had a dramatic vaulted ceiling . pomp . the re-interment of the generalfeldmarschall was marked by much pomp and ceremony by the hitler administration , who declared that the upkeep of the memorial would thenceforth be carried out at government expense . the sarcophagus was draped in the german war flag for the ceremony , at which adolf hitler performed the rededication . the masuria region , where the memorial was built , was going through an economic resurgence at that time and nationalistic spirit was running high . this , and the ceremony of re-interment , caused one newspaper to claim '' a glorious return of the teutonic order '' . from 1936-1939 a travelling exhibition about masuria , but centred on the tannenberg battle and memorial , toured germany . the baedecker guide of 1936 described the tannenberg memorial '' where president hindenburg rests beside his fallen comrades '' as '' a place of national pilgrimage '' . plans were drawn up to install busts of the commanders and politicians involved in the polish campaign with tablets inscribed with the führers speeches and a full-length statue of adolf hitler , but these never came about . at least one other commemoration was cancelled after the signing of the anglo-polish military alliance in 25 august 1939 . the last state ceremonies held at the memorial were of two generals killed in the july plot of 1944 . hindenburg 's disinterment and partial demolition of the memorial . in january 1945 , as soviet forces advanced into east prussia , hitler ordered the lead coffins of hindenburg and his wife to be disinterred and along with some of the regimental standards in the tomb , removed to safety . they were first moved to a bunker just outside berlin , then to a salt mine near the village of bernterode , thuringia ( in north central germany ) , along with the remains of both kaiser wilhelm i and frederick ii of prussia ( frederick the great ) . the four coffins were hastily marked to indicate their contents using red crayon , and interred behind a masonry wall in a deep recess of the mine complex , underground . the coffins were discovered by u.s . army ordnance troops on 27 april 1945 , and were moved to the basement of the heavily guarded marburg castle in marburg an der lahn , germany . in august 1946 , 20 months after being removed from the tannenberg memorial , hindenburg and his wife were finally laid to rest by the american army at st . elizabeth 's , the church of his teutonic ancestors in marburg , where they remain today . the case of the distinguished corpses , will lang , life magazine , 6 march 1950 on 21 january 1945 , withdrawing german forces planted explosive material inside the entrance tower and the tower previously housing von hindenburg 's coffin , causing both towers to collapse . on 22 january germans demolished more of the construction with a further 30 tonnes of explosives . after the war more destruction was caused by looting of bronze and metal from the structure , and even stones and bricks were taken to help with the rebuilding of olsztynek . dismantling . thumb in the spring of 1949 , the polish government ordered the dismantling of the remains of the monument — although enough remained for scavengers to continue recycling into local projects . removal of the ruins continued until the 1980s , by which time virtually all traces of the memorial had gone . today , only a protruding island in an isolated field remains to mark the extensive site . the court of honour ( which measured slightly larger than a football field ) has been reduced to little more than an overgrown pit of scattered debris and rubble . several significant remnants of the structure can still be seen elsewhere . a perfectly preserved sculpted lion , which once topped an eight-metre pyramid at another war memorial about 300 m beside the monument , is now displayed in the town square in nearby olsztynek . after the second world war , much of the fabric of the stone-and-granite memorial was used to build the soviet war memorial in olsztyn , the monument to the ghetto heroes in warsaw , and for the new communist party headquarters in warsaw . . replica . architect dietrich zlomke , born in mamonovo near königsberg , was commissioned to design a memorial to the dead of east and west prussia in the two world wars , which was dedicated at oberschleissheim near munich in 1995 . günter peitz dietrich zlomke war ein brückenbauer 9 . juli 2014 schwäbische zeitung his choice of design was a smaller-scale replica of the tannenberg memorial in concrete , dominated in the centre by an oak cross six metres high and a smaller iron cross on the pale wall at the rear . . references . goebel , stefan . the great war and medieval memory : war , remembrance and medievalism in britain and germany , 1914–1940 . cambridge : cambridge university press , 2007 . jürgen tietz : das tannenberg-nationaldenkmal . architektur , geschichte , kontext . berlin : verlag bauwesen 1999 . external links . tannenberg-denkmal ( german historic museum ) postcard a monument to german pride : a history of the tannenberg memorial the tannenberg monument : most pictures online . german & english