Diabelli Variations

background . the work was composed after diabelli , a well-known music publisher and composer , in the early part of 1819 sent a waltz of his creation to all the important composers of the austrian empire , including franz schubert , carl czerny , johann nepomuk hummel , and the archduke rudolph , asking each of them to write a variation on it . his plan was to publish all the variations in a patriotic volume called vaterländischer künstlerverein , and to use the profits to benefit orphans and widows of the napoleonic wars . franz liszt was not included , but it seems his teacher czerny arranged for him to also provide a variation , which he composed at the age of 11 . beethoven had had a connection with diabelli for a number of years . about a slightly earlier period , 1815 , beethoven 's authoritative biographer , alexander wheelock thayer , writes , '' diabelli , born near salzburg in 1781 , had now been for some years one of the more prolific composers of light and pleasing music , and one of the best and most popular teachers in vienna . he was much employed by steiner and co . , as copyist and corrector , and in this capacity enjoyed much of beethoven 's confidence , who also heartily liked him as a man . '' at the time of his project for variations on a theme of his own by various composers , diabelli had advanced to become a partner in the publishing firm of cappi and diabelli . the oft-told but now questionable story of the origins of this work is that beethoven at first refused categorically to participate in diabelli 's project , dismissing the theme as banal , a schusterfleck or 'cobbler 's patch , ' unworthy of his time . not long afterwards , according to the story , upon learning that diabelli would pay a handsome price for a full set of variations from him , beethoven changed his mind and decided to show how much could be done with such slim materials . ( in another version of the legend , beethoven was so insulted at being asked to work with material he considered beneath him that he wrote 33 variations to demonstrate his prowess . ) today , however , this story is taken as more legend than fact . its origins are with anton schindler , beethoven 's unreliable biographer , whose account conflicts in a number of ways with several established facts , indicating that he did not have first-hand knowledge of events . at some point , beethoven certainly did accept diabelli 's proposal , but rather than contributing a single variation on the theme , he planned a large set of variations . to begin work he laid aside his sketching of the missa solemnis , completing sketches for four variations by early 1819 . ( schindler was so far off the mark that he claimed , '' at the most , he worked three months on it , during the summer of 1823 '' . czerny , carl , '' on the proper performance of all beethoven 's works for the piano : edited and with a commentary by paul badura-skoda '' , universal editions , 1970 , p . 74 carl czerny , a pupil of beethoven , claimed that '' beethoven wrote these variations in a merry freak '' . ) by the summer of 1819 , he had completed twenty-three of the set of thirty-three . kinderman , william , beethoven , oxford university press , 1995 , p . 212 . in february 1820 , in a letter to the publisher simrock , he mentioned '' grand variations '' , as yet incomplete . then he laid the work aside for several years – something beethoven rarely did – while he returned to the missa solemnis and the late piano sonatas . in june 1822 , beethoven offered to his publisher peters '' variations on a waltz for pianoforte alone ( there are many ) '' . in the autumn of the same year he was in negotiations with diabelli , writing to him , '' the fee for the variat . should be 40 ducats at the most if they are worked out on as large a scale as planned , but if this should not take place , it would be set for less '' . it was probably in february 1823 that beethoven returned to the task of completing the set . by march or april 1823 , the full set of thirty-three variations was finished . by april 30 a copy was ready to send to ries in london . beethoven kept the original set of twenty-three in order , but inserted nos . 1 ( the opening march ) , 2 , 15 , 23 ( sometimes called a parody of a cramer finger exercise ) , 24 ( a lyrical fughetta ) , 25 , 26 , 28 , 29 ( the first of the series of three slow variations leading to the final fugue and minuet ) , 31 ( the third , highly expressive slow variation leading directly into the final fugue and minuet ) and 33 ( the concluding minuet ) . one suggestion on what prompted beethoven to write a set of '' grand variations '' on diabelli 's theme is the influence of the archduke rudolph who , in the previous year , under beethoven 's tutelage , had composed a huge set of forty variations on a theme by beethoven . in a letter of 1819 to the archduke , beethoven mentions that '' in my writing-desk there are several compositions that bear witness to my remembering your imperial highness '' . several theories have been advanced on why he decided to write thirty-three variations . he might have been trying to outdo himself after his 32 variations in c & nbsp ; minor , or trying to outdo bach 's goldberg variations with its total of thirty-two pieces ( two presentations of the theme and thirty variations ) . lewis lockwood , beethoven : the music and the life , w . w . norton & company , 2005 , , , pp . 394–95 . there is a story that diabelli was pressing beethoven to send him his contribution to the project , whereupon beethoven asked , '' how many contributions have you got ? '' '' thirty-two '' , said diabelli . '' go ahead and publish them '' , beethoven is purported to have replied , '' i shall write thirty-three all by myself . '' alfred brendel observes , '' in beethoven 's own pianistic output , the figures 32 and 33 have their special significance : 32 sonatas are followed by 33 variations as a crowning achievement , of which var . 33 relates directly to the thirty-second 's final adagio . '' and brendel adds , whimsically , '' there happens to be , between the 32 variations in c & nbsp ; minor and the sets opp . 34 and 35 , a numerical gap . the diabelli variations fills it . '' brendel , alfred , alfred brendel on music : collected essays , a cappella books , 2000 , p . 121 diabelli published the work quickly as op . 120 in june of the same year , adding the following introductory note : technically , von bülow admires in the closing four bars '' the principle of modulation chiefly developed in the master 's last creative period . the successive step-wise progression of the several parts while employing enharmonic modulation as a bridge to connect even the remotest tonalities . '' brendel 's title for this variation is to handel . : : . variation 33 : tempo di menuetto moderato . tovey comments : brendel 's title for this variation is to mozart ; to beethoven explaining : solomon describes the closing bars as '' the final image – of a tender , songful , profound nostalgia , a vantage point from which we can review the purposes of the entire journey . '' : : . works inspired . dialogue avec 33 variations de l . van beethoven sur une valse de diabelli , a 1971 dialogue between writer michel butor and beethoven . 33 variations , a 2007 play by moisés kaufman , explores the story of the variations ' composition . notes . a . a melody or musical sequence repeated one step , or some fixed interval , higher . also known as a rosalia , named after an italian song rosalia , mia cara . while it can be a simple , unimaginative device , the grove dictionary of music points out that the rosalia has been used effectively by great composers , as in handel 's hallelujah chorus in the messiah ( '' king of kings '' ) , the first movement of mozart 's jupiter symphony and the finale of mozart 's string quartet k.575 . b . grove dictionary describes the work by other composers as follows : :