1952 in film

top-grossing films . united states . the top ten 1952 released films by box office gross in the united states are as follows : . notable films released in 1952 . united states unless stated . . 1st of april , 2000 – ( austria ) 5 fingers , directed by joseph l . mankiewicz , starring james mason . a . abbott and costello meet captain kidd , starring bud abbott and lou costello above and beyond , starring robert taylor and eleanor parker affair in trinidad , starring rita hayworth and glenn ford against all flags , starring errol flynn and maureen o'hara alraune , starring hildegard knef and erich von stroheim – ( west germany ) andrine og kjell – ( norway ) androcles and the lion , starring jean simmons and victor mature angel face , starring robert mitchum and jean simmons angels one five , starring jack hawkins – ( gb ) anhonee , starring raj kapoor and nargis – ( india ) at sword 's point , starring maureen o'hara and cornel wilde the atomic city , starring gene barry and lydia clarke . b . babes in bagdad , starring paulette goddard and gypsy rose lee the bad and the beautiful , starring lana turner , kirk douglas , walter pidgeon , dick powell , barry sullivan , gloria grahame baiju bawra , starring meena kumari – ( india ) the beast must die ( la bestia debe morir ) – ( argentina ) because of you , starring loretta young because you 're mine , starring mario lanza the belle of new york , starring fred astaire and vera-ellen les belles de nuit ( beauties of the night ) , directed by rené clair – ( france ) belles on their toes , starring myrna loy , jeanne crain , debra paget bend of the river , directed by anthony mann , starring james stewart , arthur kennedy , julie adams , rock hudson beware , my lovely , starring ida lupino and robert ryan big jim mclain , starring john wayne and james arness the big sky , starring kirk douglas the big trees , starring kirk douglas the black castle , starring stephen mcnally , boris karloff , lon chaney , jr . blackbeard the pirate , starring robert newton brandy for the parson , starring james donald and kenneth more – ( gb ) buffalo bill in tomahawk territory , starring clayton moore the bushwackers , starring john ireland and lawrence tierney . c . california conquest , starring cornel wilde and teresa wright captive women , starring robert clarke carbine williams , starring james stewart and jean hagen the card , starring alec guinness , glynis johns , petula clark – ( gb ) carrie , starring laurence olivier , jennifer jones , miriam hopkins carson city , starring randolph scott casque d'or ( golden helmet ) , directed by jacques becker , starring simone signoret – ( france ) children of hiroshima ( gembaku no ko ) – ( japan ) ciguli miguli – ( yugoslavia ) the city stands trial ( processo alla città ) , directed by luigi zampa – ( italy ) clash by night , directed by fritz lang , starring barbara stanwyck , robert ryan , paul douglas , marilyn monroe come back , little sheba , starring burt lancaster and shirley booth the crimson pirate , starring burt lancaster . d . dark river ( las aguas bajan turbias ) – ( argentina ) deadline - u.s.a . , directed by richard brooks , starring humphrey bogart , ethel barrymore , kim hunter , jim backus , martin gabel denver and rio grande , starring edmond o'brien and sterling hayden derby day , starring anna neagle and michael wilding – ( britain ) desperate search , starring howard keel and jane greer the devil makes three , starring gene kelly diplomatic courier , directed by henry hathaway , starring tyrone power do n't bother to knock , starring richard widmark , anne bancroft , marilyn monroe down among the z men , starring the goons – ( gb ) dreamboat , starring ginger rogers , clifton webb , elsa lanchester , anne francis . e-f . emergency call , directed by lewis gilbert , starring jack warner , anthony steel , joy shelton and freddie mills – ( u.k . ) europa '51 , directed by roberto rossellini , starring ingrid bergman – ( italy ) the eyes leave tracks ( los ojos dejan huella ) , starring raf vallone – ( spain ) face to face , starring james mason and robert preston fanfan la tulipe ( a.k.a . fearless little soldier ) , starring gérard philipe and gina lollobrigida – ( france ) flaming feather , starring sterling hayden flavor of green tea over rice ( ochazuke no aji ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) flesh and fury , starring tony curtis and jan sterling forbidden games ( jeux interdits ) , directed by rené clément – winner of oscar for best foreign language film – ( france ) . g-h . a girl in every port , starring groucho marx , william bendix , marie wilson , dee hartford the golden coach ( le carrosse d'or ) , directed by jean renoir , starring anna magnani – ( france/italy ) the greatest show on earth , directed by cecil b . demille , starring betty hutton , cornel wilde , charlton heston , gloria grahame , dorothy lamour , james stewart hangman 's knot , starring randolph scott , donna reed , lee marvin hans christian andersen , starring danny kaye and farley granger the happy family , directed by muriel box , starring stanley holloway and kathleen harrison – ( gb ) the happy time , starring charles boyer and bobby driscoll has anybody seen my gal ? , starring piper laurie , rock hudson , charles coburn heidi , directed by luigi comencini – ( switzerland ) hellgate , starring sterling hayden hiawatha , starring vince edwards high noon , directed by fred zinnemann , starring gary cooper ( oscar for best actor ) and grace kelly los hijos de maría morales ( the children of maria morales ) , starring pedro infante – ( mexico ) holiday for sinners , starring gig young and janice rule the holly and the ivy , starring ralph richardson and celia johnson – ( gb ) home at seven , directed by and starring ralph richardson – ( gb ) horizons west , starring robert ryan , rock hudson , raymond burr hunted , directed by charles crichton , starring dirk bogarde and jon whiteley – ( gb ) . i . the i do n't care girl , starring mitzi gaynor and oscar levant i dream of jeanie , starring bill shirley ikiru ( to live ) , directed by akira kurosawa , starring takashi shimura – winner of golden bear – ( japan ) the importance of being earnest , directed by anthony asquith , starring michael redgrave – ( gb ) indian uprising , starring george montgomery it grows on trees , starring irene dunne ivanhoe , starring robert taylor , joan fontaine , elizabeth taylor . j . jaal ( net ) , starring dev anand – ( india ) jack and the beanstalk , starring bud abbott and lou costello japanese war bride , starring shirley yamaguchi and don taylor the jazz singer , starring danny thomas and peggy lee jolanda la figlia del corsaro nero ( jolanda , the daughter of the black corsair ) – ( italy ) jumping jacks , starring dean martin and jerry lewis just this once , starring janet leigh , peter lawford . k-l . kangaroo , starring maureen o'hara , peter lawford kansas city confidential , starring john payne and coleen gray kid monk baroni , starring leonard nimoy lady in the iron mask , starring louis hayward lambert the sheepish lion the last page , a.k.a . man bait , starring george brent , marguerite chapman , diana dors – ( gb ) the life of oharu ( saikaku ichidai onna ) , directed by kenji mizoguchi – ( japan ) lightning ( inazuma ) , directed by mikio naruse – ( japan ) limelight , directed by and starring charlie chaplin , with claire bloom lone star , starring clark gable and ava gardner lost in alaska , starring bud abbott and lou costello lovely to look at , starring kathryn grayson , howard keel , red skelton lure of the wilderness , starring jean peters , jeffrey hunter , walter brennan the lusty men , starring robert mitchum . m . macao , starring robert mitchum and jane russell mandy , starring phyllis calvert and jack hawkins – ( gb ) the marrying kind , starring judy holliday meet danny wilson , starring frank sinatra the member of the wedding , starring julie harris the merry widow , starring lana turner mexican bus ride ( subida al cielo ) , directed by luis buñuel – ( mexico ) million dollar mermaid , starring esther williams and victor mature the miracle of our lady of fatima , starring gilbert roland les misérables , starring michael rennie , robert newton , debra paget monkey business , starring cary grant , ginger rogers , charles coburn , marilyn monroe monsoon , starring diana douglas and ursula thiess montana belle , starring jane russell moulin rouge , starring josé ferrer and zsa zsa gabor – ( gb ) my cousin rachel , starring olivia de havilland and richard burton my pal gus , starring richard widmark and george winslow my six convicts , starring gilbert roland my son john , starring robert walker and van heflin . n . the narrow margin , directed by richard fleischer , starring charles mcgraw neighbours – ( canada ) never look back directed by francis searle , starring rosamund john – ( gb ) no room for the groom , directed by douglas sirk , starring tony curtis and piper laurie . o . o . henry 's full house , an anthology film starring charles laughton , david wayne , marilyn monroe , richard widmark , anne baxter , jeanne crain one big affair , starring evelyn keyes one minute to zero , directed by tay garnett , starring robert mitchum and ann blyth othello ( a.k.a . the tragedy of othello : the moor of venice ) , written , directed by and starring orson welles outcast of the islands , directed by carol reed , starring ralph richardson and trevor howard – ( gb ) the overcoat ( il cappotto ) – ( italy ) . p-q . pahit-pahit manis , starring titien sumarni and chatir harro ( indonesia ) pat and mike , starring spencer tracy and katharine hepburn phone call from a stranger , starring shelley winters and gary merrill the pickwick papers , starring james hayter and james donald – ( gb ) le plaisir ( a.k.a . house of pleasure ) , directed by max ophüls , starring claude dauphin – ( france ) the planter 's wife , directed by ken annakin , starring claudette colbert , jack hawkins & anthony steel – ( gb ) pony soldier , starring tyrone power the pride of st . louis , starring dan dailey the prisoner of zenda , starring stewart granger , deborah kerr , james mason , jane greer the quiet man , directed by john ford , starring john wayne and maureen o'hara . r . rancho notorious , starring marlene dietrich red ball express , starring jeff chandler red planet mars , starring peter graves retreat , hell ! , starring frank lovejoy return of the texan , starring dale robertson and joanne dru road to bali , starring bing crosby and bob hope rome 11:00 – ( italy ) ruby gentry , starring jennifer jones , charlton heston and karl malden . s . sailor beware , starring dean martin and jerry lewis sangdil , starring dilip kumar and madhubala – ( india ) saturday island , starring linda darnell and tab hunter – ( gb ) the savage , starring charlton heston and susan morrow scandal sheet , starring broderick crawford and donna reed scaramouche , starring stewart granger and janet leigh the scarlet flower ( alenkiy tsvetochek ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) sea tiger , starring marguerite chapman secrets of women ( kvinnors väntan ) , directed by ingmar bergman , starring eva dahlbeck – ( sweden ) siempre tuya ( forever yours ) – ( mexico ) singin ' in the rain , starring gene kelly , debbie reynolds , jean hagen , donald o'connor the sniper , directed by edward dmytryk the snow maiden ( snegurochka ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) the snows of kilimanjaro , starring gregory peck and ava gardner something money ca n't buy , directed by pat jackson , starring patricia roc , anthony steel , moira lister & a.e . matthews – ( u.k . ) something to live for , directed by george stevens , starring joan fontaine and teresa wright son of paleface , directed by frank tashlin , starring bob hope , jane russell , roy rogers song of the sea ( o canto do mar ) , directed by alberto cavalcanti – ( brazil ) the sound barrier , directed by david lean , starring ralph richardson – ( gb ) springfield rifle , starring gary cooper and phyllis thaxter the star , starring bette davis and sterling hayden steel town , starring ann sheridan and john lund the steel trap , starring joseph cotten and teresa wright the stooge , starring dean martin and jerry lewis stop , you 're killing me , starring broderick crawford and claire trevor the story of will rogers , starring will rogers , jr . and jane wyman sudden fear , starring joan crawford , jack palance , gloria grahame . t . the hour of 13 , starring peter lawford the thief , starring ray milland this is cinerama , directed by merian c . cooper thunderbirds , starring john derek tico-tico no fubá , directed by adolfo celi – ( brazil ) totò a colori ( totò a colori ) , starring totò – ( italy ) toxi , directed by robert a . stemmle ( west germany ) trent 's last case , starring orson welles and michael wilding – ( gb ) the turning point , starring william holden , alexis smith , edmond o'brien two cents worth of hope ( due soldi di speranza ) – ( italy ) . u-v . umberto d . , directed by vittorio de sica – ( italy ) untamed frontier , starring joseph cotten and shelley winters la villa santo-sospir , short film directed by jean cocteau – ( france ) viva zapata ! , starring marlon brando and jean peters . w-z . we 're not married ! , starring ginger rogers , marilyn monroe , eve arden , paul douglas , eddie bracken , mitzi gaynor the white reindeer ( valkoinen peura ) – ( finland ) the white sheik ( lo sceicco bianco ) , directed by federico fellini – ( italy ) who goes there ! , starring nigel patrick and valerie hobson – ( gb ) wide boy , starring sydney tafler and susan shaw – ( gb ) the wild north , starring stewart granger and cyd charisse wings of danger , directed by terence fisher , starring zachary scott – ( gb ) the witch ( noita palaa elämään ) – ( finland ) with a song in my heart , starring susan hayward a woman without love ( una mujer sin amor ) , directed by luis buñuel – ( mexico ) the world in his arms , starring gregory peck , anthony quinn , ann blyth you for me , starring peter lawford , jane greer , gig young young man with ideas , starring glenn ford and ruth roman . film releases . january–march . february 7 - viva zapata ! february 13 - snow white and the seven dwarfs ( re-release ) february 22 5 fingers one big affair . april–june . may 2 - the narrow margin may 15 - outcast of the islands june 13 - no room for the groom june 26 - the story of robin hood and his merrie men . july–september . july 21 - one minute to zero july 23 - untamed frontier september 18 - o . henry 's full house . october–december . . serials . blackhawk , starring kirk alyn king of the congo , starring buster crabbe radar men from the moon , starring george d . wallace and aline towne son of geronimo starring clayton moore zombies of the stratosphere , starring judd holdren and leonard nimoy . short film series . mickey mouse ( 1928–1953 ) looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) donald duck ( 1936 ) - ( 1956 ) goofy ( 1939–1953 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1962 ) mighty mouse ( 1942–1955 ) chip and dale ( 1943–1956 ) droopy ( 1943–1958 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) . births . january 22 – ace vergel , filipino actor ( died 2007 ) february 4 – lisa eichhorn , american actress february 12 – simon maccorkindale , english actor ( died 2010 ) march 2 – laraine newman , american actress , voice actress , comedian and writer march 19 – harvey weinstein , american producer march 27 – kalju orro , estonian actor april 1 – annette o'toole , american actress april 6 – marilu henner , american actress april 10 – steven seagal , american actor & martial artist april 15 – glenn shadix , american actor ( died 2010 ) april 16 – billy west , american voice actor , musician , singer and songwriter april 17 - joe alaskey , american stand-up comedian , actor , voice artist , and impressionist ( died 2016 ) april 28 – mary mcdonnell , american actress may 2 – christine baranski , american actress may 6 – gregg henry , american actor & musician may 11 – frances fisher , british-born american actress may 14 – robert zemeckis , american director may 15 – chazz palminteri , american actor may 21 - mr . t , american actor , bodyguard , television personality and retired professional wrestler june 7 – liam neeson , northern irish actor june 18 carol kane , american actress isabella rossellini , italian actress june 20 – john goodman , american actor july 1 dan aykroyd , canadian actor & comedian brian george , israeli-english actor , voice artist , comedian and singer july 11 – stephen lang , american actor july 15 – terry o'quinn , american actor july 20 – adrian biddle , english cinematographer ( died 2005 ) july 24 – gus van sant , american director august 10 daniel hugh kelly , american actor diane venora , american actress august 18 – patrick swayze , american actor & dancer ( died 2009 ) august 26 – michael jeter , american actor ( died 2003 ) august 27 - paul reubens , american actor , comedian , writer and producer september 4 – rishi kapoor , indian actor ( died 2020 ) september 24 – christopher reeve , american actor ( died 2004 ) october 22 – jeff goldblum , american actor october 27 – roberto benigni , italian actor october 28 – annie potts , american actress november 3 roseanne barr , american actress and stand-up comedian jim cummings , american voice actor november 8 – alfre woodard , american actress november 14 - bill farmer , american voice actor and comedian november 15 - randy savage , american professional wrestler , commentator , actor , rapper and professional baseball player ( died 2011 ) november 24 – ulrich seidl , austrian director november 30 – mandy pantinkin , american actor december 12 – sarah douglas , english actress december 20 – jenny agutter , english actress december 29 – külliki saldre , estonian actress . deaths . january 18 – curly howard , comedian ( born 1903 ) , the three stooges january 25 – polly moran , actress ( born 1883 ) , chasing rainbows , adam 's rib march 1 – gregory la cava , director ( born 1892 ) , my man godfrey , stage door march 26 – j . p . mcgowan , director ( born 1880 ) , where the west begins , tarzan and the golden lion april 21 – leslie banks , actor ( born 1890 ) , the most dangerous game , jamaica inn may 21 – john garfield , actor ( born 1913 ) , body and soul , nobody lives forever , gentleman 's agreement may 8 – william fox , movie executive ( born 1879 ) , 7th heaven may 26 – richard rober , actor ( born 1910 ) , the well , the file on thelma jordon june 27 – elmo lincoln , actor ( born 1889 ) , tarzan of the apes , the adventures of tarzan july 6 – gertrud wolle , actress ( born 1891 ) , the hound of the baskervilles august 18 – ralph byrd , actor ( born 1909 ) , dick tracy 's dilemma , the vigilante august 28 – lamar trotti , screenwriter ( born 1900 ) , the ox-bow incident , cheaper by the dozen september 7 – gertrude lawrence , actress ( born 1898 ) , rembrandt , the glass menagerie october 11 – jack conway , director ( born 1888 ) , boom town , libeled lady , viva villa ! october 17 – julia dean , stage and screen actress ( born 1878 ) , a society exile , the curse of the cat people october 20 – basil radford , actor ( born 1887 ) , actor , crook 's tour , the galloping major october 23 – susan peters , actress ( born 1921 ) , song of russia , random harvest october 26 – hattie mcdaniel , actress ( born 1895 ) , gone with the wind , saratoga november 1 – dixie lee , actress ( born 1912 ) , manhattan love song , love in bloom november 6 – george h . reed , actor , ( born 1866 ) , huckleberry finn , green pastures . film debuts . anne bancroft – do n't bother to knock brigitte bardot – crazy for love geraldine chaplin – limelight george hamilton – lone star earl holliman – pony soldier julie harris – the member of the wedding carolyn jones – the turning point . notes . references .