Jingo (novel)

plot . with the opening of the novel , the island of leshp , which had been submerged under the circle sea for centuries , rises to the surface . its position , exactly halfway between ankh-morpork and al khali ( the capital of klatch ) , makes the island a powerful strategical point for whoever lays claim to it , which both cities do . in ankh-morpork , a klatchian prince named khufurah is parading through ankh-morpork , where he will be presented with a degree in sweet fanny adams ( doctorum adamus cum flabello dulci ) , but an assassination attempt occurs , and the prince is wounded . sam vimes , commander of the ankh-morpork city watch , begins investigating the crime , originally suspecting both a klatchian named 71-hour ahmed and a senior morporkian peer , lord rust , of being involved . the attempted assassination breaks off relations between ankh-morpork and klatch as prince khufurah 's brother , prince cadram , effectively declares war on the city of ankh-morpork . at this point , havelock vetinari , patrician of ankh-morpork , resigns—apparently of his own free will—and lord rust takes command of the city . vetinari has refused to become involved in the war with klatch , due to the fact ankh-morpork does not have an army to stand against any opposing forces ( the reason given being that killing enemy soldiers makes it difficult to sell them things afterwards ) , but rust declares martial law and orders the city 's noble families to revive their old private regiments . vimes , refusing to follow rust , stands down as commander of the watch . captain carrot resigns as well , as do sergeant colon , sergeant detritus and corporal angua . the idea of putting the watch under the command of corporal nobbs is rejected by the ruling council of guild leaders and the watch is disbanded . vimes then recruits the watch into his own private army regiment , reasoning that , as an official noble , he is entitled to do so by law and by lord rust 's command , with the group remaining independent as knights legally fall under command of the king or his duly appointed representatives , neither of which exist in ankh-morpork . angua , following 71-hour ahmed , is captured by the klatchians and taken to klatch . carrot , rather than rush off to save her , reports back to vimes , who gets his private army to head for klatch . meanwhile , nobby and sergeant colon have been recruited by vetinari and his pet inventor , leonard of quirm , on a secret mission of their own , unknown to vimes . vetinari , leonard of quirm , colon , and nobby end up in leonard 's '' submarine '' and discover that leshp is actually floating on top of a huge bubble of gas , and that the gas is escaping from said bubble , meaning that leshp will , ultimately , sink back under the sea again . vimes catches up with 71-hour ahmed and has , by this time , figured out that ahmed is a fellow policeman . ahmed tells vimes that prince cadram was responsible for the assassination attempt on prince khufurah . ahmed and his band of klatchian d'regs and vimes ' army head towards gebra , in klatch , where the war is due to start . to help blend in , vetinari , nobby and fred colon get hold of some cassock , though nobby ends up wearing the costume of a belly dancer and gets in touch with his feminine side . the three also head to gebra . arriving at gebra they discover that carrot has convinced the two armies to get together and play a game of soccer ( he has an inflatable football in his backpack for just such an emergency ) , vimes is preparing to arrest both klatchian prince cadram and lord rust for various breach of the peace ( such as being prepared for war ) and 71-hour ahmed is supporting him . vetinari prevents an international incident by ostensibly declaring the surrender of ankh-morpork and offering war reparations . to be ratified on leshp in one week . vetinari is returned to ankh-morpork , under arrest and in disgrace , but as leshp has vanished back under the sea again , the treaty was to be signed in a non-existent territory and thus the charge of treason is invalid . seeing he has been tricked , and with the people and generals turning against him , prince cadram flees , with 71-hour ahmed in pursuit . his brother khufurah recovers and resumes control of klatch . vimes is informed by carrot that vetinari has been '' reminded '' that the old rank of commander was the same as the old rank of duke . he objects , claiming that only a king can make a duke , but then realises that carrot was speaking to vetinari . since carrot is , of course , very much not the king of ankh-morpork his reminding of vetinari is all that is required for vimes to get his new position and rank . vimes '' accidentally '' loses his '' dis-pda '' ( given to him by his wife ) which kept giving him incorrect information . it is explained that , had vimes reacted slightly differently in the beginning—staying in ankh-morpork rather than attempting to follow ahmed and rescue angua—the whole history of the ankh-morpork v . klatch war would have gone very differently . reception . in interzone , john clute described jingo as fitting '' seamlessly '' into the discworld , commenting that it does not '' dishonour its predecessors in the series '' and '' is in fact better than most of them '' . clute also compared pratchett 's writing to that of p . g . wodehouse , and noted the presence of '' totemic moments '' , and of several scenes which he felt to be '' homilies '' . been bondage done that , by john clute , originally published in interzone 126 ( december 1997 ) ; archived in '' scores '' , by john clute ; published november 24 , 2016 by orion publishing group escape pod stated that a significant portion of the plot is '' vimes subverting the status quo in ways that should n't work , but somehow do anyway '' . '' book review : 'snuff ' by terry pratchett '' , at escape pod ; published november 5 , 2011 ; retrieved june 30 , 2017 the sf site ranked it '' above feet of clay but not quite as good as guards ! guards ! '' , considering that '' ( t ) he story stumbles a bit , especially once the action moves to klatch , and there are ( a ) few nitpicky things here and there '' , but concluding that it is nonetheless '' a fine addition '' to the discworld . jingo , reviewed by todd richmond , at the sf site ; published 1998 ; retrieved june 30 , 2017 . references . external links . annotations for jingo quotes from jingo