Montel Williams

early life and education . born in baltimore , maryland , on july 3 , 1956 , williams attended andover high school in neighboring linthicum , maryland , where he was elected president of his class in both his junior and senior years . he was a good student , athlete , and musician , and he was active in countywide student government issues in annapolis , maryland . the official montel williams site . montelwilliams.com . retrieved on 2013-01-07 . williams was raised as a catholicism and served as an altar boy from age 8 until an altercation with a priest when he was 11 . he frequently visited his sister , who lives in westminster , maryland . montel 's father , herman williams jr . , was a firefighter who in 1992 became baltimore 's first african american fire chief . . career . military . williams enlisted in the united states marine corps in 1974 . he completed the one-year naval academy preparatory school course and was accepted to the four-year officer training program at the u.s . naval academy . he graduated in 1980 with a degree in general engineering and a minor in international security affairs . he completed naval cryptologic officer training , and spent 18 months in guam as a cryptologic officer for naval intelligence . he was later supervising cryptologic officer with the naval security fleet support division at fort meade , maryland . he left the navy at the rank of lieutenant commander . his awards include the meritorious service medal , navy commendation medal , and the navy achievement medal . . the montel williams show . williams began the montel williams show ( syndicated by cbs paramount television ) in 1991 . in 1996 williams received a daytime emmy award for outstanding talk show host . ratings for the show peaked during the 1996–97 season , with a 4.4 average rating . he was again nominated for outstanding talk show host in 2002 , and the montel williams show was nominated for outstanding talk show in 2001 and 2002 . on january 30 , 2008 , variety reported that cbs tv distribution had terminated the montel williams show when key fox-owned stations chose not to renew it for the 2008–09 season . littleton , cynthia . ( 2008-01-30 ) variety & nbsp ; – montel williams calls it quits . variety.com . retrieved on 2013-01-07 . on may 16 , 2008 the last episode of the montel williams show aired . montel williams & nbsp ; – bonus videos . montelshow.com . retrieved on 2013-01-07 . speculation followed the end of the montel williams show , which was cancelled immediately after williams criticized mainstream news media 's preference for stories about hollywood stars over those about military personnel and events . commentators felt his statements may have alienated the fox tv network . on november 10 , 2010 , oprah winfrey invited williams , along with former talk show hosts phil donahue , geraldo rivera , ricki lake , and sally jessy raphael as guests on her show . this was the first time that the fellow talkers had appeared together since their programs left the air . from donahue , sally jessy , geraldo , montel , ricki : talk show hosts—where are they now ? . oprah.com ( 2010-11-10 ) . retrieved on 2013-01-07 . williams work has been criticized by the independent investigations group , which declared the montel williams show to be noteworthy truly terrible television with its satirical tttv award ( for similar reasons , awarded to '' every episode featuring sylvia browne '' ) . controversial self-declared psychic sylvia browne featured frequently on the montel williams show from 1991 until its finale in 2008 . williams described browne as '' the most-appearing guest on a talk show in the history of television '' and '' the longest-running guest in daytime television '' , and her appearances included particularly controversial incidents relating to kidnap victims shawn hornbeck and amanda berry . williams was criticized for allowing his high-profile show to serve as a channel for browne , notably by fellow retired military officer hal bidlack , with bidlack publicly asking , '' commander williams , have you lost your honor ? '' in february 2019 , an episode of last week tonight with john oliver featured a segment on television psychics and williams 's association with browne was criticized . imdb , last week tonight , . acting . williams has also guest-starred in episodic television and off-broadway plays . among other roles , he portrayed a navy seal , lieutenant curtis rivers , in three episodes of the television series jag . he also produced and starred in a short-lived television series called matt waters , which appeared on cbs in 1996 . he played an ex-navy seal turned inner-city high school teacher . in 1997 he played lt col northrop , a usaf nuclear missile silo commander , in the fictional movie the peacekeeper . in 2002 , he played the judge presiding over erica kane 's ( susan lucci ) murder trial on the abc soap opera all my children . in 2003 he made a guest appearance on the soap as himself to promote an episode of his own show on which several amc stars were scheduled to appear . in 2004 he hosted american candidate , a political reality show on showtime . williams has also guest-starred on the new adventures of robin hood and guiding light . williams also appeared in a perry mason movie in 1993 titled the case of the telltale talk show host . his character , boomer kelly , was a former football player who was appearing on a radio talk show whose owner was found murdered . he was also a voice actor in 2008 in the political satire film war , inc . , providing the voice of the main character 's gps tracking device/counselor . on october 1 , 2019 , williams appeared in an episode of the fox drama the resident entitled , '' flesh of my flesh '' . williams played himself , as a tv personality covering a nearly impossible cancer surgery being performed on an adoptive mother of seven . production . williams produced and narrated the starline films documentary film 4chosen : the documentary , which tells the story about the new jersey turnpike shooting in 1998 , and the racial profiling case that followed the incident . starline films . starline films . retrieved on 2013-01-07 . 4chosen : the documentary ( 2008 ) . imdb.com in 1999 , williams directed the film , little pieces , starring grace morley and amy acton . . spokesman . williams is a national spokesman of the partnership for prescription assistance ( ppa ) , a patient assistance program clearinghouse that helps low-income patients apply for free or reduced-price prescription drugs . on november 30 , 2007 , while in savannah , georgia , to promote ppa , he threatened reporters following an earlier interview at which courtney scott , a 17-year-old high school intern reporter for the savannah morning news , had asked him whether restriction of pharmaceutical profits would discourage research and development of new drugs . angered by the question , williams subsequently terminated that videotaped interview ; williams later ran into scott in his hotel and threatened to '' blow her up '' . montel threatens to 'blow up ' teen reporter msnbc.com , december 2 , 2007 williams 's public relations representatives later apologized for his hostile outburst in an issued statement : '' i mistakenly thought the reporter and photographer in question were at the hotel to confront me about some earlier comments . i was wrong , and i apologize for my overreaction . '' in 2010 williams became chief spokesman for the poker training network , now card geniuses , a mlm-based poker instruction and playing website . payday loan controversy . williams is a paid spokesperson for moneymutual , a lead generator for a payday loan . in early 2015 , a controversy around this position erupted when an education activist , andré-tascha lammé , accused williams on twitter of supporting a company that harms african-american consumers . williams denied the allegations , stating that lammé was fundamentally incorrect in his assessment of the loans and their terms . the new york state department of financial services then investigated the claims and benjamin lawsky issued a statement on march 10 that it '' made no finding of a violation of law by mr . williams . '' he added that the department had found that '' using mr . williams 's reputation as a trusted celebrity endorser , moneymutual marketed loans to struggling consumers with sky-high interest rates - sometimes in excess of 1,300 percent . '' sellingsource , the parent company , was fined 2.1 million and ordered to stop advertising to new yorkers . . campaigning . : see also veterans health administration scandal of 2014 williams is an outspoken advocate for us military veterans . he has publicly lobbied for government action to promptly resolve the veterans affairs scandal calling for a surge in effort under the banner vasurge , and has promoted a white house petition to this effect . williams ' campaign to reform the va began with an impromptu speech to veterans at a picnic that was recorded by the local newspaper . several days later , he authored an op-ed laying out his plan to reform the va . . other work . on april 6 , 2009 , williams began hosting a daily radio show , montel across america , on air america media . montel williams to host radio show yahoo news , march 13 , 2009 on january 21 , 2010 , air america ceased broadcasting , leaving williams without a radio outlet . air america flies away for good the a.v . club ( 2010-01-21 ) . as of may 2009 , he started hosting an infomercial for the living well healthmaster , a blender product . it is presented under the title living well with montel ; the infomercial is structured similarly to his old talk show , featuring guests talking about their health problems , with the healthmaster mixer being the solution . later episodes of living well with montel advertised a home pressure cooker and an identity theft protection service . in june 2010 , williams began doing infomercials for lifelock , a security fraud company . media spots living well montel . lifelock ( 2010-07-28 ) . retrieved on 2013-01-07 . on october 1 , 2014 , williams spoke in front of a congressional committee in support of andrew tahmooressi , who was arrested in tijuana , baja california , for carrying guns across the u.s.-mexican border . williams was once a republican , leaving the political party in 1993 . he is a supporter of lgbt rights . he has since left the republican party and has been registered as an independent . he endorsed hillary clinton for president as the superior choice , writing that donald trump posed a '' clear and present danger '' to the nation . . cbd oil . williams has marketed cannabidiol ( also known as cbd oil ) products . montel stated to forbes '' that he spent years working to develop medicinal-quality cbd to treat his own multiple sclerosis '' . . personal life . williams has two daughters , ashley williams ( b . 1984 ) and maressa williams ( b . 1988 ) , with his first wife , rochele see . williams married grace morley , a burlesque dancer on june 6 , 1992 . they have a son , montel brian hank williams ( b . 1993 ) , and a daughter , wyntergrace williams ( b . 1994 ) . the couple divorced in 2000 . in 2001 , williams briefly dated now vice president of the united states , kamala harris . addressing the relationship , williams said , '' kamala harris and i briefly dated about 20 years ago when we were both single . so what ? i have great respect for sen . harris . '' in july 2006 , williams proposed to girlfriend tara fowler , an american airlines flight attendant . they married before friends and family on a beach in bermuda on october 6 , 2007 . montel williams marries & nbsp ; – weddings , montel williams . people.com . retrieved on 2013-01-07 . williams participated in the 2007 world series of poker main event , and planned to donate any potential winnings to american families affected by the iraq war . he was eliminated in day 2 . during the event williams also spoke out about the port security bill signed in 2006 that banned online gaming sites from accepting money transactions from the u.s . four months after making a guest appearance in an episode of touched by an angel , williams was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in 1999 . in the following year , williams created the ms foundation , a nonprofit organization with a focus on research and education . williams has openly stated that he uses medical cannabis , stating it helps to ease his multiple sclerosis-caused neuropathic pain . williams has become a vocal advocate of cannabis , supporting efforts to pass medical cannabis laws in states , as well as calling for full legalization . he has also said that snowboarding is his '' best therapy '' for multiple sclerosis , commenting that '' when i stand up i need first to hold on to something and think about the positioning of my legs . if i were to just start walking i would fall . i have to get my brain to find my legs and then i will usually take a test step , but i say something at the time to anyone who might be watching to distract from what i 'm really doing . then i 'll find places to grab as i walk and talk , sometimes even walking backwards because i have more control that way . people have no idea that i 'm doing this . but when i 'm snowboarding and my feet are strapped in , my brain seems to have a direct connection to my legs . after snowboarding it 's night and day for my balance and walking . there 's a real physical change before i get up to the mountain and when i come down . the benefits last for days . '' williams was hospitalized on may 30 , 2018 , when he suffered a cerebellar hemorrhagic stroke while working out at a gym . . bibliography . . references . external links . montel media group living well with montel montel show website living well with montel health master pparx press release