Electric Image Animation System

history . electric image , inc . was initially a visual effects production company . they developed their own in-house 3d animation and rendering package for the macintosh beginning in the late 1980s , calling it electricimage animation system . ( to avoid confusion with the current product with its similar name , we will refer to this initial incarnation of the product simply as electricimage . ) when the company later decided to offer their software for sale externally , it quickly gained a customer base that lauded the developers for the software 's exceptionally fast rendering engine and high image quality . because it was capable of film-quality output on commodity hardware , electricimage was popular in the movie and television industries throughout the decade . it was used by the '' rebel unit '' at industrial light and magic quite extensively and was in use by a variety of game companies , such as bad mojo and bad day on the midway . however , only these high end effects companies could afford it : electric image initially sold for us 7500 . eias has been used in numerous film and television productions , such as : piranha 3d , alien trespass , pirates of the caribbean : the curse of the black pearl , daddy day care , k-19 : the widowmaker , gangs of new york , austin powers : goldmember , men in black ii , the bourne identity , behind enemy lines , time machine , ticker , jag - pilot episode , spawn , star trek : first contact , star trek : insurrection , galaxy quest , mission to mars , austin powers : the spy who shagged me , star wars episode 1 : the phantom menace , titan a.e . , u-571 , dinosaur , terminator 2 : judgement day , terminator 2 : judgement day - dvd intro , jungle book 2 , american president , sleepers , star wars special edition , empire strikes back special edition , return of jedi special edition , bicentennial man , vertical limit , elf , blade trinity , and lost in space . tv shows : revolution , breaking bad , alcatraz , pan am , the whole truth , lost , flash forward , fringe , surface , weeds , pushing daisies , the x-files , alias , smallville , star trek : the next generation , babylon 5 , young indiana jones , star trek voyager , mists of avalon , star trek enterprise . electric image , inc . was always a small company that produced software on the mac platform and so never had a large a market share . play , inc . purchased electric image corporation in november 1998 . the first version of eias released under the play moniker was version 2.9 . play later released the 3.0 version . this was the first version to run on windows , and to mark this move , play renamed the package electric image universe . play was never a greatly successful company , and so electric image universe stagnated during the time they owned it . in 2000 , dwight parscale ( former ceo of newtek ) and original electric image founders markus houy and jay roth bought back the original company from play inc . on september 19 , 2000 , the company bought back the shares of electric image from play and set about to recapture the product 's former customer base . the new company released version 4.0 and 5.0 under the electric image moniker . then due to a licensing problem with spatial technologies , they dropped the modeler program from the version 5.5 release , and renamed the package back to electric image animation system . versions 6.0 and 6.5 were subsequently released with vast improvements to the rendering engine and opengl performance . version 6.5r2 added fbx file importing capability . 6.6 added universal binary support and finally drops support for mac os 9 . version 7.0 brought multi-layer rendering , image-based lighting , raytrace sky maps and rigid body dynamics . the version , 8.0 , added photon mapping , fast soft shadows , area light , quadratic light drop-off , exr and 16bit image input support , displacement sea level , new weight maps tools , much workflow enhancement and renderama improvements . in 2009 , eitg began negotiations to sell the intellectual property rights of electricimage . on january 12 , 2010 it was announced that tomas egger , igor yatsenko , and igor ivaniuk had become the new owners of eias . known collectively as '' the igors '' , igor yatsenko and igor ivaniuk had been eias 's primary software developers for many years . they released version 9.0 in november 2012 , followed by version 9.1 in june 2013 . market positioning . the existing customer base for eias favors it for its fast renderer , its high output quality , and its camera mapping features . the tool set lends itself particularly well to hard-surface animation/rendering and other forms of non-organic tasks . it is most popular with architects and visual effects artists for tv and film . eias 's primary competitors in the integrated 3d package space are autodesk with maya , 3d studio max and softimage , maxon with cinema 4d , and newtek with lightwave 3d . components . the electric image animation system is not a single program , but rather a suite of several programs designed to work together . each of the primary programs handles a particular part of the production workflow : . animator . animator is the eias animation program . it can directly import 3d models in the lightwave , 3d studio , autocad , maya , and electric image fact formats . in addition to animating models , animator allows you to set up rendering settings . it efficiently supports the animation of very geometrically complex projects . camera . camera is the eias rendering program , known for its speed and high image quality . as of version 9.0 , it supports ray tracing , phong shading , scanline rendering , spatial anti-aliasing , motion blur , caustics , radiosity , photon mapping , irradiance cache , screen cache and global illumination . camera outputs to several file formats , like quicktime and ei 's own image format . the latter is directly supported by adobe after effects cc and adobe photoshop cc . renderama . renderama and renderama slave compose eias 's distributed network rendering system . it allows for the rendering of a project to be distributed over a network 's computers ( i.e . , for the formation of a render farm ) . it supports both single and multiprocessor computers , taking advantage of all available processors to distribute the workload . it also supports rendering across platforms ( e.g . , windows 7/8 - 64 bits and mac os x 10.6.8 or earlier ) . modeler . modeler saves its files in electric image 's '' fact '' file format for importing into animator ( see above ) . it supports acis modeling , '' übernurbs '' ( eias ' subdivision surfaces modeling technology ) , laws ( based on parametric formulas ) as well as boolean operations and other modern modeling tools . modeler last shipped in electric image universe 5.0 . as a result , users of eias 5.5 and newer use a third-party modeler instead . as of this writing , electric image recommends nevercenter silo for this purpose . form-z from auto•des•sys is also popularly used as a companion for eias . references . external links . eias3d forum website eias benchmarks - eias camera & renderama benchmark database third-party plugin vendors : northern lights productions website konkeptoine website 3dmation website onyx tree website