Guiseley

etymology . the name of guiseley is first attested in an eleventh-century copy of a charter from around 972 , as gislicleh ; it next appears in the domesday book of 1086 as gisele and similar variants . the early spelling suggests that the first element of the name is an old english personal name gīslic . no such name is otherwise attested , but it is a plausible nickname form of names beginning in gīsl- , such as gīslbeorht . the second element comes from the old english word lēah ( 'open land in woodland ' ) . thus the name seems once to have meant 'gīslic 's clearing' . parsons , edward ( 1834 ) ; the civil , ecclesiastical history of leeds , halifax , huddersfield and the manufacturing district of yorkshire , p . 217 . harry parkin , your city 's place-names : leeds , english place-name society city-names series , 3 ( nottingham : english place-names society , 2017 ) , p . 50 . . history . there have been stone age and bronze age finds in guiseley and a roman road , road 72b , ran nearby on guiseley moor . a saxon settlement existed around a spring which is now called guiseley wells and provided drinking water . it was a largely farming community until the 18th century , when cottage-based woollen industry arose . in victorian times it became industrialized , acquiring a railway connection in 1865 and a town hall ( now the theatre ) in 1867 . guiseley was an ancient parish in the west riding of yorkshire from the 12th century . the parish also included the townships of carlton , horsforth , rawdon and yeadon , all of which became separate civil parishes in 1866 . in 1937 the civil parish of guiseley was abolished and merged into the new aireborough urban district . vision of britain website in 1974 aireborough was itself abolished and absorbed into the city of leeds metropolitan district in the new county of west yorkshire . st oswald 's church . guiseley 's church , dedicated to st oswald , was the centre of a large parish that included many surrounding villages . it was used by generations of the longfellow family . henry wadsworth longfellow 's 5th great-grandfather left here for the new world in the 17th & nbsp ; century . the rector of st oswald 's for several decades was rev . robert more ( died in 1642 ) , the father-in-law of the english explorer , captain christopher levett . will of rev . robert more , christopher levett of york : the pioneer colonist in casco bay , james phinney baxter , printed for the gorges society , vol . 5 , portland , maine , 1893 patrick brontë and maria branwell were married at st oswald 's and became the parents of six children , including anne , branwell , charlotte and emily brontë . business . crompton parkinson was a major employer until its factory closed in 2004 . the town was the home of silver cross , a pram manufacturer , whose factory was operational from 1936 to 2002 . the town is known for harry ramsden , whose fish and chips traded from a small shed next to the tram terminus at white cross . in 1930 he opened '' the world 's biggest fish and chip shop '' . the original restaurant was closed in december 2011 . the wetherby whaler group purchased the site and planned a £500,000 refurbishment to open during the summer of 2012 . the new wetherby whaler restaurant opened on 22 may 2012 . amenities . guiseley has two retail parks : guiseley retail park in the centre of town , and westside retail park between guiseley and yeadon . the town has a morrisons supermarket , charity shops and beauty stores on the high street , as well as many pubs , bars , takeaways and restaurants located around the town and a leisure centre with swimming pool and gym on the green . many of the retail outlets in the town have been established on the converted sites of old factories or mills . recently , an increasing number of stores of well known leading brands such as argos , tk maxx , marks & spencer , asda living , currys , costa coffee , next and sports direct have been opened in the area . mcdonald 's , kfc and subway all have stores in the town . places of worship . in addition to st oswald 's there is also guiseley methodist church and guiseley baptist church which was built in 1883 on oxford road in the old town , and the kingdom hall of jehovah 's witnesses on otley road . file : guiseley methodist church - oxford road - geograph.org.uk - 689029.jpg guiseley methodist church file : baptist chapel , oxford road , guiseley - geograph.org.uk - 340107.jpg guiseley baptist church . sports and recreation . guiseley 's professional football team , guiseley a.f.c . , play at nethermoor park . they played in the conference north during the 2014–15 season , gaining promotion to the conference premier through the playoffs . guiseley cricket club shares the club house and plays in the airedale-wharfedale senior cricket league . aireborough rufc play at nunroyd park . local philanthropist jonathan peate gave nethermoor park ( guiseley ) and nunroyd park ( between yeadon and guiseley ) to local people in the early 20th century . two other parks were regenerated in 2011/12 , springfield road and parkinson 's park . parkinson 's park was given to guiseley in the 1930s by frank and albert parkinson . by 2002 it had become an wasteland with frequent occurrences of antisocial behaviour . it is now owned by bellway homes , and its rehabilitation is supported by the friends of parkinson 's park . guiseley is also home to england athletics registered running club airecentre pacers . . schools . guiseley school on fieldhead road was built as a secondary modern in the 1960s and is sometimes known as fieldhead school . aireborough grammar school opened in 1910 and closed in 1991 . primary schools include tranmere park school and st . oswald 's c of e school . . notable people . harry corbett , known for his children 's television glove puppet character sooty stage act , lived with his parents , who owned a fish and chip shop on springfield road . mcintyre , annette ; '' guiseley chip shop wraps up place in tv show '' , gazette & observer , 30 april 2008 . retrieved 11 june 2008 tasmin archer , whose co-written song '' sleeping satellite '' reached number one in the uk charts , and maurice lee of the grumbleweeds lived in the town . . geography . guiseley is situated in a hanging valley between airedale and wharfedale . the a65 road passes through , there is a railway station and leeds bradford airport is nearby . see also . listed buildings in guiseley and rawdon . references . external links . guiseley on the net guisely baptist church website guiseley school website . further reading . guiseley conservation area appraisal and management plan