Victor Talking Machine Company

nipper . victor had acquired the pan-american rights to use the now famous trademark of the fox terrier nipper quizzically listening to a gramophone when berliner and johnson affiliated their fledgling companies . ( see also his master 's voice . ) the original painting was an oil on canvas by francis barraud in 1898 . barraud 's deceased brother , a london photographer , willed him his estate including his dc-powered edison-bell cylinder phonograph with a case of cylinders and his dog nipper . barraud 's original painting depicts nipper staring intently into the horn of an edison-bell while both sit on a polished wooden surface . the horn on the edison-bell machine was black and after a failed attempt at selling the painting to a cylinder record supplier of edison phonographs in the uk , a friend of barraud 's suggested that the painting could be brightened up ( and possibly made more marketable ) by substituting one of the brass-belled horns on display in the window at the new gramophone shop on maiden lane . the gramophone company in london was founded and managed by an american , william barry owen . barraud paid a visit with a photograph of the painting and asked to borrow a horn . owen gave barraud an entire gramophone and asked him to paint it into the picture , offering to buy the result . on close inspection , the original painting still shows the contours of the edison-bell phonograph beneath the paint of the gramophone . dozens of copies of '' his master 's voice '' were painted by barraud , several of them commissioned for executives of the gramophone company and victor , though barraud apparently would paint copies for anybody who paid him for one . the original painting is in the archives of emi records ( successor to the gramophone company in the uk ) , now owned by universal music group . in 1915 , the '' his master 's voice '' logo was rendered in immense circular leaded-glass windows in the tower of the nipper building at victor 's headquarters in camden , new jersey . the building still stands today with replica windows installed during rca 's ownership of the plant in its later years . today , one of the original windows is located at the smithsonian museum in washington , d.c . . name . there are different accounts as to how the '' victor '' name came about . rca historian fred barnum gives various possible origins of the name in '' his master 's voice '' in america , he writes , '' one story claims that johnson considered his first improved gramophone to be both a scientific and business 'victory . ' a second account is that johnson emerged as the 'victor ' from the lengthy and costly patent litigations involving berliner and frank seaman 's zonophone . a third story is that johnson 's partner , leon douglass , derived the word from his wife 's name 'victoria . ' finally , a fourth story is that johnson took the name from the popular 'victor ' bicycle , which he had admired for its superior engineering . of these four accounts the first two are the most generally accepted . '' barnum , fred , '' 'his master 's voice ' in america '' , general electric co , 1991 . , perhaps coincidentally , the first use of the victor title on a letterhead , on march 28 , 1901 , the talking machine review international , ernie bayly © 1973 the gramophone company limited was only nine weeks after the death of british queen victoria . acoustical recording era . before 1925 , recording was done by the same purely mechanical , non-electronic '' acoustical '' method used since the invention of the phonograph nearly fifty years earlier . no microphone was involved and there was no means of electrical amplification . the recording machine was essentially an exposed-horn acoustical record player functioning in reverse . one or more funnel-like metal horns was used to concentrate the energy of the airborne sound waves onto a recording diaphragm , which was a thin glass disc about two inches in diameter held in place by rubber gaskets at its perimeter . the sound-vibrated center of the diaphragm was linked to a cutting stylus that was guided across the surface of a very thick wax disc , engraving a sound-modulated groove into its surface . the wax was too soft to be played back even once without seriously damaging it , although test recordings were sometimes made and sacrificed by playing them back immediately . the wax master disc was sent to a processing plant where it was electroplated to create a negative metal '' stamper '' used to mould or '' press '' durable replicas of the recording from heated '' biscuits '' of a shellac-based compound . although sound quality was gradually improved by a series of small refinements , the process was inherently insensitive . it could only record sources of sound that were very close to the recording horn or very loud , and even then the high-frequency overtones and sibilants necessary for clear , detailed sound reproduction were too feeble to register above the background noise . resonances in the recording horns and associated components resulted in a characteristic '' horn sound '' that immediately identifies an acoustical recording to an experienced modern listener and seemed inseparable from '' phonograph music '' to contemporary listeners . from the start , victor innovated manufacturing processes and soon rose to pre-eminence by recording famous performers . in 1903 , it instituted a three-step mother-stamper process to produce more stampers than previously possible . after improving the quality of disc records and players , johnson began an ambitious project to have the most prestigious singers and musicians of the day record for victor , with exclusive agreements where possible . even if these artists demanded high fees or royalty advances which the company could not hope to immediately make up from the sales of their records , johnson shrewdly knew that he would get his money 's worth in the long run in promotion of the victor brand name . these new celebrity recordings bore red labels , and were marketed as red seal records . for many years , victor red seal records were only available single-sided : not until 1923 did victor begin offering red seals in more economical double-sided form . countless advertisements were published , praising the renowned stars of the opera and concert stages and boasting that they recorded only for victor . as johnson intended , the majority of the record-buying public assumed from all this that victor records must be superior . in the company 's early years , victor issued recordings on the victor , monarch and de luxe labels , with the victor label on 7-inch records , monarch on 10-inch records and de luxe on 12-inch records . de luxe special 14-inch records were briefly marketed in 1903–1904 . in 1905 , all labels and sizes were consolidated into the victor imprint . the victor recordings made by world-famous tenor enrico caruso between 1904 and 1920 were particularly successful and were often used by retailers to demonstrate victor phonographs ; caruso 's powerful voice and unusual timbre highlighted the best range of audio fidelity of the early audio technology while being minimally affected by its defects . even people who otherwise never listened to opera often owned a record or two of the great voice of caruso . victor recorded numerous classical musicians , including jascha heifetz , fritz kreisler , victor herbert , ignacy jan paderewski and sergei rachmaninoff in recordings at its home studios in camden , new jersey and in new york . rachmaninoff , in particular , became one of the first composer-performers to record extensively ; he recorded exclusively for victor from 1920 to 1942 . arturo toscanini 's long association with victor also began in 1920 , with a series of records conducting members of the orchestra of the la scala opera house of milan . he recorded for the company until his retirement in 1954 . the first jazz and blues records were recorded by the victor talking machine company . the victor military band recorded the first recorded blues song , '' the memphis blues '' , on july 15 , 1914 in camden , new jersey . in 1917 , the original dixieland jazz band recorded '' livery stable blues '' , and established jazz as popular music . electrical recording era . the advent of radio as a home entertainment medium in the early 1920s presented victor and the entire record industry with new challenges . not only was music becoming available over the air free of charge , but a live broadcast made using a high-quality microphone and heard over a high-quality receiver provided clearer , more '' natural '' sound than a contemporary record . in 1925 , victor switched from the acoustical or mechanical method of recording to the new microphone-based electrical system developed by western electric . victor called its version of the improved fidelity recording process '' orthophonic '' , and sold a new line of record players , called '' orthophonic victrolas '' , scientifically designed to play these improved records . victor 's first electrical recordings were made and issued in the spring of 1925 . however , in order to create sufficient catalogs of them to satisfy anticipated demand , and to allow dealers time to liquidate their stocks of acoustical recordings , victor and its rival , columbia , agreed to keep secret from the public , until near the end of 1925 , the fact that they were making the new electrical recordings which offered a vast improvement over the ones currently available . then , with a large advertising campaign , victor openly announced the new technology and introduced its orthophonic victrolas on '' victor day '' , november 2 , 1925 . victor 's first commercial electrical recording was made at the company 's camden , new jersey studios on february 26 , 1925 . a group of eight popular victor artists , billy murray , frank banta , henry burr , albert campbell , frank croxton , john meyer , monroe silver , and rudy wiedoeft gathered to record '' a miniature concert '' . several takes were recorded by the old acoustical process , then additional takes were recorded electrically for test purposes . the electrical recordings turned out well , and victor issued the results that summer as the two sides of twelve inch 78 & nbsp ; rpm record victor 35753 . victor 's first electrical recording to be issued was victor 19626 , a ten inch disc consisting of two numbers recorded on march 16 , 1925 from the university of pennsylvania 's thirty-seventh annual production of the mask and wig club , issued in april , 1925 . on march 21 , 1925 , victor recorded its first electrical red seal disc , twelve inch 6502 by pianist alfred cortot , of pieces by chopin and schubert . victor recording book log , pp . 4761 and 4761a . victor quickly recorded the philadelphia orchestra conducted by stokowski in a series at its camden , new jersey studios and then in philadelphia 's academy of music . among stokowski 's first electrical recordings were performances of danse macabre by camille saint-saëns and marche slave by pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky . frederick stock and the chicago symphony orchestra made a series of recordings for victor , beginning in 1925 , first in victor 's chicago studios and then in orchestra hall . the san francisco symphony orchestra conducted by alfred hertz made a few acoustical recordings early in 1925 , then switched to electrical recordings in oakland and san francisco , california , continuing until 1928 . within a few years , serge koussevitzky began a long series of recordings with the boston symphony orchestra in boston 's symphony hall . toscanini made his first victor electrical recordings with the new york philharmonic orchestra in november , 1929 . the origins of country music as we know it today can be traced to two seminal influences and a remarkable coincidence . jimmie rodgers and the carter family are considered the founders of country music and their songs were first captured at an historic recording session in bristol , tennessee ( also known as the bristol sessions ) on august 1 , 1927 , where ralph peer was the talent scout and recording engineer for victor . acquisition by radio corporation of america . in 1926 , johnson sold his controlling ( but not holding ) interest in the victor company to the banking firms of jw seligman and speyer & co . , who in turn sold victor to the radio corporation of america in 1929 . it then became known briefly as the radio-victor division of the radio corporation of america , then the rca manufacturing company , the rca victor division and in 1968 , rca records . most record labels continued to bear only the '' victor '' name until 1946 , when the labels changed to '' rca victor '' and eventually , to simply '' rca '' in late 1968 , '' victor '' becoming the label designation for rca 's popular music releases . ( see rca and rca records for later history of the victor brand name . ) . subsidiaries , partners , and plants . johnson and many victor executives became extremely wealthy by the 1920s and in doing so were able to expand victor 's markets outside of the original camden , nj base of operations . having established a hand-shake agreement with emile berliner in forming the victor talking machine co , berliner was sent from the united states to manage the remaining holdings of the gramophone company ( a company in which victor owned a significant portion in part due to patent pooling agreements , and victor 's success in its first two decades ) . eventually , this meant that victor ( in addition to owning studios , offices , and plants in camden , new york city , los angeles , oakland , chicago , montreal , mexico city and south america ) also owned controlling interests in the gramophone company in england , as well as the deutsche gramophone co . in europe . soon , victor formed the victor company of japan ( jvc ) , founded in 1927 . as radio corporation of america acquired victor , the gramophone co . in england became emi giving rca a controlling interest in jvc , columbia ( uk ) , and emi . during world war ii , jvc severed its ties to rca victor and today remains one of the oldest and most successful japanese record labels as well as an electronics giant . meanwhile , rca sold its remaining shares in emi during this time . today the '' his master 's voice '' trademark in music is split amongst several companies including jvc ( in japan ) , hmv ( in the uk ) , and rca ( in the us ) . list of victor records artists . archives . victor kept meticulous written records of all of its recordings . the files cover the period 1903 to 1958 ( thus including the rca victor era , as well as the victor talking machine co . era ) . these written records are among the most extensive and important sources of available primary discographic information in the world . there were three main categories of files : a daily log of recordings for each day , a file maintained for each important victor artist , and a 4 '' ×6 '' index card file kept in catalog number order . there are about 15,000 daily log pages , each titled '' recording book , '' that are numbered chronologically . each recording was assigned a '' matrix number '' to identify the recording . when issued , the recording had a '' catalog number , '' almost always different from the matrix number , on the record label . as of 2010 , the remaining pages available at the victor archives go only up to april 22 , 1935 . victor 's original pages after this date were apparently discarded or lost at some point . however , victor 's ties with emi in england , and at hayes , hillingdon , in london , emi has more recent pages . these pages were sent at the time they were first written and therefore do not have the annotations made afterwards . most , but not all , daily log information for recordings made for synchronization with motion pictures were kept separately , and the separate synchronization recording information is missing from the victor archives . victor also issued annual catalogs of all available recordings with monthly supplements announcing the release of new and forthcoming records issued throughout the year . these publications were carefully prepared and were lavishly illustrated with many photographs and advertisements of popular victor recording artists . the encyclopedic discography of victor recordings ( edvr ) is a continuation of a project of ted fagan and william moran to make a complete discography of all victor recordings . the victor archive files are a major source of information for this project . in 2011 , the library of congress and victor catalog owner sony music entertainment launched the national jukebox offering streaming audio of more than 10,000 pre-1925 recorded works for listening by the general public ; many of these recordings have not been widely available for over 100 years . . the victrola and other products . in september 1906 , victor introduced a new line of talking machines with the turntable and amplifying horn tucked away inside a wooden cabinet , the horn being completely invisible . this was not done for reasons of audio fidelity , but for visual aesthetics . the intention was to produce a phonograph that looked less like a piece of machinery and more like a piece of furniture . these internal horn machines , trademarked with the name victrola , were first marketed to the public in september of that year and were an immediate hit . soon an extensive line of victrolas was available , ranging from small tabletop models selling for 15 , through many sizes and designs of cabinets intended to go with the decor of middle-class homes in the 100 to 250 range , up to 600 chippendale and queen anne-style cabinets of fine wood with gold trim designed to look at home in elegant mansions . victrolas became by far the most popular type of home phonograph , and sold in great numbers until the end of the 1920s . rca victor continued to market record players under the victrola name until the late 1960s . other victor products included the electrola ( a phonograph with an electric motor ) , radiola ( a radio often paired with a phonograph which was a joint venture with rca prior to their acquisition of the company ) , and musical instruments ( including the first electronic instrument , the theremin ) . see also . rca records rca red seal grammy award list of phonograph manufacturers . further reading . instructions for the setting up , operation & care of the victrola , spring type , victor talking machine company , camden , nj . , c . 1924 . ( from the roaring 20 's victrola page ) bryan , martin f . report to the phonothèque québécoise on the search for archival documents of berliner gram-o-phone co . , victor talking machine co . , r.c.a . victor co . ( montréal ) , 1899–1972 . further augmented ed . montréal : phonothèque québécoise , 1994 . 19 , 1 p . references . external links . victor masters in the discography of american historical recordings '' victrola credenza '' at victor-victrola page '' identifying victor products '' at victor-victrola page victor timeline at the david sarnoff library rca corporation records at hagley museum and library ( 1887–1983 ) about the history of rca and victor rca corporation photos at hagley museum ( 1878–1960 ) victor records on the internet archive 's great 78 project