1918 in literature

events . january 1 – the english novelist and wartime propagandist hall caine is made a knight of the kbe . january 2 – the english novelist marie corelli is convicted under wartime legislation against hoarding food . january 18 – the first edition of aussie : the australian soldiers ' magazine appears . january 23 – the english poet robert graves marries the painter nancy nicholson in london . the wedding guests include wilfred owen , whose first nationally published poem appears three days later ( '' miners '' in the nation ) . he will be killed by the end of the year . march the telemachus episode in james joyce 's ulysses is published in serialized form in the u.s . journal the little review . the english novelist alec waugh is taken prisoner of war . he will be incarcerated in mainz citadel with the monologist j . milton hayes , also taken prisoner this year , and hugh kingsmill . april hu shih , chief advocate of the use of the vernacular in chinese literature at the time , publishes an essay , '' constructive literary revolution – a literature of national speech '' in the magazine new youth ( xin qingnian ) proposing a hu shih writings program . the english writer may sinclair introduces the term '' stream of consciousness '' to describe a narrative mode , in a discussion of dorothy richardson 's novel sequence pilgrimage in the egoist . may 3 – the new zealand writer and poet katherine mansfield marries her long-time partner john middleton murry at kensington register office in london . june the 2nd annual pulitzer prizes are awarded in the united states , including the first award for a novel . the english poet basil bunting is imprisoned as a conscientious objector . august 17 – the poets wilfred owen and siegfried sassoon meet for the last time , in london , and spend what sassoon will recall as '' the whole of a hot cloudless afternoon together . '' october 3 – siegfried sassoon visits his mentor robbie ross for the last time . sassoon will write later that ross 's goodbye gave him a '' presentiment of final farewell . '' november 4 – wilfred owen is killed in action aged 25 , at the sambre–oise canal , with only five of his poems published . news of his death reaches his parents in shrewsbury a week later on armistice day . he is awarded a posthumous military cross a year later . december – the poems of gerard manley hopkins ( died 1889 , including the wreck of the deutschland , 1875/1876 ) are published through robert bridges . few were published in hopkins ' lifetime , so that this introduces his innovative sprung rhythm and imagery to many readers . december 28 – emperor khải định of vietnam declares the traditional chữ nôm script for the vietnamese language to be replaced by the latin script vietnamese alphabet . winter – parisian farceur georges feydeau contracts tertiary syphilis . new books . fiction . ryūnosuke akutagawa – '' hell screen '' ( 地獄変 , jigokuhen ; short story ) arnold bennett – the roll-call willa cather – my ántonia blaise cendrars i have killed ( j'ai tué ) the severed hand ( la main coupée ) marie corelli – the young diana grazia deledda – l'incendio nell'oliveto ( the fire in the olive-grove ) alfred döblin – wadzeks kampf mit der dampfturbine ( wadzek 's struggle with the steam turbine ) sarah lee brown fleming – hope 's highway mary e . wilkins freeman – edgewater people august gailit – fairyland owen gregory – meccania the super-state thea von harbou – das indische grabmal herbert george jenkins – patricia brent , spinster wyndham lewis – tarr ( in book form ) lu xun – a madman 's diary ( 狂人日記 , kuángrén rìjì , short story ) compton mackenzie – the early life and adventures of sylvia scarlett brinsley macnamara ( john weldon writing as oliver blyth ) – the valley of the squinting windows heinrich mann – der untertan frans masereel – 25 images of a man 's passion ( wordless novel ) andré maurois – les silences du colonel bramble george moore – a story-teller 's holiday baroness orczy flower o ' the lily the man in grey leo perutz – from nine to nine ( zwischen neun und neun , originally freiheit ) romain rolland – colas breugnon junichiro tanizaki ( 谷崎 潤一郎 ) – gold and silver ( 金と銀 ) booth tarkington – the magnificent ambersons edgar wallace the clue of the twisted candle down under donovan the man who knew those folk of bulboro mary augusta ward – the war and elizabeth rebecca west – the return of the soldier edith wharton – the marne francis brett young – the crescent moon . children and young people . elsa beskow – tant grön , tant brun och tant gredelin ( aunt green , aunt brown and aunt lavender ) edgar rice burroughs – tarzan and the jewels of opar may gibbs – snugglepot and cuddlepie johnny gruelle – raggedy ann stories norman lindsay – the magic pudding ferenc móra – kincskereső kisködmön ( a little fortune-hunting frock coat ) beatrix potter – the tale of johnny town-mouse . drama . bertolt brecht – baal ( written ) john drinkwater – abraham lincoln marcel gerbidon and paul armont – school for coquettes ( l'école des cocottes ) susan glaspell – tickless time walter c . hackett – the freedom of the seas hugo von hofmannsthal – the difficult man james joyce – exiles georg kaiser – gas alice dunbar nelson – mine eyes have seen gregorio martínez sierra – sueño de una noche de agosto ( dream of an august night ) vladimir mayakovsky – mystery-bouffe ( « мистерия-буфф » , misteriya-buff ) emma orczy ( baroness orczy ) – the legion of honour ( adaptation of a sheaf of bluebells ) luigi pirandello but it 's nothing serious ( ma non è una cosa seria ) the rules of the game ( il giuoco delle parti , literally the game of rôles ) . poetry . guillaume apollinaire – calligrammes laurence binyon – the new world : poems vera brittain – verses of a vad toirdhealbhach mac suibhne ( terence macswiney ) – battle-cries walter de la mare – the marionettes siegfried sassoon – s : counter-attack edward thomas ( posthumous ) – last poems tristan tzara – vingt-cinq poèmes . non-fiction . henry adams & ndash ; the education of henry adams enid bagnold & ndash ; a diary without dates clive bell & ndash ; pot-boilers laurence binyon & ndash ; for dauntless france william inge & ndash ; the philosophy of plotinus daniel jones & ndash ; an outline of english phonetics federico garcía lorca & ndash ; impressiones y paisajes ( impressions and landscapes ) walther rathenau & ndash ; an deutschlands jugend oswald spengler & ndash ; the decline of the west ( der untergang des abendlandes ) dr marie stopes married love wise parenthood lytton strachey & ndash ; eminent victorians mary augusta ward & ndash ; a writer 's recollections . births . january 16 philip josé farmer , american science fiction writer ( died 2009 ) stirling silliphant , american writer , producer ( died 1996 ) february 1 – muriel spark , scottish novelist ( died 2006 ) february 6 – lothar-günther buchheim , german novelist , war correspondent and painter ( died 2007 ) march 9 – mickey spillane , american mystery writer ( died 2006 ) march 10 – theodore cogswell , american science fiction author ( died 1987 ) march 15 – richard ellmann , american literary biographer ( died 1987 ) april 23 maurice druon , french historical novelist ( died 2009 ) james kirkup , english poet ( died 2009 ) may 16 – juan rulfo , mexican author ( died 1986 ) june 9 – bidhyanath pokhrel , nepali poet ( died 1994 ) july 9 – john heath-stubbs , english poet and translator ( died 2006 ) july 14 – arthur laurents , american novelist and screenwriter ( died 2011 ) july 24 – antonio candido , brazilian literary critic ( died 2017 ) august 9 – robert aldrich , american writer and filmmaker ( died 1983 ) august 20 – jacqueline susann , american novelist ( died 1974 ) august 27 – leon levițchi , romanian translator ( died 1991 ) september 19 – penelope mortimer , welsh-born english novelist and biographer ( died 1999 ) october 19 – louis althusser , french marxist philosopher ( died 1990 ) october 29 – ștefan baciu , romanian and brazilian poet , novelist and literary promoter ( died 1993 ) november 2 – roger lancelyn green , english biographer ( died 1987 ) november 16 – nicholas moore , english poet ( died 1986 ) november 20 – naomi frankel , german-born israeli novelist ( died 2009 ) november 25 – peter opie , english writer on children 's literature and lore ( died 1982 ) november 29 – madeleine l'engle , american writer for children and teens ( died 2007 ) december 7 – liu yichang , chinese novelist , editor and publisher ( died 2018 ) december 11 – aleksandr solzhenitsyn , russian novelist ( died 2008 ) december 30 – al purdy , canadian poet ( died 2000 ) . deaths . january 1 – william wilfred campbell , canadian poet ( born 1860 ) january 6 – dora sigerson shorter , irish poet , novelist and sculptor ( born 1866 ) january 28 – john mccrae , canadian military surgeon and war poet ( pneumonia , born 1872 ) holt , tonie ; valmai ( 1996 ) . '' lieutenant-colonel john mccrae '' . poets of the great war . barnsley : leo cooper ( reprinted 1999 ) . pp . 54-62 . february 8 – lascăr vorel , romanian visual artist and short story writer ( kidney disease , born 1879 ) april 1 – isaac rosenberg , english poet and artist ( killed in action , born 1890 ) april – william hope hodgson , english author and essayist ( killed in action , born 1877 ) may 8 – ernst von hesse-wartegg , austrian writer and traveler ( born 1851 ) may 27 – francis george fowler , english grammarian ( tuberculosis contracted on military service , born 1871 ) june 10 – arrigo boito ( tobia gorio ) , italian poet and composer ( born 1842 ) june 26 – peter rosegger , austrian poet ( born 1843 ) june 28 – alexander turnbull , new zealand bibliophile ( born 1868 ) july 30 – joyce kilmer , american poet ( killed in action , born 1886 ) august 3 – maria fetherstonhaugh , english novelist , born 1847 ) october 5 – robbie ross , journalist ( heart failure , born 1869 ) november 4 wilfred owen , english poet ( killed in action , born 1893 ) andrew dickson white , american diplomat and author ( born 1832 ) november 9 – guillaume apollinaire , french poet , dramatist , novelist and critic ( influenza , born 1880 ) baxter , john ( 2009-02-10 ) . carnal knowledge : baxter 's concise encyclopedia of modern sex . harpercollins . p . 13 . november 14 – seumas o'kelly , irish journalist and author ( born 1881 ) november 24 – annie hall cudlip , english novelist , journalist and editor ( born 1838 ) december 1 – margit kaffka , hungarian novelist , short story writer and poet ( influenza , born 1880 ) december 2 – edmond rostand , french poet and dramatist ( influenza ; born 1868 ) december 15 – salvatore farina , italian novelist ( born 1846 ) . awards . nobel prize in literature : not awarded pulitzer prize for drama : jesse lynch williams , why marry ? pulitzer prize for poetry : sara teasdale , love songs pulitzer prize for the novel : ernest poole , his family . references . see also . world war i in literature