Liskeard and Looe Union Canal

general description . the canal started from a point on the tidal east looe river just below terras bridge , about a mile ( about 1.5 & nbsp ; km ) above looe bridge . when the railway branch line was built , a bridge over the canal was made , and this bridge can still be seen , showing the alignment of the canal at its lower termination . the canal ran broadly north , following closely the course of the river itself , for a distance of , terminating at moorswater , in the valley to the west of liskeard . this involved a considerable climb , of over its length , and there were 24 locks . the canal ran on the east side of the river , except between a point below plashford bridge to near landreast bridge , the present day railway branch line closely follows the route of the canal . moorswater was chosen as a feasible terminal because of its altitude—below liskeard town—and proximity to the agricultural lands the canal was built to serve . roads for onward transport were built , eastward to liskeard itself and northward to highwood . there was a basin at moorswater , located in the area near the present-day railway level crossing , close to the point where old road crosses under the a38 main road . a reservoir was built immediately north of the basin area . it was designed for 20 tonne barges ; water supply was from the upper reaches of the east looe river and the crylla . when the railway line was built in 1860 , the canal gradually fell into disrepair , and is shown as '' disused '' on 1882 ordnance survey maps , ordnance survey , 25 inch plans , cornwall and the isles of scilly , 1882 although the short southern section to sandplace continued in use for several years priestley , published in 1831 , described the canal : the liskeard and looe canal commences at tarras pill , and proceeds from thence in a northerly direction to the parish of liskeard terminating at moorswater , ] above the level of the sea . the distance which it passes over is five miles and seven furlongs , 9.5 & nbsp ; km and in its course there are twenty-five locks . there is a short branch of about a mile in length to sand place . priestley incorporates a number of inaccuracies into his description : he has taken the number of locks from the authorising act ; in fact there were twenty-four . there was a wharf at sandplace ( sand place ) but it was immediately adjacent to the main line of the canal ; messenger points out that a quay was dug into the river bank at sandplace to serve a kiln , and priestley was misled into thinking that this was a branch of the canal ; actually it was the main river . the vertical interval he quotes may be due to the definition of '' sea level '' at the time ; in any case the lower end of the canal joined the river some distance above the sea . origins . agricultural land around the looe valleys was considered to be of high quality , but the acid soil required annual improvement with lime . traditionally the limestone to prepare this had come from the plymouth area by coastal shipping to the east looe valley where it was burnt in kilns to make the lime . while the coastal shipping element of the journey was straightforward , even main roads were in a primitive condition ; for example : despite its grand title , it would seem that the 'royal cornish way ' ( today 's a30 ) was little better than a muddy cart-track by the beginning of the 18th century . in places it may well have had no defined edge or surface at all , leaving travellers to struggle as best they could in mist or darkness . to get to liskeard above the navigable river , the means of transport was on the backs of horses : the first wheeled wagon was introduced into the liskeard district in 1790 . quoted in as late as the 1830s , pack horses and mules were the general means of transport for goods throughout the county , once off the turnpike roads . approaching 10 tonnes ( 11 short tons ) of limestone were required per acre annually ( about 25 tonnes per hectare ) , so that its transport was a considerable undertaking . from messenger 's figures , page 9 : four to five tons of lime per acre annually ; 14.5 tons of limestone required for 100 '' double winchester bushels '' of 150 lbs of lime . one tonne is taken as close to one imperial ton . the idea for a canal to liskeard was first investigated in 1777 when edmund leach and '' a gentleman from liskeard '' proposed a canal which would run between banka mill , west of liskeard , and sandplace , to the north of looe on the east looe river . it would have been a contour canal , with three reaches connected by '' machines '' —evidently inclined planes . at the time no canal inclined plane had been installed anywhere in the world : the first actually installed on a canal was on the ketley canal in 1788 . the project was estimated to cost £17,495 , which would be recouped in seven years , based on expected income , but the scheme was not progressed . after at least one other abortive proposal , a local solicitor peter glubb convened a meeting on 2 august 1823 in liskeard to agree the way forward . after a second meeting at east looe on 9 august , the engineer james green was asked to present proposals for a canal , a railway or a turnpike road to link looe to liskeard . he swiftly presented his views , on 30 august , recommending a tub-boat canal , suitable for four-ton boats in trains ( i.e . connected groups ) . the rise of 180 & nbsp ; feet in in 10 & nbsp ; km ) threatened water supply difficulties if negotiated by locks , so green repeated the earlier proposal for two inclined planes . a subscription list was quickly filled , but soon this proposal too stalled , due to strong opposition from interests in lostwithiel and fowey , and '' weakness of the proprietors in a pecuniary point of view and other insuperable obstacles '' . report by john buller , quoted in the following year the plan was revived , this time for a canal with locks . in order to appease john buller , a substantial local landowner , the canal would have a '' towing path of sufficient width for gentlemen 's carriages '' . the committee needed buller 's support to aid the passage of the bill through parliament . green prepared plans for a bill , and the necessary act of parliament was obtained on 22 june 1825 , but after green 's departure , the proprietors asked robert coad to design the route in detail . the act created the liskeard and looe union canal company , with an authorised capital of £13,000 in shares of £25 , and authority to borrow a further £10,000 on mortgage if required . the act gave powers '' for making and maintaining a navigable canal from tarras pill , in the parish of duloe . to or near moorswater , in the parish of liskeard , and for making several roads to communicate therewith '' . it also allowed feed water to be taken from the river looe and the '' crylla rivulet '' ; but there were restrictions on the latter , so '' that no injury may be done to the navigation of the fowey , of which river the crylla is a tributary stream '' . an engineer could be appointed by the mayor of lostwithiel to monitor compliance with this obligation . inclined planes may not have been ruled out , because priestley says that '' the company are also empowered to make rollers and inclined planes . '' however priestley does not offer this as a direct quotation from the act , and he may have heard this reported from an earlier , unsuccessful bill , and mistakenly understood the plan to be still current . work on building the canal began on 6 september 1825 , with robert coad as the engineer and robert retallick as superintendent of works . there was some internal tension in the committee of management , for there was a motion at the general meeting in february 1826 that a properly qualified civil engineer should be asked to assess the work done so far , and whether the two men should be allowed to proceed without further assistance , but the motion was defeated by 49 votes to 10 , and four of the nine committee members changed at the subsequent election . the canal had been planned to run on the west side of the river towards looe , but a landowner , mr eliot , was holding out for excessive compensation for his land , and the construction was transferred to the east side over the affected length , in the lands of john buller , to by-pass eliot 's land . during the construction , the company operated a health insurance scheme for the labourers similar to that commonly in place in the cornish mines , with each worker contributing 6 pence ( 2.5p ) per month , which was used to pay mr . robert rean , an apothecary and surgeon from east looe , for his services . opening . part of the canal opened for traffic on 27 august 1827 , and in march 1828 the royal cornwall gazette reported that it was complete . it rose through over its length of although the canal was in full operation , there were numerous challenges facing the proprietors . the works were '' in a slovenly and unfinished state '' , and it took until 1830 for the reservoir at moorswater and the feed from the crylla to be completed . company minute books quoted in a road had to be made from moorswater into liskeard at dean well , at a cost of £1,200 , completed in 1829 . dean well was at the north-western extremity of dean street , so the road referred to would appear to be '' new road '' . traffic immediately transferred to this road from the steep and inconvenient turnpike road ( '' old road '' ) and the canal company demanded a subscription for maintenance from the turnpike trustees . users of the canal company 's road were subject to tolls . about 1835 a section of road from looe mills to highwood was constructed by the canal company . highwood is a little less than a mile ( about 1 & nbsp ; km ) north of looe mills , on the turnpike road north-west of moorswater . the new road gave access to highwood from the canal , using the turnpike road from moorswater to looe mills . operation . the canal vastly increased the facility of bringing lime and sea sand to the agricultural hinterland above liskeard ; in addition coal was brought for lime burning and for domestic use . prices of these commodities fell considerably ; however other traffics—particularly downstream traffic which would have generated return loads—were disappointing . lime was burnt at moorswater and elsewhere on the higher reaches of the canal , leading to the failure of kilns at sandplace , which lost trade . the company watched expenditure carefully , but managed to pay a dividend of 6 per cent in 1830 and 5 per cent thereafter for most of the canal 's life . income was generally allocated to capital expenditure . net annual profit seems to have been in the region of £300 to £400 during this period . considerable attention was given to improving the terminal facilities at moorswater , as the trade increased . in 1832 a quay was constructed , and a tramway ( referred to as a '' railroad '' ) was constructed alongside it . william hodge and john lyne had lime kilns on the west and east side of the canal head respectively , and they had simple plateways connecting the basin with the kilns by inclined planes powered by water wheel . hodge 's had a gauge of 2 & nbsp ; ft 6 & nbsp ; in gauge ( 760 & nbsp ; mm ) , was supported by a series of pillars and used an undershot wheel . lyne built five kilns in 1831 , and water from a pond to the north of the works was channelled along a culvert to power an overshot wheel . by 1835 the poor condition of the canal works was again giving cause for concern , and contract arrangements were put in place to rectify the situation . however , the unsatisfactory state of affairs was slow to be rectified , and complaints about the conditions and measures put in place by the directors continued to dominate the minute books until at least 1851 . from 1842 the company became concerned at the gradual decline in usage of the canal and of income . this was due to a general agricultural depression , and also competition from st germans and lerryn ( on an arm of the river fowey ) ; the company repeatedly reduced dues on the canal . mineral extraction on caradon . copper ore had been discovered on caradon in 1836 , and as the volume of extraction grew , it had been taken to st germans and elsewhere for onward transport . from 1839 granite too began to be seriously quarried at the cheesewring . moving the minerals by pack horse was expensive and inconvenient , and the liskeard and caradon railway was promoted to bring the ore to moorswater ; the canal company made room at their terminal for the railway . the railway reached that place in 1846 , on 8 march , from when the ore was taken to looe on the canal . this transformed the economy of the canal and of the area . mineral ore could now be brought relatively conveniently to market : by railway to moorswater ; by canal boat to looe ; and onwards by coastal shipping . this not only brought about transfer of the transportation from other routes to the benefit of the canal , but it encouraged further exploration and mineral extraction , which then further augmented carrying on the canal . the new mines required coal for operation of their engines , and also iron products , and these traffics also used the canal . this vastly increased volume of traffic caused the company to extend considerably the wharf facilities at moorswater . there were also concerns about the adequacy of the water supply with the increased use of the locks , and there was considerable friction between the company and millers higher up the east looe valley over use of water . some limited statistics have survived : in 1849 , 21,713 tons were carried , of which 7,546 tons were copper ore , and 6,175 tons were coal ; in 1859 , 48,193 tons were carried , of which 17,361 tons were copper ore and 15,712 tons were coal , as well as 8,297 tons of granite . messenger says that the profit each year was about £2,000 . proposals for a railway . at the later date , the canal was working at capacity , and the transshipment at moorswater from rail to canal was costing from 4d to 6d per ton ; because of congestion on the canal , trade was being lost to competing routes via calstock and st germans ; and the twenty-four locks caused the journey to be slow and cumbersome . moreover , the cornwall railway was being constructed to run through liskeard , with unknown implications for the competitiveness of the canal . attention was given to constructing a railway from moorswater to looe . a report was presented on 30 september 1857 , which proposed a railway at a cost of £11,000 , and this was quickly approved . although there was some opposition from buller 's son , also called john , and from the admiralty , who were concerned about navigation on the river , the duchy of cornwall helped the company to obtain its authorising act of parliament , the liskeard and looe railway act , which was granted on 11 may 1858 . it authorised the canal company to raise additional capital of £13,000 in £25 shares , with authority to borrow £4,000 . two of the clauses in the 1825 act were repealed , relating to penalties for destroying the canal . the railway opened on 27 december 1860 for goods traffic , passenger traffic following in 1879 ; it is more fully described in the article liskeard and looe railway . the canal after the railway . the railway did not take over the canal alignment : it crossed the canal by bridge in five places , three below sandplace and two above , although the railway seems to have obliterated the canal in the northern extremity . sandplace continued to be a significant wharf for the canal , due to the activities of john buller , but it appears that the canal above that point , although not actually displaced by the railway construction , was positively allowed to decline . although the canal was still officially open , the liskeard water company negotiated the takeover of the crylla leat and its water supply from may 1861 , subsequently agreeing to pay £5 per year for its perpetual use . with no water supply to the top of the canal , water was channeled through a culvert under the railway to keep the section below sandplace navigable . the canal was still maintained , as £179 was spent on repairs between 1862 and 1867 , but it is fairly certain that this only affected the lower section . the upper section may have been used by the tenants of the morval estate for the transport of agricultural produce , for which no tolls were chargeable , but residents at duloe complained in 1867 that the canal could no longer be used since the railway had been built . a note in the accounts for 1862 states : '' 1861 : lluc 's canal replaced by railway and steam introduced on the lcr . '' decline of navigability continued steadily , and only small boats could make any passage at all . between 1901 and 1909 , the annual gross dues averaged 35 shillings ( £1.75 ) , mainly derived from tolls of 3 pence ( 1.25p ) for small boats of about 1.5 tons carrying sand and seaweed , which was used to improve the land . two of the original 16-ton boats were still operational , and were charged 1s 9d ( 8.75p ) for the journey to sandplace . the great western railway purchased the canal company in 1909 , in order to acquire the railway line , passenger traffic , and especially tourism , having taken over as the dominant traffic . the liskeard and caradon railway closed in 1917 but the liskeard and looe railway still operates , with passenger trains on the line being marketed under the brand name '' the looe valley line '' . conservation . towards the end of the twentieth century , there was some interest in conserving what remains of the canal . in 1988 the west country branch of the inland waterways association produced a walking guide to the canal , and to several others in the west country , hoping to stimulate interest in it . in 1997 , caradon district council announced plans for a partial restoration of the remains , although not to a navigable standard . however , there is no publicity available at present ( 2012 ) to indicate whether this work was carried out . points of interest . this shows the locations of locks which were still identified as such on the 1882 ordnance survey map . 13 of the original 24 are shown . at moorswater , the railway has obliterated the terminal basin by that date . ordnance survey , 1:2500 map , 1882 . notes . references . . bibliography . . see also . canals of great britain history of the british canal system