1968 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1968 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : palme d'or ( cannes film festival ) : canceled due to events of may 1968 golden lion ( venice film festival ) : : die artisten in der zirkuskuppel : ratlos ( artists under the big top : perplexed ) , directed by alexander kluge , west germany golden bear ( berlin film festival ) : : ole dole doff ( who saw him die ? ) , directed by jan troell , sweden . films released . us unless stated . january–march . january 1968 january 3 the wicked dreams of paula schultz january 8 wild 90 january 12 nobody 's perfect january 17 the biggest bundle of them all january 18 spider baby january 24 danger : diabolik ( italy/u.s . ) firecreek maryjane sebastian january 25 up the junction january 29 how to save a marriage and ruin your life february 1968 february 7 the anniversary sol madrid february 8 blackbeard 's ghost sweet november february 11 charlie bubbles february 18 the money jungle february 21 bye bye braverman the power february 24 kuroneko ( japan ) february 29 the secret war of harry frigg march 1968 march 1 day of the evil gun march 5 romeo and juliet march 6 p.j . psych-out march 8 a man called gannon stay away , joe march 11 otley march 13 counterpoint march 18 the producers march 20 no way to treat a lady march 21 the one and only , genuine , original family band march 27 arizona bushwhackers march 29 madigan . april–june . april 1968 april 2 a dandy in aspic the scalphunters april 3 2001 : a space odyssey planet of the apes april 4 the party april 10 the charge of the light brigade hammerhead where angels go , trouble follows will penny april 14 the bofors gun april 17 the bride wore black ( france ) the private navy of sgt . o'farrell april 20 baby love april 23 blue april 24 yours , mine and ours april 26 je t'aime , je t'aime ( france ) may 1968 may 1 countdown do n't just stand there ! the mini-skirt mob tarzan and the jungle boy may 2 the odd couple may 10 project x may 15 the devil 's brigade the swimmer witchfinder general ( film ) may 17 journey to shiloh may 23 kona coast prudence and the pill may 24 the savage seven what 's so bad about feeling good ? may 28 boom ! the detective may 29 madigan 's millions villa rides wild in the streets june 1968 june 1 bandolero ! june 5 angels from hell chubasco for singles only jigsaw june 8 kill ! ( japan ) june 10 petulia june 12 rosemary 's baby speedway the sweet ride june 19 the green berets the thomas crown affair the lost continent where were you when the lights went out ? june 21 salt and pepper june 25 the secret life of an american wife june 26 never a dull moment . july–september . july 1968 july 3 dark of the sun eve july 12 do n't raise the bridge , lower the river a lovely way to die july 14 did you hear the one about the traveling saleslady ? july 15 interlude july 17 for love of ivy july 19 inspector clouseau july 20 the devil rides out july 23 isabel july 24 anzio the strange affair july 29 in enemy country july 31 5 card stud asterix the gaul the heart is a lonely hunter august 1968 august 1 destroy all monsters ( japan ) august 3 hang 'em high august 7 adieu l'ami ( france ) with six you get eggroll august 15 targets a time to sing august 18 stolen kisses ( france ) august 20 how sweet it is ! august 22 nobody runs forever august 24 a stranger in town august 26 rachel , rachel august 28 the hell with heroes september 1968 september 2 negatives september 11 the young runaways september 12 spirits of the dead ( france/italy ) september 15 song of summer ( u.k . ) september 18 funny girl pretty poison september 19 hot millions september 22 the split september 23 charly september 26 oliver ! ( u.k . ) . october–december . october 1968 october 1 night of the living dead october 2 coogan 's bluff october 7 i love you , alice b . toklas october 8 deadfall october 9 finian 's rainbow if he hollers , let him go ! october 10 barbarella ( u.s . ) october 13 the subject was roses october 14 paper lion october 16 the boston strangler the girl on a motorcycle october 17 bullitt october 19 a flea in her ear october 22 star ! vixen ! october 23 live a little , love a little secret ceremony october 24 ice station zebra october 30 the lion in winter october 31 ace high ( italy ) they came to rob las vegas november 1968 november 6 dracula has risen from the grave head november 13 killers three yellow submarine november 15 the shoes of the fisherman november 16 the legend of lylah clare november 18 house of cards november 20 lady in cement woman in chains ( france ) november 24 faces joanna november 27 the great silence ( italy ) hellfighters november 28 carry on up the khyber november 30 the shakiest gun in the west sympathy for the devil december 1968 december 1 the green slime december 4 corruption where eagles dare december 8 the fixer december 9 the birthday party december 10 buona sera , mrs . campbell the magus december 12 the killing of sister george december 13 shalako december 15 curse of the crimson altar greetings december 16 chitty chitty bang bang ( u.k . ) december 17 candy december 18 hell in the pacific isadora the night they raided minsky's december 19 if . mayerling ( u.k./france ) a place for lovers skidoo december 20 the horse in the gray flannel suit three in the attic twisted nerve december 21 once upon a time in the west ( italy ) december 22 the sea gull december 24 the love bug december 25 assignment to kill the brotherhood the sergeant the stalking moon december 26 monterey pop december 28 uptight . notable films released in 1968 . : note : u.s . releases unless stated . . 5 card stud , starring dean martin , robert mitchum , inger stevens 17th parallel : vietnam in war ( 17e parallele le vietnam en guerre ) , a documentary directed by joris ivens – ( france/vietnam ) 2001 : a space odyssey , directed by stanley kubrick , starring keir dullea and gary lockwood – ( u.s./ u.k . ) . a . aadmi , starring dilip kumar – ( india ) aankhen ( the eyes ) – ( india ) ace high , starring eli wallach – ( italy ) adieu l'ami ( farewell friend ) , starring alain delon and charles bronson – ( france ) all my compatriots ( všichni dobří rodáci ) – ( czechoslovakia ) the amorous ones ( as amorosas ) – ( brazil ) the anniversary , starring bette davis – ( u.k . ) anzio , starring robert mitchum , earl holliman , peter falk artists under the big top ( die artisten in der zirkuskuppel : ratlos ) , golden lion winner – ( west germany ) assignment to kill , starring patrick o'neal and joan hackett asterix and cleopatra – ( france/belgium ) . b . baby love , starring linda hayden and keith barron– ( u.k . ) bandits in milan ( banditi a milano ) , starring gian maria volonté – ( italy ) bandolero ! , starring james stewart , dean martin , raquel welch , george kennedy , will geer barbarella , directed by roger vadim , starring jane fonda – ( france/italy ) be sick . it 's free ( il medico della mutua ) , starring alberto sordi – ( italy ) berserk ! , starring joan crawford and diana dors – ( u.k . ) les biches , directed by claude chabrol , starring stéphane audran and jean-louis trintignant – ( france ) the biggest bundle of them all , starring raquel welch and edward g . robinson the birthday party , directed by william friedkin , starring robert shaw – ( u.k . ) black jesus ( seduto alla sua destra ) , starring woody strode – ( italy ) blackbeard 's ghost , starring dean jones , peter ustinov , suzanne pleshette blue , starring terence stamp , joanna pettet , karl malden , and ricardo montalbán the bofors gun , starring nicol williamson and ian holm – ( u.k . ) boom ! , starring elizabeth taylor and richard burton – ( u.k . ) the boston strangler , starring tony curtis and henry fonda the bride wore black ( la mariée était en noir ) , directed by françois truffaut , starring jeanne moreau and michel bouquet – ( france ) brilliantovaya ruka ( the diamond arm ) – a hugely popular russian comedy – ( u.s.s.r . ) the brotherhood , starring kirk douglas bullitt , directed by peter yates , starring steve mcqueen , jacqueline bisset , robert vaughn buona sera , mrs . campbell , starring gina lollobrigida , shelley winters , phil silvers , peter lawford , telly savalas bye bye braverman , directed by sidney lumet , starring george segal , jessica walter , joseph wiseman . c . candy , starring marlon brando , richard burton , james coburn , ringo starr – ( france/italy/u.s . ) capricious summer ( rozmarné léto ) , directed by jiří menzel – ( czechoslovakia ) carry on . up the khyber , starring sid james and kenneth williams – ( u.k . ) the charge of the light brigade , directed by tony richardson , starring trevor howard , john gielgud and vanessa redgrave – ( u.k . ) charly , starring cliff robertson chitty chitty bang bang , starring dick van dyke – ( u.k . ) the chronicle of anna magdalena bach – ( west germany ) colonel wolodyjowski , directed by jerzy hoffman – ( poland ) coogan 's bluff , directed by don siegel , starring clint eastwood , susan clark , lee j . cobb , don stroud corruption , directed by robert hartford-davis – ( u.k . ) countdown , directed by robert altman and starring james caan and robert duvall counterpoint , starring charlton heston , maximilian schell , leslie nielsen curse of the crimson altar ( a.k.a . the crimson cult ) , starring christopher lee and boris karloff – ( u.k . ) . d . a dandy in aspic , starring laurence harvey , tom courtenay , and mia farrow – ( u.k . ) danger : diabolik , starring john phillip law and michel piccoli – ( italy/u.s . ) dark of the sun ( a.k.a . the mercenaries ) , starring rod taylor and yvette mimieux – ( u.k./u.s . ) day of the evil gun , starring glenn ford the day of the owl ( il giorno della civetta ) , starring claudia cardinale and franco nero – ( italy ) dead season ( myortvyy sezon ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) deadfall , starring michael caine – ( u.k . ) death by hanging ( kōshikei ) , directed by nagisa oshima – ( japan ) death laid an egg ( la morte ha fatto l'uovo ) , directed by giulio questi – ( italy/france ) destroy all monsters ( kaijū sōshingeki ) , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) the detective , starring frank sinatra , lee remick , jacqueline bisset , jack klugman , william windom , robert duvall the devil rides out , starring christopher lee and charles gray – ( u.k . ) the devil 's brigade , starring william holden , cliff robertson , vince edwards diamonds for breakfast , directed by christopher morahan – ( u.k . ) the doll ( lalka ) , directed by wojciech jerzy has – ( poland ) do n't raise the bridge , lower the river , starring jerry lewis dracula has risen from the grave , starring christopher lee – ( u.k . ) duniya ( the world ) , starring dev anand and vyjayanthimala – ( india ) . e . eve , starring robert walker jr . , christopher lee , herbert lom hasta el viento tiene miedo ( hasta el viento tiene miedo ) – ( mexico ) . f . faces , directed by john cassavetes fando y lis ( fando and lis ) – ( mexico ) finian 's rainbow , directed by francis ford coppola , starring fred astaire , petula clark , tommy steele , don francks , keenan wynn , al freeman jr . fire , water , and brass pipes , directed by alexander rou , starring natalya sedykh and georgy millyar – ( u.s.s.r . ) firecreek , starring james stewart , henry fonda , gary lockwood , jack elam , james best , inger stevens the fixer , directed by john frankenheimer , starring alan bates and dirk bogarde – ( u.k . ) for love of ivy , starring sidney poitier , abbey lincoln , robert duvall for singles only , starring john saxon , mary ann mobley , milton berle funny girl , directed by william wyler , starring barbra streisand and omar sharif . g . the girl on a motorcycle , starring alain delon and marianne faithfull – ( u.k./france ) the girl with the pistol ( la ragazza con la pistola ) , starring monica vitti and stanley baker – ( italy ) great catherine , starring peter o'toole and jeanne moreau the great silence ( il grande silenzio ) , starring jean-louis trintignant and klaus kinski – ( italy ) the green berets , directed by and starring john wayne , with jim hutton , david janssen greetings , directed by brian de palma , starring robert de niro guns for san sebastian , starring anthony quinn , charles bronson and anjanette comer . h . hammerhead , starring vince edwards and diana dors hang 'em high , directed by ted post , starring clint eastwood hatsukoi jigokuhen ( the inferno of first love ) – ( japan ) head , directed by bob rafelson , starring the monkees the heart is a lonely hunter , starring alan arkin and sondra locke hell in the pacific , directed by john boorman , starring lee marvin and toshiro mifune hellfighters , starring john wayne , katharine ross , jim hutton high school , directed by frederick wiseman the horse in the gray flannel suit , starring dean jones hot millions , starring peter ustinov and maggie smith hour of the wolf ( vargtimmen ) , directed by ingmar bergman , starring max von sydow and liv ullmann – ( sweden ) house of cards , starring george peppard , inger stevens and orson welles how to save a marriage and ruin your life , starring dean martin and stella stevens how sweet it is ! , starring james garner and debbie reynolds . i . i am curious ( blue ) ( jag är nyfiken – en film i blått ) – ( sweden ) i love you , alice b . toklas , starring peter sellers ice station zebra , directed by john sturges , starring rock hudson , patrick mcgoohan , jim brown , ernest borgnine if . , directed by lindsay anderson , starring malcolm mcdowell – palme d'or winner – ( u.k . ) the immortal story , directed by and starring orson welles – ( france ) in enemy country , starring anthony franciosa inspector clouseau , starring alan arkin – ( u.k . ) interlude , starring oskar werner , barbara ferris , donald sutherland isabel , starring geneviève bujold – ( canada ) isadora , a.k.a . the loves of isadora , a biopic of isadora duncan , directed by karel reisz , starring vanessa redgrave , jason robards , james fox – ( u.k . ) it rains in my village ( biće skoro propast sveta ) , starring annie girardot – ( yugoslavia ) . j . je t'aime , je t'aime , directed by alain resnais – ( france ) jigsaw , starring harry guardino , bradford dillman and hope lange joanna , starring geneviève waïte . k . kill ! ( kiru ) – ( japan ) killers three , starring dick clark and merle haggard the killing of sister george , directed by robert aldrich , starring beryl reid , susannah york and coral browne king of hearts – directed by mohammad ali fardin ( iran ) kona coast , starring vera miles and richard boone kuroneko ( a.k.a . yabu no naka no kuroneko ) – ( japan ) . l . lady in cement , starring frank sinatra , dan blocker , raquel welch , richard conte , martin gabel , lainie kazan the last of the mohicans ( ultimul mohican ) – ( romania ) the legend of lylah clare , starring kim novak and peter finch el libro de piedra ( the book of stone ) – ( mexico ) the lion in winter , starring peter o'toole and katharine hepburn – ( u.k . ) the little golden calf ( zolotoy telyonok ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) live a little , love a little , starring elvis presley and michele carey the love bug , directed by robert stevenson , starring dean jones , michele lee , buddy hackett a lovely way to die , starring kirk douglas and sylva koscina lucía – ( cuba ) . m . madigan , directed by don siegel , starring richard widmark , inger stevens , henry fonda , james whitmore , susan clark the magus , starring michael caine , anthony quinn and candice bergen – ( u.k . ) the man who lies ( l'homme qui ment / muž , ktorý luže ) , starring jean-louis trintignant – ( france/czechoslovakia ) mandabi ( le mendat ) , directed by ousmane sembène – ( senegal ) matthew 's days ( żywot mateusza ) – ( poland ) mayerling , starring omar sharif and catherine deneuve – ( u.k./france ) memories of underdevelopment ( memorias del subdesarrollo ) – ( cuba ) mera naam joker ( my name is joker ) , directed by and starring raj kapoor – ( india ) the mercenary , also known as a professional gun , starring franco nero and jack palance – ( italy ) a midsummer night 's dream , directed by peter hall , starring derek godfrey , ian holm , judi dench and helen mirren – ( u.k . ) a minute to pray , a second to die , starring alex cord , arthur kennedy , robert ryan – ( italy ) the money jungle , starring lola albright and leslie parrish monterey pop , a concert film by d . a . pennebaker , featuring simon & garfunkel , the mamas & the papas , jimi hendrix and others more dead than alive , starring clint walker and anne francis murder a la mod , directed by brian de palma . n . naked children ( l'enfance nue ) , directed by maurice pialat – ( france ) neel kamal – ( india ) negatives , starring peter mcenery , glenda jackson and diane cilento– ( u.k . ) never a dull moment , starring dick van dyke , dorothy provine , edward g . robinson the night of the following day , starring marlon brando , richard boone , rita moreno night of the living dead , first in the zombie trilogy by george a . romero the night they raided minsky 's , directed by william friedkin , starring jason robards nobody runs forever ( a.k.a . the high commissioner ) , directed by ralph thomas , starring rod taylor , scobie malone and christopher plummer – ( u.k./u.s . ) nobody 's perfect , starring doug mcclure no way to treat a lady , starring rod steiger , george segal , lee remick las noches del hombre lobo ( nights of the werewolf ) – ( spain/france ) . o . the odd couple , directed by gene saks , starring jack lemmon and walter matthau oliver ! , directed by carol reed , starring ron moody , oliver reed , shani wallis , jack wild , mark lester – winner of six academy awards – ( u.k . ) once upon a time in the west ( c'era una volta il west ) , directed by sergio leone , starring charles bronson , henry fonda , claudia cardinale , jason robards – ( italy ) the one and only , genuine , original family band , starring walter brennan , buddy ebsen , kurt russell , wally cox , lesley ann warren one plus one ( a.k.a . sympathy for the devil ) , a docudrama directed by jean-luc godard , featuring the rolling stones – ( u.k . ) otley , starring tom courtenay and romy schneider – ( u.k . ) . p . padosan ( neighbour ) , starring sunil dutt – ( india ) palo y hueso ( stick and bone ) – ( argentina ) the party , directed by blake edwards , starring peter sellers and claudine longet performance , directed by nicolas roeg and donald cammell , starring mick jagger and james fox – ( u.k . ) petulia , starring julie christie and george c . scott the pink jungle , starring james garner p.j . , starring george peppard , gayle hunnicutt , raymond burr , susan saint james a place for lovers ( amanti ) , directed by vittorio de sica , starring marcello mastroianni and faye dunaway planet of the apes , directed by franklin j . schaffner , starring charlton heston , roddy mcdowall , kim hunter the power , starring george hamilton pretty poison , starring tuesday weld and anthony perkins the private navy of sgt . o'farrell , starring bob hope and phyllis diller the producers , written and directed by mel brooks , starring zero mostel , gene wilder , kenneth mars , dick shawn il profeta ( il profeta ) , directed by dino risi , starring vittorio gassman and ann-margret – ( italy ) the profound desire of the gods ( kamigami no fukaki yokubō ) , directed by shohei imamura – ( japan ) project x , directed by william castle prudence and the pill , starring deborah kerr and david niven – ( u.k . ) psych-out , directed by richard rush , starring susan strasberg , dean stockwell , jack nicholson . r . rachel , rachel , directed by paul newman and starring joanne woodward romeo and juliet , directed by franco zeffirelli , starring leonard whiting and olivia hussey – ( u.k./italy ) rosemary 's baby , directed by roman polanski , starring mia farrow and john cassavetes . s . saathi , starring vyjayanthimala , rajendra kumar and simi garewal – ( india ) salt and pepper , directed by richard donner , starring sammy davis jr . and peter lawford – ( u.k . ) the scalphunters , starring burt lancaster , ossie davis and telly savalas the sea gull , directed by sidney lumet , starring vanessa redgrave and simone signoret – ( u.s./ u.k./greece ) sebastian , starring dirk bogarde and susannah york – ( u.k . ) secret ceremony , starring elizabeth taylor , mia farrow and robert mitchum the secret life of an american wife , starring walter matthau the secret war of harry frigg , starring paul newman the sergeant , starring rod steiger and john phillip law sergeant ryker , starring lee marvin and vera miles the shakiest gun in the west , starring don knotts and barbara rhoades shalako , starring sean connery and brigitte bardot – ( u.k . ) shame ( skammen ) , directed by ingmar bergman , starring liv ullmann and max von sydow – ( sweden ) the shoes of the fisherman , starring anthony quinn , laurence olivier , john gielgud , oskar werner , leo mckern , david janssen , barbara jefford signs of life ( lebenszeichen ) , directed by werner herzog – ( west germany ) single room furnished , starring jayne mansfield in her final film skidoo , directed by otto preminger , starring jackie gleason , carol channing and , in his final film , groucho marx sol madrid , starring david mccallum , stella stevens , rip torn song of summer , directed by ken russell – ( made for television ) – ( u.k . ) speedway , starring elvis presley and nancy sinatra spider baby , starring lon chaney jr . spirits of the dead , directed by federico fellini , louis malle and roger vadim , starring jane fonda , brigitte bardot , alain delon , terence stamp , peter fonda – ( france/italy ) the split , starring jim brown , gene hackman , ernest borgnine , julie harris the stalking moon , starring gregory peck and eva marie saint star ! , starring julie andrews stay away , joe , starring elvis presley stolen kisses ( baisers volés ) , directed by françois truffaut , starring jean-pierre léaud and delphine seyrig – ( france ) the strange affair , starring susan george – ( u.k . ) the subject was roses , starring patricia neal , jack albertson , martin sheen sunghursh , starring dilip kumar and vyjayanthimala – ( india ) the swedish kings ( shvedskite krale ) , directed by lyudmil kirkov , starring kiril gospodinov – ( bulgaria ) the sweet ride , starring michael sarrazin and jacqueline bisset the swimmer , starring burt lancaster . t . targets , directed by peter bogdanovich , starring boris karloff teorema , directed by pier paolo pasolini , starring silvana mangano and terence stamp – ( italy ) tevye and his seven daughters ( tuvia vesheva benotav ) , directed by menahem golan – ( israel ) they came to rob las vegas , starring gary lockwood , elke sommer , lee j . cobb , jack palance the thomas crown affair , directed by norman jewison , starring steve mcqueen and faye dunaway three in the attic , starring christopher jones , yvette mimieux , judy pace , maggie thrett a twist of sand , starring richard johnson and honor blackman – ( u.k . ) twisted nerve , starring hywel bennett and hayley mills – ( u.k . ) . u . the unfaithful wife ( la femme infidèle ) , directed by claude chabrol , starring stéphane audran – ( france ) up the junction , starring dennis waterman and suzy kendall – ( u.k . ) . v . villa rides , starring yul brynner and robert mitchum vixen ! , directed by russ meyer . w . what 's so bad about feeling good ? , starring george peppard and mary tyler moore where angels go , trouble follows , starring rosalind russell where eagles dare , directed by brian g . hutton , starring richard burton and clint eastwood – ( u.k./u.s . ) ole dole doff ( ole dole doff ) , directed by jan troell – ( sweden ) the wicked dreams of paula schultz , starring elke sommer and bob crane wild 90 , directed by and starring norman mailer wild in the streets , starring christopher jones , shelley winters , hal holbrook will penny , starring charlton heston and joan hackett winnie the pooh and the blustery day ( animation short ) witchfinder general , directed by michael reeves , starring vincent price – ( u.k . ) with six you get eggroll , directed by howard morris , starring doris day , brian keith , barbara hershey woman in chains ( la prisonnière ) , directed by henri-georges clouzot – ( france ) . y . yellow submarine , an animated film with music by the beatles – ( u.k . ) yours , mine and ours , starring lucille ball and henry fonda . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930 & ndash ; 1969 ) merrie melodies ( 1931 & ndash ; 1969 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953 & ndash ; 1968 ) daffy duck ( 1937–1968 ) cool cat ( 1967 & ndash ; 1969 ) merlin the magic mouse ( 1967 & ndash ; 1969 ) . film debuts . gary busey – wild in the streets john cleese – interlude timothy dalton – the lion in winter frederic forrest – the filthy five goldie hawn – the one and only , genuine , original family band barbara hershey – with six you get eggroll madeline kahn – the dove lainie kazan – dayton 's devils stacy keach – the heart is a lonely hunter margot kidder – the best damn fiddler from calabogie to kaladar sally kirkland – blue sondra locke – the heart is a lonely hunter ali macgraw – a lovely way to die marsha mason – beyond the law malcolm mcdowell – if . chuck norris – the wrecking crew hanna schygulla – the bridegroom , the comedienne and the pimp talia shire – the wild racers barbra streisand – funny girl jack thompson – personnel , or people ? . births . january 2 – cuba gooding , jr . , actor january 6 – john singleton , director and writer ( d . 2019 ) january 14 – ll cool j , rapper , actor january 19 – matt hill , canadian actor , voice actor , comedian january 29 – edward burns , actor and producer february 1 – pauly shore , actor february 12 – josh brolin , american actor february 13 - kelly hu , american actress , voice artist , former fashion model and beauty queen february 14 - phil lewis , american actor , comedian and director february 18 – molly ringwald , actress march 2 – daniel craig , actor march 4 – patsy kensit , actress march 6 - moira kelly , american actress march 12 – aaron eckhart , actor march 29 - lucy lawless , new zealand actress and singer march 30 – celine dion , singer april 8 – patricia arquette , actress april 14 – anthony michael hall , actor april 19 – ashley judd , actress april 24 – stacy haiduk , actress may 3 – amy ryan , american actress may 12 tony hawk , actor and professional skateboarder catherine tate , english actress , comedian and writer may 16 - stephen mangan , english actor , comedian and presenter may 20 – timothy olyphant , actor july 8 – billy crudup , actor july 18 – grant bowler , actor july 24 – kristin chenoweth , actress and singer july 26 – olivia williams , actress july 30 - terry crews , american actor , comedian , activist , artist , bodybuilder and former professional football player august 9 gillian anderson , american-british actress eric bana , australian actor august 11 – sophie okonedo , actress august 15 - debra messing , american actress august 28 – billy boyd , actor september 4 – john dimaggio , american actor and voice actor . september 9 – julia sawalha , actress september 10 – guy ritchie , director , screenwriter september 12 - paul f . tompkins , american comedian , actor and writer september 15 – danny nucci , actor september 15 – shawn doyle , actor september 22 – megan hollingshead , voice actress september 25 – will smith , actor september 26 – jim caviezel , actor september 28 – naomi watts , actress october – musola cathrine kaseketi , zambian director october 11 tiffany grant , voice actress jane krakowski , american actress and singer october 12 – hugh jackman , actor october 13 – tisha campbell , actress october 23 - maria darling , british voice actress october 27 – dileep , indian actor november 5 – sam rockwell , actor november 6 – kelly rutherford , actresses november 10 – tracy morgan , american actor , voice actor and comedian november 18 – owen wilson , actor november 21 – sean schemmel , voice actor december 2 – lucy liu , actress december 3 – brendan fraser , actor december 7 – greg ayres , voice actor . deaths . january 7 - hugo butler , 53 , canadian screenwriter , edison , the man , lassie come home january 18 – john ridgely , 58 , american actor , the big sleep , god is my co-pilot january 25 - virginia maskell , 31 , british actress , only two can play , virgin island february 4 – eddie baker , 70 , american actor , oranges and lemons , giant february 7 – nick adams , 36 , american actor , pillow talk , rebel without a cause february 13 – mae marsh , 73 , american actress , the birth of a nation , 3 godfathers february 20 – anthony asquith , 65 , british director , the v.i.p.s , the winslow boy march 10 – helen walker , 47 , american actress , impact , call northside 777 march 11 – pearl doles bell , 84 , american film scenarist , novelist and editor , her elephant man march 16 – june collyer , 63 , american actress , hangman 's house , a face in the fog march 18 - harry kurnitz , 60 , american screenwriter , witness for the prosecution , how to steal a million march 20 – carl theodor dreyer , 79 , danish director , the passion of joan of arc , gertrud march 24 – alice guy-blaché , 94 , pioneer french/american filmmaker , the pit and the pendulum , the great adventure march 30 – bobby driscoll , 31 , american actor , peter pan , treasure island april 4 - martin luther king jr . , 39 , american minister , civil rights activist and nobel peace prize laureate april 5 – lois andrews , 44 , american actress , dixie dugan , the desert hawk april 6 – keith pyott , 66 , english actor , village of the damned april 16 – fay bainter , 74 , american actress , woman of the year , the children 's hour april 24 – tommy noonan , 46 , american actor , a star is born , gentlemen prefer blondes may 5 – albert dekker , 62 , american actor , the wild bunch , kiss me deadly may 9 albert lewin , 73 , american director , pandora and the flying dutchman , the picture of dorian gray marion lorne , 84 , american actress , the graduate , strangers on a train may 10 – scotty beckett , 38 , american actor , my favorite wife , the jolson story may 21 – doris lloyd , 71 , british actress , disraeli , kind lady may 25 – charles k . feldman , 64 , american producer , a streetcar named desire , the seven year itch may 26 - joseph macdonald , 62 , mexico-born american cinematographer , my darling clementine , the young lions may 27 – denise legeay , 70 , french actress , happy couple , zigano may 31 – preben uglebjerg , 37 , danish actor , pigen og vandpytten june 4 – dorothy gish , 70 , american actress , the cardinal , orphans of the storm june 7 – dan duryea , 61 , american actor , winchester '73 , scarlet street june 8 - patricia jessel , 47 , british actress , the city of the dead , a funny thing happened on the way to the forum june 21 – ingeborg spangsfeldt , 72 , danish actress june 24 – tony hancock , 44 , british comedian , call me genius , the punch and judy man june 29 – hans egede budtz , 78 , danish actor , nøddebo præstegård july 1 – virginia weidler , 41 , american actress , the philadelphia story , the women july 12 – antonio pietrangeli , 49 , italian director , it happened in rome , the magnificent cuckold july 27 – lilian harvey , 62 , british actress and singer , waltz of love , let 's live tonight july 30 – alexander hall , 74 , american director , here comes mr . jordan , little miss marker august 23 – hunt stromberg , 74 , american producer , the thin man , the great ziegfeld august 26 – kay francis , 63 , american actress , charley 's aunt , little men august 30 – william talman , 53 , american actor , the hitch-hiker , crashout august 31 – dennis o'keefe , 60 , american actor , t-men , raw deal september 3 – isabel withers , 72 , american actress , possessed , lady of burlesque september 16 - nedrick young , 54 , american screenwriter , inherit the wind , the defiant ones september 18 – franchot tone , 63 , american actor , the mutiny on the bounty , advise & consent september 24 - virginia valli , 70 , american actress , the pleasure garden , evening clothes october 18 – lee tracy , 70 , american actor , dinner at eight , the best man october 29 – pert kelton , 61 , american actress , the music man , sing and like it october 30 – ramon novarro , 69 , mexican actor , ben-hur , mata hari november 8 – wendell corey , 54 , american actor , rear window , harriet craig november 9 – gerald mohr , 54 , american actor , gilda , the angry red planet november 18 – walter wanger , 74 , american producer , cleopatra , i want to live ! november 25 – upton sinclair , 90 , american author and producer , there will be blood , the gnome-mobile december 2 – colin kenny , 79 , irish actor , the adventures of robin hood , captain blood december 4 - archie mayo , 77 , american director , the petrified forest , a night in casablanca december 5 – fred clark , 54 , american actor , white heat , auntie mame december 12 – tallulah bankhead , 66 , american actress , lifeboat , stage door canteen , fanatic ( film ) december 15 – dorothy abbott , 47 , american actress , south pacific , red , hot and blue december 20 - john steinbeck , 66 , american author and screenwriter , viva zapata ! , the red pony . references . external links . '' filmmaking in west germany , 1968 '' ( goethe-institut )