Factory Records

history . 'the factory' . the factory name was first used for a club in may 1978 ; the first factory night was on the 26 may 1978 . the club became a manchester legend in its own right , being known variously as the russell club , caribbean club , psv ( public service vehicles ) club ( so titled as it was originally a social club for bus drivers who worked from the nearby depot ) and 'the factory' . the ‘ factory ’ night at the russell club was launched by alan erasmus , tony wilson , and helped by promoter alan wise . the name 'factory ' was chosen in homage to the new york club of the factory . as well as attracting numerous touring bands to the area and many upcoming post punk bands , it featured local bands including the durutti column ( managed at the time by erasmus and wilson ) , cabaret voltaire from sheffield and joy division . the club was demolished in 2001 . the club was located on the ne corner of the now demolished hulme crescents development , on the corner of royce rd and clayburn st . peter saville designed advertising for the club , and in september factory released an ep of music by acts who had played at the club ( the durutti column , joy division , cabaret voltaire , and comedian john dowie ) called a factory sample . 1978 and 1979 . as a follow-on from the successful 'factory nights ' held at the russell club , factory records made their first release , '' a factory sample '' , in january 1979 . at that time there was a punk label in manchester called rabid records , run by tosh ryan and martin hannett . it had several successful acts , including slaughter & the dogs ( whose tour manager was rob gretton ) , john cooper clarke , and jilted john . after his seminal tv series so it goes , tony wilson was interested in the way rabid records ran , and was convinced that the real money and power were in album sales . with a lot of discussion , tony wilson , rob gretton and alan erasmus set up factory records , with martin hannett from rabid . in 1978 , wilson compered the new wave afternoon at deeply vale festival . this was actually the fourth live appearance by the fledgling durutti column and that afternoon wilson also introduced an appearance ( very early in their career ) by the fall , featuring mark e . smith and marc riley on bass guitar . , was released in june . . 1980s . in january 1980 , the return of the durutti column was released , the first in a long series of releases by guitarist vini reilly . in may , joy division singer ian curtis committed suicide shortly before a planned tour of the usa . the following month saw joy division 's single '' love will tear us apart '' reach the uk top twenty , and their second album closer was released the following month . in late 1980 , the remaining members of joy division decided to continue as new order . factory branched out , with factory benelux being run as an independent label in conjunction with les disques du crepuscule , and factory us organising distribution for the uk label 's releases in america . in 1981 , factory and new order opened a nightclub and preparations were made to convert a victorian textile factory near the centre of manchester , which had lately seen service as a motor boat showroom . hannett left the label , as he had wanted to open a recording studio instead , and subsequently sued for unpaid royalties ( the case was settled out of court in 1984 ) . saville also quit as a partner due to problems with payments , although he continued to work for factory . wilson , erasmus and gretton formed factory communications ltd . to alcohol . therefore the haçienda ended up costing tens of thousands of pounds every month . in 1983 new order 's '' blue monday '' ( fac 73 ) became an international chart hit . however , the label did not make any money from it since the original sleeve , die-cut and designed to look like a floppy disk , was so costly to make that the label lost 5 pence on every copy they sold . saville noted that nobody at factory expected blue monday to be a commercially successful record at all , so nobody expected the cost to be an issue . 1985 saw the first release by happy mondays . new order and happy mondays became the most successful bands on the label , bankrolling a host of other projects . factory , and the haçienda , became a cultural hub of the emerging techno and acid house genres and their amalgamation with post-punk guitar music ( the '' madchester '' scene ) . 1986 saw mick middles ' book joy division to new order published by virgin books ( later being reprinted under the title factory ) . in 1989 the label extended its reach to fringe punk folk outfit to hell with burgundy . factory also opened a bar ( the dry bar , fac 201 ) and a shop ( the area , fac 281 ) in the northern quarter of manchester . . 1990s . factory 's headquarters ( fac 251 ) on charles street , near the oxford road bbc building , were opened in september 1990 ( prior to which the company was still registered at alan erasmus ' flat in didsbury ) . in 1991 , factory suffered two tragedies : the deaths of martin hannett and dave rowbotham . hannett had recently re-established a relationship with the label , working with happy mondays , and tributes including a compilation album and a festival were organised . rowbotham was one of the first musicians signed by the label ; he was an original member of the durutti column and shared the guitar role with vini reilly ; he was murdered and his body was found in his flat in burnage . saville 's association with factory was now reduced to simply designing for new order and their solo projects ( the band itself was in suspension , with various members recording as electronic , revenge and the other two ) . by 1992 , the label 's two most successful bands caused the label serious financial trouble . the happy mondays were recording their troubled fourth album yes please ! in barbados , and new order reportedly spent £400,000 on recording their comeback album republic . london records were interested in taking over factory but the deal fell through when it emerged that , due to factory 's early practice of eschewing contracts , new order rather than the label owned new order 's back catalogue . factory communications ltd , the company formed in 1981 , declared bankruptcy in november 1992 . many former factory acts , including new order , found a new home at london records . published his book on his time as co-owner of the haçienda , how not to run a club , and in 2010 he had six bass guitars made using wood from the haçienda 's dancefloor . . 2000s . the 2002 film 24 hour party people is centred on factory records , the haçienda , and the infamous , often unsubstantiated anecdotes and stories surrounding them . many of the people associated with factory , including tony wilson , have minor parts ; the central character , based on wilson , is played by actor and comedian steve coogan . anthony wilson , factory records ' founder , died on 10 august 2007 at age 57 , from complications arising from renal cancer . colin sharp , the durutti column singer during 1978 who took part in the a factory sample ep , died on 7 september 2009 , after suffering a brain haemorrhage . although his involvement with factory was brief , sharp was an associate for a short while of martin hannett and wrote a book called who killed martin hannett , which upset martin 's surviving relatives , who stated the book included numerous untruths and fiction . only months after sharp 's death , larry cassidy , section 25 's bassist and singer , died of unknown causes , on 27 february 2010 . in early 2010 , peter hook , in collaboration with the haçienda 's original interior designer ben kelly and british audio specialists funktion-one , renovated and reopened fac 251 ( the former factory records headquarters on charles street ) as a nightclub . the club still holds its original name , fac 251 , but people refer to it as '' the factory '' . despite ben kelly 's design influences , peter hook insists , '' it 's not the haçienda for fucks sake '' . the club has a weekly agenda , featuring djs and live bands of various genres . in may 2010 , james nice , owner of ltm recordings , published the book shadowplayers . the book charts the rise and fall of factory and offers detailed accounts and information about many key figures involved with the label . . fac numbers . musical releases , and essentially anything closely associated with the label , were given a catalogue number in the form of either fac , or fact , followed by a number . fact was reserved for full-length albums , while fac was used for both single song releases and many other factory '' productions '' , including : posters ( fac 1 advertised a club night ) , the haçienda ( fac 51 ) , a lawsuit filed against factory records by martin hannett ( fac 61 ) , bbc film : factory : from joy division to happy mondays a hairdressing salon ( fac 98 ) , a broadcast of channel 4 's the tube tv series ( fac 104 ) , customised packing tape ( fac 136 ) , a bucket on a restored watermill ( fac 148 ) , the haçienda cat ( fac 191 ) , a bet between wilson and gretton ( fac 253 ) , a radio advertisement ( fac 294 ) , and a website ( fac 421 ) . similar numbering was used for compact disc media releases ( facd ) , cd video releases ( facdv ) , factory benelux releases ( fac bn or fbn ) , factory us releases ( factus ) , and gap records australia releases ( facoz ) , with many available numbers restricted to record releases and other directly artist-related content . numbers were not allocated in strict chronological order ; numbers for joy division and new order releases generally ended in 3 , 5 , or 0 ( with most joy division and new order albums featuring multiples of 25 ) , a certain ratio and happy mondays in 2 , and the durutti column in 4 . factory classical releases were 226 , 236 and so on . despite the demise of factory records in 1992 , the catalogue was still active . additions included the 24 hour party people film ( fac 401 ) , its website ( fac 433 ) and dvd release ( facdvd 424 ) , and a book , factory records : the complete graphic album ( fac 461 ) . even tony wilson 's coffin received a factory catalogue number ; fac 501 . . factory classical . in 1989 , factory classical was launched with five albums by composer steve martland , the kreisler string orchestra , the duke string quartet ( which included durutti column viola player john metcalfe ) , oboe player robin williams and piano rolf hind . composers included martland , benjamin britten , paul hindemith , francis poulenc , dmitri shostakovich , michael tippett , györgy ligeti and elliott carter . releases continued until 1992 , including albums by graham fitkin , vocal duo red byrd , a recording of erik satie 's socrate , piers adams playing handel 's recorder sonatas , walter hus and further recordings both of martland 's compositions and of the composer playing mozart . successor labels . in 1994 , wilson attempted to revive factory records , in collaboration with london records , as '' factory too '' . the first release was by factory stalwarts the durutti column ; the other main acts on the label were hopper and space monkeys , and the label gave a uk release to the first album by stephin merritt 's side project the 6ths , wasps ' nests . a further release ensued : a compilation ep featuring previously unsigned manchester acts east west coast , the orch , italian love party , and k-track . this collection of 8 tracks ( 2 per band ) was simply entitled a factory sample too ( facd2.02 ) . the label was active until the late 1990s , latterly independent of london records , as was '' factory once '' , which organised reissues of factory material . wilson founded a short-lived fourth incarnation , f4 records , in the early 2000s . in 2012 , peter saville and james nice formed a new company called factory records ltd . , in association with alan erasmus and oliver wilson ( son of tony ) . this released only a vinyl reissue of from the hip by section 25 . nice subsequently revived the factory benelux imprint for factory reissues , and for new recordings by factory-associated bands . in 2019 warner music group marked the 40th anniversary of factory as a record label with a website , exhibition , and select vinyl editions including unknown pleasures and box set compilation communications 1978-1992 . factory records recording artists . the bands with the most numerous releases on factory records include joy division/new order , happy mondays , durutti column and a certain ratio . each of these bands has between 15 and 30 fac numbers attributed to their releases . retrospective . an exhibition took place celebrating the 20th anniversary of the closing of factory records ( 1978–1992 ) and its musical output , at the ice plant , manchester , between 4 and 7 may 2012 . the exhibition was called factvm ( from the latin for 'deed accomplished ' ) . factvm 20th anniversary exhibition , peterhook.co.uk , 11 april 2012 . retrieved 2013-09-21 . factvm factory records 1978-1992 exhibition , 5-7 may 2012 , cerysmaticfactory.info . retrieved 2013-09-21 . in october 2019 a new box set was released containing both rarities and the label ’ s releases from its first two years . . references . external links . dennis remmer 's extensive factory discography , with pictures and descriptions of each fac number john cooper 's factory catalogue the factory overseas releases ( australia . japan , canada , etc ) cerysmatic 's extensive factory archive and news site oliver wood 's factory graphics page . factory on musicbrainz