1930 in film

top-grossing films . the top ten 1930 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . events . february 23 : silent screen legend mabel normand dies at the age of 37 in monrovia , california after a lengthy battle with tuberculosis . march 10 : release of goodbye argentina ( adiós argentina ) , the first argentine film with a ( musical ) soundtrack . ada cornaro has her first starring role and libertad lamarque makes her film debut . april 6 : william fox sells his interest in fox film for 18 million and harley l . clarke becomes president . may 27 : howard hughes ' epic film hell 's angels premieres at tcl chinese theatre in hollywood and features jean harlow in her first major role as well as some impressive aerial sequences . although not a financial success upon its release due to its bloated budget , the film is acclaimed by critics and launches harlow as one of the 1930s ' biggest stars . september 3 : the hollywood reporter is first published . september 19 : the love parade receives a record six academy award nominations . november 1 : the big trail featuring a young john wayne in his first starring role is released in both 35mm and a very early form of 70mm film . it is the first large scale big-budget film of the sound era , costing over 2 million . the film is praised for its aesthetic quality and realism that will not become commonplace until many decades later . however , due to the new film format and the film 's release during the great depression , the film will go on to become a financial failure at the box office . academy awards . best picture : all quiet on the western front – universal pictures best director : lewis milestone – all quiet on the western front best actor : george arliss – disraeli best actress : norma shearer – the divorcee . notable films released in 1930 . united states unless stated . a . abi and rabi by ovanes ohanian ( iran ) abraham lincoln , starring walter huston november 8 , 1930 l'âge d'or ( the golden age ) , directed by luis buñuel november 29 , 1930 – ( france ) alraune march 2 , 1930 – ( germany ) all quiet on the western front , directed by lewis milestone , starring lew ayres april 21 , 1930 a lady to love , starring edward g . robinson and vilma bánky a man from wyoming , starring gary cooper animal crackers , starring the marx brothers august 23 , 1930 anna christie , starring greta garbo february 21 , 1930 the arizona kid , starring warner baxter and carole lombard . b . the bad man , starring walter huston the benson murder case , starring william powell the bat whispers , starring chester morris and una merkel big boy , a musical comedy with al jolson the big house , starring chester morris and wallace beery the big pond , starring maurice chevalier and claudette colbert the big trail , starring john wayne der blaue engel ( the blue angel ) , directed by josef von sternberg , starring marlene dietrich and emil jannings – ( germany ) billy the kid , starring johnny mack brown the blood of a poet ( le sang d'un poete ) , directed by jean cocteau – ( france ) borderline , starring paul robeson – ( gb ) bride of the regiment , starring walter pidgeon bright lights , directed by michael curtiz , a musical comedy in technicolor . c . call of the flesh , starring ramón novarro , a musical romance with technicolor sequences the cat creeps , starring helen twelvetrees , a mystery film released by universal chasing rainbows , starring bessie love , a musical comedy with technicolor sequences check and double check , a comedy based on amos ' n ' andy radio show children of pleasure , a musical comedy with technicolor sequences city girl , directed by f . w . murnau common clay , starring constance bennett the cuckoos , a musical comedy with technicolor sequences . d . danger lights , starring louis wolheim the dawn patrol , directed by howard hawks , starring richard barthelmess and douglas fairbanks , jr . the devil to pay ! , starring ronald colman , loretta young , myrna loy the divorcee , directed by robert z . leonard , starring norma shearer and robert montgomery dixiana , starring bebe daniels , a lavish musical comedy with technicolor sequences doughboys , a world war i comedy starring buster keaton . e . earth ( zemlya ) , directed by alexander dovzhenko – ( u.s.s.r . ) elstree calling , a british revue with color sequences , co-directed by alfred hitchcock – ( gb ) escape , directed by basil dean , starring gerald du maurier , edna best ( gb ) . f . fast and loose , starring miriam hopkins in her film debut , with carole lombard and frank morgan feet first , a comedy starring harold lloyd holiday , starring buster keaton the florodora girl , directed by harry beaumont ; starring marion davies , lawrence gray , and ilka chase the flute concert of sanssouci – ( germany ) follow thru , starring charles 'buddy ' rogers , a musical comedy entirely in technicolor . g . general crack , a drama with technicolor sequences starring john barrymore the girl said no , directed by sam wood l'age d'or , directed by luis buñuel good news , starring bessie love , a musical comedy with technicolor sequences . h . hell 's angels , directed by howard hughes , starring jean harlow and ben lyon hell 's heroes , directed by william wyler her man , starring helen twelvetrees high society blues , starring janet gaynor hold everything , starring joe e . brown , a musical comedy entirely in technicolor holiday , starring ann harding and mary astor . i . imperial and royal field marshal ( c . a k . polní maršálek ) – ( czechoslovakia ) ingagi , exploitation-documentary on gorilla-worshiping women encountered by an explorer . box-office hit was revealed to be a hoax . j-k . journey 's end , directed by james whale – ( gb/us ) just imagine , directed by david butler king of jazz , a revue with paul whiteman and his orchestra entirely in technicolor . l . ladies love brutes , a comedy directed by rowland v . lee , starring george bancroft and mary astor ladies of leisure , starring barbara stanwyck leathernecking , a musical comedy with technicolor sequences starring irene dunne let 's go native , starring jack oakie and jeanette macdonald liliom , starring charles farrell and rose hobart loose ankles , comedy drama starring loretta young and douglas fairbanks , jr . , directed by ted wilde lord byron of broadway , a musical drama with technicolor sequences the lottery bride , a musical comedy with technicolor sequences starring jeanette macdonald . m . madam satan , directed by cecil b . demille mamba , first talking drama entirely in technicolor starring jean hersholt and eleanor boardman mammy , a musical comedy starring al jolson with technicolor sequences the man from blankley 's , comedy drama directed by alfred e . green starring john barrymore manslaughter , starring claudette colbert and fredric march min and bill , starring marie dressler and wallace beery montana moon , starring joan crawford and johnny mack brown monte carlo , directed by ernst lubitsch , starring jack buchanan and jeanette macdonald morocco , starring gary cooper and marlene dietrich murder ! , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring herbert marshall – ( gb ) ( le mystère de la chambre jaune ) , directed by marcel l'herbier – ( france ) . n-o . nerone , directed by alessandro blasetti – ( italy ) night birds directed by richard eichberg ( germany/gb ) not so dumb , directed by king vidor , starring marion davies and elliott nugent the other ( der andere ) , directed by robert wiene – ( germany ) outside the law , directed by tod browning , starring edward g . robinson . p . paid , starring joan crawford and robert armstrong paramount on parade , an all-star revue with technicolor sequences peacock alley , a musical drama with technicolor sequences starring mae murray people on sunday ( menschen am sonntag ) , directed by robert siodmak – ( germany ) prix de beauté ( beauty prize ) , starring louise brooks – ( france ) puttin ' on the ritz , directed by edward sloman , starring joan bennett , with technicolor sequences . r . raffles , featuring ronald colman and kay francis reaching for the moon , starring douglas fairbanks renegades , starring warner baxter and myrna loy the return of dr . fu manchu , starring warner oland and jean arthur the rogue song , a musical operetta entirely in technicolor directed by lionel barrymore the royal family of broadway , starring fredric march . s . show girl in hollywood , a musical comedy with technicolor sequences directed by mervyn leroy son of the gods , a drama with technicolor sequences starring richard barthelmess song o ' my heart , a musical starring irish tenor john mccormack , directed by frank borzage , and shot in both 35mm and 70mm fox grandeur formats the song of love ( la canzone dell'amore ) directed by gennaro righelli , starring dria paola , isa pola – ( italy ) spring is here musical directed by john francis dillon st . jorgen 's day ( prazdnik svyatogo yorgena ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) soup to nuts , a comedy and film debut for the three stooges street of chance , starring william powell and jean arthur sweet kitty bellairs , a musical comedy entirely in technicolor . t . tarakanova , directed by raymond bernard – ( france ) the temporary widow , starring lilian harvey and laurence olivier – ( gb ) three faces east , starring erich von stroheim the three from the filling station ( die drei von der tankstelle ) , directed by wilhelm thiele and starring willy fritsch , lilian harvey – ( germany ) tom sawyer , starring jackie coogan true to the navy , starring clara bow and fredric march two hearts in waltz time ( zwei herzen im 3/4 takt ) – ( germany ) . u-v . under a texas moon , a musical comedy entirely in technicolor directed by michael curtiz under the roofs of paris ( sous les toits de paris ) , directed by rené clair – ( france ) the vagabond king , a musical drama entirely in technicolor starring jeanette macdonald viejo smoking ( old smoking jacket ) – ( argentina ) . w-y . the w plan , directed by victor saville , starring brian aherne and madeleine carroll – ( gb ) wara wara , directed by josé maria velasco maidana ; now the only surviving silent bolivian feature film way for a sailor , starring john gilbert and wallace beery westfront 1918 ( vier von der infanterie ) , directed by g . w . pabst – ( germany ) whoopee ! , a musical comedy in technicolor with eddie cantor young man of manhattan , starring claudette colbert , charles ruggles and ginger rogers young woodley , directed by thomas bentley , starring madeleine carroll ( britain ) . serials . across the world with mr & mrs martin johnson hunting tigers in india the indians are coming the jade box the lightning express the lone defender , starring rin tin tin terry of the times the voice from the sky . short film series . buster keaton ( 1917–1941 ) our gang ( 1922–1944 ) laurel and hardy ( 1921–1943 ) another fine mess ( 28 min ) night owls ( 21 min ) hog wild ( 19 min ) laughing gravy ( 21 min ) brats ( 21 min ) below zero ( 20 min ) spooney melodies ( 5 min ) . animated short film series . felix the cat ( 1919-1936 ) april maze ( 7 min ) skulls and sculls hootchy cootchy parlais vous aesop 's film fables ( 1921–1933 ) krazy kat ( 1925–1940 ) mickey mouse ( 1928–1953 ) just mickey ( 7 min ) the barnyard concert ( 6 min ) the cactus kid the fire fighters the shindig the chain gang the gorilla mystery the picnic pioneer days oswald the lucky rabbit silly symphonies summer autumn the cannibal capers night frolicking fish arctic antics midnight in a toyshop monkey melodies winter playful pan screen songs ( 1929–1938 ) prisoner 's song ( 8 min ) talkartoons ( 1929–1932 ) dizzy dishes ( first betty boop cartoon ) barnacle bill ( second betty boop cartoon ) looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) sinkin ' in the bathtub congo jazz hold anything the booze hangs high box car blues flip the frog ( 1930–1933 ) the village barber ( 7 min ) puddle pranks ( 7 min ) cuckoo murder case ( 8 min ) little orphan willie flying fists ( 7 min ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) toby the pup ( 1930–1931 ) the museum toby the miner toby the fiddler toby the showman the bug house '' beary bear '' ( 1930–1949 ) '' experiment gone wrong '' '' hickory 's hijinks '' '' piano problems '' '' oh deer ! '' '' bushy the lion '' '' trouble in paris '' . births . january 3 – robert loggia , american actor ( died 2015 ) january 10 – roy e . disney , american film executive ( died 2009 ) january 11 – rod taylor , australian actor ( died 2015 ) january 13 – frances sternhagen , american actress january 19 – tippi hedren , american actress january 29 – benjamin tatar , american actor ( died 2012 ) january 30 – gene hackman , american actor february 6 – allan king , canadian director ( died 2009 ) february 10 – robert wagner , american actor february 16 – ricou browning , american film director , actor , cinematographer and stuntman february 20 – patricia smith ( actress ) , american actress ( died 2011 ) february 27 – joanne woodward , american actress march 6 – allison hayes , american actress ( died 1977 ) march 16 – lotte ledl , austrian actress march 24 – steve mcqueen , american actor ( died 1980 ) march 24 30 – estella blain , french actress ( died 1982 ) april 1 – grace lee whitney , american actress ( died 2015 ) april 7 – andrew sachs , german-born british actor and writer ( died 2016 ) april 13 – roger browne , american actor april 14 – bradford dillman , american actor ( died 2018 ) april 18 – clive revill , new zealand actor april 21 – silvana mangano , italian actress ( died 1989 ) april 24 – richard donner , american director and producer april 25 – paul mazursky , american director and actor ( died 2014 ) april 28 – carolyn jones , american actress ( died 1983 ) may 9 – joan sims , english actress ( died 2001 ) may 11 – bud ekins , american actor and stuntman ( died 2007 ) may 31 – clint eastwood , american actor , director and producer june 1 – edward woodward , english actor and singer ( died 2009 ) june 15 – odile versois , french actress ( died 1980 ) june 19 gena rowlands , american actress diana sowle , american actress ( died 2018 ) june 29 – ariadna welter , mexican actress ( died 1998 ) july 10 – bruce boa , canadian actor ( died 2004 ) july 18 – burt kwouk , british-chinese actor ( died 2016 ) august 12 – peter weck , austrian film director and actor august 14 – liz fraser , english actress ( died 2018 ) august 25 – sir sean connery , scottish-born actor ( died 2020 ) september 16 – anne francis , american actress ( died 2011 ) september 21 – dawn addams , english actress ( died 1985 ) october 1 – richard harris , irish actor ( died 2002 ) october 5 – yuriy yakovlev , bulgarian actor ( died 2002 ) october 23 – gérard blain , french actor and director ( died 2000 ) october 24 – jack angel , american voice actor and former radio personality december 3 – jean-luc godard , french director december 9 – francesco maselli , italian director december 11 – jean-louis trintignant , french actor december 17 – armin mueller-stahl , german actor . deaths . january 31 – dorothy seastrom , american actress ( born 1903 ) february 23 – mabel normand , american actress ( born 1892 ) july 7 – arthur conan doyle , british author and creator of sherlock holmes ( born 1859 ) august 26 – lon chaney , american actor ( born 1883 ) september 14 – tommy mintz , american actor , assistant director ( born 1906 ) september 15 – milton sills , american actor ( born 1882 ) november 8 – clare eames , american actress ( born 1894 ) december 15 – diane ellis , american actress ( born 1909 ) . film debuts . pat o'brien – compliments of the season james cagney – sinners ' holiday john carradine – bright lights buster crabbe – good news bing crosby – king of jazz frances dee – playboy of paris irene dunne – leathernecking jimmy durante – roadhouse nights rex harrison – the great game miriam hopkins – fast and loose ruby keeler – show girl in hollywood hedy lamarr – money on the street ethel merman – her future laurence olivier – the temporary widow eleanor powell – queen high penny singleton – good news maureen o'sullivan – so this is london spencer tracy – the strong arm . references .