1923 in literature

events . january a copy of james joyce 's 1922 novel ulysses posted to a london bookseller by the proprietor of davy byrne 's pub in dublin , which features in the book , is detained as obscene by the u.k . authorities . t . e . lawrence is forced to leave the british royal air force , his alias as 352087 aircraftman john hume ross having been exposed . he joins the royal tank corps as 7875698 private t . e . shaw . february 5 – poet and super-tramp w . h . davies marries helen payne , an ex-prostitute thirty years his junior , at east grinstead . march – the first issue of the pulp magazine weird tales appears in the u.s . it becomes noted for its horror fiction and fantasy . april 11 – seán o'casey 's drama the shadow of a gunman , the first of his '' dublin trilogy '' , set during the recent irish war of independence , opens at the abbey theatre , dublin . april 21 – the first of a series of innovative modern–dress productions of shakespeare plays , cymbeline , directed by h . k . ayliff , opens at barry jackson 's birmingham repertory theatre in england . may 9 – the première of bertolt brecht 's play in the jungle of cities ( im dickicht der städte ) at the residenz theatre in munich is disrupted by nazi demonstrators . may 11 – dorothy l . sayers ' fictional english detective and bibliophile , lord peter wimsey , makes his first appearance in the novel whose body ? , published by boni & liveright in the united states . the first u.k . edition follows in october from t . fisher unwin . july 6 – a riot breaks out at the re-staging of tristan tzara 's dadaist play the gas heart at the théâtre michel , paris , between those aligned with andré breton and those aligned with tzara . the conflict leads to a permanent split in the dada movement and the founding of surrealism as an alternative . summer – the teenage english brothers julian and quentin bell begin issuing a family newspaper , the charleston bulletin , at their sussex home , charleston farmhouse , with occasional contributions by their maternal aunt virginia woolf . september – t . s . eliot 's poem the waste land ( 1922 ) is first published in the united kingdom in book form , complete with notes , in a limited edition by the hogarth press of richmond upon thames . the firm is run by eliot 's bloomsbury group friends leonard and virginia woolf , and the type handset by virginia ( completed in july ) . october 8 – a production of shakespeare 's titus andronicus at the old vic , directed by robert atkins , is the first in london since 1857 . it is also the first to restore the full original text since the playwright 's time . december – persian poet nima yooshij publishes the poem afsaneh , the manifesto of the she ' r-e nimaa ' i school of modernist poetry . december 28 – george bernard shaw 's drama saint joan is premièred at the garrick theatre ( new york city ) on broadway by the theatre guild , with winifred lenihan in the title role . unknown dates the poet xu zhimo founds the crescent moon society at private dinner meetings in china . the swedish printers almqvist & wiksell of uppsala move into publishing . new books . fiction . sherwood anderson – many marriages gertrude atherton – black oxen arnold bennett – riceyman steps maxwell bodenheim – blackguard elizabeth bowen – encounters ( short stories ) thomas alexander boyd – through the wheat max brand – seven trails john buchan – midwinter hall caine – the woman of knockaloe willa cather – a lost lady alphonse de chateaubriant – la brière ( passion and peat ) agatha christie – the murder on the links jean cocteau – thomas l'imposteur ( thomas the imposter ) colette – green wheat ( le blé en herbe ) joseph conrad – the rover marie corelli – love and the philosopher susan ertz – madame claire hans fallada – anton und gerda jeffery farnol – sir john dering lion feuchtwanger – die häßliche herzogin ( the ugly duchess ) j . s . fletcher – the charing cross mystery zona gale – faint perfume garet garrett – cinder buggy philip gibbs – the middle of the road kahlil gibran – the prophet jaroslav hašek – the good soldier švejk ( osudy dobrého vojáka švejka za světové války ) ernest hemingway – three stories and ten poems hermann hesse – demian ( first english-language edition ) georgette heyer the great roxhythe instead of the thorn powder and patch winifred holtby – anderby wold aldous huxley – antic hay ernst jünger – sturm d . h . lawrence kangaroo the fox , the captain 's doll , the ladybird : three novellas maurice leblanc – les huit coups de l'horloge ( the eight strokes of the clock ) david lindsay – sphinx agnes mure mackenzie – without conditions katherine mansfield – the doves ' nest ( short stories , published posthumously ) stratis myrivilis – η ζωή εν τάφω ( i zoí en tafo , life in the tomb ; serialization ) zofia nałkowska – romans teresy hennert ( the romance of teresa hennert ) liam o'flaherty – thy neighbour 's wife frank l . packard – the four stragglers marcel proust – the prisoner ( la prisonnière , vol . 5 of in search of lost time ) raymond radiguet – le diable au corps ( the devil in the flesh ) william macleod raine – iron heart maurice renard – new bodies for old ( first english language edition of le docteur lerne – sous-dieu ( 1908 ) ) joseph roth – das spinnennetz ( the spider 's web ) rafael sabatini – fortune 's fool dorothy l . sayers – whose body ? james stephens – deirdre gene stratton-porter – the white flag italo svevo – la coscienza di zeno alexei tolstoy – aelita ( аэлита ) jean toomer – cane sigrid undset – the bridal wreath ( english translation of kransen by charles archer ) jules verne ( died 1905 ) ( first english-language editions ) the castaways of the flag the lighthouse at the end of the world ( largely attributed to michel verne ) e . c . vivian – fields of sleep edgar wallace bones of the river the books of bart captains of souls chick ( short stories ) the clue of the new pin the green archer the missing million h . g . wells – men like gods edith wharton – a son at the front margaret widdemer – graven image william carlos williams – the great american novel margaret wilson – the able mclaughlins p . g . wodehouse the inimitable jeeves leave it to psmith virginia woolf – '' mrs dalloway in bond street '' in the dial vol . 75 , no . 1 , july . anzia yezierska – salome of the tenements . children and young people . cicely mary barker – flower fairies of the spring ( first in the flower fairies series of at least ten books ) vitaly bianki – whose nose is better ? ( чей нос лучше ? ) edgar rice burroughs – tarzan and the golden lion charles boardman hawes – the dark frigate hugh lofting – doctor dolittle 's post office ( third in the doctor dolittle series of 13 books ) lucy maud montgomery – emily of new moon ( first in the emily series of three books ) felix salten – bambi , a life in the woods ( bambi , a life in the woods ) ruth plumly thompson – the cowardly lion of oz ( 17th in the oz series overall and the third written by her ) else ury – nesthäkchen and her chicks hugh walpole – jeremy and hamlet ( second in the jeremy series of three books ) tom swift and his flying boat ( 26th in the original series ) . drama . dorothy brandon – the outsider bertolt brecht – in the jungle of cities gerald du maurier – the dancers ian hay – good luck garnet holme ( adapted from helen hunt jackson ) – the ramona pageant georg kaiser – side by side ( nebeneinander ) charles mcevoy – the likes of her seán o'casey – the shadow of a gunman elmer rice – the adding machine arnold ridley – the ghost train jules romains – knock ( knock , ou le triomphe de la médecine ) george bernard shaw – saint joan marie stopes – our ostriches ernst toller – hinkemann sergei tretyakov do you hear , moscow ? ( слышишь , москва ? ! ) earth in turmoil sutton vane – outward bound stanisław ignacy witkiewicz the crazy locomotive ( szalona lokomotywa ) janulka , daughter of fizdejko ( janulka , córka fizdejki ) the madman and the nun ( wariat i zakonnica ) . poetry . louise bogan – body of this death : poems e . e . cummings – tulips and chimneys robert frost – new hampshire ( including '' stopping by woods on a snowy evening '' ) pablo neruda – crepusculario sukumar ray – abol tabol wallace stevens – harmonium david vogel – lifney hasha'ar ha'afel ( before the dark gate ) william carlos williams go go spring and all . non-fiction . vladimir arsenyev – dersu uzala godfrey benson , 1st baron charnwood – theodore roosevelt algernon blackwood – episodes before thirty j . b . bury – a history of the later roman empire from the death of theodosius i to the death of justinian e . k . chambers – the elizabethan stage winston churchill – the world crisis ( volumes 1 & 2 specifically ) le corbusier – toward an architecture ( vers une architecture ) sigmund freud – the ego and the id khalil gibran – the prophet robert henri – the art spirit rudyard kipling – the irish guards in the great war d . h . lawrence – studies in classic american literature arthur moeller van den bruck – das dritte reich mihai ralea – l'idée de la révolution dans les doctrines socialistes mary roberts rinehart – the out trail max weber – wirtschaftsgeschichte rose wilder lane – the peaks of shala . births . january 2 – rachel waterhouse , english historian and author ( died 2020 ) january 6 – jacobo timerman , argentine writer ( died 1999 ) january 9 – david holbrook , english novelist , poet and academic ( died 2011 ) january 10 – ingeborg drewitz , german novelist and dramatist ( died 1986 ) january 16 – anthony hecht , american poet ( died 2004 ) january 29 – paddy chayefsky , american writer ( died 1981 ) january 31 – norman mailer , american writer and journalist ( died 2007 ) february 2 – james dickey , american poet and author ( died 1997 ) february 9 – brendan behan , irish writer and playwright ( died 1964 ) february 12 – alan dugan , american poet and author ( died 2003 ) march 26 – elizabeth jane howard , english novelist ( died 2014 ) march 27 shusaku endo ( 遠藤 周作 ) , japanese novelist ( died 1996 ) louis simpson , jamaican-born american poet ( died 2012 ) march 30 – milton acorn , canadian poet , writer , and playwright ( died 1986 ) april 3 – daniel hoffman , american poet ( died 2013 ) april 21 – john mortimer , english dramatist , screenwriter and barrister ( died 2009 ) april 23 – manuel mejía vallejo , colombian novelist ( died 1998 ) may 1 – joseph heller , american novelist ( died 1999 ) may 21 – dorothy hewett , australian poet , playwright and novelist ( died 2002 ) june 7 – martyn goff , english author and bookseller ( died 2015 ) june 14 – judith kerr , german-born english children 's writer ( died 2019 ) june 24 – yves bonnefoy , french poet and essayist ( died 2016 ) july 2 – wisława szymborska , polish poet and essayist ( died 2012 ) july 12 – james e . gunn , american science fiction writer ( died 2020 ) july 17 – james purdy , american writer ( died 2009 ) august 21 – emma smith ( elspeth hallsmith ) , english novelist and autobiographer ( died 2018 ) september 13 – miroslav holub , czech poet ( died 1998 ) september 22 – dannie abse , welsh poet and writer ( died 2014 ) october 5 – stig dagerman , swedish author and journalist ( died 1954 ) october 15 – italo calvino , italian writer ( died 1985 ) october 24 – denise levertov , english-born american poet ( died 1997 ) november 20 – nadine gordimer , south african writer ( died 2014 ) november 23 – gloria whelan , american poet , short story writer , and novelist december 14 – gerard reve , dutch novelist and poet ( died 2006 ) december 21 – richard hugo , american poet and educator ( died 1982 ) unknown date – qu bo ( 曲波 ) , chinese novelist ( died 2002 ) . deaths . january 3 – jaroslav hašek , czech novelist ( born 1883 ) january 9 – katherine mansfield , new zealand writer ( born 1888 ) february 1 – ernst troeltsch , german theologian ( born 1865 ) february 8 – bernard bosanquet , english philosopher and political theorist ( born 1848 ) march 6 – william boyle , irish dramatist and short story writer ( born 1853 ) march 26 – sarah bernhardt , french actress ( born 1844 ) march 29 – j . smeaton chase , english-born american author and photographer ( born 1864 ) april 30 – emerson hough , american fiction author ( born 1857 ) may 10 – ulderiko donadini , croatian novelist , dramatist and short story writer ( suicide , born 1894 ) may 23 – henry bradley , english philologist and lexicographer ( born 1845 ) june 4 – hume nisbet , scottish thriller writer , poet and artist ( born 1849 ) june 10 louis couperus , dutch novelist and poet ( born 1863 ) pierre loti , french novelist and travel writer ( born 1850 ) june 22 – morris rosenfeld , yiddish poet ( born 1862 ) june 24 – edith södergran , finnish swedish poet ( born 1892 ) july 9 – florence caddy , english non-fiction writer ( born 1837 ) july 16 louis couperus , dutch writer of fiction , non-fiction and poetry ( born 1863 ) charles boardman hawes , american writer of fiction & non-fiction ( born 1889 ) august 19 – vilfredo pareto , italian economist , political scientist and philosopher ( born 1848 ) august 24 – kate douglas wiggin , american children 's author ( born 1856 ) october 6 – oscar browning , english historian ( born 1837 ) october 8 – florence montgomery , english novelist and children 's writer ( born 1843 ) october 12 – john cadvan davies , welsh poet and wesleyan methodist minister ( born 1846 ) october 14 – marcellus emants , dutch novelist ( born 1848 ) november 18 – george wharton james , english-born american journalist ( born 1858 ) november 23 – urmuz , romanian short prose writer ( suicide , born 1883 ) december 1 – virginie loveling , flemish poet and novelist ( born 1836 ) december 4 – maurice barrès , french novelist and journalist ( born 1862 ) december 12 – raymond radiguet , french novelist and poet ( born 1903 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : arnold bennett , riceyman steps james tait black memorial prize for biography : sir ronald ross , memoirs , etc . newbery medal for children 's literature : hugh lofting , the voyages of doctor dolittle nobel prize in literature : william butler yeats prix goncourt : lucien fabre , rabevel ou le mal des ardents pulitzer prize for drama : owen davis , icebound pulitzer prize for poetry : edna st . vincent millay , the ballad of the harp-weaver : a few figs from thistles : eight sonnets in american poetry , 1922 . a miscellany pulitzer prize for the novel : willa cather , one of ours . references .