Noggin the Nog

plot and characters . the stories were based around the central character of noggin , the rather simple but good-natured son of knut , king of the nogs , and his queen grunhilda . when king knut dies , noggin must find a queen to rule beside him or else forfeit the crown to his uncle , nogbad the bad . noggin meets and marries nooka of the nooks ( an inuit princess ) , and becomes the new king . noggin and nooka have a son , knut , who comes to the fore in later storylines . other regular characters include : thor nogson & nbsp ; – noggin 's closest friend and captain of the royal guard . nogson portrays himself as '' fierce '' , but is actually anything but fierce . nevertheless , he is unfailingly loyal , and never hesitates to defend the honour of his king . olaf the lofty & nbsp ; – an eccentric and occasionally arrogant , but well-meaning , inventor . olaf 's inventions rarely work out exactly as he intends them to , although his most notable success is the flying machine . graculus & nbsp ; – a big green bird who arrives as nooka 's messenger in the first episode . later by chance they return to the place of his birth and meet his family , who unlike him are incapable of human speech . grolliffe & nbsp ; – a friendly ice dragon whom noggin befriends , and who helps noggin and his friends in a later episode . although the individual stories vary , any trouble encountered by the heroes is usually caused by nogbad the bad , who never gives up trying to claim noggin 's throne for himself . nogbad always loses in the end , though not always through the intervention of noggin himself . television series . the original television series was first broadcast , beginning on 11 september 1959 , by the bbc in the united kingdom , and continued until 1965 . production company smallfilms made twenty-one programmes in black and white , and six in colour , each with a running time of ten minutes . when the programme made a comeback in 1982 it ran for just six episodes and was made in colour . the new series comprised one new two-part story and a colour remake of the second saga , originally a six-parter , '' noggin and the ice dragon '' . the level of stop-motion animation was basic , but did not detract from the popularity of the series . the on-screen title is '' the saga of noggin the nog '' , since the stories were based on the principle of a norse saga , and episodes began with the words , '' listen to me and i will tell you the story of noggin the nog , as it was told in the days of old '' , or '' in the lands of the north , where the black rocks stand guard against the cold sea , in the dark night that is very long , the men of the northlands sit by their great log fires and they tell a tale & nbsp ; . and those tales they tell are the stories of a kind and wise king and his people ; they are the sagas of noggin the nog . welcome to northlands , a tribute to noggin , king of the nogs and the people of the northlands . '' these opening lines were accompanied by vernon elliott 's bassoon score . visually , the series was primarily inspired by the lewis chessmen ( of norse origin ) ; one of the stories is about noggin playing chess with nogbad the bad . a new series was rumoured in the late 1990s , but nothing came of it . the complete series was released on dvd in 2005 , in a package that also included dvd versions of the short story books . television sagas . 1 . the saga of noggin the nog ( a.k.a . the king of the nogs ) ( 6 episodes ) ( b/w ) episode 1 & nbsp ; – the king episode 2 & nbsp ; – the ship episode 3 & nbsp ; – the journey episode 4 & nbsp ; – the island episode 5 & nbsp ; – nogbad the bad episode 6 & nbsp ; – the king of the nogs 2 . the ice dragon ( 6 episodes ) ( b/w ) 1 & nbsp ; – the little man 2 & nbsp ; – the journey 3 & nbsp ; – the hot water valley 4 & nbsp ; – the dragon 5 & nbsp ; – the treasure 6 & nbsp ; – nogbad the bad 3 . the flying machine ( 3 episodes ) ( b/w ) 1 & nbsp ; – the jar 2 & nbsp ; – the birds 3 & nbsp ; – the city 4 . the omruds ( 3 episodes ) ( b/w ) 1 & nbsp ; – the great invention 2 & nbsp ; – under the hill 3 & nbsp ; – the challenge 5 . the firecake ( 3 episodes ) ( b/w ) 1 & nbsp ; – the crown of flowers 2 & nbsp ; – the dream 3 & nbsp ; – the sorcerer 's sword 6 . noggin and the ice dragon ( 4 episodes ) ( colour ) ( remake of 2nd saga ) 7 . noggin and the pie ( 2 episodes ) ( colour ) ( based on the book published in 1971 ) narrated by oliver postgate . character voices by oliver postgate and ronnie stevens . stories by oliver postgate , pictures by peter firmin . music by vernon elliott . books . various noggin short stories were also published , and a visitor in one of them , noggin and the moon mouse , provided the basis for the characters in the popular clangers tv series . all the books were written by oliver postgate , illustrated in full colour by peter firmin , and published by kaye & ward . edmund ward starting to read books : noggin the king ( 1965 ) noggin and the whale ( 1965 ) noggin and the dragon ( 1966 ) nogbad comes back ! ( 1966 ) noggin and the moon mouse ( 1967 ) nogbad and the elephants ( 1967 ) noggin and the money ( 1973 ) noggin and the storks ( 1973 ) there was also a standard book series published in the 1960s and 1970s consisting of 12 illustrated hardback books : king of the nogs ( 1968 ) the ice dragon ( 1968 ) the flying machine ( 1968 ) the omruds ( 1968 ) the island ( 1969 ) the firecake ( 1969 ) the pie ( 1971 ) the flowers ( 1971 ) the game ( 1972 ) the monster ( 1972 ) the black-wash ( 1975 ) the icebergs ( 1975 ) a large book about nog 's life , illustrated in black and white , was also published : nogmania ( 1977 ) ( reprinted by the dragon 's friendly society in 2000 ) two omnibus books were published to tie in with the colour tv series : three tales of noggin volume 1 ( 1981 ) ( noggin the king/noggin and the whale/noggin and the moon mouse ) three tales of noggin volume 2 ( 1981 ) ( noggin and the dragon/nogbad and the elephant/noggin and the storks ) in 1992 a fully illustrated 96-page colour book , the sagas of noggin the nog , was published by harpercollins . this volume contains four tales : king of the nogs , the ice dragon , the flying machine , and the omruds . vhs and dvd releases . between 8 may 1990 and 5 august 1991 . two noggin the nog videos were released by the bbc . the saga of noggin the nog : tales of the northlands ( bbcv 4359 ) . released : 8 may 1990 . two episodes : '' noggin and the ice dragon '' ( colour ) , noggin and the flying machine ( black & white ) . the saga of noggin the nog : the omruds/the firecake ( bbcv 4651 ) . released : 5 august 1991 two episodes : '' noggin and the omruds '' ( black & white ) , '' noggin and the firecake '' ( black & white ) . recognition . noggin has received an accolade achieved by very few norse characters & nbsp ; – he appeared with the ice dragon reading him a note from nogbad , on a british commemorative postage stamp ( sg1804 ) in january 1994 . the art work for the stamp was drawn by peter firmin , who also produced a series of illustrations for the advertising campaign to publicize the new stamps . the stamp was one of a set of ten on the theme of '' messages '' , featuring characters from british children 's literature . all the characters were pictured holding a letter , note or message . noggin 's note reads : '' i , nogbad 'the bad ' do hereby promise to be 'the good ' . '' . references . external links . noggin the nog fan site noggin the nog at smallfilms.co.uk the dragons ' friendly society