François Guizot

early years . guizot was born at nîmes to a bourgeois protestant family . on 8 april 1794 , when françois guizot was 6 , his father was executed on the gallows at nîmes during the reign of terror . from then on , the boy 's mother was completely responsible for his upbringing . driven from nîmes by the revolution , madame guizot and her son went to geneva , where he was educated . in spite of her decided calvinism opinions , the theories of jean-jacques rousseau influenced madame guizot . a strong liberal , she even adopted the notion inculcated in emile that every man ought to learn a manual trade or craft . guizot learnt carpentry , and succeeded in making a table with his own hands , which is still preserved . in the work which he entitled memoirs of my own times guizot omitted all personal details of his early life . in 1805 he arrived in paris and he entered at the age eighteen as tutor into the family of m . stapfer , formerly swiss minister in france . he soon began to write in a journal edited by jean-baptiste-antoine suard , the publiciste . this connection introduced him to the literary society of paris . in october 1809 , aged twenty-two , he wrote a review of françois-rené de chateaubriand 's martyrs , which won chateaubriand 's approbation and thanks , and he continued to contribute largely to the periodical press . at suard 's he had made the acquaintance of pauline de meulan ( born 2 november 1773 colburn 's new monthly magazine by e.w . allen , 1828 , pg . 174 ) , a contributor to suard 's journal . her contributions were interrupted by illness , but immediately resumed and continued by an unknown hand . it was discovered that françois guizot had substituted for her . in 1812 mademoiselle de meulan married guizot . she died in 1827 . ( an only son , françois , born in 1819 , died in 1837 of consumption . ) in 1828 guizot married elisa dillon , niece of his first wife , and also an author . she died in 1833 , leaving two daughters , henriette ( 1829–1908 ) , a co-author with her father and prolific writer herself , and pauline ( 1831–1874 ) and a son , guillaume ( 1833–1892 ) , who attained some reputation as a scholar and writer . he and historian francois mignet invented the concept of the bourgeois revolution . on 15 june 1837 , guizot sat next to the princess lieven at a dinner given by the duc de broglie . after twenty years as russian ambassadress to london , she had separated from her husband and sought refuge in paris , where from 1835 she had held an increasingly influential salon occasionally attended by guizot . she had sympathised with him over his son 's death earlier in 1837 . from 15 june , they formed a close and loving friendship , exchanging over 5000 letters . he was present at her death in paris in 1856 . her role in supporting and influencing his aims in aristocratic , political and diplomatic circles was considerable , aided by her retaining many contacts in england and her brother being chief of secret police in russia and a confidant of the tsar . madeleine bingham , princess lieven – russian intriguer , hamish hamilton 1982 , p.209 et seq , pen portrait p.211 during the first french empire , guizot , entirely devoted to literary pursuits , published a collection of french synonyms ( 1809 ) , an essay on the fine arts ( 1811 ) , and a translation of edward gibbon 's the history of the decline and fall of the roman empire , with additional notes , in 1812 . these works recommended him to the notice of louis-marcelin de fontanes , grand-master of the university of france , who selected guizot for the chair of modern history at the sorbonne in 1812 . he delivered his first lecture ( reprinted in his memoirs ) on 11 december of that year . he omitted the customary compliment to the all-powerful emperor , in spite of the hints given him by his patron , but the course which followed marks the beginning of the great revival of historical research in france in the 19th century . he had now acquired a considerable position in paris society , and the friendship of royer-collard and leading members of the liberal party , including the young duc de broglie . absent from paris at the moment of the fall of napoleon in 1814 , he was at once selected , on the recommendation of royer-collard , to serve the government of king louis xviii , in the capacity of secretary-general of the ministry of the interior , under the abbé de montesquiou . upon the return of napoleon from elba he immediately resigned , on 25 march 1815 , and returned to his literary pursuits . '' the man of ghent '' . after the hundred days , he returned to ghent , where he saw louis xviii , and in the name of the liberal party pointed out that a frank adoption of a liberal policy could alone secure the duration of the restored monarchy & nbsp ; – advice which was ill-received by the king 's confidential advisers . this visit to ghent was brought up by political opponents in later years as unpatriotic . '' the man of ghent '' was one of the terms of insult frequently used against him in the days of his power . the reproach appears to be wholly unfounded . he was acting not to preserve the failing empire , but to establish a liberal monarchy and to combat the reactionary ultra-royalists . on the second restoration , guizot was appointed secretary-general of the ministry of justice under de barbé-marbois , but resigned with his chief in 1816 . in 1819 he was one of the founders of the liberal journal le courrier français . again in 1819 he was appointed general director of communes and departments in the ministry of the interior , but lost his office with the fall of decazes in february 1820 . during these years guizot was one of the leaders of the doctrinaires , a small party strongly attached to the charter and the crown , and advocating a policy which has become associated ( especially by émile faguet ) with the name of guizot , that of the juste milieu , a middle path between absolutism and popular government . adhering to the great principles of liberty and toleration , they were sternly opposed to the anarchical traditions of the revolution . they hoped to subdue the elements of anarchy through the power of a limited constitution based on the suffrage of the middle class and promoted by the literary talents of the time . they were opposed alike to the democratic spirit of the age , to the military traditions of the empire , and to the bigotry and absolutism of the court . the doctrinaires fell out of influence following the july revolution in 1830 . in 1820 , when the reaction was at its height after the murder of the duc de berry , and the fall of the ministry of the duc decazes , guizot was deprived of his offices , and in 1822 even his course of lectures were interdicted . during the succeeding years he played an important part among the leaders of the liberal opposition to the government of charles x , although he had not yet entered parliament , and this was also the time of his greatest literary activity . in 1822 he had published his lectures on representative government ( histoire des origines du gouvernement représentatif , 1821–1822 , 2 vols . ; eng . trans . 1852 ) ; also a work on capital punishment for political offences and several important political pamphlets . from 1822 to 1830 he published two important collections of historical sources , the memoirs of the history of england in 26 volumes , and the memoirs of the history of france in 31 volumes , a revised translation , of shakespeare , and a volume of essays on the history of france . written from his own pen during this period was the first part of his histoire de la révolution d'angleterre depuis charles i à charles ii ( 2 vols . , 1826–1827 ; eng . trans . , 2 vols . , oxford , 1838 ) , which he resumed and completed during his exile in england after 1848 . the martignac administration restored guizot in 1828 to his professor 's chair and to the council of state . during his time at the university of paris his lectures earned him a reputation as a historian of note . these lectures formed the basis of his general histoire de la civilisation en europe ( 1828 ; eng . trans . by william hazlitt , 3 vols . , 1846 ) , and of his histoire de la civilisation en france ( 4 vols . , 1830 ) , in january 1830 he was elected by the town of lisieux to the chamber of deputies , and he retained that seat during the whole of his political life . guizot delivered an address in march 1830 calling for greater political freedom in the chamber of deputies . the motion passed 221 against 181 . charles x responded by dissolving the chamber and called for new elections which only strengthened opposition to the throne . on his returning to paris from nîmes on 27 july , the fall of charles x was already imminent . guizot was called upon by his friends casimir perier , jacques laffitte , villemain and dupin to draw up the protest of the liberal deputies against the royal ordinances of july , while he applied himself with them to control the revolutionary character of the late contest . personally , guizot was always of opinion that it was a great misfortune for the cause of parliamentary government in france that the infatuation and ineptitude of charles x and prince polignac rendered a change in the hereditary line of succession inevitable . once convinced that it was inevitable , he became one of the most ardent supporters of louis philippe . in august 1830 guizot was made minister of the interior , but resigned in november . he had now joined the ranks of the moderate liberals , and for the next eighteen years was a determined foe of democracy , the unyielding champion of '' a monarchy limited by a limited number of bourgeois . '' . a minister of the citizen-king . in 1831 casimir périer formed a more vigorous and compact administration , terminated in may 1832 by his death ; the summer of that year was marked by a formidable republican rising in paris , and it was not until 11 october 1832 that a stable government was formed , in which marshal soult was first minister , victor , 3rd duc de broglie took the foreign office , adolphe thiers the home department , and guizot the department of public instruction . guizot , however , was already unpopular with the more advanced liberal party . he remained unpopular all his life . yet never were his great abilities more useful to his country than while he filled this office of secondary rank but of primary importance in the department of public instruction . the duties it imposed on him were entirely congenial to his literary tastes , and he was master of the subjects they concerned . he applied himself in the first instance to carry the law of 28 june 1833 , which established and organized primary education in france . the branch of the institute of france known as the académie des sciences morales et politiques , which had been suppressed by napoleon , was revived by guizot . some of the old members of this learned body & nbsp ; – talleyrand , sieyès , roederer and lakanal & nbsp ; – again took their seats there , and a host of more recent celebrities were added by election for the free discussion of the great problems of political and social science . the société de l'histoire de france was founded for the publication of historical works , and a vast publication of medieval chronicles and diplomatic papers was undertaken at the expense of the state . the july monarchy was threatened in 1839 by louis-mathieu molé , who had formed an intermediate government . guizot and the leaders of the left centre and the left , thiers and odilon barrot worked together to stop molé . victory was secured at the expense of principle , and guizot 's attack on the government gave rise to a crisis and a republican insurrection . none of the three leaders of that alliance took ministerial office , and guizot was not sorry to accept the post of ambassador in london , which withdrew him for a time from parliamentary contests . this was in the spring of 1840 , and thiers succeeded shortly afterwards to the ministry of foreign affairs . guizot was received with distinction by queen victoria and by london society . his literary works were highly esteemed , and he was sincerely attached to the alliance of the two nations and the cause of peace . he also secured the return of napoleon 's ashes to france at the insistence of thiers . as he himself remarked , he was a stranger to england and a novice in diplomacy ; the embroiled state of the syrian war question , on which the french government had separated itself from the joint policy of europe , and possibly the absence of entire confidence between the ambassador and the minister of foreign affairs , placed him in an embarrassing and even false position . the warnings he transmitted to thiers were not believed . the treaty of 15 july was signed without his knowledge and executed against his advice . for some weeks europe seemed to be on the brink of war , until the king ended the crisis by refusing his assent to the military preparations of thiers , and by summoning guizot from london to form a ministry and to aid his majesty in what he termed '' ma lutte tenace contre l'anarchie . '' . the second soult government . thus began , under dark and adverse circumstances , on 29 october 1840 , the important administration in which guizot remained the master-spirit for nearly eight years . he himself took the office of minister for foreign affairs , and upon the retirement of marshal soult , he became prime minister . his first care was the maintenance of peace and the restoration of amicable relations with the other powers of europe . his success gave unity and strength to the moderate liberal party , who now felt that they had a great leader at their head . during guizot 's tenure as foreign minister , he and lord aberdeen , the foreign secretary to robert peel , carried on well , and thus they secured france and britain in the entente cordiale . part of the formation of the entente came about when guizot secured the transfer of napoleon 's ashes from st . helena to the french government . stanley mellon . “ the july monarchy and the napoleonic myth ” the opposition in france denounced guizot 's foreign policy as basely subservient to england . he replied in terms of unmeasured contempt : '' you may raise the pile of calumny as high as you will ; vous n'arriverez jamais a la hauteur de mon dédain ! '' in 1845 british and french troops fought side by side for the first time in the anglo-french blockade of the río de la plata . the fall of peel 's government in 1846 changed these intimate relations ; and the return of palmerston to the foreign office led guizot to believe that he was again exposed to the passionate rivalry of the british cabinet . a friendly understanding had been established between the two courts with reference to the future marriage of the young queen of spain . the language of lord palmerston and the conduct of sir henry bulwer ( afterwards lord dalling ) at madrid led guizot to believe that this understanding was broken , provoking the affair of the spanish marriages after guizot came to believe that britain intended to place a coburg on the throne of spain . determined to resist any such intrigue , guizot and the king plunged headlong into a counter-intrigue , wholly inconsistent with their previous engagements to britain and fatal to the happiness of the queen of spain . by their influence she was urged into a marriage with a despicable offset of the house of bourbon , and her sister was at the same time married to the youngest son of the french king , in direct violation of louis philippe 's promises . this transaction , although it was hailed at the time as a triumph of the policy of france , was in truth as fatal to the monarch as it was discreditable to the minister . it was accomplished by a mixture of secrecy and violence . it was defended by subterfuges . its immediate effect was to destroy the anglo-french alliance , and to throw guizot into closer relations with the reactionary policy of metternich and the northern courts . his first object as prime minister was to unite and discipline the moderate liberal party , which had been broken up by previous dissensions and ministerial changes . in this he entirely succeeded by his courage and eloquence as a parliamentary leader , and by the use of all those means of influence which france supplied to a dominant minister . no one ever doubted the purity and disinterestedness of guizot 's own conduct . he despised money ; he lived and died poor ; and though he encouraged the fever of money-getting in the french nation , his own habits retained their primitive simplicity . but he did not disdain to use in others the baser passions from which he was himself free . some of his instruments were mean ; he employed them to deal with meanness after its kind . in 1846 the opposition accused the government of buying the votes of the electorate . guizot acknowledged that corruption happened but the government could not really prevent it . non-voters exaggerated the occurrences of corruption to point to their need for enfranchisement . guizot utterly failed to satisfy the demand for expansion of suffrage . e.l . woodward . three studies in european conservatism : metternich : guizot : the catholic church in the nineteenth century . archon books , 1963 . some scholars point out that corruption , while certainly present , did not have a large effect on the voting records of those in the chamber of deputies . patrick and trevor higonnet . '' class , corruption , and politics in the french chamber of deputies , 1846–1848 '' the strength of guizot 's oration was his straightforward style of speaking . he was essentially a ministerial speaker , far more powerful in defence than in opposition . nor was he less a master of parliamentary tactics and of those sudden changes and movements in debate which , as in a battle , sometimes change the fortune of the day . his confidence in himself , and in the majority of the chamber which he had moulded to his will , was unbounded ; and long success and the habit of authority led him to forget that in a country like france there was a people outside the chamber elected by a small constituency , to which the minister and the king himself were held responsible . guizot 's view of politics was essentially historical and philosophical . his tastes and his acquirements gave him little insight into the practical business of administrative government . of finance he knew nothing ; trade and commerce were strange to him ; military and naval affairs were unfamiliar to him ; all these subjects he dealt with by second hand through his friends , pierre sylvain dumon ( 1797–1870 ) , tanneguy duchâtel ( 1803–1867 ) , or marshal bugeaud . the consequence was that few measures of practical improvement were carried by his administration . still less did the government lend an ear to the cry for parliamentary reform . on this subject the king 's prejudices were insurmountable , and his ministers had the weakness to give way to them . it was impossible to defend a system which confined the suffrage to 200,000 citizens and returned a chamber of whom half were placemen . nothing would have been easier than to strengthen the moderate liberal party by attaching the suffrage to the possession of land in france , but blank resistance was the sole answer of the government to the moderate demands of the opposition . warning after warning was addressed to them in vain by friends and by foes alike , and they remained profoundly unconscious of their danger till the moment when it overwhelmed them . strange to say , guizot never acknowledged either at the time or to his dying day the nature of this error , and he speaks of himself in his memoirs as the much-enduring champion of liberal government and constitutional law . he utterly failed to perceive that a more enlarged view of the liberal destinies of france and a less intense confidence in his own specific theory might have preserved the constitutional monarchy and averted a vast series of calamities , which were in the end fatal to every principle he most cherished . but with the stubborn conviction of absolute truth he dauntlessly adhered to his own doctrines to the end . 1848 and after . in the afternoon of 23 february 1848 the king summoned his minister from the chamber , which was then sitting , and informed him that considering the situation in paris and elsewhere in the country during the banquet agitation for electoral reform , and the alarm and division of opinion in the royal family , led him to doubt whether he could retain guizot as his prime minister . guizot instantly resigned , returning to the chamber only to announce that the administration was at an end and that the king had sent for louis-mathieu molé . molé failed in the attempt to form a government , and between midnight and one in the morning guizot , who had according to his custom retired early to rest , was again sent for to the tuileries . the king asked his advice . '' we are no longer the ministers of your majesty , '' replied guizot ; '' it rests with others to decide on the course to be pursued . but one thing appears to be evident : this street riot must be put down ; these barricades must be taken ; and for this purpose my opinion is that marshal bugeaud should be invested with full power , and ordered to take the necessary military measures , and as your majesty has at this moment no minister , i am ready to draw up and countersign such an order . '' the marshal , who was present , undertook the task , saying , '' i have never been beaten yet , and i shall not begin to-morrow . the barricades shall be carried before dawn . '' adolphe thiers and barrot decided to withdraw the troops . guizot found a safe refuge in paris for some days in the lodging of a humble miniature painter whom he had befriended , and shortly afterwards effected his escape across the belgium frontier and thence to london , where he arrived on 3 march . his mother and daughters had preceded him , and he was speedily installed in a modest habitation in pelham crescent , brompton . the society of england , though many persons disapproved of much of his recent policy , received the fallen statesman with as much distinction and respect as they had shown eight years before to the king 's ambassador . a professorship at oxford was spoken of , which he was unable to accept . he stayed in england about a year , devoting himself again to history . back in paris in 1850 , guizot published two more volumes on the english revolution -- pourquoi la révolution d'angleterre a-t-elle reussi ? and discours sur l'histoire , de la révolution d'angleterre . in february 1850 karl marx and frederick engels co-wrote a critical assessment of this two-volume history . collected works of karl marx and frederrick engels : volume 10 , ( international publishers : new york , 1978 ) pp . 251–256 . in 1854 guizot published his histoire de la république d'angleterre et de cromwell ( 2 vols . , 1854 ) , then his histoire du protectorat de cromwell et du rétablissement des stuarts ( 2 vols . , 1856 ) . he also published an essay on peel , and amid many essays on religion , during the ten years 1858–1868 , appeared the extensive mémoires pour servir à l'histoire de mon temps , in nine volumes . his speeches were included in 1863 in his histoire parlementaire de la france ( 5 vols . of parliamentary speeches , 1863 ) . after having resigned as prime minister of france , he left politics . he was aware that the link between himself and public life was broken forever , and he never made the slightest attempt to renew it . the greater part of the year he spent at his residence at val richer , an augustine monastery near lisieux in normandy , which had been sold at the time of the first revolution . his two daughters , who married two descendants of the illustrious dutch family of de witt , so congenial in faith and manners to the huguenots of france , kept his house . one of his sons-in-law farmed the estate . and here guizot devoted his later years with undiminished energy to literary labour , which was in fact his chief means of subsistence . proud , independent , simple and contented he remained to the last ; and these years of retirement were perhaps the happiest and most serene portion of his life . two institutions may be said even under the second empire to have retained their freedom : the institute of france and the protestant consistory . in both of these guizot continued to the last to take an active part . he was a member of three of the five academies into which the institute of france is divided . the academy of moral and political science owed its restoration to him , and he became in 1832 one of its first associates . the academy of inscriptions and belles lettres elected him in 1833 as the successor to dacier , and in 1836 he was chosen a member of the académie française , the highest literary distinction of the country . in these learned bodies guizot continued for nearly forty years to take a lively interest and to exercise a powerful influence . he was the jealous champion of their independence . his voice had the greatest weight in the choice of new candidates ; the younger generation of french writers never looked in vain to him for encouragement , and his constant aim was to maintain the dignity and purity of the profession of letters . in 1842 , he was elected a foreign member of the royal swedish academy of sciences , and a foreign honorary member of the american academy of arts and sciences in 1855 . in the consistory of the protestant church in paris guizot exercised a similar influence . his early education and his experience of life conspired to strengthen the convictions of a religious temperament . he remained throughout his life a firm believer in the truths of revelation , and a volume of méditations on the christian religion was one of his latest works . but though he adhered inflexibly to the church of his fathers and combated the rationalist tendencies of the age , which seemed to threaten it with destruction , he retained not a tinge of the intolerance or asperity of the calvinism creed . he respected in the church of rome the faith of the majority of his countrymen , and the writings of the great catholic prelates , bossuet and bourdaloue , were as familiar and as dear to him as those of his own persuasion , and were commonly used by him in the daily exercises of family worship . in these literary pursuits and in the retirement of val richer , years passed smoothly and rapidly away ; and as his grandchildren grew up around him , he began to direct their attention to the history of their country . from these lessons sprang his last work , the histoire de france racontée à mes petits enfants . the history came down to 1789 , and was continued to 1870 by his daughter madame guizot de witt from her father 's notes . down to the summer of 1874 guizot 's mental vigour and activity were unimpaired . he died peacefully , and is said to have recited verses of corneille and texts from bible on his death-bed . legacy . during the 1820s , guizot was among the darlings of the european liberal intelligentsia . his historical works such as histoire générale de la civilisation en europe ( 1828 ) and histoire de la civilisation en france ( 1830 ) were widely admired by such luminaries as john stuart mill ( '' i have dinned into people 's ears that guizot is a great thinker and writer '' ) , johann wolfgang von goethe ( '' guizot is a man after my own heart.he possesses deep knowledge , combined with an enlightened liberality '' ) , charles sainte-beuve ( '' this astonishing man about whom one could say so many things '' ) , and alexis de tocqueville . guizot 's later resolute opposition to universal suffrage has led his critics to argue that he was a conservative or even reactionary . however , it is more accurate to describe guizot as a proponent of the juste milieu or centrism that defended representative government against absolutism and the excesses of democracy . his doctrine of the sovereignty of reason was intended as a liberal strategy to divide and limit sovereignty , and to consolidate the constitutional gains of the charter of 1814 . he likewise called for the abolition of capital punishment . his ideas influenced subsequent liberal reformers throughout europe such as józsef eötvös in hungary , johan rudolph thorbecke in the netherlands , and josé ortega y gasset in spain . in recent years , the scholarship of pierre rosanvallon , larry siedentop , ivo mosley and aurelian crăiuțu has renewed interest in guizot 's political thought and the doctrinaires more generally . quotes . '' you may raise the pile of calumny as high as you like ; it will never reach the height of my disdain . '' ( the second soult government ) '' the spirit of revolution , the spirit of insurrection , is a spirit radically opposed to liberty . '' . works . dictionnaire des synonymes de la langue française , 1809 . de l ’ état des beaux-arts en france , 1810 . annales de l ’ éducation , 1811–1815 , 6 vol . vie des poètes français du siècle de louis xiv , 1813 . quelques idées sur la liberté de la presse , 1814 . du gouvernement représentatif de l ’ état actuel de la france , 1816 . essai sur l ’ état actuel de l ’ instruction publique en france , 1817 . du gouvernement de la france depuis la restauration . des conspirations et de la justice politique , 1820 . des moyens de gouvernement et d ’ opposition dans l ’ état actuel de la france . du gouvernement de la france et du ministère actuel . histoire du gouvernement représentatif en europe , 1821 , 2 vol . de la souveraineté , 1822 . de la peine de mort en matière politique , 1822 . essai sur l ’ histoire de france du ve s . au xe s . , 1823 . histoire de charles ier , 1827 , 2 vol . histoire générale de la civilisation en europe , 1828 . 2e édition langlet et cie , 1838 . histoire de la civilisation en france , 1830 , 4 vol . le presbytère au bord de la mer , 1831 . rome et ses papes , 1832 . le ministère de la réforme et le parlement réformé , 1833 . essais sur l ’ histoire de france , 1836 . monk , étude historique , 1837 . de la religion dans les sociétés modernes , 1838 . vie , correspondance et écrits de washington , 1839–1840 . washington , 1841 . madame de rumfort , 1842 . des conspirations et de la justice politiques , 1845 . des moyens de gouvernement et d ’ opposition dans l ’ état actuel de la france , 1846 . histoire de la révolution d'angleterre depuis l'avènement de charles ier jusqu ' à sa mort , 1846 . m . guizot et ses amis . de la démocratie en france , 1849 . pourquoi la révolution d ’ angleterre a-t-elle réussi ? discours sur l ’ histoire de la révolution d ’ angleterre , 1850 . études biographiques sur la révolution d ’ angleterre . études sur les beaux-arts en général , 1851 . shakespeare et son temps . corneille et son temps , 1852 . abélard et héloïse , 1853 . édouard iii et les bourgeois de calais , 1854 . histoire de la république d ’ angleterre , 1855 , 2 vol . , sir robert peel . histoire du protectorat de cromwell et du rétablissement des stuarts , 1856 , 2 vol . mémoires pour servir à l ’ histoire de mon temps , 1858–1867 , 8 vol . l ’ amour dans le mariage , 1860 . l ’ église et la société chrétienne en 1861 , discours académique , 1861 . un projet de mariage royal , 1862 . histoire parlementaire de france , recueil de discours , , 1863 , 5 vol . trois générations . méditations sur l ’ essence de la religion chrétienne , 1864 . guillaume le conquérant , 1865 . méditations sur l ’ état actuel de la religion chrétienne , 1866 . la france et la prusse responsables devant l ’ europe , 1868 . méditations sur la religion chrétienne dans ses rapports avec l ’ état actuel des sociétés et des esprits . mélanges biographiques et littéraires , 1868 . mélanges politiques et historiques , 1869 . l ’ histoire de france depuis les temps les plus reculés jusqu ’ en 1789 , racontée à mes petits enfants . 1870–1875 , 5 vol . le duc de broglie , 1872 . les vies de quatre grands chrétiens français , 1873 . see also . aide-toi , le ciel t'aidera le globe comité des travaux historiques et scientifiques . references . unless noted with a footnote below , this article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : chisholm , hugh , ed ( 1911 ) . encyclopædia britannica ( 11th ed . ) . cambridge university press . the 1911 encyclopædia britannica , in turn , gives the following references : guizot 's own mémoires pour servir à l'histoire de mon temps ( 8 vols . , 1858–1861 ) lettres de m . guizot à sa famille et à ses amis ( 1884 ) charles augustin sainte-beuve , causeries du lundi ( vol . 1 . , 1857 ) and nouveaux lundis ( vols . i . and ix . , 1863–1872 ) e scherer , etudes critiques sur la littérature contemporaine ( vol . iv . , 1873 ) mme de witt , guizot dans sa famille ( 1880 ) jules simon , thiers , guizot et rémusat ( 1885 ) ; e faguet , politiques et moralistes au xix e siècle ( 1891 ) a bardoux , guizot ( 1894 ) in the series of '' les grands ecrivains français '' the eb1911 article for françois guizot has the error '' g bardoux '' instead of the correct '' a bardoux '' . maurice guizot , les années de retraite de m . guizot ( 1901 ) for a long list of books and articles on guizot in periodicals see hp thième , guide bibliographique de la littérature française de 1800–1906 ( s.c . guizot , paris , 1907 ) . for a notice of his first wife see charles augustin sainte-beuve , portraits de femmes ( 1884 ) , and ch . de rémusat , critiques et études littéraires ( vol . ii . , 1847 ) . 263 footnotes . further reading . crăiuțu , aurelian . liberalism under siege : the political thought of the french doctrinaires ( 2003 ) . johnson , douglas . guizot : aspects of french history , 1787–1874 ( 1963 ) . richter , melvin . '' tocqueville and guizot on democracy : from a type of society to a political regime . '' history of european ideas 30.1 ( 2004 ) : 61–82 . . external links . official website on françois guizot at website created on the initiative of françois guizot 's descendants and the françois guizot association . contains unpublished archives . '' the history of the origins of representative government in europe '' condition of the july monarchy , 1830–1848 at the modern history sourcebook .