Government of Hong Kong

head of government . the chief executive is the head of region and head of government of hong kong . the basic law designates a system of governance led by a chief executive and an executive council , with a two-tiered system of semi-representative government and an independent judiciary . the chief executive is elected by an election committee , a 1200-member electoral college consisting of individuals and bodies ( i.e . special interest groups ) elected within 28 functional constituencies defined in the basic law . the winner is then appointed to the position by the premier of the people 's republic of china . the chief executive is responsible for implementing the basic law , signing bills and budgets , promulgating laws , making decisions on government policies , and issuing executive orders . the chief executive , carrie lam , began exercise of her unfettered residual powers of law-making by decree on 4 october 2019 , under the emergency regulations ordinance , chapter 241 of the laws of hong kong , bypassing the legislature . as of 1 july 1997 , the chief executive of hong kong officially replaced the governor of hong kong as the head of the government for hong kong following the transfer of sovereignty . the chief executive is assisted by the chief secretary for administration and the financial secretary , and other secretaries who heads policy bureaus . the secretaries for each government affairs are appointed by the central people 's government on the nomination of the chief executive . the secretary for justice ( sj ) is responsible for legal matters of the government and prosecution for criminal cases in the territory . the independent commission against corruption and audit commission report directly to the chief executive . the current chief executive is carrie lam . executive . executive council . the executive council decides on matters of policy , the introduction of bills to the legislative council and the drafting of subordinate legislation . the council consists of 15 principal officials and 14 non-official members . all members are appointed by the chief executive from among the senior officials of the executive authorities , members of the legislative council , and other influential public personnels . they serve for a period no longer than the expiry of the chief executive 's term of office . . principal officials . in a system popularly called the principal officials accountability system introduced by then chief executive tung chee hwa in july 2002 , all principal officials , including the chief secretary , financial secretary , secretary for justice and heads of government bureaux would no longer be politically neutral career civil servants , but would all be political appointees chosen by the chief executive from within or outside the civil service . the system was portrayed as the key to solve previous administrative problems , notably the co-operation of high-ranking civil servants with the chief executive . under the new system , there are 3 secretaries of department and 13 directors of bureau . the system is aimed at raising the accountability of the civil service , so the political appointees are responsible for all their job aspects and will step down if they make any failure . under the new system , all heads of bureaux became members of the executive council , and came directly under the chief executive instead of the chief secretary or the financial secretary . deputy ministers and political assistants . the government released a report on the further development of the political appointment system report on further development of the political appointment system on 17 october 2007 . '' consultation document on the further development of the political appointment system '' , hong kong government , july 2006 two new layers , deputy directors of bureaux and assistants to directors ( ad ) would be added to the political appointments . each director of bureau will be assisted by the two new appointees and constitute the political team , who would ostensibly work closely with bureau secretaries and top civil servants in implementing the chief executive 's policy agenda in an executive-led government . as with the principal officials , these two new posts may be drawn from within or outside the civil service , and appointees may or may not have a political background . michael ng , '' attracting new political talent ` from all sectors ' '' , the standard , 27 july 2006 eight new under-secretaries were named on 20 may , and nine political assistant appointments were announced on 22 may 2008 . by the administration 's own admission , the announcements were poorly handled , and there was widespread criticism of several key aspects , namely the nationality and experience of appointees , the transparency of the recruitment process and the level of officials ' salaries . ambrose leung , '' tsang 's assistant may face legco censure '' , pg a3 , south china morning post , 17 june 2008 . chief secretary for administration . the chief secretary for administration is responsible for assisting the chief executive in the supervision of policy bureaux and plays a key role in ensuring harmony in policy formulation and implementation . the current chief secretary is matthew cheung . financial secretary . the financial secretary is responsible for preparing the government budget in accordance with the chief executive 's agenda in the policy address , ensuring policy is in accordance to the public finance ordinance . he has to estimate of revenue and expenditure before the legislative council each year , and to deliver an annual budget to the legislative council , outlining the government 's budgetary proposals and moving the appropriation bills . the current fs is paul chan mo-po . secretary for justice . the secretary for justice is responsible for prosecutions and legal matters . he or she heads the department of justice . the current secretary for justice is teresa cheng . government offices and policy bureaux ( ministries ) . office of the chief executive . the office of the chief executive is responsible for ensuring the chief executive receives the best advice and support for formulating and co-ordinating policies . it is headed by the director of the chief executive 's office , who would sit in meetings of the executive council . the policy innovation and coordination office , independent commission against corruption , audit commission , office of the ombudsman and public service commission report to the chief executive directly . chief secretary for administration ’ s office . the human resources planning and poverty co-ordination office , administration wing and legal aid department are under the chief secretary for administration 's office . financial secretary 's office . the office of the government economist and the hong kong monetary authority are under the financial secretary 's office . department of justice . the department of justice is led by the secretary for justice ( hong kong ) ( legal department and attorney general before the transfer of sovereignty ) . the secretary for justice ( sj ) is responsible for all prosecutions in hong kong , drafting all government legislation , and advising other policy bureaux and departments of the government on a vast array of legal issues . the department consists of the prosecutions division , the civil division , the legal policy division , the law drafting division , the international law division , and the administration and development division . government secretariat . after the reorganisation in 2007 , the government secretariat today consists of thirteen policy bureaux . nine of which reports to the chief secretary ( hong kong ) , and the other four reports to the financial secretary . the chief secretary for administration is customarily considered to be the leader of the bureaux . civil service bureau constitutional and mainland affairs bureau education bureau food and health bureau home affairs bureau labour and welfare bureau security bureau transport and housing bureau environment bureau commerce and economic development bureau development bureau financial services and the treasury bureau innovation and technology bureau . departments and agencies .