Styrene

natural occurrence . styrene is named after storax balsam , the resin of liquidambar trees of the altingiaceae plant family . styrene occurs naturally in small quantities in some plants and foods ( cinnamon , coffee beans , balsam trees and peanuts ) and is also found in coal tar . history . in 1839 , the german apothecary eduard simon isolated a volatile liquid from the resin ( called storax or styrax ( latin ) ) of the american sweetgum tree ( liquidambar styraciflua ) . he called the liquid '' styrol '' ( now styrene ) . simon , e . ( 1839 ) '' ueber den flüssigen storax ( styrax liquidus ) '' ( on liquid storax ( styrax liquidus ) , annalen der chemie , 31 : 265–277 . from p . 268 : '' das flüchtige oel , für welches ich den namen styrol vorschlage , … '' ( the volatile oil , for which i suggest the name '' styrol '' , … ) for further details of the history of styrene , see : f . w . semmler , die ätherischen öle nach ihren chemischen bestandteilen unter berücksichtigung der geschichtlichen entwicklung the volatile liquids according to their chemical components with regard to historical development , vol . 4 ( leipzig , germany , veit & co . , 1907 ) , § 327 . styrol , pp . 24-28 . he also noticed that when styrol was exposed to air , light , or heat , it gradually transformed into a hard , rubber-like substance , which he called '' styrol oxide '' . ( simon , 1839 ) , p . 268 . from p . 268 : '' für den festen rückstand würde der name styroloxyd passen . '' ( for the solid residue , the name '' styrol oxide '' would fit . ) by 1845 , the german chemist august hofmann and his student john blyth had determined styrene 's empirical formula : c 8 h 8 . see : ; see p . 339 . reprinted in : ; see p . 102 . german translation : ; see p . 297 . note that blyth and hofmann state the empirical formula of styrene as c 16 h 8 because at that time , some chemists used the wrong atomic mass for carbon ( 6 instead of 12 ) . they had also determined that simon 's '' styrol oxide '' – which they renamed '' metastyrol '' – had the same empirical formula as styrene . ( blyth and hofmann , 1845a ) , p . 348 . from p . 348 : '' analysis as well as synthesis has equally proved that styrol and the vitreous mass ( for which we propose the name of metastyrol ) possess the same constitution per cent . '' furthermore , they could obtain styrene by dry-distilling '' metastyrol '' . ( blyth and hofmann , 1845a ) , p . 350 . in 1865 , the german chemist emil erlenmeyer found that styrene could form a dimer , erlenmeyer , emil ( 1865 ) '' ueber distyrol , ein neues polymere des styrols '' ( on distyrol , a new polymer of styrol ) , annalen der chemie , 135 : 122–123 . and in 1866 the french chemist marcelin berthelot stated that '' metastyrol '' was a polymer of styrene ( i.e . polystyrene ) . berthelot , m . ( 1866 ) '' sur les caractères de la benzine et du styrolène , comparés avec ceux des autres carbures d'hydrogène '' ( on the characters of benzene and styrene , compared with those of other hydrocarbons ) , bulletin de la société chimique de paris , 2nd series , 6 : 289–298 . from p . 294 : '' on sait que le styrolène chauffé en vase scellé à 200° , pendant quelques heures , se change en un polymère résineux ( métastyrol ) , et que ce polymère , distillé brusquement , reproduit le styrolène . '' ( one knows that styrene when heated in a sealed vessel at 200 & nbsp ; °c , for several hours , is changed into a resinous polymer ( metastyrol ) , and that this polymer , when distilled abruptly , reproduces styrene . ) meanwhile , other chemists had been investigating another component of storax , namely , cinnamic acid . they had found that cinnamic acid could be decarboxylated to form '' cinnamene '' ( or '' cinnamol '' ) , which appeared to be styrene . in 1845 , french chemist emil kopp suggested that the two compounds were identical , kopp , e . ( 1845 ) , '' recherches sur l'acide cinnamique et sur le cinnamène '' ( investigations of cinnamic acid and cinnamen ) , comptes rendus , 21 : 1376–1380 . from p . 1380 : '' je pense qu'il faudra désormais remplacer le mot de styrol par celui de cinnamène , et le métastyrol par le métacinnamène . '' ( i think that henceforth one will have to replace the word '' styrol '' with that of '' cinnamène '' , and '' metastyrol '' with '' metacinnamène '' . ) and in 1866 , erlenmeyer suggested that both '' cinnamol '' and styrene might be vinylbenzene . erlenmeyer , emil ( 1866 ) '' studien über die s.g . aromatischen säuren '' ( studies of the so-called aromatic acids ) , annalen der chemie , 137 : 327–359 ; see p . 353 . however , the styrene that was obtained from cinnamic acid seemed different from the styrene that was obtained by distilling storax resin : the latter was optical rotation . from p . 160 : '' 1° le carbure des cinnamates est privé de pouvoir rotatoire , tandis que le carbure du styrax dévie de 3 degrés la teinte de passage ( l 100 mm ) . '' ( 1 . the carbon atom of cinnamates is bereft of rotary power i.e . , the ability to rotate polarized light , whereas the carbon of styrax deflects by 3 degrees the neutral tint i.e . , the relative orientation of the polarized quartz plates at which the light through the polarimeter appears colorless ( length 100 mm ) . for further details about 19th century polarimeters , see : ) eventually , in 1876 , the dutch chemist van 't hoff resolved the ambiguity : the optical activity of the styrene that was obtained by distilling storax resin was due to a contaminant . van 't hoff , j . h . ( 1876 ) '' die identität von styrol und cinnamol , ein neuer körper aus styrax '' ( the identity of styrol and cinnamol , a new substance from styrax ) , berichte der deutschen chemischen gesellschaft , 9 : 5-6 . . industrial production . from ethylbenzene . the vast majority of styrene is produced from ethylbenzene , and almost all ethylbenzene produced worldwide is intended for styrene production . as such , the two production processes are often highly integrated . ethylbenzene is produced via a friedel–crafts reaction between benzene and ethylene ; originally this used aluminum chloride as a catalyst , but in modern production this has been replaced by zeolites . by dehydrogenation . around 80 % of styrene is produced by the dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene . this is achieved using superheated steam ( up to 600 & nbsp ; °c ) over an iron ( iii ) oxide catalyst . the reaction is highly endothermic and reversible , with a typical yield of 88–94 % . : the crude ethylbenzene/styrene product is then purified by distillation . as the difference in boiling points between the two compounds is only 9 & nbsp ; °c at ambient pressure this necessitates the use of a series of distillation columns . this is energy intensive and is further complicated by the tendency of styrene to undergo thermally induced polymerisation into polystyrene , requiring the continuous addition of polymerization inhibitor to the system . via ethylbenzene hydroperoxide . styrene is also co-produced commercially in a process known as posm ( lyondell chemical company ) or sm/po ( shell ) for styrene monomer / propylene oxide . in this process , ethylbenzene is treated with oxygen to form the ethylbenzene hydroperoxide . this hydroperoxide is then used to oxidize propylene to propylene oxide , which is also recovered as a co-product . the remaining 1-phenylethanol is dehydrated to give styrene : : . other industrial routes . . pyrolysis gasoline extraction . extraction from pyrolysis gasoline is performed on a limited scale . . from toluene and methanol . styrene can be produced from toluene and methanol , which are cheaper raw materials than those in the conventional process . this process has suffered from low selectivity associated with the competing decomposition of methanol . exelus inc . claims to have developed this process with commercially viable selectivities , at 400–425 & nbsp ; °c and atmospheric pressure , by forcing these components through a proprietary zeolitic catalyst . it is reported that an approximately 9:1 mixture of styrene and ethylbenzene is obtained , with a total styrene yield of over 60 % . stephen k . ritter , chemical & engineering news , 19 march 2007 , p.46 . . from benzene and ethane . another route to styrene involves the reaction of benzene and ethane . this process is being developed by snamprogetti and dow . ethane , along with ethylbenzene , is fed to a dehydrogenation reactor with a catalyst capable of simultaneously producing styrene and ethylene . the dehydrogenation effluent is cooled and separated and the ethylene stream is recycled to the alkylation unit . the process attempts to overcome previous shortcomings in earlier attempts to develop production of styrene from ethane and benzene , such as inefficient recovery of aromatics , production of high levels of heavies and tars , and inefficient separation of hydrogen and ethane . development of the process is ongoing . . laboratory synthesis . a laboratory synthesis of styrene entails the decarboxylation of cinnamic acid : : c 6 h 5 ch chco 2 h → c 6 h 5 ch ch 2 + co 2 styrene was first prepared by this method . r . fittig und f . binder '' ueber die additionsproducte der zimmtssaure '' in '' untersuchungen über die ungesättigten säuren . i . weitere beiträge zur kenntniß der fumarsäure und maleïnsäure '' rudolph fittig , camille petri , justus liebigs annalen der chemie 1879 , volume 195 , pp . 56–179 . . polymerization . the presence of the vinyl group allows styrene to polymerize . commercially significant products include polystyrene , abs , styrene-butadiene ( sbr ) rubber , styrene-butadiene latex , sis ( styrene-isoprene-styrene ) , s-eb-s ( styrene-ethylene/butylene-styrene ) , styrene-divinylbenzene ( s-dvb ) , styrene-acrylonitrile resin ( san ) , and polyester resin . these materials are used in rubber , plastic , insulation , fiberglass , pipes , automobile and boat parts , food containers , and carpet backing . hazards . explosive autopolymerisation . styrene will polymerise spontaneously to polystyrene , without the need of external initiators . this is known as autopolymerisation , and will take place at ambient temperatures and above . at 100 & nbsp ; °c it will polymerise at a rate of ~2 % per hour , and more rapidly than this at higher temperatures . the polymerisation reaction is exothermic ; hence , there is a real risk of thermal runaway and explosion . an example is the 2019 explosion of the tanker stolt groenland ; in this incident 5,250 metric tons of styrene monomer detonated while the ship was docked in ulsan , republic of korea . the autopolymerisation reaction can only be kept in check by the continuous addition of polymerisation inhibitors . health effects . styrene is regarded as a '' known carcinogen '' , especially in case of eye contact , but also in case of skin contact , of ingestion and of inhalation , according to several sources . styrene is largely metabolized into styrene oxide in humans , resulting from oxidation by cytochrome p450 . styrene oxide is considered toxic , mutagenic , and possibly carcinogenic . styrene oxide is subsequently hydrolyzed in vivo to styrene glycol by the enzyme epoxide hydrolase . the u.s . environmental protection agency ( epa ) has described styrene to be '' a suspected toxin to the gastrointestinal tract , kidney , and respiratory system , among others '' . on 10 june 2011 , the national toxicology program has described styrene as '' reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen '' . however , a stats author describes a review that was done on scientific literature and concluded that '' the available epidemiologic evidence does not support a causal relationship between styrene exposure and any type of human cancer '' . boffetta , p . , et al . , epidemiologic studies of styrene and cancer : a review of the literature , j . occupational and environmental medicine , nov.2009 , v.51 , n.11 . despite this claim , work has been done by danish researchers to investigate the relationship between occupational exposure to styrene and cancer . they concluded , '' the findings have to be interpreted with caution , due to the company based exposure assessment , but the possible association between exposures in the reinforced plastics industry , mainly styrene , and degenerative disorders of the nervous system and pancreatic cancer , deserves attention '' . in 2012 , the danish epa concluded that the styrene data do not support a cancer concern for styrene . danish epa 2011 review the u.s . epa does not have a cancer classification for styrene , us environmental protection agency . section i.b.4 relates to neurotoxicology . but it has been the subject of their integrated risk information system ( iris ) program . the national toxicology program of the u.s . department of health and human services has determined that styrene is '' reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen '' . various regulatory bodies refer to styrene , in various contexts , as a possible or potential human carcinogen . the international agency for research on cancer considers styrene to be '' probably carcinogenic to humans '' . the neurotoxic properties of styrene have also been studied and reported effects include effects on vision ( although unable to reproduce in a subsequent study ) and on hearing functions . studies on rats have yielded contradictory results , but epidemiologic studies have observed a synergistic interaction with noise in causing hearing difficulties . . industrial accident . on 7 may 2020 , a gas , reported to be styrene , leaked from a tank at the lg chem ( lg polymers india private limited ) plant at rr venkatapuram , visakhapatnam , andra pradesh , india . the leak occurred in the early morning hours while workers were preparing to reopen the plant , which was closed due to the covid-19 pandemic . thirteen people reportedly died and over 200 people were hospitalized .