Soft Cell

history . mutant moments and '' memorabilia '' . soft cell was initiated during 1977 after almond and ball met at leeds polytechnic . their initial efforts at recording resulted that year in an ep titled mutant moments which was funded by a loan of £2,000 from dave ball 's mother and made with a simple 2-track recorder . almond , marc ( 1999 ) . tainted life . london : sidgwick & nbsp ; '' jackson . soft cell 's next recording , '' the girl with the patent leather face '' , appeared as a contribution to the some bizzare album , which featured bands such as depeche mode , the the , and blancmange . the duo ultimately signed to the some bizzare label , backed by phonogram records . their first single , '' a man could get lost '' b/w '' memorabilia '' on 7 '' and '' memorabilia '' b/w '' persuasion '' on 12 '' , was produced by daniel miller who founded mute records . while '' memorabilia '' was a success in nightclubs , soft cell would remain essentially unknown until their next release . '' tainted love '' . after the chart failure of '' memorabilia '' , phonogram records allowed soft cell to record a second and final single in an attempt to score a chart success . the band opted to record a cover version of '' tainted love '' , an obscure 1965 northern soul track originally released by gloria jones ( the girlfriend of marc bolan at the time of his death ) and written by ed cobb of the four preps . released in 1981 , soft cell 's '' tainted love '' was a no . & nbsp ; 1 hit in 17 countries , including the united kingdom , as well as a no . & nbsp ; 8 single in the united states during 1982 , and went on to set a guinness world record at the time for the longest consecutive stay ( 43 weeks ) on the us billboard hot 100 chart . the song 's popularity developed slowly , needing 19 weeks to enter the us top 40 . the a-side of the 12-inch single of '' tainted love '' actually featured a two-song medley , with '' tainted love '' blending into the motown classic '' where did our love go '' ( originally recorded by the supremes , in 1964 ) . non-stop erotic cabaret . the duo 's first album , non-stop erotic cabaret , hit uk no . & nbsp ; 5 and further explored the now-trademark soft cell themes of squalor and sleaze . '' seedy films '' talks of long nights in porno cinemas , while '' frustration '' and '' secret life '' deal with the boredom and hypocrisy associated with suburban life . a companion video titled non-stop exotic video show was released alongside the album and featured videos directed by tim pope . the video generated some controversy in britain , mainly due to a scandal involved with the '' sex dwarf '' clip . the original version of the music video was confiscated by police and censored before it was even released . non-stop erotic cabaret garnered two additional hits : '' bedsitter '' dealt with the loneliness and lifestyle of a young man having recently left home to live in a bedsit while partying hard . '' bedsitter '' reached no . 4 in the uk singles chart in november 1981 . the song was highly acclaimed in a retrospective review by allmusic journalist ned raggett who wrote that it '' ranks as one of the best , most realistic portrayals of urban life recorded . '' the final single on the album , the ballad '' say hello , wave goodbye '' , peaked at no . 3 in february 1982 and was subsequently covered by david gray nearly 20 years later when his version reached no . 26 in the uk . during 1982 , the duo spent most of their time recording and relaxing in new york city , where they met a woman named cindy ecstasy whom almond would later confirm was his drug supplier ( it was cindy ecstasy who introduced them to the new nightclub drug of the same name ) . soon after '' say hello wave goodbye '' dropped out of the chart , soft cell released a brand new song : '' torch '' , a love song which was to prove the closest the band ever got to having a no . 1 hit with one of their own songs . the song entered straight into the top 20 and peaked at no . 2 . the duo released their second album entitled non stop ecstatic dancing , a 6-track mini album containing remixes of older material along with their new hit single , '' what ! '' . this was a cover of the 1965 song by melinda marx . it was later covered in 1968 by judy street , whose version became extremely popular on the northern soul scene . almond later admitted that the album was recorded and mixed under the influence of ecstasy . interview with marc almond bbc tv programme 'young guns go for it ' '' what ! '' placed at no . 101 in the us charts , but was a major hit in the uk and reached no . 3 on the uk singles chart in august of that year . . decline and dissolution . by 1983 , fame and nearly constant drug use were having a bad effect on the duo . marc almond also formed the group marc and the mambas , featuring collaborations with the the 's matt johnson and future almond collaborator annie hogan , as an offshoot to experiment out of the glare of the soft cell spotlight . soft cell 's third album release , appropriately titled the art of falling apart , was a top 5 hit in the uk but the singles were only modest successes . the first single '' where the heart is '' only reached 21 , while the double a-side '' numbers '' / '' barriers '' peaked at 25 . '' numbers '' also generated controversy due to references in the song to the drug speed . in september 1983 , the duo released a new single '' soul inside '' , which returned them to the uk top 20 , but by early 1984 the duo had amicably decided to end soft cell . they played farewell concerts at hammersmith palais in january , and released one final album called this last night in sodom ( uk no . & nbsp ; 12 ) in march . headed by the duo 's final single '' down in the subway '' ( uk no . & nbsp ; 24 ) , the album departed from its predecessors by featuring more live drums and guitars than previous albums . reunions . almond and ball reunited as soft cell in 2001 with a series of live dates . they performed at the opening of the ocean nightclub in london during march 2001 . a mini-tour followed later in the year . the track '' god shaped hole '' featured on the some bizzare compilation titled i 'd rather shout at a returning echo than kid someone 's listening , released during 2001 . a new soft cell album , cruelty without beauty , was released during late 2002 , followed by a european tour and a small us tour during early 2003 . the second single from the album , a cover of the four seasons '' the night '' , reached no . & nbsp ; 39 in the uk . soft cell had considered recording '' the night '' in place of '' tainted love '' during 1981 , though keyboardist david ball stated in a 2003 interview with the bbc , '' i think history has kind of shown that we did make the right choice in 1981 . '' in november 2008 , the band released a remix album entitled heat . the album included soft cell tracks remixed by such acts as paul dakeyne , the grid , manhattan clique , cicada , richard x , ladytron , mhc , atomizer , mark moore , spektrum , the dark poets and many more . in february 2018 , soft cell announced that they would reunite for one last uk reunion concert . on 21 august 2018 , almond revealed on the chris evans breakfast show on bbc radio 2 that soft cell were releasing two new tracks ahead of the concert : '' northern lights '' and '' guilty ( cos i say you are ) '' . entitled '' say hello , wave goodbye '' , the reunion concert took place at the o2 arena in london on 30 september 2018 . it was stated this was their final live uk show as a duo , but that they may still perform abroad and record material together . in 2019 ball said a new soft cell album was in the works . in may 2019 , a new book 'to show you , i 've been there ' was released , which came with a vinyl copy of the magick mutants , a sequel to their debut mutant moments ep . for june 2020 , the mutant moments ep is to have its first official release . originally to be part of the uk june record store day 2020 , the 10 inch ep is now to be sold directly through the band 's website , as the event was cancelled due to the ongoing covid-19 pandemic . . influences . the group cited david bowie , marc bolan and suicide as primary influences . almond also named siouxsie sioux as a major influence for his early performance style . . discography . non-stop erotic cabaret ( 1981 ) non stop ecstatic dancing ( 1982 ) the art of falling apart ( 1983 ) this last night in sodom ( 1984 ) cruelty without beauty ( 2002 ) the bedsit tapes ( 2005 ) cruelty without beauty - 2020 expanded reissue ( 2020 ) . references . further reading . . external links . soft cell singles list bbc top of the pops interview marc almond 's official site