Banking in the United States

history . merchants traveled from britain to the united states and established the bank of pennsylvania in 1780 to fund the american revolutionary war ( 1775–1783 ) . during this time , the thirteen colonies had not established currency and used informal trade to finance their daily activities . on january 4 , 1782 , the first commercial bank in the u.s . , bank of north america , opened . in 1791 , u.s . treasury secretary alexander hamilton created the federal reserve system , a national bank meant to maintain american taxes and pay off foreign debt . president andrew jackson closed the bank in 1832 and redirect all bank assets into u.s . state banks . state banks began printing money rapidly sparking inflation and leading to the panic of 1837 . investment banking began in the 1860s with the establishment of jay cooke & company , one of the first issuers of government bonds . in 1863 , the national bank act was passed to create a national currency , a federal banking system , and make public loans . however at this time not all states had yet formally joined the union . in oklahoma territory , which did not become a state until 1907 , muskogee mayor h.b . spaulding resigned in 1902 from his position as vice-president of the territorial trust and surety company , after his spaulding mercantile company was given a charter to found a private bank . similarly in 1903 several more private banks were founded . one contemporary banker from oklahoma defending the vitality of these private non-us banks did note that a small number of bank failures had resulted from a '' dip in deposits due to partial crop failure '' . in 1913 the federal reserve was established and began executing monetary policy . the great depression saw to the separation between investment and commercial banking known as the '' glass-steagall act '' , but the act was repealed in 1991 leading to the 2008 financial crisis . . regulatory agencies . while most of the countries have only one bank regulator , in the u.s . , banking is regulated at both the federal and state level . sotto ( 2014 ) , p . 191 depending on its type of charter and organizational structure , a banking organization may be subject to numerous federal and state banking regulations . unlike switzerland and the united kingdom ( where regulatory authority over the banking , securities and insurance industries is combined into one single financial-service agency ) , the u.s . maintains separate securities , commodities , and insurance regulatory agencies—separate from the bank regulatory agencies—at the federal and state level . u.s . banking regulations address privacy , disclosure , fraud prevention , anti-money laundering , anti-terrorism , anti-usury lending , and the promotion of lending to lower-income populations . some individual cities also enact their own financial regulation laws ( for example , defining what constitutes usurious lending ) . . federal reserve system . the central banking system of the united states , called the federal reserve system , was created in 1913 by the enactment of the federal reserve act , largely in response to a series of financial panics , particularly a severe panic of 1907 . over time , the roles and responsibilities of the federal reserve system have expanded and its structure has evolved . events such as the great depression were major factors leading to changes in the system . its duties today , according to official federal reserve documentation , are to conduct the nation 's monetary policy , supervise and regulate banking institutions , maintain the stability of the financial system and provide financial services to depository institutions , the u.s . government , and foreign official institutions . . federal deposit insurance corporation . the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) is a united states government corporation created by the glass–steagall act of 1933 . it provides deposit insurance , which guarantees the safety of deposits in member banks , up to 250,000 per depositor per bank . , the fdic insures deposits at 6,800 institutions . the fdic also examines and supervises certain financial institutions for safety and soundness , performs certain consumer-protection functions , and manages banks in receiverships ( failed banks ) . since the start of fdic insurance on january 1 , 1934 , no depositor has lost any insured funds as a result of a bank failure . . office of the comptroller of the currency . the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) is a u.s . federal agency established by the national currency act of 1863 and serves to charter , regulate , and supervise all national banks and the federal branches and agencies of foreign banks in the united states . thomas j . curry was sworn in as the 30th comptroller of the currency on april 9 , 2012 . . office of thrift supervision . the office of thrift supervision is a u.s . federal agency under the department of the treasury . it was created in 1989 as a renamed version of another federal agency ( that was faulted for its role in the savings and loan crisis ) . like other u.s . federal bank regulators , it is paid by the banks it regulates . on july 21 , 2011 , the office of thrift supervision became part of the office of the comptroller of the currency . . consumer financial protection bureau . . bank classification . there are various classifications and charters that a bank can obtain in the united states and depending on their classification , they may be overseen by the federal reserve and supervised by either the fdic or occ . national bank . a national bank is a bank that is nationally or federally chartered and is allowed to operate throughout the country in any state . the advantage of holding a national bank act charter is that a national bank is not subject to state usury laws intended to prevent predatory lending . beneficial national bank v . anderson , . ( however , see also cuomo v . clearing house association , l . l . c . , stating that federal banking regulations do not preempt the ability of states to enforce their own fair-lending laws . ) there is currently no federal cap on rates . the federal government only requires that whatever rates , fees , or terms are set by issuers be disclosed to the consumer in accordance with the truth in lending act . a national bank must have '' national '' or '' n.a . '' in its corporate name . state bank . a state bank is a bank that is state chartered meaning that they are only allowed to operate in the state where they are chartered . they are allowed to pick up different customers from other states if they wish but they can not open a branch in another state without either that specific state charter or a national charter . a state chartered bank can not have '' national '' or '' federal '' in its name . state non-member bank . these are the same as state chartered banks but are not members of the federal reserve . they are still overseen by the fdic . . federal savings association . federal savings associations ( fsas ) , including federal savings banks ( fsbs ) , are chartered under the homeowners refinancing act of 1933 . although originally focused on residential mortgage lending , they have expanded their business across the range of banking activities . they operate under a distinct regulatory framework from national banks that allows them , for example , to invest directly in real estate development companies . fsas were originally overseen by the office of thrift supervision , but the dodd–frank act transferred most regulatory jurisdiction to the office of the comptroller of the currency . state savings association . this is the same thing as a federal savings association but are registered under state law . they are overseen by the fdic . fdic charter class table . n commercial bank , national ( federal ) charter and fed member , supervised by the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) sm commercial or savings bank , state charter and fed member , supervised by the federal reserve ( frb ) nm commercial bank , state charter and fed nonmember , supervised by the fdic or occ sb savings banks , state charter , supervised by the fdic sa as of july 21 , 2011 , fdic supervised state chartered thrifts and occ supervised federally chartered thrifts . prior to that date , state or federally chartered savings associations supervised by the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) . oi insured u.s . branch of a foreign chartered institution ( iba ) . bank mergers and closures . bank mergers happen for many reasons in normal business , for example , to create a single larger bank in which operations of both banks can be streamlined ; to acquire another bank 's brands ; or due to regulators closing the institution due to unsafe and unsound business practices or inadequate capitalization and liquidity . banks may not go bankrupt in the united states . depositor accounts are insured up to 250,000 as of october 2008 per individual per bank by the fdic . banks that are in danger of failing are either taken over by the fdic , administered temporarily , then sold or merged with other banks . the fdic maintains a list of banks showing institutions seized by regulators and the assuming institutions . banking privacy . in the united states , bank secrecy and information security is not protected through a singular law nor is it an unalienable right . the regulation of banking privacy is typically undertaken by a sector-by-sector basis . the most prominent federal law governing banking privacy in the u.s . is the gramm–leach–bliley act ( glb ) . this regulates the disclosure , collection , and use of non-public information by banking institutions . additionally , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) serves as the primary protector of banking privacy by fining violators of federal and state banking privacy laws . unlike banking in switzerland or other european countries , violations of banking privacy are usually a civil offense not a crime . however , the financial industry regulatory authority ( finra ) offers numerous banking privacy provisions within its statutes . . list of banks . according to the fdic , there were 6,799 fdic-insured commercial banks in the united states as of february 11 , 2014 . every member of the federal reserve system is listed along with non-members who are also insured by the fdic . the five largest banks by assets in 2011 were jpmorgan chase , bank of america , citigroup , wells fargo , and goldman sachs . . see also . credit in the thirteen colonies financial services in the united states banking in switzerland banking in germany banking in the united kingdom . references . bibliography .