André Hazes

biography . early years . hazes was born in 1951 in amsterdam 's de pijp area . at the age of eight , he was discovered at the albert cuyp market by comedian johnny kraaykamp and made his television debut on weekendshow in 1966 , where he sang a song in fake italian , '' piove '' . two singles , '' droomschip '' and '' juanita '' , were released but did not lead to a career in music . . 1970s . hazes pursued several odd jobs ( ordinary seaman , flower delivery boy , chimney sweep , butcher 's apprentice , bicycle repairman , trench digger , construction worker , demolition man , market salesman , and disc jockey ) before building up a reputation as a singing barman in his hometown , in café de krommert on the witte de withstraat . '' andré hazes , the singing bartender of café de krommerdt at the witte de withstraat '' stadsdeelkrant amsterdam west ( dutch ) in 1976 he wrote and demoed '' eenzame kerst '' , a song about a prisoner 's lonely christmas , for singer willy alberti hoping that he would record it ; alberti suggested that hazes record it himself . the single sold 70,000 copies in three weeks and made him an instant star . an album , zo is het leven ( '' such is life '' ) was released in 1977 and reached the dutch top 20 ; extracted singles '' mama '' and '' de vlieger '' did n't chart although the latter became a dutch standard ( and a top 40 hit second time round ) in years to come . still , he returned to bartending . . 1980s . in 1980 he signed a contract with emi , and soon after that his career started to take off . '' een vriend '' ( '' a friend '' ) and '' een beetje verliefd '' ( '' a little in love ) '' were both top ten hits in 1981 , produced by his best friend tim griek . in 1981 hazes was awarded the zilveren harp ( silver harp ) for his album gewoon andré ( just andré ) which sold 500,000 copies de telegraaf , 23 september 2004 , andré hazes overleden , link ( dutch ) ( accessed : 12 august 2006 ) and was certified five times platinum in its first year of release and two more times two years later . nvpi.nl dutch certification database accessed 4 november 2006 three of the album 's songs , including '' een beetje verliefd '' , were written for hazes by aart mol and his colleagues from the 1970s band catapult , who had formed the production company cat music , which would write a total of 39 songs for hazes . 1982 was the year of his great concert in the concertgebouw in amsterdam . during his heyday hazes also had a sideline as an actor ; in 1982 he played a restaurant owner in the inspector general-inspired movie de boezemvriend ( starring his comedian namesake andre van duin ) , in 1983 he appeared in the comedy series zoals u wenst mevrouw ( as you wish madam ) as a down-and-out taking a gardening job under false pretenses and singing new lyrics to recent hits . he also appeared in commercials for toasts ( as an italian singer ) and custard ( as a football-playing son of singer/actress joke bruijs ) . meanwhile hazes ' backing musicians at the time recorded a parody medley for their notorious comedy music project rubberen robbie . in 1986 hazes released two albums ; the first featured italian covers ( including '' volare '' , '' bueno sera '' and a new version of '' piove '' which he first sang in his childhood days ) and was dedicated to the memory of willy alberti . the second featured translated versions of peter maffay 's '' du '' and gloria gaynor 's '' i will survive '' . in february 1988 record producer and best friend , tim griek , died in a car accident . hazes dedicated the album liefde , leven , geven to griek 's memory . in 1988 he sang the song '' wij houden van oranje '' ( '' we love orange '' —orange being the national colour of the netherlands and also a nickname for the dutch national football team and in general all sports teams ) for the football championships . the song became very popular as the netherlands won the uefa euro 1988 in the same year . in 1989 his career was stalled after several years without record releases and to revive it record company emi approached hazes for a new album , asking him what he wanted to do next . emi offered him a free hand and full control if he decided to revitalize his career . he responded by recording the bilingual album dit is wat ik wil ( '' this is what i want '' ) , a blues and rock ' n roll album featuring many contemporary rock artists like herman brood and jan akkerman . extracted singles are '' de gokker '' ( '' the gambler '' ) and '' jammer '' ( '' crying time '' , converted into an earth pollution-song ) ; the latter was backed by '' working in a coal mine '' . joe bourne , an american singer living in the netherlands at the time , released an english-language version of '' een beetje verliefd '' for his tribute album bourne in holland . 1990s . 1999 saw the release of a hit documentary on hazes , named zij gelooft in mij ( '' she believes in me '' ) documentary film 'zij gelooft in mij ' director : john appel , 1999 after his translation of the kenny rogers song '' she believes in me '' . the film portrayed the singer as a tragic man of simple ways , a well-meaning but clueless father and lousy husband tormented by stage fright and a propensity towards drinking . hazes had mixed feelings about the film , but most viewers saw a man who had remained true to his humble background and whose raw emotional songs were genuinely felt . it earned him something of a cult status outside of his loyal fan base , with the cultural establishment taking him in a somewhat uncomfortable embrace . hazes was known to live unhealthily , beer being his main vice . he himself once said : '' if it was n't for the fame , i 'd be a full-blown alcoholic . '' in fact , he already was ; he just managed to high-functioning alcoholic . 2000s . in may 2002 hazes briefly entered local politics by getting elected to the municipal council of de ronde venen for the local political party ronde venen belang . he quickly became the focus of criticism because after a month he had n't shown up yet for any meetings . after being criticized and ridiculed in national newspapers , hazes did show for a council meeting in june 2002 , but shortly before it started hazes suffered a mental breakdown and was unable to attend . four days later he announced his resignation and offered his seat to the party . on 23 september 2004 hazes died of cardiac arrest . eventually , his lifestyle had caught up with him , and somehow he became bigger in death than he had ever been during his lifetime . everybody identified with him , and in the months after his death , andré hazes became public property . in an interview with de volkskrant , he made the remark that he knew as a child that when he died , he would make the television news . not only did that happen , four days after he died , a startling crowd of about 48,000 attended a memorial ceremony in his honour at the amsterdam arena stadium . over 8 million viewers followed the event which was broadcast live on dutch and belgian television . hazes was cremated the day after . on 29 september 2004 the single '' zij gelooft in mij '' was re-released and was his first no . 1 hit in the dutch top 40 . in 2007 , one of his songs , the hit '' blijf bij mij '' ( '' stay with me '' ) , reached the number one position in the dutch top 40 again . this song was sung with gerard joling . '' blijf bij mij '' is a cover from the song '' forse '' by the italian singer pupo . exactly one year after his death , in accordance with his wishes , hazes ' remaining ashes were distributed over a couple of skyrockets , which were then launched into the sky by his surviving relatives . on the same day , his statue was unveiled in de pijp , amsterdam , near the singer 's birthplace . personal life . hazes married annie dijkstra in 1974 . she had given birth to a daughter , nathalie , in 1973 . the couple divorced in 1979 . after their divorce , dijkstra and hazes had a legal battle involving the rights to sell a biography of hazes ; dijkstra lost the case . in 1981 , hazes married ellen wolf . she gave birth to a son , melvin , in 1982 . the couple divorced in 1990 ; wolf later died of breast cancer in 2005 , at age 47 . in 1991 , hazes married his third wife , longtime girlfriend rachel van galen . hazes was van galen 's senior by nineteen years ; she gave birth to his third and fourth child , daughter roxeanne ( 1993 ) and son andré '' dré '' jr . ( 1994 ) . hazes remained married to his third wife until his death in 2004 . after his death , a conflict arose between hazes ' first two children . they accused his third wife rachel of commercially exploiting hazes ' death for her personal gain . hazes ' youngest two children , roxeanne and andré jr . , released a cover album ( '' voor jou , van jou '' for you , from you ) in 2010 , containing the most famous of hazes ' songs . they went on to become successful artists in their own right . in 2016 , hazes ' first grandson andré iii was born . movie . lemming film released the movie bloed , zweet & tranen , named after a song of hazes , in 2015 . the film describes the life of hazes in his childhood , in his heyday and during the last weeks of his life . references . . external links . official website andre hazes on europopmusic.eu cultural gems or sentimental crap ? , article in leiden university weekly newspaper