Å

scandinavian languages . the å in scandinavian alphabets represents two sounds , one short and one long . the short version represents ipa . in swedish , the long version represents ipa . in danish and norwegian , the long version is pronounced ipa . origin . the å-sound originally had the same origin as the long sound in german and ( scandinavian , , english eel , hair ) . historically , the å derives from the old norse long vowel ( spelled with the letter á ) , but over time , it developed to an sound in most scandinavian language varieties ( in swedish and norwegian , it has eventually reached the pronunciation . medieval writing often used doubled letters for long vowels , and the vowel continued to be written aa . in old swedish the use of the ligature æ and of ø ( originally also a variant of the ligature œ ) that represented the sounds and respectively were gradually replaced by new letters . instead of using ligatures , a minuscule e was placed above the letters a and o to create new graphemes . they later evolved into the modern letters ä and ö , where the e was simplified into the two dots now referred to as umlaut . this construction was also applied to construct a new grapheme where an '' aa '' had previously been used . a minuscule o was placed on top of an a to create a new letter . it was first used in print in the gustav vasa bible that was published in 1541 and replaced aa in the 16th century . pettersson ( 1996 ) , p . 139 in an attempt to modernize the orthography , linguists tried to introduce the å to danish and norwegian writing in the 19th century . most people felt no need for the new letter , although the letter group aa had already been pronounced like å for centuries in denmark and norway . aa was usually treated as a single letter , spoken like the present å when spelling out names or words . orthography reforms making å official were carried out in norway in 1917 and in denmark in 1948 . it has been argued that the å only made its way to official danish spelling due to anti-german and pro-scandinavian sentiment after world war ii . danish had been the only language apart from german and luxembourgish to use capitalized nouns in the last decades , but abolished them at the same occasion . in a few names of danish cities or towns , the old spelling has been retained as an option due to local resistance , e.g . aalborg and aabenraa ; however , ålborg and åbenrå are the spellings recommended by the dansk sprognævn . orthography rules , §3.2 , sproget.dk ( in danish ) between 1948 and 2010 , the city of aarhus was officially spelled århus . however , the city has changed to the aa spelling starting 2011 , in a controversial decision citing internationalization and web compatibility advantages . icelandic and faroese are the only north germanic languages not to use the å . the old norse letter á is retained , but the sound it now expresses is a diphthong , pronounced in icelandic and in faroese . the short variation of faroese á is pronounced , though . use in names . in some place names , the old aa spelling dominates , more often in denmark than in norway ( where it has been abolished in official use since 1917 ) . locals of and resist the å , whereas is rarely seen with aa spelling . official rules allow both forms in the most common cases , but å is always correct . å as a word means '' small river '' in danish , swedish , and norwegian and can be found in place names . before 1917 , when spelling with the double a was common , some norwegian place names contained three or four consecutive a letters : for instance ( now , a river ) and ( blååsen , 'the blue ( '' blå '' ) ridge ( '' ås '' ) ' ) . in family names , the bearer of the name uses aa or å according to their choice , but since family names are inherited they are resistant to change and the traditional aa style is often kept . for instance , the last name aagaard is much more common than ågård . the surname aa is always spelled with double a , never with the single å . however , given names - which are less commonly inherited - have largely changed to the use of the å . for instance , in norway more than 12,000 male citizens spell their name håkon , while only around 2,500 are named haakon . company names are sometimes spelled with the double a by choice , usually in order to convey an impression of old-fashionedness or traditionality . the double a , representing a single sound , is usually kept in initials e.g . for people whose first , middle , and/or last name begins with the double a . accordingly , a man named '' hans aagard hauge '' would spell his initials '' h . aa . h . '' ( not '' h . a . h . '' nor '' h . å . h . '' ) , while a woman named aase vestergaard would spell her initials '' aa . v . '' ( not '' a . v . '' nor '' å . v . '' ) . place in alphabet . . danish and norwegian . correct alphabetization in danish and norwegian places å as the last letter in the alphabet , the sequence being æ , ø , å . this is also true for the alternative spelling '' aa '' . unless manually corrected , sorting algorithms of programs localised for danish or norwegian will place e.g . , aaron after zorro . in danish the correct sorting of aa depends on pronunciation - if the sound is pronounced as one sound it is sorted as å regardless of the sound is ' a ' or ' å ' ; thus , for example , the german city aachen is listed under å , as well as the danish city aabenraa . this is § 3 in the danish retskrivningsreglerne . swedish . in the swedish and finnish alphabets , å is sorted after z , as the third letter from the end , the sequence being å , ä , ö . this is easiest to remember across the nordic languages , that danish and norwegian follow z first with e-mutated letters æ and ø and then the symbol with a one-stroke diacritic å . swedish and finnish follow z with a one-stroke diacritic å and then a two-stroke ( or two-dot ) diacritic ä , ö . a combined nordic sorting mnemonic is æ , ø , å , ä , ö . international transcription . alternative spellings of the scandinavian å have become a concern because of globalization , and particularly because of the popularization of the world wide web . this is to a large extent due to the fact that prior to the creation of idna system around 2005 , internet domains containing scandinavian letters were not recognized by the dns system , and anyway do not feature on keyboards adapted for other languages . while it is recommended to keep the å intact wherever possible , the next best thing is to use the older , double a spelling ( e.g . '' www.raade.com '' instead of '' www.råde.com '' ) . this is because , as previously discussed , the å/aa indicates a separate sound . if the å is represented as a common a without the overring ( e.g . '' www.rade.com '' ) there is no indication that the a is supposed to represent another sound entirely . even so , representing the å as just an a is particularly common in sweden , as compared to norway and denmark , because the spelling aa has no traditional use there . finnish . image : pois pakkoruotsi.svg thumb the fact that å is a common letter in swedish while having no native use in finnish has led to it being used as a concise symbol for the swedish language in finland , as in this campaign to rid finnish schools of mandatory swedish . the phrase reads '' away with enforced swedish '' . because the finnish alphabet is derived from the swedish alphabet , å is carried over , but it has no native finnish use and is treated as in swedish . its usage is limited to loanwords and names of swedish , danish or norwegian origin . in finland there are many swedish-speaking as well as many finnish-speaking people with swedish surnames , and many swedish surnames include å . in addition , there are many geographical places in the finnish coastal areas that have å in their swedish names , such as kråkö and långnäs . the finnish name for å is ( '' swedish o '' ) , and is pronounced identically to o , which has the value . it is not advised to substitute aa for å in finnish , as aa is already a common letter combination with the value . emilian-romagnol . in emilian-romagnol , å is used to represent the open-mid back unrounded vowel , e.g . modenese dialect , , '' man , woman '' ; e.g . bolognese dialect , '' bologna , later '' . walloon writing . å was introduced to some eastern local variants of walloon at the beginning of the 16th century and initially noted the same sound as in danish . its use quickly spread to all eastern dialects , but the cultural influence liège and covered three sounds , a long open o , a long close o or a long a , depending on the local varieties . the use of a single å letter to cover such pronunciations has been embraced by the new pan-walloon orthography , with one orthography for words regardless of the local phonetic variations . the walloon use of å became the most popular use outside a scandinavian language , even being used in the international phonetic alphabet drafted by otto jespersen . in standardized writings outside the liège area , words containing å are written with uh , â or ô . for example , the word ( house ) , in the standardized orthography is spelled , , , in dialectal writings . istro-romanian . the istro-romanian alphabet is based on the standard romanian alphabet with three additional letters used to mark sounds specific only to this language : å , ľ and ń . chamorro . å and å are also used in the practical orthography of chamorro , a language indigenous to the people of northern mariana islands and guam . the chamorro name for guam is , and its capital is called . symbol for ångström . the letter '' å '' ( u+00c5 ) is also used throughout the world as the international symbol for the non-si unit ångström , a physical unit of length named after the sweden physicist anders jonas ångström . it is always upper case in this context ( symbols for units named after persons are generally upper-case ) . the ångström is a unit of length equal to ( one ten-billionth of a meter ) or . unicode also has encoded . however , that is unicode normalization to the ordinary letter å . the duplicate encoding at u+212b is due to round-trip mapping compatibility with an east-asian character encoding , but is otherwise not to be used . . on computers . image : illuminated keyboard 2.jpg thumb right danish keyboard with keys for æ , ø and å . on norwegian keyboards the æ and ø trade places . other uses . the logo of the major league baseball team known as the los angeles angels is a capital '' a '' with a halo . due to the resemblance , angels fans are known to stylize the name as '' ångels '' . the logo of the stargate series similarly features a stylized a with a circle above it , making it resemble an å as in stargåte ; in norwegian , means '' riddle '' . similarly , cirque du soleil 's koozå production also uses this character in its logo , although it is pronounced by the main singer as a regular '' a '' . british producer and singer låpsley uses å in her stage name . a related phenomenon is the metal umlaut , which unlike the previous examples is intentional use of diacritics .