1905 in film

events . the manaki brothers make the first motion picture in the balkans , the weavers . pathé frères colors black-and-white films by machine . filmmaking takes an unexpected historical role by recording activities along market street , in the year preceding the destruction from the san francisco earthquake of 1906 ( footage in the modern film trip down market street 1905/2005 ) . aleksandr khanzhonkov begins filming his first documentaries . the misadventure of a french gentleman without pants at the zandvoort beach , the oldest surviving dutch fictional film is released by alberts frères . later to be included in the canon of dutch cinema as released by the netherlands film festival . june 19 – john p . harris and his brother harry in pittsburgh open the first theater in the u.s . devoted exclusively to the exhibition of motion pictures . december 16 – variety , an entertainment trade newspaper that would later cover the film industry , is published for the first time in new york city . films released in 1905 . alice guy-blaché . à la cabane bambou allumeur-marche au poulailler ! c'est une ingénue cake-walk nègre chez le dentiste chien jouant à la balle clown , chien et ballon comment on dort à paris ! cucurbitacée douaniers et contrebandiers esmeralda directed with victorin-hippolyte jasset espagne ( documentary short ) être légume five o'clock tea jeune homme et le trottin l'enfant du cordonnier la charité du prestidigitateur la fifille à sa mère la malagueña et le torero la mattchiche la paimpolaise la polka des trottins la statue le bébé embarrassant le boléro cosmopolite le cake-walk du nouveau cirque ( documentary short ) le coq dressé de cook et rilly le képi le lorgnon accusateur le pantalon coupé le pavé le petit grégoire le petit panier le plateau le rire du nègre les maçons les p'tits pois le tango le trou de mon quai le vrai jiu-jitsu lilas blanc miss helyett : air du portrait on est poivrot , mais on a du coeur peintre et ivrogne polin , l'anatomie du conscrit robert macaire et bertrand roméo pris au piège si ça t'va une noce au lac saint-fargeau v'la le rétameur valsons viens , poupoule villa dévalisée la valise enchantée . cecil hepworth . baby 's toilet ( directed ) the other side of the hedge ( produced ) directed by lewin fitzhamon rescued by rover , starring cecil hepworth , margaret hepworth ( his wife ) , barbara hepworth ( their baby daughter ) , and blair ( their dog ) ; co-directed by lewin fitzhamon and cecil hepworth . georges méliès . an adventurous automobile trip the black imp the inventor crazybrains and his wonderful airship the living playing cards the palace of the arabian nights rip 's dream ulysses and the giant polyphemus kinnard , roy ( 1995 ) . '' horror in silent films '' . mcfarland and company inc . page 20 . . edwin s . porter . the boarding school girls ( cinematography ) the kleptomaniac ( directed ) the little train robbery a parodic sequel to the 1903 film the great train robbery with an all-child cast , released on september 1 , 1905 . original release date . both were directed by edwin s . porter . the miller 's daughter is a 1905 american silent film produced by edison manufacturing company . edison employees wallace mccutcheon and edwin s . porter are generally credited as directors . niver , kemp ( 1967 ) . motion pictures from the library of congress paper print collection 1894-1912 . university of california press , the film is based on the melodrama hazel kirke by steele mackaye . the night before christmas ( directed ) starring harry eytinge the whole dam family and the dam dog ( directed ) . g . w . bitzer . a trip to salt lake city directed by g . w . bitzer , the first known narrative film treatment of members of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints . in the swimming pool , palm beach , florida ( photographed ) a silent short actuality/documentary film . james williamson . our new errand boy a uk short silent comedy film , directed by james williamson . mitchell and kenyon . halifax catholic procession ( produced ) special march past of st . joseph 's scholars and special parade of st . matthew 's pupils , blackburn ( produced ) . others . 2 a . m . in the subway a one shot , 53 second-long comedy filmed , and probably directed , by billy bitzer adventures of sherlock holmes ; or , held for ransom , directed by j . stuart blackton airy fairy lillian tries on her new corsets , produced by frank marion and wallace mccutcheon automobile races at ormond , fla . , directed by unknown person the bobby 's nightmare , directed by alf collins ( british ) the conscience , made in france . dingjun mountain , chinese silent film directed by ren qingtai the d.t . 's , or the effect of drink , directed by william haggar ( british ) the fairy of the black rocks ( british ) kinnard , roy ( 1995 ) . '' horror in silent films '' . mcfarland and company inc . page 19 . the freak barber , directed by j . h . martin ( british ) los héroes del sitio de zaragoza is a 1903 or 1905 spain short black-and-white silent film directed by segundo de chomón . the misadventure of a french gentleman without pants at the zandvoort beach is an early dutch silent film directed by willy mullens , and produced by alberts frères . a six-minute short comedy film ( really a slapstick ) , it is one of the oldest surviving dutch fictional films . when the netherlands film festival presented its canon of dutch cinema ( containing sixteen monumental films in dutch film history ) in 2007 , it included this film . the nihilist is an american short silent film directed by wallace mccutcheon , sr . la presa di roma , directed by filoteo alberini ; possibly the first italian short film la revolution en russie , directed by ferdinand zecca the thirteen club , produced by american mutoscope workman , christopher ; howarth , troy ( 2016 ) . '' tome of terror : horror films of the silent era '' . midnight marquee press . trip to the center of the moon ( viaggio al centro della luna ) , starring mario caserini ( italian ) kinnard , roy ( 1995 ) . '' horror in silent films '' . mcfarland and company inc . page 20 . the unfortunate policeman a british short silent comedy film produced by robert w . paul the weavers , directed by the manaki brothers ; most likely the first film shot in the ( then-ottoman ) balkans . births . january 3 – anna may wong , american actress ( d . 1961 ) january 12 – tex ritter , american actor , singer ( d . 1974 ) january 13 – kay francis , american actress ( d . 1968 ) january 14 - sterling holloway , american actor ( d . 1992 ) january 17 – grant withers , american actor ( d . 1959 ) january 26 – charles lane , american actor ( d . 2007 ) february 27 – franchot tone , american actor ( d . 1968 ) march 18 – robert donat , english actor ( d . 1958 ) march 23 – joan crawford , american actress ( d . 1977 ) april 8 – ilka chase , american actress , ( d . 1978 ) april 17 – arthur lake , american actor ( d . 1987 ) may 1 – leila hyams , american actress ( d . 1977 ) may 15 – joseph cotten , american actor ( d . 1994 ) may 16 – henry fonda , american actor ( d . 1982 ) june 19 – mildred natwick , american actress ( d . 1994 ) july 29 – clara bow , american actress ( d . 1965 ) august 2 – myrna loy , american actress ( d . 1993 ) august 3 – dolores del río , mexican actress ( d . 1983 ) september 5 – meta luts , estonian actress ( d . 1958 ) september 18 – greta garbo , swedish actress ( d . 1990 ) september 21 – marguerite roberts , american writer ( d . 1989 ) october 4 – leslie mitchell , british newsreel commentator ( d . 1985 ) october 10 – aksella luts , estonian screenwriter and actress ( d . 2005 ) november 5 – joel mccrea , american actor ( d . 1990 ) december 5 – otto preminger , austro-hungarian-american director ( d . 1986 ) december 11 – gilbert roland , mexican-american actor ( d . 1994 ) december 24 – howard hughes , american director , producer , editor ( d . 1976 ) . deaths . march 24 – jules verne , famous novelist of fantasy stories and science-fiction , ( born 1828 ) march 25 – maurice barrymore , barrymore family patriarch ( born 1849 ) april 23 – joseph jefferson , rip van winkle ( 1896 film ) ( born 1829 ) october 13 – henry irving , english shakespearean actor and stage manager , who at one time was bram stoker 's employer , ( born 1838 ) . debuts . arthur johnson – the white caps ( short ) max linder – first night out ( short ) paul panzer – stolen by gypsies ( short ) . references .