Sir John Acton, 6th Baronet

origins . john was born on 3 june 1736 at besançon in france , the son of edward acton , an english-born physician who had settled in that town , the great-grandson of sir walter acton , 2nd baronet ( 1623–1665 ) of aldenham park , morville , in shropshire , england . in 1791 , aged 55 , john succeeded his second cousin once removed as 6th baronet . career . service in tuscany . he served under his uncle in the navy of the grand duchy of tuscany , and in 1775 commanded the tuscan frigates in the spanish-led invasion of algiers . concerning the calamitous disembarkation in which the spanish were drawn into a trap by the feigned retreat of the algerines , the travel writer henry swinburne wrote that the spaniards would have been '' broken and slaughtered to a man . had not mr . acton , the tuscan commander , cut his cables and let his ships drive in to shore just as the enemy was coming on us full gallop . the incessant fire of his great guns , loaded with grape-shot , not only stop't them in their career but obliged them to retire with great loss . '' travels through spain , in the years 1775 and 1776 , volume 1 , pages 61–62 , by henry swinburne , published 1787 . service in naples . in 1779 queen maria carolina of naples persuaded her brother the grand-duke leopold of tuscany to allow acton , who had been recommended to her by prince caramanico , to undertake the reorganisation of the neapolitan navy . the ability displayed by him in this led to his rapid advancement . he became commander-in-chief of both the army and the navy of the kingdom of naples , minister of finance , and finally prime minister . his policy , devised in concert with sir william hamilton , the english ambassador to naples , aimed at removing spanish influence from naples and replacing it with that of britain and austria . the policy led to open opposition to france and the french party in italy . the neapolitan fleet , which when acton entered the service of naples had been practically non-existent , he had built up by 1798 to 120 ships with 1,200 cannon , while the land forces had increased fourfold from 15 to 60 thousand . unfortunately in no degree were the interests of naples promoted by the vainglorious policy thus inaugurated , which speedily resulted in disaster . although acton had aimed to extend the commerce of the country by increasing the facilities of internal communication and restoring some of the principal ports , the increased taxation required to support the army and navy more than counter-balanced these efforts and caused acute distress and general discontent . the introduction of foreign officers into the services , which had aroused the resentment of the upper classes , was further augmented when the fleet was placed under the orders of the british admiral horatio nelson . although nelson and the british fleet had extinguished french naval power in the mediterranean by his victory at the battle of the nile in august 1798 , thereby saving the kingdom of naples from naval conquest by revolutionary france , the french armies entered the north of italy , where they met successes . in response in december 1798 the king and queen , together with acton , hamilton ( and his wife lady emma hamilton ) , by order of nelson were evacuated from naples on board hms vanguard to the king 's sicilian capital of palermo . thereupon , freed of the royal presence , the neapolitan citizens and nobles sympathetic to the ideals of the french revolution promptly established the short-lived parthenopean republic , with the aid of the french . however the monarchy was restored in naples five months later with the help of a calabrian army , called the sanfedisti , led by cardinal ruffo . to re-establish order and with the consent of the queen and the help of ruffo , acton established at naples the junta of state , a reign of terror during which many prominent citizens were thrown into prison or executed . in 1804 acton was removed from power , on the demand of france , but nevertheless advised the king , who had agreed to an alliance with napoleon , to permit british and russian troops to land at naples . shortly afterwards the minister was recalled , but when the french entered naples in 1806 , he together with the royal family again took refuge in sicily . a letter of 25 july 1809 reported that acton had '' returned a few days since from the baths of termina , not in the least benefited by their waters . the painful effects of a paralytic stroke , and a severe fall last year , are now aggravated by a nearly total deprivation of sight . '' he died at palermo on 12 august 1811 and a '' magnificent funeral was prepared for him ; but during the procession , so tremendous a shower of rain came on , that the body remained abandoned in the street for a long time . '' he was buried in the church of santa ninfa dei crociferi . succeeds to baronetcy . in 1791 , aged 55 , he succeeded to the acton baronetcy and estates on the death of his second cousin once removed , richard acton , 5th baronet of aldenham park in shropshire . . marriage and issue . on 2 february 1800 , at the age of 63 , he married his 13 year-old niece mary ann acton , the eldest daughter of his younger brother general joseph edward acton ( 1737-1830 ) . the marriage appears to have been made for dynastic purposes to keep control of the family 's wealth and required papal dispensation due to consanguinity . on hearing the news nelson commented '' it is never too late to do well '' and following his arrival in naples threw a party for the newlyweds aboard his flagship , the foudroyant . '' by raising the awning twenty feet , removing the guns , and robing the masts in silk , two spacious rooms were given , and these were most splendidly decorated ; and when lighted up in the evening , really presented a fairy-like appearance , while the music that floated over the calm waters of this beautiful bay was softened . all the nobles of the court , with the exception of the king and queen , were there '' . the festivities were somewhat marred when a drunk english lieutenant accidentally knocked an italian princess into the water ( on emerging she furiously demanded he be hanged from the foreyard arm ) . by his wife he had three children : sir ferdinand dalberg-acton , 7th baronet ( 1801–1837 ) , eldest son and heir , whose son was john emerich edward dalberg acton , 1st baron acton . cardinal charles januarius edward acton ( 1803–1847 ) elizabeth acton ( 1806–1850 ) , who married sir robert throckmorton , 8th baronet , of coughton court , warwickshire , and had issue . death , burial & monument . he died at palermo on 12 august 1811 , aged 75 , and was buried there in the church of santa ninfa dei crociferi , where survives his mural monument , see : file : jactongravepalermo.jpg displaying sculpted ( all in relief ) his bust within a laurel circlet and antique trophy of arms above a pedimented sarcophagus in the form of a double-bodied winged sphinx , inscribed in latin as follows : : dom hic jacet joannes acton angliae dynasta vere egenorum pater . obiit pridie idus sextilis anno domini mdcccxi aetatis suae lxxv ( '' to the greatest and best god . here lies john acton , from a dynasty of england , truly the father of the needy . he died on the first day of the ides of the august ( i.e of the roman calendar , thus august ) in the year of our lord 1811 , ( in the year ) of his age 75 '' ) . notes . references .