Battle of Vitoria

background . in july 1812 , after the battle of salamanca , the french had evacuated madrid , which wellington 's army entered on 12 august 1812 . deploying three divisions to guard its southern approaches , wellington marched north with the rest of his army to lay siege to the fortress of burgos , away , but he had miscalculated the enemy 's strength , and on 21 october he had to abandon the siege of burgos and retreat . by 31 october he had abandoned madrid too , and retreated first to salamanca then to ciudad rodrigo , near the portuguese frontier , to avoid encirclement by french armies from the north-east and south-east . wellington spent the winter reorganizing and reinforcing his forces . napoleon recalled to france numerous soldiers to reconstruct his main army after his disastrous invasion of russia . by 20 may 1813 wellington marched 121,000 troops ( 53,749 british , 39,608 spanish and 27,569 portuguese from northern portugal across the mountains of northern spain and the esla river to outflank marshal jourdan 's army of 68,000 , strung out between the douro and the tagus . the french retreated to burgos , with wellington 's forces marching hard to cut them off from the road to france . wellington himself commanded the small central force in a strategic feint , while sir thomas graham conducted the bulk of the army around the french right flank over landscape considered impassable . wellington launched his attack with 57,000 british , 16,000 portuguese and 8,000 spanish at vitoria on 21 june , from four directions . terrain . the battlefield centres on the zadorra river , which runs from east to west . as the zadorra runs west , it loops into a hairpin bend , finally swinging generally to the southwest . on the south of the battlefield are the heights of la puebla . to the northwest is the mass of monte arrato . vitoria stands to the east , two miles ( 3 & nbsp ; km ) south of the zadorra . five roads radiate from vitoria , north to bilbao , northeast to salinas and bayonne , east to salvatierra , south to logroño and west to burgos on the south side of the zadorra . plans . jourdan was ill with a fever all day on 20 june . because of this , few orders were issued and the french forces stood idle . an enormous wagon train of booty clogged the streets of vitoria . a convoy left during the night , but it had to leave siege artillery behind because there were not enough draft animals to pull the cannons . gazan 's divisions guarded the narrow western end of the zadorra valley , deployed south of the river . maransin 's brigade was posted in advance , at the village of subijana . the divisions were disposed with leval on the right , daricau in the centre , conroux on the left and villatte in reserve . only a picket guarded the western extremity of the heights of la puebla . further back , d'erlon 's force stood in a second line , also south of the river . darmagnac 's division deployed on the right and cassagne 's on the left . d'erlon failed to destroy three bridges near the river 's hairpin bend and posted avy 's weak cavalry division to guard them . reille 's men originally formed a third line , but sarrut 's division was sent north of the river to guard the bilbao road while lamartinière 's division and the spanish royal guard units held the river bank . wellington directed hill 's 20,000-man right column to drive the french from the zadorra defile on the south side of the river . while the french were preoccupied with hill , wellington 's right centre column moved along the north bank of the river and crossed it near the hairpin bend behind the french right flank . graham 's 20,000-man left column was sent around the north side of monte arrato . it drove down the bilbao road , cutting off the bulk of the french army . dalhousie 's left centre column cut across monte arrato and struck the river east of the hairpin , providing a link between graham and wellington . battle . wellington 's plan split his army into four attacking '' columns '' , attacking the french defensive position from south , west and north while the last column cut down across the french rear . coming up the burgos road , hill sent pablo morillo 's division to the right on a climb up the heights of la puebla . stewart 's 2nd division began deploying to the left in the narrow plain just south of the river . seeing these moves , gazan sent maransin forward to drive morillo off the heights . hill moved col . henry cadogan 's brigade of the 2nd division to assist morillo . gazan responded by committing villatte 's reserve division to the battle on the heights . about this time , gazan first spotted wellington 's column moving north of the zadorra to turn his right flank . he asked jourdan , now recovered from his fever , for reinforcements . having become obsessed with the safety of his left flank , the marshal refused to help gazan , instead ordering some of d'erlon 's troops to guard the logroño road . wellington thrust james kempt 's brigade of the light division across the zadorra at the hairpin . at the same time , stewart took subijana and was counterattacked by two of gazan 's divisions . on the heights , cadogan was killed , but the anglo-spanish force managed to hang on to its foothold . wellington suspended his attacks to allow graham 's column time to make an impression and a lull descended on the battlefield . at noon , graham 's column appeared on the bilbao road . jourdan immediately realised he was in danger of envelopment and ordered gazan to pull back toward vitoria . graham drove sarrut 's division back across the river , but could not force his way across the zadorra despite bitter fighting . further east , longa 's spanish troops defeated the spanish royal guards and cut the road to bayonne . with some help from kempt 's brigade , picton 's 3rd division from dalhousie 's column crossed to the south side of the river . according to picton , the enemy responded by pummelling the 3rd with 40 to 50 cannon and a counter-attack on their right flank , still open because they had captured the bridge so quickly , causing the 3rd to lose 1,800 men ( over one third of all allied losses at the battle ) as they held their ground . historical record of the seventy-fourth regiment ( highlanders ) , richard cannon , published by parker , furnivall & parker , 1847 cole 's 4th division crossed further west . with gazan on the left and d'erlon on the right , the french attempted a stand at the village of arinez . formed in a menacing line , the 4th , light , 3rd and 7th divisions soon captured this position . the french fell back to the zuazo ridge , covered by their well-handled and numerous field artillery . this position fell to wellington 's attack when gazan refused to cooperate with his colleague d'erlon . french morale collapsed and the soldiers of gazan and d'erlon fled from the field . artillerists left their guns behind as they fled on the trace horses . soon the road was jammed with a mass of wagons and carriages . the efforts of reille 's two divisions , holding off graham , allowed tens of thousands of french troops to escape by the salvatierra road . aftermath . the allied army lost about 5,000 men , with 3,675 british , 921 portuguese and 562 spanish casualties . french losses totalled at least 5,200 killed and wounded , plus 2,800 men and 151 cannon captured . by army , the losses were south 4,300 , centre 2,100 and portugal 1,600 . there were no casualty returns from the royal guard or the artillery . french losses were not higher for several reasons . first , the allied army had already marched that morning and was in no condition to pursue . second , reille 's men valiantly held off graham 's column . third , the valley by which the french retreated was narrow and well-covered by the 3rd hussar and the 15th dragoon regiments acting as rearguard . last , the french left their booty behind . many british soldiers turned aside to plunder the abandoned french wagons , containing '' the loot of a kingdom '' . it is estimated that more than £1 million of booty ( perhaps £100 million in modern equivalent ) was seized , but the gross abandonment of discipline caused an enraged wellington to write in a dispatch to earl bathurst , '' we have in the service the scum of the earth as common soldiers '' . wellington to bathurst , dispatches , p . 496 . the british general also vented his fury on a new cavalry regiment , writing , '' the 18th hussars are a disgrace to the name of soldier , in action as well as elsewhere ; and i propose to draft their horses from them and send the men to england if i can not get the better of them in any other manner . '' ( on 8april 1814 , the 18th redeemed their reputation in a gallant charge led by henry murray ( british army officer ) at croix d'orade , shortly before the battle of toulouse . ) order was soon restored , and by december , after detachments had seized san sebastián and pamplona , wellington 's army was encamped in france . legacy . the battle was the inspiration for beethoven 's opus 91 , often called the '' battle symphony '' or '' wellington 's victory '' , which portrays the battle as musical drama . the climax of the movie the firefly , starring jeanette macdonald , occurs with wellington 's attack on the french centre . ( the film used music from an opera of the same name by rudolf friml , but with a totally different plot . ) the battle and french rout also forms the climax to bernard cornwell 's book sharpe 's honour . reenactment . reenactment of the battle of vitoria , staged on armentia fields , vitoria-gasteiz , 22 june 2013 , bicentenary of the battle file : vitoria - recreación histórica de la batalla de vitoria , bicentenario 1813-2013 006.jpg british line infantry and highlanders file : vitoria - recreación histórica de la batalla de vitoria , bicentenario 1813-2013 009.jpg cavalry charge file : vitoria - recreación histórica de la batalla de vitoria , bicentenario 1813-2013 012.jpg hand-to-hand combat between british and imperial marksmen file : vitoria - recreación histórica de la batalla de vitoria , bicentenario 1813-2013 013.jpg spanish soldiers file : vitoria - recreación histórica de la batalla de vitoria , bicentenario 1813-2013 015.jpg french soldiers file : vitoria - recreación histórica de la batalla de vitoria , bicentenario 1813-2013 019.jpg british column file : vitoria - recreación histórica de la batalla de vitoria , bicentenario 1813-2013 020.jpg spanish infantrymen file : vitoria - recreación histórica de la batalla de vitoria , bicentenario 1813-2013 021.jpg british highland grenadiers file : vitoria - recreación histórica de la batalla de vitoria , bicentenario 1813-2013 024.jpg portuguese infantrymen file : vitoria - recreación histórica de la batalla de vitoria , bicentenario 1813-2013 026.jpg imperial grenadiers file : vitoria - recreación histórica de la batalla de vitoria , bicentenario 1813-2013 033.jpg anglo-portuguese advance file : vitoria - recreación histórica de la batalla de vitoria , bicentenario 1813-2013 032.jpg mounted chasseurs a cheval and horse grenadiers . monuments & memorials . file : vitoria - museo de armeria 06.jpg recreation with model figures of the battle , displayed at the : es : museo de armería de álava in vitoria-gasteiz . file : vitoria - museo de armeria 09.jpg imperial militaria captured by the allies after the battle , displayed at the : es : museo de armería de álava in vitoria-gasteiz . file : vitoria - monumento batalla vitoria3.jpg the french withdrawal , monument to the battle , in vitoria-gasteiz . . notes . references . . further reading . . external links . the cruel war in spain - armies , battles , skirmishes