Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar

early life . little is known about the early life of velázquez . kent , p . 307-308 he was born in cuéllar around 1465 , in the segovia region of spain . for a time he was a member of the spanish military and served in naples . afterwards he returned to spain and lived in seville . in september 1493 , velázquez was one of 1500 men who sailed with columbus on his second voyage to the new world . velázquez never returned to spain . florstedt 1942 velázquez settled on the island of hispaniola and survived the early hardships which killed many colonists or drove them back home . in time he demonstrated an aptitude for dealing with the political factions on the island . he was well regarded by bartholomew columbus , the younger brother of christopher and the administrator of the island from 1493 to 1500 . when bartholomew left the island for any length of time , he would make velázquez acting governor of hispaniola . there is no record of velázquez during francisco de bobadilla 's brief tenure as governor of the island but when nicolás de ovando was appointed to the post in 1501 , velázquez quickly became one of the governor 's trusted lieutenants . in 1503 , when a taino revolt broke out in the western provinces of the island , velázquez was ordered to jaragua where he quashed the rebellion . after the revolt ovando determined that five new towns should be built in the rebellious territory . velázquez was sent to the western end of the island to establish salvatierra de la zabana and perhaps other towns . velázquez resided in salvatierra de la zabana and all five of the new settlements were placed under his administration . by 1511 , velázquez was one of the wealthiest men on hispaniola . he held encomiendas at verapaz , salvatierra de la zabana , and santiago de caballeros , where he was a partner with an unidentified encomendero in mining enterprises . floyd , p . 63 , 81 . conquest of cuba . when diego columbus became governor in 1509 , he was instructed by king ferdinand to explore , conquer , and colonize the neighboring island of cuba in hopes of obtaining new sources of gold and native labor . miguel de pasamonte , the king 's treasurer in the caribbean , was influential in seeing that columbus selected velásquez to lead the expedition . velásquez was to finance the project himself and though columbus assured him that the crown would reimburse him later , no money was ever forthcoming . he assembled a small fleet of four ships and three hundred men among whom were several relatives , debt-ridden encomenderos and a few who would later become notable , including hernán cortés and pedro de alvarado . martinez-fernandez , 2018 wright , 1916 velásquez sailed for cuba in january , 1511 , and landed at a small harbor in the native province of mayci . the spaniards were opposed by a taino force led by hatuey , formerly a chief from hispaniola who fled to cuba and helped the local natives organize resistance to the incursion . the tainos were outmatched by the spanish weaponry and after two months of intermittent fighting , they were defeated . according to bartolome de las casas , who did not arrive on the island until later , hatuey was captured and burned at the stake . floyd , 1973 , p . 114 florstedt , 1942 the first spanish settlement , baracoa , was established on the northeast corner of the island by august , 1511 . it consisted of a fort surrounded by thatched huts and served as the initial base of operations for the spanish occupation of cuba . later that year , velásquez was joined by panfilo de narvaez who brought thirty spanish archers and native auxiliaries from jamaica . velásquez was glad for the reinforcements and made narvaez second in command . more than a year was spent consolidating control of the present-day oriente province . floyd , 1973 , p . 114 in early 1513 velásquez married maria de cuéllar in the new town of baracoa . she was the daughter of the royal treasurer , cristóbal de cuéllar , and a former lady-in-waiting for maria de toledo , the wife of diego columbus . maria died less than a week after their wedding . wright , 1916 , p . 25,41 after a slow start , the conquest of cuba accelerated dramatically in 1513 when velásquez organized three expeditions to proceed west , explore the island , and establish a spanish presence . narvaez led a force through the interior of the country while velásquez and a lieutenant proceeded along the south and north coasts respectively . near the south coast , narvaez soon met with a force of 2,500 tainos led by their chief , caguax . the spanish struck first , before they could be attacked by the natives defending their land , defeating caguex and killing some one hundred tainos . this was the last significant resistance faced by the spanish and thereafter they proceeded relatively unchallenged in their colonization and search for gold . floyd , 1973 , p . 117-118 in october , 1513 , velásquez received letters from the king that expanded his powers in cuba . velásquez was authorized to assign indians to encomiendas and establish additional towns as warranted by his discoveries . in particular he was encouraged to create settlements on the southern coast that would support trade with the growing spanish presence in panama . by 1514 , the island was largely pacified and significant gold deposits were discovered at several sites on the island , setting off a brief gold rush that lasted until about 1520 . floyd , 1973 , p . 119 at its peak , officials complained that the search for cuban gold was depleting manpower in hispaniola . sauer , 1966 , p . 186 in addition to baracoa , velásquez used his authority to establish six more cuban towns by 1515 . most of the new settlements were sited on the coast near gold deposits and significant populations of indian labor . bayamo was founded in 1513 , followed in 1514 by trinidad , sancti spiritus , and havana . havana , destined to become the premier city of cuba , was originally founded on the south coast . puerto principe was established in 1515 . velásquez added santiago de cuba in july , 1515 and made it his residence and the new capital of the island . sauer , 1966 , p . 186-187 velázquez used the assignment of encomiendas to reward relatives and associates and thus ensure an island aristocracy that was loyal to him . by 1522 significant encomiendas were held by his relatives juan de grijalva and manuel de rojas ; his close associates panfilo de narvaez , bachiller de alonso parada , and vasco porcallo de figueroa ; and fourteen others . in total , these encomenderos controlled almost 3,000 indian laborers . martinez-fernandez , 2018 the new colonizers did not wish to be under the personal authority of diego columbus , so velázquez convoked a general cabildo ( a local government council ) which was duly authorized to deal directly with spain , and therefore removed velázquez and the colonizers from under the authority of columbus , their nominal superior . it was a precedent that would come back to haunt him with the mexican adventures . conquest of mexico . in 1514 , velázquez wrote to the king concerning rumors of unknown lands to the north and west of cuba . initially , these rumors were merely the subject of idle speculation and the king instructed velázquez to remain focused on the governance of cuba and especially the production of gold . however , as the demand for labor grew , slaving expeditions explored the region in search of natives to work the cuban ranches and gold mines . thomas , p . 323 interest in exploration and conquest intensified in 1516 when a slave ship returned carrying 20,000 pesos of gold seized from the natives living on the guanajes , a series of small islands off the coast of central america . florstedt , p . 45 velázquez quickly commissioned francisco hernández de córdoba to lead an expedition which sailed in february , 1517 , with instructions to explore certain neighboring islands . they soon came upon the shore of what they initially believed to be a large island , thus marking the spanish discovery of the yucatán peninsula . initial encounters with the mayans living along the coast turned into armed conflict ; 25 spaniards were killed and many more wounded , including córdoba himself . on his return to cuba , córdoba reported to velázquez that the mayans exhibited a sophistication not seen before in the region , including buildings of stone and mortar , clothing of woven cloth , and ornamentation of gold and silver . florstedt , p . 45 wright , p . 72-74 velázquez organized another expedition , hoping to trade with the mayans for their gold , '' for there must have been much there . '' florstedt , p . 48 he put his nephew , juan de grijalva , in command of four ships which departed cuba in january , 1518 . grijalva sailed along the yucatan and then headed northwards following the mexican coastline , exploring and trading with the natives as the opportunity arose . when grijalva returned in october he brought back a profit of 20,000 crowns ; but velázquez was angry with his nephew and felt the returns did not justify the time and effort . florstedt , p . 49-52 even before grijalva returned , velázquez was preparing for another , larger expedition to the yucatan . he sent a representative to spain requesting authority to trade with or conquer the new lands and was granted the title of adelantado of the yucatan and any other lands he might discover . velázquez was unsure of who should lead this latest effort and after some hesitancy selected hernán cortés . relations between them had been turbulent . cortes served as the governor 's private secretary during the initial conquest but was later involved in a plot to overthrow him . the attempted coup nearly cost cortes his life but velázquez pardoned him and awarded cortes with one of the first encomiendas in cuba . florstedt , p . 53-55 cortés readily accepted the commission and quickly began to organize a fleet and recruit volunteers . the governor soon regretted his choice when friends and allies warned him that his former secretary could not be trusted to remain loyal . in response , velázquez named vasco porcallo to replace cortés but when messages were sent ordering him to relinquish command , cortés refused and even managed to recruit one of the messengers to his cause . florstedt , p . 53-55 despite further entreaties and demands , cortés refused turn over his command . in february , 1519 , he left havana for mexico with ten ships and about 500 fighting men , effectively declaring himself free of velázquez 's authority . florstedt , p . 59 wright , p . 85-86 in august 1519 , velázquez received word that cortes had sent a ship to spain carrying aztec treasure and a request to be recognized as the rightful leader of the new territory . velázquez hurriedly sent an emissary to spain , contesting cortes and reasserting his own authority . the crown agreed to hear the dispute but postponed a decision for two years , perhaps waiting to see how the struggle was resolved in the field . florstedt , p . 63-67 velázquez was determined to remove cortes by force if necessary . in early 1520 , he organized an armada of about 1000 fighting men and 18 ships equipped with both light and heavy artillery . panfilo de narvaez was selected to lead the force with instructions to arrest cortes and assume government of the new territory on behalf of velázquez . instead , narvaez was easily defeated and cortes persuaded most of the force to switch sides and join his invasion of the aztec empire . the failed adventure was a disaster for velázquez ; he lost a substantial fortune invested in the fleet and left cuba seriously depopulated and vulnerable to a native uprising . florstedt , p . 67-71 wright , p . 87-88 . later life . velázquez spent the remaining few years of his life defending his governorship in cuba and continuing his dispute with cortes . diego colón perhaps sensed that velázquez was politically vulnerable ; he sent alonso zuazo to cuba in january , 1521 , to replace the governor and conduct his residencia . a formal review of an official 's time in office conducted at the end of his tenure however , colon himself was in political difficulties and under investigation by the crown . finally , by july , 1523 , colon was recalled to spain and velázquez was fully restored to office . floyd p . 211-213 in 1522 , carlos ii formally recognized cortes as governor of new spain , thus ending velázquez 's claims to the newly conquered territory . in 1523 , cortés made cristobal de olid the leader of an expedition to conquer honduras . while resupplying in havana , olid conspired with velázquez and they agreed that olid would renounce cortez and capture honduras on behalf of velázquez . when cortes heard of this plot , he wrote a letter of protest to the king and then dispatched his agents to honduras where they eventually killed olid . velázquez 's health began to fail in the summer of 1523 and a year later he died on june 11 or 12 , 1524 . at his request , he was buried under the altar steps of the new cathedral in santiago . his close associate , gonzalo de guzman , was the principal heir of his estate and would later serve two terms as governor . even before he died , plans were underway to replace velázquez . in may , 1524 , carlos ii named juan altamirano to conduct a residencia and become the new governor of cuba . floyd , p . 228 florstedt , p . 78-79 at the time of his death at the age of 59 , velázquez was '' the richest spaniard in the americas , '' despite financial losses on the expedition of francisco hernández de córdoba and of hernán cortés . he completed the successful conquest and colonization of cuba , founded towns that remain important today , made cuba economically prosperous , and positioned it as a center of trade and a staging point for expeditions of conquest elsewhere . kent , p . 375 . . see also . list of viceroys of new spain viceroyalty of new spain history of cuba history of havana juan de grijalva . notes . citations . bibliography . . external links . enciclopedia libre universal biography , with a bibliography short biography encarta ( archived 2009-10-31 )