A Study of History

titles of the volumes . the 12-volume work contains more than 3 million words and about 7,000 pages , plus 412 pages of indices . publication of a study of history the table of contents for all the volumes is presented at this website a study of history some volumes being given in greater detail than others . selected portions of the text are also provided , as keyed to the table of contents . vol i : introduction : the geneses of civilizations , part one ( oxford university press , 1934 ) vol ii : the geneses of civilizations , part two ( oxford university press , 1934 ) vol iii : the growths of civilizations ( oxford university press , 1934 ) vol iv : the breakdowns of civilizations ( oxford university press , 1939 ) vol v : the disintegrations of civilizations , part one ( oxford university press , 1939 ) vol vi : the disintegrations of civilizations , part two ( oxford university press , 1939 ) vol vii : universal states ; universal churches ( oxford university press , 1954 ) as two volumes in paperback vol viii : heroic ages ; contacts between civilizations in space ( encounters between contemporaries ) ( oxford university press , 1954 ) vol ix : contacts between civilizations in time ( renaissances ) ; law and freedom in history ; the prospects of the western civilization ( oxford university press , 1954 ) vol x : the inspirations of historians ; a note on chronology ( oxford university press , 1954 ) vol xi : historical atlas and gazetteer ( oxford university press , 1959 ) vol xii : reconsiderations ( oxford university press , 1961 ) abridgements by d . c . somervell : a study of history : abridgement of vols i–vi , with a preface by toynbee ( oxford university press , 1946 ) this first abridgement by somervell has been translated into arabic , danish , dutch , finnish , french , german , gujarati , hindi , italian , japanese , norwegian , portuguese , serbo-croat , spanish , swedish , and urdu . william h . mcneill , arnold j . toynbee . a life ( oxford university , 1989 ) , text at 285 , note 5 337 . a study of history : abridgement of vols vii–x ( oxford university press , 1957 ) a study of history : abridgement of vols i–x in one volume , with new preface by toynbee & new tables ( oxford univ . press , 1960 ) . genesis and growth . toynbee argues that civilizations are born out of more primitive societies , not as the result of racial or environmental factors , but as a response to challenges , such as hard country , new ground , blows and pressures from other civilizations , and penalization . he argues that for civilizations to be born , the challenge must be a golden mean ; that excessive challenge will crush the civilization , and too little challenge will cause it to stagnate . he argues that civilizations continue to grow only when they meet one challenge only to be met by another , in a continuous cycle of '' challenge and response '' . he argues that civilizations develop in different ways due to their different environments and different approaches to the challenges they face . he argues that growth is driven by '' creative minorities '' : those who find solutions to the challenges , who inspire ( rather than compel ) others to follow their innovative lead . this is done through the '' faculty of mimesis . '' creative minorities find solutions to the challenges a civilization faces , while the great mass follow these solutions by imitation , solutions they otherwise would be incapable of discovering on their own . in 1939 , toynbee wrote , '' the challenge of being called upon to create a political world-order , the framework for an economic world-order … now confronts our modern western society . '' . breakdown and disintegration . toynbee does not see the breakdown of civilizations as caused by loss of control over the physical environment , by loss of control over the human environment , or by attacks from outside . rather , it comes from the deterioration of the '' creative minority '' , which eventually ceases to be creative and degenerates into merely a '' dominant minority '' . he argues that creative minorities deteriorate due to a worship of their '' former self , '' by which they become prideful and fail adequately to address the next challenge they face . results of the breakdown . the final breakdown results in '' positive acts of creation ; '' the dominant minority seeks to create a universal state to preserve its power and influence , and the internal proletariat seeks to create a universal church to preserve its spiritual values and cultural norms . universal state . he argues that the ultimate sign a civilization has broken down is when the dominant minority forms a '' universal state '' , which stifles political creativity within the existing social order . the classic example of this is the roman empire , though many other imperial regimes are cited as examples . toynbee writes : '' first the dominant minority attempts to hold by force—against all right and reason—a position of inherited privilege which it has ceased to merit ; and then the proletariat repays injustice with resentment , fear with hate , and violence with violence when it executes its acts of secession . yet the whole movement ends in positive acts of creation—and this on the part of all the actors in the tragedy of disintegration . the dominant minority creates a universal state , the internal proletariat a universal church , and the external proletariat a bevy of barbarian war-bands . '' . universal church . toynbee developed his concept of an '' internal proletariat '' and an '' external proletariat '' to describe quite different opposition groups within and outside the frontiers of a civilization . these groups , however , find themselves bound to the fate of the civilization . arnold j . toynbee , a study of history ( oxford university 1934–1961 ) , 12 volumes , in volume v the disintegration of civilizations ( part one ) ( oxford university 1939 ) , at 58–194 ( internal proletariats ) , and at 194–337 ( external proletariats ) . during its decline and disintegration , they are increasingly disenfranchised or alienated , and thus lose their immediate sense of loyalty or of obligation . nonetheless an '' internal proletariat , '' untrusting of the dominant minority , may form a '' universal church '' which survives the civilization 's demise , co-opting the useful structures such as marriage laws of the earlier time while creating a new philosophical or religious pattern for the next stage of history . toynbee , a study of history ( 1934–1961 ) , e.g . , in volume vii universal states , universal churches ( oxford university 1954 ) , at 70–76 , and in volume viii contacts between civilizations in space ( oxford university 1954 ) at 82–84 ( referring to islam , christianity , mahayana buddhism , and hinduism ) . before the process of disintegration , the dominant minority had held the internal proletariat in subjugation within the confines of the civilization , causing these oppressed to grow bitter . the external proletariat , living outside the civilization in poverty and chaos , grows envious . then , in the social stress resulting from the failure of the civilization , the bitterness and envy increase markedly . toynbee argues that as civilizations decay , there is a '' schism '' within the society . in this environment of discord , people resort to archaism ( idealization of the past ) , futurism ( idealization of the future ) , detachment ( removal of oneself from the realities of a decaying world ) , and transcendence ( meeting the challenges of the decaying civilization with new insight , e.g . , by following a new religion ) . from among members of an '' internal proletariat '' who transcend the social decay a '' church '' may arise . such an association would contain new and stronger spiritual insights , around which a subsequent civilization may begin to form . toynbee here uses the word '' church '' in a general sense , e.g . , to refer to a collective spiritual bond found in common worship , or the unity found in an agreed social order . predictions . it remains to be seen what will come of the four remaining civilizations of the 21st century : western world , muslim world , hindu society , and the far east . toynbee argues two possibilities : they might all merge with western civilization , or western civilization might develop a 'universal state ' after its 'time of troubles ' , decay , and die . list of civilizations . the following table lists the 23 civilizations identified by toynbee in vol . vii . this table does not include what toynbee terms primitive societies , arrested civilizations , or abortive civilizations . civilizations are shown in boldface . toynbee 's '' universal churches '' are written in italic and are chronologically located between second- and third- generation civilizations , as is described in volume vii . reception . historian carroll quigley expanded upon toynbee 's notion of societal collapse in the evolution of civilizations ( 1961 , 1979 ) . he argued that societal disintegration involves the metamorphosis of social instruments , set up to meet actual needs , into institutions , which serve their own interest at the expense of social needs . harry j hogan in the foreword ( p17 ) and quigley in the conclusion ( p416 ) to social scientist ashley montagu assembled 29 other historians ' articles to form a symposium on toynbee 's a study of history , published as toynbee and history : critical essays and reviews . the book includes three of toynbee 's own essays : '' what i am trying to do '' ( originally published in international affairs vol . 31 , 1955 ) ; what the book is for : how the book took shape ( a pamphlet written upon completion of the final volumes of a study of history ) and a comment written in response to the articles by edward fiess and pieter geyl ( originally published in journal of the history of ideas , vol . 16 , 1955 . ) david wilkinson suggests that there is an even larger unit than civilisation . using the ideas drawn from '' world systems theory '' he suggests that since at least 1500 bc that there was a connection established between a number of formerly separate civilisations to form a single interacting '' central civilisation '' , which expanded to include formerly separate civilisations such as india , the far east , and eventually western europe and the americas into a single '' world system '' . in some ways , it resembles what william h . mcneill calls the '' closure of the eurasian ecumene , 500 b.c.-200 a.d . '' after 1960 , toynbee 's ideas faded both in academia and the media , to the point of seldom being cited today . toynbee 's approach to history , his style of civilizational analysis , faced skepticism from mainstream historians who thought it put an undue emphasis on the divine , which led to his academic reputation declining , though for a time , toynbee 's study remained popular outside academia . nevertheless , interest revived decades later with the publication of the clash of civilizations ( 1997 ) by political scientist samuel p . huntington . huntington viewed human history as broadly the history of civilizations and posited that the world after the end of the cold war will be a multi-polar one of competing major civilizations divided by '' fault lines . '' . jews as a '' fossil society '' . volume 1 of the book , written in the 1930s , contains a discussion of jewish culture which begins with the sentence '' there remains the case where victims of religious discrimination represent an extinct society which only survives as a fossil . by far the most notable is one of the fossil remnants of the syriac society , the jews . '' a study of history , volume 1 , section vii , at 135–139 . that sentence has been the subject of controversy , and some reviewers have interpreted the line as antisemitic ( notably after 1945 ) . franz borkenau , '' toynbee 's judgment of the jews : where the historian misread history '' , commentary ( may 1955 ) . eliezer berkovits , judaism : fossil or ferment ? ( philosophical library , 1956 ) . nathan rotenstreich , '' the revival of the fossil remnant : or toynbee and jewish nationalism '' , jewish social studies , vol . 24 , no . 3 ( july 1962 ) , pp . 131–143 . abba solomon eban , '' the toynbee heresy : address delivered at the israel '' , in toynbee and history : critical essays and reviews , ed . by ashley montagu ( porter sargent , 1956 ) . oskar k . rabinowicz , arnold toynbee on judaism and zionism : a critique ( w.h . allen , 1974 ) . in later printings , a footnote was appended which read '' mr . toynbee wrote this part of the book before the nazi persecution of the jews opened a new and terrible chapter of the story . '' . the subject is extensively debated with input from critics in vol xii , reconsiderations , published in 1961 .