Livius Andronicus

biography . name . in ancient sources , livius andronicus is either given that name or is simply called livius . andronicus is the latinization of a greek name , which was held by a number of greek historical figures of the period . it is generally considered that andronicus came from his greek name and that livius , a name originally local to latium , was the gentilicium , the family name , of his patron ( patronus ) . his career at rome was launched from servitude and he became a freedman ( libertus ) by the grace of his master , one of the livia gens . the praenomen lucius is given by aulus gellius and cassiodorus . livingston ( 2004 , xii ) . . dates . livius ' dates are based mainly on cicero brutus 18.72–74 . and livy . cicero says , '' this livius exhibited his first performance at rome in the consulship of m . tuditanus , and c . clodius the son of caecus , the year before ennius was born , '' that is , in 240 bc . cicero goes on to relate the point of view of accius , that livius was captured from taranto in 209 , and produced a play in 197 . cicero disagrees with this view on the grounds that it would make livius younger than plautus and naevius , though he was supposed to have been the first to produce a play . livy says , '' the pontiffs also decreed that three bands of maidens , each consisting of nine , should go through the city singing a hymn . this hymn [ the parthenion ) was composed by the poet , livius . '' this action was taken to expiate the gods after a series of evil portents in the consulship of '' c . claudius nero for the first time , m . livius for the second ; '' that is , in 207 . only the dates of 240 and 207 seem exempt from controversy . conte ( 1994 , 40 ) . . events . jerome has some additional detail that tends to support the capture at tarentum and enslavement . his entry for the year of abraham 1829 , the second year of the 148th olympiad ( 186/185 bc ) , of his chronicon , reads titus livius tragoediarum scriptor clarus habetur , qui ob ingenii meritum a livio salinatore , cuius liberos erudiebat , libertate donatus est . titus livius , author of tragedies , is held to be outstanding . he was given liberty by livius salinator , whose children he was educating , by merit of his intelligence . jerome is the only author to name him titus . the passage is ambiguous concerning the events actually happening in olympiad 148 ; andronicus could have been being given liberty or simply have been being honoured , having been liberated long ago . livius salinator might be gaius livius salinator , his father marcus livius salinator , or his grandfather marcus . if jerome means that the liberation took place in 186 , then he seems to be following accius ' view , which might have been presented in the missing portions of suetonius ' de poetis and read by jerome . the passage is not conclusive about anything . however , the mixed name of livius and his being associated with salinator suggests that he was captured at the first fall of tarentum in 272 , sold to the first marcus livius salinator , tutored the second and was set free to have an independent career when the task was complete . works . odusia . livius made a translation of the odyssey , entitled the odusia in latin , for his classes in saturnian verse . all that survives is parts of 46 scattered lines from 17 books of the greek 24-book epic . in some lines , he translates literally , though in others more freely . his translation of the odyssey had a great historical importance . livius ' translation made this fundamental greek text accessible to romans , and advanced literary culture in latin . this project was one of the first examples of translation as an artistic process ; the work was to be enjoyed on its own , and livius strove to preserve the artistic quality of the original . since there was no tradition of epic in italy before him , livius must have faced enormous problems . for example , he used archaising forms to make his language more solemn and intense . his innovations would be important in the history of latin poetry . in the fragments we have , it is clear that livius had a desire to remain faithful to the original and to be clear , while having to alter untranslatable phrases and ideas . for example , the phrase '' equal to the gods '' , which would have been unacceptable to romans , was changed to '' summus adprimus '' , '' greatest and of first rank '' . also , early roman poetry made use of pathos , expressive force , and dramatic tension , so livius interprets homer with a mind to these ideas as well . conte ( 1994 , 41 ) . in general , livius did not make arbitrary changes to the text ; rather , he attempted to remain faithful to homer and to the latin language . von albrecht ( 1997 , 115 ) . plays . livius ' first play , according to cicero , was staged in 240 . livy tells us that livius was the first to create a play with a plot . one story says that after straining his voice , livius , who was also an actor , was the first to leave the singing to singers and limited the actors to dialogue . his dramatic works were written in the iambic senarius and trochaic septenarius . they included both lyric passages ( cantica ) and dialogue ( diverbia ) . his dramatic works had large element of solos for chief actor , often himself . it is not known whether he had a chorus . these dramatic works of livius andronicus were consistent with greek requirements of drama and probably had greek models , and we have no more than 60 fragments , as quoted in other authors . the titles of his known tragedy are achilles , aegisthus , aiax mastigophorus ( ajax with the whip ) , andromeda , antiopa , danae , equus troianus , hermiona , and tereus . two titles of his comedies are certain , gladiolus and ludius , though the third , virgo , is probably corrupt . they were all composed on the model of greek new comedy , adapting stories from the greek . the romans called this sort of adaptation of comedy by livius and his immediate successors fabula palliata , or comoedia palliata , named from the pallium , or short cloak , worn by the actors . ashmore ( 1908 , 14 ) of andronicus ' palliata we have 6 fragments of 1 verse each and 1 title , gladiolus , ( little saber ) . the hymn . according to livy , 27.37.7 livius also composed a hymn for a chorus of 27 girls in honour of juno to be performed in public as part of religious ceremonies in 207 . because of the success of this hymn , livius received public honours when his professional organization , the collegium scribarum histrionumque was installed in the temple of minerva on the aventine . actors and writers would gather here and offer gifts . notes . further reading . albrecht , michael von . ( 1997 ) . a history of roman literature : from livius andronicus to boethius . with special regard to its influence on world literature . 2 vols . revised by gareth l . schmeling and michael von albrecht . mnemosyne supplement 165 . leiden : brill . boyle , a . j . , ed . ( 1993 ) . roman epic . london and new york : routledge . büchner , karl . ( 1979 ) . '' livius andronicus und die erste künstlerische übersetzung der europäischen kultur . '' symbolae osloenses 54 : 37–70 . erasmi , g . ( 1979 ) . '' the saturnian and livius andronicus . '' glotta , 57 ( 1/2 ) , 125–149 . farrell , joseph . ( 2005 ) . '' the origins and essence of roman epic . '' in a companion to ancient epic . edited by john miles foley , 417–428 . blackwell companions to the ancient world , literature and culture . malden : blackwell . fantham , elaine . ( 1989 ) . '' the growth of literature and criticism at rome . '' in the cambridge history of literary criticism . vol . 1 , classical ccriticism . edited by george a . kennedy , 220–244 . cambridge : cambridge university press . horsfall , n . ( 1976 ) . '' the collegium poetarum . '' bulletin of the institute of classical studies , ( 23 ) , 79–95 . kearns , j . ( 1990 ) . '' semnoths and dialect gloss in the odussia of livius andronicus . '' the american journal of philology , 111 ( 1 ) , 40–52 . sciarrino , e . ( 2006 ) . '' the introduction of epic in rome : cultural thefts and social contests . '' arethusa 39 ( 3 ) , 449–469 . the johns hopkins university press . sheets , g . a . ( 1981 ) . '' the dialect gloss , hellenistic poetics and livius andronicus . '' the american journal of philology , 102 ( 1 ) , 58–78 . waszink , j . ( 1960 ) . '' tradition and personal achievement in early latin literature . '' mnemosyne , 13 ( 1 ) , fourth series , 16–33 . wright , john . ( 1974 ) . dancing in chains : the stylistic unity of the comoedia palliata . papers and monographs of the american academy in rome 25 . rome : american academy in rome . external links . lucius livius andronicus phi latin texts