Timeline of nuclear fusion

1920s . 1920 based on f.w . aston measurements of the masses of low-mass elements and einstein 's discovery that e mc 2 , arthur eddington proposes that large amounts of energy released by fusing small nuclei together provides the energy source that powers the stars . henry norris russell notes that the relationship in the hertzsprung–russell diagram suggests a hot core rather than burning throughout the star . eddington uses this to calculate that the core would have to be about 40 & nbsp ; million kelvin . this remains a matter of some debate because it appears to be much higher than what observations suggest , which is about one-third to one-half that value . 1928 george gamow introduces the mathematical basis for quantum tunnelling . 1929 atkinson and houtermans provide the first calculations of the rate of nuclear fusion in stars . based on gamow 's tunnelling , they show fusion can occur at lower energies than previously believed . when used with eddington 's calculations of the required fusion rates in stars , their calculations demonstrate this would occur at the lower temperatures that eddington had calculated . . 1930s . 1932 ernest rutherford 's cavendish laboratory at cambridge university begins nuclear experiments with a particle accelerator built by john cockcroft and ernest walton . in april , walton produces the first man-made fission by using protons from the accelerator to split lithium into alpha particles . using an updated version of the equipment firing deuterium rather than hydrogen , mark oliphant discovered helium-3 and tritium , and that heavy hydrogen nuclei could be made to react with each other . this is the first direct demonstration of fusion in the lab . 1938 kantrowitz and jacobs of the naca langley research center built a toroidal magnetic bottle and heat the plasma with a 150 & nbsp ; w radio source . hoping to heat the plasma to millions of degrees , the system fails and they are forced to abandon their diffusion inhibitor . this is the first attempt to make a working fusion reactor . 1939 peter thonemann develops a detailed plan for a pinch device , but is told to do other work for his thesis . hans bethe provides detailed calculations of the proton–proton chain reaction that powers stars . this work results in a nobel prize for physics . . 1940s . 1948 tuck and ware built a prototype pinch device out of old radar parts at imperial university . 1950s . 1950 the tokamak , a type of magnetic confinement fusion device , was proposed by soviet scientists andrei sakharov and igor tamm . 1951 edward teller and stanislaw ulam at los alamos national laboratory ( lanl ) develop the teller-ulam design for the thermonuclear weapon , allowing for the development of multi-megaton weapons . fusion work in the uk is classified after the klaus fuchs affair . a press release from argentina claims that their huemul project had produced controlled nuclear fusion . this prompted a wave of responses in other countries , especially the u.s . lyman spitzer dismisses the argentinian claims , but while thinking about it comes up with the stellarator concept . funding is arranged under project matterhorn and develops into the princeton plasma physics laboratory . tuck introduces the british pinch work to lanl . he develops the perhapsatron under the codename project sherwood . the project name is a play on his name via friar tuck . . the first money to be allocated to controlled nuclear research happened to be for tuck , and was diverted from project lincoln , in the hood laboratory . the coincidence of names prompted the well-known cover name '' project sherwood '' . james l . tuck , '' curriculum vita and autobiography '' , declassified document from los alamos national laboratory ( 1974 ) , reproduced with permission . archived 9 february 2012 . richard f . post presents his magnetic mirror concept and also receives initial funding , eventually moving to lawrence livermore national laboratory ( llnl ) . in the uk , repeated requests for more funding that had previously been turned down are suddenly approved . within a short time , three separate efforts are started , one at harwell and two at atomic weapons establishment ( aldermaston ) . early planning for a much larger machine at harwell begins . using the huemul release as leverage , soviet researchers find their funding proposals rapidly approved . work on linear pinch machines begins that year . image : ivymike2.jpg right thumb ivy mike , the first thermonuclear weapon , in 1952 1952 ivy mike shot off operation ivy , the first detonation of a thermonuclear weapon , yields 10.4 megatons of tnt out of a fusion fuel of liquid deuterium . cousins and ware build a larger toroidal pinch device in england and demonstrated that the plasma in pinch devices is inherently unstable . 1953 the soviet rds-6s test , code named '' joe 4 '' , demonstrated a fission/fusion/fission ( '' layercake '' ) design for a nuclear weapon . z-pinch in the us and ussr attempted to take the reactions to fusion levels without worrying about stability . both reported detections of neutrons , which were later explained as non-fusion in nature . 1954 early planning for the large zeta device at harwell begins . the name is a take-off on research reactor which often had '' zero energy '' in their name , zeep being an example . edward teller gives a now-famous speech on plasma stability in magnetic bottles at the princeton gun club . his work suggests that most magnetic bottles are inherently unstable , outlining what is today known as the interchange instability . 1955 at the first atoms for peace meeting in geneva , homi j . bhabha predicts that fusion will be in commercial use within two decades . this prompts a number of countries to begin fusion research ; japan , france and sweden all start programs this year or the next . 1956 experimental research of tokamak systems started at kurchatov institute , moscow by a group of soviet scientists led by lev artsimovich . construction of zeta begins at harwell . igor kurchatov gives a talk at harwell on pinch devices , '' lecture of i.v . kurchatov at harwell '' , from the address of i.v . kurchatov : '' on the possibility of producing thermonuclear reactions in a gas discharge '' at harwell on 25 april 1956 . archived 20 july 2015 . revealing for the first time that the ussr is also working on fusion . he details the problems they are seeing , mirroring those in the us and uk . in august , a number of articles on plasma physics appear in various soviet journals . in the wake of the kurchatov 's speech , the us and uk begin to consider releasing their own data . eventually , they settle on a release prior to the 2nd atoms for peace conference in geneva . 1957 in the us , at lanl , scylla i in 1957 , los alamos achieved the first controlled thermonuclear plasma . , now and then at los alamos . begins operation using the θ-pinch design . zeta is completed in the summer , it will be the largest fusion machine for a decade . initial results in zeta appear to suggest the machine has successfully reached basic fusion temperatures . uk researchers start pressing for public release , while the us demurs . scientists at the aei research laboratory in harwell reported that the sceptre iii plasma column remained stable for 300 to 400 microseconds , a dramatic improvement on previous efforts . working backward , the team calculated that the plasma had an electrical resistivity around 100 times that of copper , and was able to carry 200 ka of current for 500 microseconds in total . 1958 in january , the us and uk release large amounts of data , with the zeta team claiming fusion . other researchers , notably artsimovich and spitzer , are skeptical . in may , the claims of fusion have to be retracted . american , british and ussr scientists began to share previously classified controlled fusion research as part of the atoms for peace conference in geneva in september . it is the largest international scientific meeting to date . it becomes clear that basic pinch concepts are not successful . scylla demonstrates the first controlled thermonuclear fusion in any laboratory . reviewing next the thermonuclear plasma achievements at los alamos , we have achieved : ( 1 ) the first controlled thermonuclear reaction . , review of controlled thermonuclear research at los ammos 1965 , j . l . tuck the first experiment in which thermonuclear fusion was achieved in any laboratory was done in 1958 with the scylla i machine . , winter/spring 1983 los alamos science . though it came too late to be announced at geneva . this θ-pinch approach will ultimately be abandoned as calculations show it can not scale up to produce a reactor . 1960s . 1960 after considering the concept for some time , john nuckolls publishes the concept of inertial confinement fusion . the laser , introduced the same year , appears to be a suitable '' driver '' . 1961 the soviet union test the tsar bomba ( 50 & nbsp ; megatons ) , the most powerful thermonuclear weapon ever . 1964 plasma temperatures of approximately 40 million degrees celsius and a few billion deuteron-deuteron fusion reactions per discharge were achieved at lanl with the scylla iv device in 1964 plasma temperatures of approximately 40 million degrees.were achieved with the scylla iv , winter/spring 1983 los alamos science . 1965 at an international meeting at the uk 's new fusion research centre in culham , the soviets release early results showing greatly improved performance in toroidal pinch machines . the announcement is met by scepticism , especially by the uk team who 's zeta was largely identical . spitzer , chairing the meeting , essentially dismisses it out of hand . at the same meeting , odd results from the zeta machine are published . it will be years before the significance of these results are realized . by the end of the meeting , it is clear that most fusion efforts have stalled . all of the major designs , including the stellarator , pinch machines and magnetic mirrors are all losing plasma at rates that are simply too high to be useful in a reactor setting . less-known designs like the levitron and astron are faring no better . the 12-beam '' 4 pi laser '' using ruby as the lasing medium is developed at lawrence livermore national laboratory ( llnl ) includes a gas-filled target chamber of about 20 centimeters in diameter . 1967 demonstration of farnsworth-hirsch fusor appeared to generate neutrons in a nuclear reaction . hans bethe wins the 1967 nobel prize in physics for his publication on how fusion powers the stars in work of 1939 . 1968 further results from the t-3 tokamak , similar to the toroidal pinch machine mentioned in 1965 , claims temperatures to be over an order of magnitude higher than any other device . the western scientists remain highly sceptical . the soviets invite a uk team from zeta to perform independent measurements on t-3 . 1969 the uk team , nicknamed '' the culham five '' , confirm the soviet results early in the year . they publish their results in october 's edition of nature . this leads to a '' veritable stampede '' of tokamak construction around the world . 1970s . 1970 the model c stellarator is quickly converted to the symmetrical tokamak , matching the soviet results . with an apparent solution to the magnetic bottle problem in-hand , plans begin for a larger machine to test the scaling . kapchinskii and teplyakov introduce a particle accelerator for heavy ions that appears suitable as an icf driver in place of lasers . 1972 the first neodymium-doped glass ( nd : glass ) laser for icf research , the '' long path laser '' is completed at llnl and is capable of delivering ~50 joules to a fusion target . 1973 design work on jet , the joint european torus , begins . 1974 j.b . taylor re-visited zeta results of 1958 and explained that the quiet-period was in fact very interesting . this led to the development of reversed field pinch , now generalised as '' self-organising plasmas '' , an ongoing line of research . kms fusion , a private-sector company , builds an icf reactor using laser drivers . despite limited resources and numerous business problems , kms successfully compresses fuel in december 1973 , and on 1 may 1974 successfully demonstrates the world ’ s first laser-induced fusion . neutron-sensitive nuclear emulsion detectors , developed by nobel prize winner robert hofstadter , were used to provide evidence of this discovery . beams using mature high-energy accelerator technology are hailed as the elusive '' brand-x '' laser capable of driving fusion implosions for commercial power . the livingston curve , which demonstrates the improvement in power of particle accelerators , is modified to show the energy needed for fusion to occur . experiments commence on the single beam llnl cyclops laser , testing new optical designs for future icf lasers . 1975 the princeton large torus ( plt ) , the follow-on to the symmetrical tokamak , begins operation . it soon surpasses the best soviet machines and sets several temperature records that are above what is needed for a commercial reactor . plt continues to set records until it is decommissioned . 1976 workshop , called by the us-erda ( now doe ) at the claremont hotel in berkeley , ca for an ad-hoc two-week summer study . fifty senior scientists from the major us icf programs and accelerator laboratories participated , with program heads and nobel laureates also attending . in the closing address , dr . c . martin stickley , then director of us-erda ’ s office of inertial fusion , announced the conclusion was '' no showstoppers '' on the road to fusion energy . the two beam argus laser is completed at llnl and experiments involving more advanced laser-target interactions commence . based on the continued success of the plt , the doe selects a larger princeton design for further development . initially designed simply to test a commercial-sized tokamak , the doe team gives them the explicit goal of running on a deuterium-tritium fuel as opposed to test fuels like hydrogen or deuterium . the project is given the name tokamak fusion test reactor ( tftr ) . 1977 the 20 beam shiva laser at llnl is completed , capable of delivering 10.2 kilojoules of infrared energy on target . at a price of 25 million and a size approaching that of a football field , the shiva laser is the first of the '' megalasers '' at llnl and brings the field of icf research fully within the realm of '' big science '' . the jet project is given the go-ahead by the ec , choosing the uk 's center at culham as its site . thumb 1978 as plt continues to set new records , princeton is given additional funding to adapt tftr with the explicit goal of reaching breakeven . 1979 lanl successfully demonstrates the radio frequency quadrupole accelerator ( rfq ) . anl and hughes research laboratories demonstrate required ion source brightness with xenon beam at 1.5mev . foster panel reports to us-doe 's energy research and advisory board that high-energy heavy ion fusion ( hif ) is the '' conservative approach '' to fusion power . listing hif 's advantages in his report , john foster remarked : '' …now that is kind of exciting . '' after doe office of inertial fusion completed review of programs , director gregory canavan decides to accelerate the hif effort . 1980s . 1982 hiball study by german and us institutions , . gesellschaft für schwerionenforschung ; institut für plasmaphysik , garching ; kernforschungszentrum karlsruhe , university of wisconsin , madison ; max-planck-institut für quantenoptik garching uses the high repetition rate of the rf accelerator driver to serve four reactor chambers and first-wall protection using liquid lithium inside the chamber cavity . tore supra construction starts at cadarache , france . its superconducting magnets will permit it to generate a strong permanent toroidal magnetic field . high-confinement mode ( h-mode ) discovered in tokamaks . 1983 jet , the largest operational magnetic confinement plasma physics experiment is completed on time and on budget . first plasmas achieved . the novette laser at llnl comes on line and is used as a test bed for the next generation of icf lasers , specifically the nova laser . 1984 the huge 10 beam nova laser at llnl is completed and switches on in december . nova would ultimately produce a maximum of 120 kilojoules of infrared laser light during a nanosecond pulse in a 1989 experiment . 1985 national academy of sciences reviewed military icf programs , noting hif ’ s major advantages clearly but averring that hif was '' supported primarily by other than military programs '' . the review of icf by the national academy of sciences marked the trend with the observation : '' the energy crisis is dormant for the time being . '' energy becomes the sole purpose of heavy ion fusion . the japanese tokamak , jt-60 completed . first plasmas achieved . 1988 the t-15 , soviet tokamak with superconducting helium-cooled coils completed . the conceptual design activity for the international thermonuclear experimental reactor ( iter ) , the successor to t-15 , tftr , jet and jt-60 , begins . participants include euratom , japan , the soviet union and united states . it ended in 1990 . the first plasma produced at tore supra in april . 1989 on march 23 , two utah electrochemists , stanley pons and martin fleischmann , announced that they had achieved cold fusion : fusion reactions which could occur at room temperatures . however , they made their announcements before any peer review of their work was performed , and no subsequent experiments by other researchers revealed any evidence of fusion . 1990s . 1990 decision to construct the national ignition facility '' beamlet '' laser at llnl is made . 1991 the start tokamak fusion experiment begins in culham . the experiment would eventually achieve a record beta ( plasma pressure compared to magnetic field pressure ) of 40 % using a neutral beam injector . it was the first design that adapted the conventional toroidal fusion experiments into a tighter spherical design . 1992 the engineering design activity for the iter starts with participants euratom , japan , russia and united states . it ended in 2001 . the united states and the former republics of the soviet union cease nuclear weapons testing . 1993 the tftr tokamak at princeton ( pppl ) experiments with a 50 % deuterium , 50 % tritium mix , eventually producing as much as 10 megawatts of power from a controlled fusion reaction . 1994 nif beamlet laser is completed and begins experiments validating the expected performance of nif . the usa declassifies information about indirectly driven ( hohlraum ) target design . comprehensive european-based study of hif driver begins , centered at the gesellschaft für schwerionenforschung ( gsi ) and involving 14 laboratories , including usa and russia . the heavy ion driven inertial fusion ( hidif ) study will be completed in 1997 . 1996 a record is reached at tore supra : a plasma duration of two minutes with a current of almost 1 million amperes driven non-inductively by 2.3 mw of lower hybrid oscillation ( i.e . 280 mj of injected and extracted energy ) . this result was possible due to the actively cooled plasma-facing components installed in the machine . 1997 the jet tokamak in the uk produces 16 mw of fusion power - this remains the world record for fusion power . four megawatts of alpha particle self-heating was achieved . llnl study compared projected costs of power from icf and other fusion approaches to the projected future costs of existing energy sources . groundbreaking ceremony held for the national ignition facility ( nif ) . 1998 the jt-60 tokamak in japan produced a high performance reversed shear plasma with the equivalent fusion amplification factor q_ of 1.25 - the current world record of q , fusion energy gain factor . results of european-based study of heavy ion driven fusion power system ( hidif , gsi-98-06 ) incorporates telescoping beams of multiple isotopic species . this technique multiplies the 6-d phase space usable for the design of hif drivers . 1999 the united states withdraws from the iter project . the start experiment is succeeded by mast . 2000s . 2001 building construction for the immense 192-beam 500-terawatt nif project is completed and construction of laser beam-lines and target bay diagnostics commences , expecting to take its first full system shot in 2010 . negotiations on the joint implementation of iter begin between canada , countries represented by the european union , japan and russia . 2002 claims and counter-claims are published regarding bubble fusion , in which a table-top apparatus was reported as producing small-scale fusion in a liquid undergoing acoustic cavitation . like cold fusion ( see 1989 ) , it is later dismissed . european union proposes cadarache in france and vandellos in spain as candidate sites for iter while japan proposes rokkasho . 2003 the united states rejoins the iter project with china and republic of korea also joining . canada withdraws . cadarache in france is selected as the european candidate site for iter . sandia national laboratories begins fusion experiments in the z machine . 2004 the united states drops its own projects , recognising an inability to match eu progress ( fusion ignition research experiment ( fire ) ) , and focuses resources on iter . 2005 following final negotiations between the eu and japan , iter chooses cadarache over rokkasho for the site of the reactor . in concession , japan is able to host the related materials research facility and granted rights to fill 20 % of the project 's research posts while providing 10 % of the funding . the nif fires its first bundle of eight beams achieving the highest ever energy laser pulse of 152.8 kj ( infrared ) . 2006 china 's east test reactor is completed , the first tokamak experiment to use superconducting magnets to generate both the toroidal and poloidal fields . 2009 construction of the nif reported as complete . ricardo betti , the third under secretary , responsible for nuclear energy , testifies before congress : '' ife icf for energy production has no home '' . fusion power corporation files patent application for '' single pass rf driver '' , an rf accelerator driven hif process and method . 2010s . 2010 hif-2010 symposium in darmstadt germany . robert j burke presented on single pass ( heavy ion fusion ) hif and charles helsley made a presentation on the commercialization of hif within the decade . 2011 may 23–26 , workshop for accelerators for heavy ion fusion at lawrence berkeley national laboratory , presentation by robert j . burke on '' single pass heavy ion fusion '' . the accelerator working group publishes recommendations supporting moving rf accelerator driven hif toward commercialization . 2012 stephen slutz & roger vesey of sandia national labs publish a paper in physical review letters presenting a computer simulation of the maglif concept showing it can produce high gain . according to the simulation , a 70 mega amp z-pinch facility in combination with a laser may be able to produce a spectacular energy return of 1000 times the expended energy . a 60 ma facility would produce a 100x yield . jet announces a major breakthrough in controlling instabilities in a fusion plasma . in august robert j . burke presents updates to the sprfd hif process and charles helsley presents the economics of sprfd at the 19th international hif symposium at berkeley , california . industry was there in support of ion generation for sprfd . the fusion power corporation sprfd patent is granted in russia . 2013 china 's east tokamak test reactor achieves a record confinement time of 30 seconds for plasma in the high-confinement mode ( h-mode ) , thanks to improvements in heat dispersal from tokamak walls . this is an improvement of an order of magnitude with respect to state-of-the-art reactors . 2014 us scientists at nif successfully generate more energy from fusion reactions than the energy absorbed by the nuclear fuel . phoenix nuclear labs announces the sale of a high-yield neutron generator that could sustain 5×10 11 deuterium fusion reactions per second over a 24-hour period . 2015 germany conducts the first plasma discharge in wendelstein 7-x , a large-scale stellarator capable of steady-state plasma confinement under fusion conditions . in january the polywell is presented at microsoft research . in august , mit announces the arc fusion reactor , a compact tokamak using rare-earth barium-copper oxide ( rebco ) superconducting tapes to produce high-magnetic field coils that it claims produce comparable magnetic field strength in a smaller configuration than other designs . 2016 the wendelstein 7-x produces the device 's first hydrogen plasma . 2017 china 's east tokamak test reactor achieves a stable 101.2-second steady-state high confinement plasma , setting a world record in long-pulse h-mode operation on the night of july 3 . helion energy 's fifth-generation plasma machine goes into operation , seeking to achieve plasma density of 20 tesla and fusion temperatures . uk company tokamak energy 's st40 fusion reactor generates first plasma . tae technologies announces that the norman reactor had achieved plasma . 2018 energy corporation eni announces a 50 million investment in start-up commonwealth fusion systems , to commercialize arc technology via the sparc test reactor in collaboration with mit . mit scientists formulate a theoretical means to remove the excess heat from compact nuclear fusion reactors via larger and longer divertors . general fusion begins developing a 70 % scale demo system to be completed around 2023 . tae technologies announces its reactor has reached a high temperature of nearly 20 million°c . 2019 the united kingdom announces a planned £200-million ( us 248-million ) investment to produce a design for the spherical tokamak for energy production ( step ) fusion facility around 2040 . . 2020s . 2020 assembly of iter , which has been under construction for years , commences . energy giant chevron corporation announces an investment in fusion energy start-up zap energy . the chinese experimental nuclear fusion reactor hl-2m is turned on for the first time , achieving its first plasma discharge . . references . citations . . bibliography . . external links . fusion experiments from the british science museum international fusion research council , status report on fusion research , nuclear fusion 45:10a , october 2005 .