Jamaican English

sociolinguistics . jamaican standard english is a variety of international standard english ( see english language in england ) . there are several language varieties that have significantly impacted this dialect of english . british english was introduced to jamaica in 1655 given jamaica 's colonial past . british english was spread through post-primary education as well as through british teachers that immigrated to jamaica . standard english in jamaica is often conflated with the british standard . those who speak the standard variety are often considered to be of a higher social class . this is correlated with higher paying jobs as well as greater societal prestige . american english has also significantly contributed to the jamaican english dialect . these impacts can be traced to the development of stronger social and economic ties with the united states , the popularity of u.s . cultural offerings , including film , music , and televised dramas and comedy and tourism . rosenfelder , ingrid ( 2009 ) . '' sociophonetic variation in educated jamaican english : an analysis of the spoken component of ice-jamaica '' ( pdf ) . phd dissertation , university of freiburg . jamaican patois is another source of influence on jamaican english . mair , christian . ( 2002 ) . creolisms in an emerging standard : written english in jamaica . english world-wide . 23 . 31-58 . 10.1075/eww.23.1.03mai . many rural homes are monolingually patois . once children enter the first grade , they are exposed to jamaican standard english . . grammar . as jamaican standard english is often conflated with the british standard dialect , there are great similarities between grammar , idiom , and vocabulary . however , there are several creolisms that show up in written forms of the language . in papers written by students , many demonstrated the dropping of the -ed morpheme in past and perfect verb forms , a missing -s morpheme on the third person singular form of a verb , and absent plural markings on nouns . . vocabulary . recent american influence is apparent in the lexicon . for example , the american words '' crib '' and '' apartment '' are used more than the british '' cot '' and '' flat '' . however , the british influence has not completely disappeared because jamaicans tend to say '' bonnet '' , '' maths '' and '' garbage/rubbish bin '' instead of '' hood '' , '' math '' and '' trash can '' . thompson , keith ( 2010 ) . '' caribbean islands : the land and the people '' . new africa press . the '' bonnet '' / '' hood '' distinction is particularly interesting because it shows how jamaican patois affects english in jamaica . the american word , which can be heard elsewhere in the caribbean , is n't used in this capacity in jamaica because the term '' hood '' is used as a vulgar slang for penis . jamaica phrase dictionary '' rasta/patois jamaica dictionary '' in other cases , both versions coexist as in the case of '' diapers '' , '' pampers '' and '' nappies '' or '' rubber '' and '' eraser '' . jamaican english has also borrowed some words from jamaican patois . such borrowings include '' duppy '' for '' ghost '' ; '' higgler '' for '' informal vendor/hawker '' ; '' bandooloo '' for '' dishonest/illegal/sketchy '' ; and some terms for jamaican foods , like '' ackee '' , '' callaloo '' , '' guinep '' , and '' bammy '' . mair , christian , 2002 , pp . 36 , 43-45 . . phonology . jamaican standard english pronunciation , while it differs greatly from jamaican patois pronunciation , is nevertheless recognisably caribbean . features include the characteristic pronunciation of the diphthong in words like , which is often more closed and rounded than in received pronunciation or general american ; the pronunciation of the vowel to ( again , more closed and rounded than the british received pronunciation or general american varieties ) ; and the very unusual feature of '' variable semi-rhoticity '' . rosenfelder , 2009 , p . 81 . non-rhoticity ( the pronunciation of '' r '' nowhere except before vowels ) is highly variable in jamaican english and can depend upon the phonemic and even social context . rosenfelder , 2009 , p . 95 . typically , jamaican english accents are rhotic ( i.e . , fully preserving the '' r '' sound ) regarding words of the and sets and non-rhotic regarding words like ( at the ends of unstressed syllables ) , show middling degrees of rhoticity regarding the and sets , and smaller degrees regarding all other word sets . rosenfelder , 2009 , p . 89 . when '' r '' is followed by a consonant , non-rhoticity is more likely than when '' r '' is not followed by a consonant . rosenfelder , 2009 , pp . 93 , 176 . however , across the board , more rhoticity is positively correlated with higher levels of education . this has been attributed to the jamaican education system normalizing and promoting a rhotic variety of english . irvine-sobers , g . alison ( 2018 ) . '' the acrolect in jamaica : the architecture of phonological variation '' ( studies in caribbean languages 1 ) . berlin : language science press . p . 53 that being said , the overall degree of rhoticity in educated jamaican english remains very low , with rhoticity occurring only 21.7 % of the time . rosenfelder , ingrid ( 2009 ) . '' rhoticity in educated jamaican english : an analysis of the spoken component of ice-jamaica . '' p . 68 . merger of the diphthongs in '' fair '' and '' fear '' takes place both in jamaican standard english and jamaican patois , resulting in those two words ( and many others , like '' bear '' and '' beer '' ) often becoming homophones : the sound being , though often ( something like '' ee-air '' ; thus '' bear/beer '' as '' bee-air '' ) . the short '' a '' sound , man , hat , etc . ) is very open , similar to its irish versions , while , , and all use this same sound too , but lengthened , and perhaps slightly backed ; rosenfelder , 2009 , p . 146 . this distinction can maintain a london-like split . both and use a rounded , though a cot-caught merger is theoretically avoided by the latter set of words being more lengthened ; however , in reality , a full merger ( of is reportedly increasing in informal contexts . rosenfelder , 2009 , pp . 145 , 147 . for jamaican patois speakers , the merged vowel is much lower . and vowels in the standard educated dialect are long monophthongs : respectively and . the unstressed schwa phoneme appears to be normally produced in the area of . rosenfelder , 2009 , pp . 139-140 . before the low central vowel , the velars and can be realized with palatalisation , so that cat can be pronounced k h at ~ kjat and card as k h a : d ~ kja : d ) ; while ɡ and ɡj coexist , as in gap ɡap ~ ɡjap or guard ɡa : ( ɹ ) d ~ ɡja : ( ɹ ) d . these variations are distinct phonemes in jamaican patois before a : ɡja : dn̩ is garden while ɡa : dn̩ is gordon ; kja : f is calf while ka : f is cough . they are not distinct phonemes in jamaica english because these word pairs are distinguished by the vowel ( a vs ɔ ) instead . however , this fact has n't stopped educated speakers from incorporating kj in their english at least before the short '' a '' sound . ( it is not permitted before the long vowel ) . as a result , it is possible to hear forms like for cat , for carry , for character , and for caribbean , but never for car . irving-sobers , g . alison , 2018 , pp . 45-46 . irving-sober , g . alison ( 1994 ) . '' dialect variation in jamaican english : a study of the phonology of social group marking '' . english world-wide , volume 15 ( 1 ) . p . 69 . presumably less-educated jamaican patois speakers may speak english with several other notable features , including a merger ( e.g . with rat and rot homophones ) to and a merger ( e.g . with line and loin homophones ) to . th-stopping is also common . one of the most salient sounds of caribbean english to speakers of outside english dialects is its unique rhythm and intonation . linguists debate whether this system centres mostly on stress , tone , or a mixture in which the two interact . sometimes , jamaican english is perceived as maintaining less of a contrast between stress ( linguistics ) , in other words , making all syllables sound relatively-equally stressed : thus kitchen not so much as ( perhaps even perceived by a non-caribbean as having second-syllable stress : . in jamaican english , normally reduced english vowels are sometimes not reduced , and other times are hyper-reduced , so that token is not but , yet cement can be as reduced as ; the exact nuances of the rules at play here are also highly debated . . language use : jamaican standard english versus patois . jamaican standard english and jamaican patois exist together in a post-creole speech continuum . jamaican ( creole/patois ) is used by most people for everyday , informal situations - it is the language most jamaicans use at home and are most familiar with , as well as the language of most local popular music . jamaican patois has begun to be used on the radio as well as the news . standard english , on the other hand , is the language of education , high culture , government , the media and official/formal communications . it is also the native language of a small minority of jamaicans ( typically upper-class and upper/traditional middle-class ) . most creole-dominant speakers have a fair command of english and standard english , through schooling and exposure to official culture and mass media ; their receptive skills ( understanding of standard english ) are typically much better than their productive skills ( their own intended standard english statements often show signs of jamaican creole interference ) . most writing in jamaica is done in english ( including private notes and correspondence ) . jamaican patois has a standardised orthography , dynamics of orthographic standardisation in jamaican creole and nigerian pidgin , dagmar deuber and lars hinrichs , world englishes 26 , no . 1 ( february 2007 ) , pp . 22 & ndash ; 47 , . and has only recently been taught in some schools . as a result , the majority of jamaicans can read and write standard english only , and have trouble deciphering written patois ( in which the writer tries to reflect characteristic structures and pronunciations to differing degrees , without compromising readability ) . written patois appears mostly in literature , especially in folkloristic '' dialect poems '' ; in humoristic newspaper columns ; and most recently , on internet chat sites frequented by younger jamaicans , who seem to have a more positive attitude toward their own language use than their parents . lars hinrichs ( 2006 ) , codeswitching on the web : english and jamaican patois in e-mail communication . amsterdam/philadelphia : benjamins . while , for the sake of simplicity , it is customary to describe jamaican speech in terms of standard english versus jamaican creole , a clear-cut dichotomy does not adequately describe the actual language use of most jamaicans . between the two extremes— '' broad patois '' on one end of the spectrum , and '' perfect '' standard english on the other—there are various in-between varieties . this situation typically results when a creole language is in constant contact with standardised english ( superstrate or lexifier language ) and is called a creole speech continuum . the least prestigious ( most creole ) variety is called the basilect ; standard english ( or high prestige ) variety , the acrolect ; and in-between versions are known as mesolects . consider , for example , the following forms : '' im/ ( h ) ihn de/da/a wok úoba désò '' ( basilect ) '' im workin ova deso '' ( low mesolect ) '' ( h ) e ( h ) is workin ' over dere '' ( high mesolect ) '' he is working over there . '' ( acrolect ) ( as noted above , the '' r '' in '' over '' is not pronounced in any variety , but the one in '' dere '' or '' there '' is . ) jamaicans choose from the varieties available to them according to the situation . a creole-dominant speaker will choose a higher variety for formal occasions like official business or a wedding speech , and a lower one for relating to friends ; a standard english-dominant speaker is likely to employ a lower variety when shopping at the market than at their workplace . code-switching can also be metacommunication ( as when a standard-dominant speaker switches to a more heavily basilect-influenced variety in an attempt at humor or to express solidarity ) . see also . regional accents of english speakers nation language . references .