The Moon Is Blue

production . preminger contracted with united artists to finance and distribute a screen adaptation over which he would have complete control . preminger cast david niven over the objection of studio executives , who felt the actor 's career was in decline . he deferred his producer 's and director 's salaries in exchange for 75 % of the film 's profits . fujiwara , chris , the world and its double : the life and work of otto preminger . new york : macmillan publishers 2009 . , pp . 140–142 the world and its double , p . 142 maggie mcnamara , who appeared as patty o ’ neill in the chicago production of the play , and briefly in new york , received her first screen role and the film 's last casting . herbert 's play had been a huge success in germany , and preminger decided to multiple-language version , namely , english and german , using the same sets but different casts . the director estimated this method would increase the filming schedule by only eight to ten days and production costs by only 10 to 15 percent . the budget for both films was 373,445 . the world and its double , p . 143 it is estimated that deferred costs came to nearly 500,000 but in return united artists gave the producers herbert and preminger 75 % of the profits , 20 % of which they gave to william holden . . mpaa objections . herbert ’ s play was first submitted to the mpaa/pca for approval by paramount pictures in 1951 , with samuel j . briskin as producer . on june 26 , 1951 , joseph breen 1934–1941 sent a letter back , stating that the script was unacceptable under the production code . later , on july 13 , 1951 , the joseph breen 1934–1941 contacted herbert and advised him his screenplay was in violation of the motion picture production code because of its '' light and gay treatment of the subject of illicit sex and seduction . '' on december 26 , preminger submitted a revised draft of the script which , due to numerous lines of dialogue exhibiting '' an unacceptably light attitude towards seduction , illicit sex , chastity , and virginity , '' was rejected on january 2 , 1952 . contrary to later legend , the words '' virgin , '' '' mistress , '' and '' pregnant , '' all of which had been in the original play 's dialogue , were not singled out as objectionable . on january 6 , preminger and herbert advised the breen office they disagreed with its decision and would film the screenplay without further changes . the world and its double , pp . 143–144 in a display of solidarity , united artists heads arthur b . krim and robert s . benjamin amended their contract and deleted the clause requiring preminger to deliver a film that would be granted a production code seal of approval . after ten days of rehearsals for each of his casts , preminger began principal photography of both films on january 21 , filming an english language scene and then its german equivalent in quick succession . preminger later stated he much preferred the moon is blue to die jungfrau auf dem dach because he felt the psychology of the plot did not translate well . filming was completed in twenty-four days and it previewed in pasadena on april 8 . two days later , breen notified preminger the film would not be approved . outraged at breen 's '' unwarranted and unjustified attack '' on '' a harmless story , '' the director joined forces with ua executives to appeal the decision with the motion picture association of america board of directors , who ruled against them . the world and its double , p . 145 . distribution . united artists decided to release the film without the pca seal of approval , the first major american film to do so , initially in major urban markets where they hoped its success would encourage exhibitors in rural areas to book the film . the film premiered for an '' adults only '' audience at the woods theatre in chicago on june 22 and opened at the alcazar theatre ( 1911 ) in san francisco on june 25 . on june 30 , variety reported three major nationwide theater chains were willing to exhibit the film , and it went into general release on july 8 , and was in the top five box-office successes of that week . ( in its year-end report , variety said the film had ranked 15 at the box office with a gross of 3.5 million . ) the world and its double , p . 146 it was banned in jersey city , new jersey as '' indecent and obscene '' . theaters in many small towns in the united states restricted audiences to men or women separately . kansas , ohio , and maryland also banned the film , and preminger and united artists decided to bring suit in a maryland court . on december 7 , 1953 , judge herman moser reversed the state censor board . in his ruling , he called the film '' a light comedy telling a tale of wide-eyed , brash , puppy-like innocence . '' preminger and ua then appealed in kansas , but the supreme court of kansas upheld the state board of review 's decision to ban the film . determined to win , the director and studio took their case to the supreme court of the united states , which overturned the finding of the kansas supreme court on october 24 , 1955 ( holmby v . vaughn ) . hirsch , foster , otto preminger : the man who would be king . new york : alfred a . knopf 2007 . , p . 197 “ the question here is neither one of great art nor even of particularly good taste . it is rather a question of whether american movies are continually to be hamstrung by rules that confine picture themes , picture morals , and picture language to what is deemed fit for children , or for childlike mentalities . — saturday review . 27 june 1953 . ” the success of the film was instrumental in weakening the influence of the production code . on june 27 , 1961 , the pca granted both the moon is blue and the man with the golden arm , preminger 's similarly controversial 1955 release , the seals of approval they initially withheld . the world and its double , p . 147 . critical reception . bosley crowther of the new york times observed it '' is not outstanding , either as a romance or as film . the wit of mr . herbert . is turned almost wholly on his freeness with the startling idea or phrase , as glibly tossed off ( for the most part ) by a young lady who appears a wide-eyed child . and otto preminger 's lifting of the play from the stage to the screen is much too rigidly respectful of its conversational form . as a consequence , the movement is restricted and the talk is exceedingly long . at times , it gets awfully tedious , considering its limited range . '' variety called it '' an entertaining adult comedy , '' which '' constantly reminds of its origin , being more a filmed play than a motion picture . but it 's still entertaining theatre , whether behind the footlights or on celluloid . '' harrison 's reports called it '' vastly amusing adult entertainment , '' adding that '' even though the material is spicy and has its delicate moments , it has been handled so adroitly that it is always amusing without ever becoming offensive . '' richard l . coe of the washington post called it '' flip , frolicsome fun , '' adding , '' otto preminger 's direction of herbert 's own screen play follows the stage action fairly closely , resulting in occasionally static splotches but the feel of flip sophistication is achieved . '' edwin schallert of the los angeles times wrote that '' this film is likely to induce a goodly share of laughter and have a special appeal to feminine audiences , '' but thought it '' talks too much for complete satisfaction as a picture . '' schallert , edwin ( july 2 , 1953 ) . '' stage quips still life of 'moon film ' '' . los angeles times . part iii , p . 9 . the chicago tribune wrote that the film was '' deftly constructed and moves along at a bright , brisk pace , peppered with some remarkably funny dialog , which sends audiences into such guffaws that some of the best lines are drowned in a sea of laughter . '' john mccarten of the new yorker faulted the film for '' all sorts of slowdowns . to permit the principals to give out with their views on life , love and so on . however , as the photograph of a pleasant little comedy , the picture has some merit . '' the monthly film bulletin called it '' quite pleasant entertainment ; '' time magazine also found the film to be pleasant . '' cinema : the new pictures , july 6 , 1953 '' the catholic legion of decency gave the movie a '' c '' , '' condemned '' rating , despite giving the original play a milder '' b '' , '' unobjectionable for adults '' rating . the catholic parent-teacher league condemned the movie . francis cardinal spellman of new york and james francis cardinal mcintyre of los angeles urged catholics to avoid the film . pacific film archive called it '' an innocuous sex comedy that talks about bedding down but never turns a sheet '' and noted : '' the furor surrounding the film leaves the impression that a full-scale orgy had occurred . '' in his review of the dvd release of the film , tim purtell of entertainment weekly called the film a '' trifle '' that '' seems overly talky and slight '' . entertainment weekly review . awards and nominations . golden globe award for best actor – motion picture musical or comedy , won by david niven . academy award for best actress , maggie mcnamara was nominated , but lost to audrey hepburn in roman holiday . academy award for best film editing , otto ludwig was nominated , but lost to william a . lyon for from here to eternity . academy award for best original song , herschel burke gilbert and sylvia fine were nominated for the title tune : :but lost to sammy fain and paul francis webster for '' secret love '' from calamity jane . writers guild of america award , f . hugh herbert was nominated for the best written comedy : :but lost to ian mclellan hunter , dalton trumbo , and john dighton for roman holiday . . preservation . the academy film archive preserved the moon is blue in 2006 . . in popular culture . in 1982 , the film was the focus of the m a s h episode , '' the moon is not blue '' . having heard of the film 's controversy , hawkeye pierce and b.j . hunnicutt attempt to get a copy of the film shipped to the 4077th in korea . but when they finally see the film , hawkeye and b.j . are greatly let down by its lack of promised sexually explicit content . hawkeye complains that he 's never seen a cleaner movie in his life , and when father mulcahy points out that one of the characters did say '' virgin , '' hawkeye responds , '' that 's because everyone was ! '' m a s h episode recap at tv.com otto preminger 's brother , ingo preminger was producer of the mash ( film ) . the moon is blue was released nineteen days before the armistice for the korean war was signed . further reading . lev , peter , '' censorship and self regulation . '' in : the fifties : transforming the screen , 1950–1959 . university of california press , 2006 . pp . & nbsp ; 89–90 . butters , gerald r . , jr . '' moon is blue over kansas . '' in : banned in kansas : motion picture censorship , 1915-1966 columbia : university of missouri press , c2007 . harris , albert w . jr . '' movie censorship and the supreme court : what next ? '' california law review vol . 42 , no . 1 ( spring , 1954 ) , pp . 122-138 leff , leonard j . '' the moon is blue and the french line . '' in : the dame in the kimono : hollywood , censorship , and the production code lexington : university press of kentucky , c2001 . . references . external links .