Finnmark

sami . the sami are the indigenous people of finnmark , but norwegians have lived for hundreds of years on the islands ' outer parts , where they made up the majority . the sami people still constitute the majority in finnmark 's interior parts , while the fjord areas have been ethnically mixed for a long time . this essentially holds true today . the sami were for many years victims of the norwegianization policy , which in essence was an attempt by the government to make them '' true norwegians '' and forget about their sami way of life and religion , which was seen as inferior . as a result , the sami living at the coast and in the fjords gradually lost much of their culture and often felt ashamed by their sami inheritance . the sami in the interior managed to preserve more of their culture . in the 1970s , instruction of the sami language started in schools , and a new sense of consciousness started to grow among the sami ; today most are proud of their background and culture . in the midst of this awakening ( 1979 ) , norway 's government decided to build a dam in alta to produce hydropower , provoking many sami and environmentalists to demonstrations and civil disobedience ( altasaken ) . in the end , the dam was built on a much smaller scale than originally intended and the sami culture was on the government 's agenda . the sami parliament ( sámediggi ) was opened in karasjok in 1989 . norwegian . gjesvær in nordkapp is mentioned in the sagas ( heimskringla ) as a northern harbor in the viking age , especially used by vikings on the way to bjarmaland ( see ottar from hålogaland ) , and probably also for gathering food in the nearby seabird colony . coastal areas of finnmark were colonized by norwegians beginning in the 10th century , and there are stories describing clashes with the karelians . border skirmishes between the norwegians and novgorodians continued until 1326 , when the treaty of novgorod settled the issue . the first known fortification in finnmark is vardøhus fortress , first erected in 1306 by king haakon v magnusson . this is the world 's most northern fortress . in the 17th century , 88 young women were burned as witches in vardø , an extremely high number compared to the total population in this area at the time . however , the first person burned as witch in vardø in the 17th century was not a woman , but a man . vardø archives finnmark first became subject to increased colonization in the 18th and 19th century . norway , sweden , and russia all claimed control over this area . finland was part of russia at that time and had no independent representative . finnmark was given the status of an amt ( county ) in the 19th century . for a time , there was a vibrant trade with russia ( pomor trade ) , and many norwegians settled on the kola peninsula ( see kola norwegians ) . kven . the finnic kven residents of finnmark are largely descendants of finland-speaking immigrants who arrived in the area in the 18th century from meänmaa , and later in the 19th century from finland , suffering from famine and war . . brief summary . in 1576 , the king of norway established vardøhus len as a new administrative unit for the kingdom . in 1660 , it became vardøhus amt , a subordinate to the large trondhjems stiftamt , based in trondheim . in 1787 , the senja ( island ) and the troms area were transferred from nordlandenes amt to vardøhus amt . in 1866 , the island of senja and the troms area were separated from vardøhus to form the new tromsø amt . in 1919 , the name was again changed to finnmark fylke . in 2002 , the sami language name , finnmárku , was added as a co-official name for the county . per fugelli has said that world war ii resulted in many persons acquiring psychiatric disorders ( psykiske senskadene ) which could be from experiencing '' bombing , accidents involving mines , burning down of homes , forcible evacuation , illness and starvation during the war and liberation . but it was maybe in particular the treatment of russian prisoners that left marks on the local population . '' . world war ii . towards the end of world war ii , with operation nordlicht , the germans used the scorched earth tactic in finnmark and northern troms to halt the red army . as a consequence of this , few houses survived the war , and a large part of the population was forcefully evacuated further south ( tromsø was crowded ) , but many people avoided evacuation by hiding in caves and mountain huts and waited until the germans were gone , then inspected their burned homes . there were 11,000 houses , 4,700 cow sheds , 106 schools , 27 churches , and 21 hospitals burned . there were 22,000 communications lines destroyed , roads were blown up , boats destroyed , animals killed , and 1,000 children separated from their parents . however , after taking the town of kirkenes on 25 october 1944 ( as the first town in norway ) , the red army did not attempt further offensives in norway . free norwegian forces arrived from britain and liberated the rest of the county . when war was over , more than 70,000 people were left homeless in finnmark . the government imposed a temporary ban on residents returning to finnmark because of the danger of landmines . the ban lasted until the summer of 1945 when evacuees were told that they could finally return home . cold war . the cold war was a period with sometimes high tension in eastern finnmark , at the long border with the soviet union . to keep tensions from getting too high , norway declared that no nato exercises would take place in finnmark . there was , however , a lot of military intelligence activity , and norwegian p-3 orion maritime surveillance aircraft were often the first to get pictures of newly built soviet submarines and aircraft . a purpose built elint vessel , marjata , was always stationed near the border , and the current marjata ( 7500 t ) is still operating out of the ports in eastern finnmark . as recently as 2000 , russian generals threatened to target the globus ii radar in vardø with nuclear missiles . . demographics . the old stone age komsa culture is very difficult to relate to the people living in finnmark today . there are findings suggesting that the sami people have been there for a long time , but exactly how long is unclear , some scholars claiming 8000 years but others only 2500 years . from the 10th century , the coastal areas have been populated and visited by ethnic norwegians , and finnmark became part of the kingdom . the sami core areas in norway are in finnmark , where they constitute about one quarter of the total population . the municipalities of kautokeino , karasjok , tana , nesseby , and porsanger in finnmark county ; and the municipalities of kåfjord ( in troms ) , tysfjord ( in nordland ) , and snåsa ( in nord-trøndelag ) also have official names in the sami language . most municipalities in sápmi , however , have unofficial names in sámi as well . in the 18th century and the 19th century , many finnish-speaking immigrants settled in finnmark . since 1996 , they have had minority status as kven people . the town of vadsø is often seen as the '' kven capital '' in finnmark . lakselv , in central finnmark , is sometimes referred to as '' meeting place for three tribes '' . after the collapse of the soviet union and severe economic troubles in the russian economy during the 90s , russian immigrants and shoppers arrived in kirkenes . since the beginning of the european migrant crisis many syrian refugees arrived in kirkenes via russia .