Written vernacular Chinese

history . during the zhou dynasty ( 1046–256 bc ) , old chinese was the spoken and written form of chinese , and was used to write classical chinese texts . starting from the qin ( 221 bc ) , however , spoken chinese began to evolve faster than written . the difference grew larger with the passage of time . by the time of the tang and song dynasties ( 618–1279 ) , people began to write in their vernacular dialects in the form of bianwen and yǔlù , and the spoken language was completely distinct from the still-maintained written standard of classical chinese ( wenyanwen ) . the majority of the population , not educated in classical chinese , could understand very little of written or printed texts . during the ming and qing ( 1368–1912 ) , vernacular language began to be used in novels , but formal writing continued to use classical chinese . lower yangtze mandarin formed the standard for written vernacular chinese until it was displaced by the beijing dialect in the late qing . this baihua was used by writers all over china regardless of the dialect they spoke . chinese writers who spoke other dialects had to use the grammar and vocabulary of lower yangtze and beijing mandarin to make their writing understandable to the majority of chinese . after the may fourth movement , baihuawen became the normal written form of chinese . while the phonology of modern standard chinese is based on that of beijing , its grammar is officially based on the exemplary works of vernacular literature , which excludes certain colloquial or 'extreme ' forms while incorporating some constructions from classical chinese ( see below ) . similarly , the vocabulary of written vernacular chinese discards the majority of slang terms from the beijing dialect while absorbing some literary and/or archaic words from classical chinese , as well as foreign loanwords and a small number of regionalisms from other major dialect groups . literature in vernacular mandarin and the modern written language . jin shengtan , who edited several novels in vernacular chinese in the 17th century , is widely regarded as the pioneer of literature in the vernacular style . however , it was not until after the may fourth movement in 1919 and the promotion by scholars and intellectuals such as pragmatist reformer hu shih , pioneering writer chen hengzhe , leftist lu xun , chen duxiu , and leftist qian xuantong that vernacular chinese , or bai hua , gained widespread importance . in particular , the true story of ah q by lu xun is generally accepted as the first modern work to fully utilize the vernacular language . luo , jing . 2004 ( 2004 ) . over a cup of tea : an introduction to chinese life and culture . university press of america . classical chinese became increasingly viewed by the progressive forces as hindering education and literacy , and , many suggested , social and national progress . the works of lu xun and other writers of fiction and nonfiction did much to advance this view . vernacular chinese soon came to be viewed as mainstream by most people . along with the growing popularity of vernacular writing in books in this period was the acceptance of punctuation , modeled after that used in western languages ( traditional chinese literature was almost entirely unpunctuated ) , and the use of arabic numerals . following the 1911 revolution , successive governments continuously carried out a progressive and national education system to include primary and secondary education . all the curriculum was in vernacular chinese . prolific writers such as lu xun and bing xin published very popular works often in important literary journals of the day , the journals published essays and reviews providing the theoretical background for the vernacular writings . for example , lu xun 's a madman 's diary elicited spirited debate in the journals of the time . systematic education , talented authors and an active scholastic community closely affiliated with the education system all contributed to the establishment of the contemporary vernacular written language within a short time . since the late 1920s , nearly all chinese newspapers , books , and official and legal documents have been written in vernacular chinese using the standard chinese . however , the tone or register and the choice of vocabulary may have been formal or informal , depending on the context . generally , the more formal the register of vernacular chinese ; the greater the resemblance to classical chinese , and modern writing lies on a continuum between the two . since the transition , it has been , however , extremely rare for a text to be written predominantly in classical chinese . until the 1970s , the legal code of the republic of china was written in classical chinese , though in a form replete with modern expressions and constructions that would have been foreign to ancient writers . similarly , until the end of the 20th century , men of letters , especially in the republic of china ( taiwan ) , exchanged personal letters ( known as 尺牘 ) using classical chinese stock phrases for openings , greetings , and closings , and using vernacular chinese ( albeit heavily influenced by the classical language ) for the body . nevertheless , only well-educated individuals in modern times have full reading comprehension of classical texts , and very few are able to write proficiently in classical chinese . presently , the ability to read some classical chinese is taught throughout mainland china ( in simplified orthography ) and taiwan , hong kong and macau ( in traditional orthography ) as part of compulsory primary and secondary education , with the reading of tang poetry taught starting from elementary school and classical prose taught throughout lower and upper secondary schools . though it is rare to encounter fully classical texts in modern times , it is just as rare to see text of a considerable length only employ colloquial chinese resources and exclude all classical constructions and lexical items . despite initial intentions on the part of reformers to create a written language that closely mirrors the colloquial mandarin dialects and to expunge classical influences from the language for the sake of modernization , it became clear to users of the new written standard that the admixture of a certain proportion of classical ( wenyanwen ) grammatical constructions and vocabulary into baihuawen was unavoidable and serves as an important means of conveying tone and register . thus , for the vernacular language used in official settings like academic and literary works or government communications ( e.g . , academic papers , formal essays , textbooks , political speeches , legal codes , state-media news , etc . ) , a small number of stock classical constructions ( around 300 patterns ) and vocabulary items ( around 250 expressions ) continue to be employed and are subject to additional related requirements relating to classical prosody and parallelism . the use of these structures is a characteristic of formal registers of baihuawen ( termed 書面漢語 , 'formal written chinese ' , lit . 'book surface chinese ' ) and distinguishes the formal modern language from conversational baihuawen on the one hand and fully classical wenyanwen on the other hand . though clearly dependent on context and on the personal preferences of the author , analyses of typical 20th century essays and speeches have yielded a ratio of formal to informal expressions of around 2:3 ( i.e . , ~40 % of the texts consist of formal expressions ) . even in informal personal communications otherwise composed entirely in the vernacular , classical words and usages may still appear every so often . in particular , chengyu ( 成語 ) , four-character classical idioms , are used by writers and speakers of all education levels in a variety of contexts . literature in other chinese varieties . there is also a modest body of literature for cantonese , shanghainese , and taiwanese hokkien , which include additional characters for writing the language as spoken . efforts to standardize the written forms of these languages include the taiwanese southern min recommended characters lists in the case of taiwanese . they are most commonly used in advertisement , song lyrics sung in local varieties , and court records of dialogue and colloquial expressions . they are often mixed to varying degrees with classical chinese and modern standard chinese . see also . chinese literature chinese poetry . references .