Sourdough

baking . the starter must be fed 4 to 12 hours prior to being added to dough , by mixing flour and water to the starter . this creates an active leaven , which should grow in size and is ready to use when it is bubbly and floats in water . the leaven is mixed with flour and water to make a final dough of the desired consistency . the starter weight is usually 13 % to 25 % of the total flour weight , though formulas may vary . the dough is shaped into loaves , left to rise , and then baked . a number of 'no knead ' methods are available for sourdough bread . due to the length of time sourdough bread takes to proof , many bakers may refrigerate their loaves prior to baking . this process is known as 'retardation ' to slow down the proofing process . this process has the added benefit of developing a richer flavoured bread . because the rise time of most sourdough starters is longer than that of breads made with baker 's yeasts , sourdough starters are generally unsuitable for use in a bread machine . however , sourdough that has been proved over many hours , using a sourdough starter or mother dough , can then be transferred to the machine , utilizing only the baking segment of the bread-making program , bypassing timed mechanical kneading by the machine 's paddle . this may be convenient for single loaf production , but the complex blistered and slashed crust characteristics of oven-baked sourdough bread can not be achieved in a bread making machine , as this usually requires the use of a baking stone in the oven and misting of the dough to produce steam . furthermore , ideal crust development requires loaves of shapes not achievable in a machine 's loaf tin . biology and chemistry of sourdough . sourdough is a stable culture of lactic acid bacteria and yeast in a mixture of flour and water . broadly speaking , the yeast produces gas ( carbon dioxide ) which leavens the dough , and the lactic acid bacteria produce lactic acid , which contributes flavor in the form of sourness . the lactic acid bacteria metabolize sugars that the yeast can not , while the yeast metabolizes the by-products of lactic acid fermentation . during sourdough fermentation , many cereal enzymes , particularly phytases , proteases and pentosanases , are activated through acidification and contribute to biochemical changes during sourdough fermentation . . lactic acid bacteria . lactic acid bacteria are anaerobic organism , which means that though they are anaerobes , they can multiply in the presence of oxygen . major lactic acid bacteria in sourdough are heterofermentative organisms and convert hexoses by the phosphoketolase pathway to lactate , co 2 and acetate or ethanol ; heterofermentative lactic acid bacteria are usually associated with homofermentative lactobacilli , particularly lactobacillus and companilactobacillus species . yeasts . the most common yeast species in sourdough are kazachstania exigua , saccharomyces cerevisiae , k . exiguus and k . humilis ( previously candida milleri or candida humilis ) . . type i sourdough . traditional sourdoughs used as sole leavening agent are referred to as type i sourdough , examples include sourdoughs used for san francisco sourdough bread , panettone , and rye bread . type i sourdoughs are generally firm doughs , have a ph range of 3.8 to 4.5 , and are fermented in a temperature range of . lactobacillus sanfranciscensis was named for its discovery in san francisco sourdough starters , though it is not endemic to san francisco . f sanfranciscensis and limosilactobacillus pontis often highlight a lactic-acid bacterial flora that includes limosilactobacillus fermentum , fructilactobacillus fructivorans , levilactobacillus brevis , and companilactobacillus paralimentarius . the yeasts saccharomyces exiguus , kasachstania humilis , or candida holmii usually populate sourdough cultures symbiotically with lactobacillus sanfranciscensis . the perfect yeast s . exiguus is related to the imperfect yeasts c . milleri and c . holmii . torulopsis holmii , torula holmii , and s . rosei are synonyms used prior to 1978 . c . milleri and c . holmii are physiologically similar , but dna testing established them as distinct . other yeasts reported found include c . humilis , c . krusei , pichia anomaola , c . peliculosa , p . membranifaciens , and c . valida . see table 183.6 there have been changes in the taxonomy of yeasts in recent decades . f . sanfranciscensis requires maltose , while c . milleri is maltase negative and thus can not consume maltose . c . milleri can grow under conditions of low ph and relatively high acetate levels , a factor contributing to sourdough flora 's stability . in order to produce acetic acid , f . sanfrancisensis needs maltose and fructose . wheat dough contains abundant starch and some sinistrines , which enzymes degrade to '' maltose , fructose and little glucose . '' the terms '' fructosan , glucofructan , sucrosyl fructan , polyfructan , and polyfructosan '' are all used to describe a class of compounds that are '' structurally and metabolically '' related to sucrose , where '' carbon is stored as sucrose and polymers of fructose ( fructans ) . '' yeasts have the ability to free fructose from glucofructans which compose about 1–2 % of the dough . glucofructans are long strings of fructose molecules attached to a single glucose molecule . sucrose can be considered the shortest glucofructan , with only a single fructose molecule attached . when l . sanfrancisensis reduces all available fructose , it stops producing acetic acid and begins producing ethanol . if the fermenting dough gets too warm , the yeasts slow down , producing less fructose . fructose depletion is more of a concern in doughs with lower enzymatic activities . a belgian study of wheat and spelt doughs refreshed once every 24 hours and fermented at in a laboratory environment provides insight into the three-phase evolution of first-generation-to-stable sourdough ecosystems . in the first two days of refreshment , atypical genera enterococcus and lactococcus bacteria highlighted the doughs . during days 2–5 , sourdough-specific bacteria belonging to the genera lactobacillus , pediococcus , and weissella outcompete earlier strains . yeasts grew more slowly and reached population peaks near days 4–5 . by days 5–7 , '' well-adapted '' lactobacillus strains such as l . fermentum and lactiplantibacillus plantarum had emerged . at their peaks , yeast populations were in the range of about 1–10 % of the lactobacilli populations or 1:10–1:100 . one characteristic of a stable dough is that the heterofermentative have outcompeted homofermentative lactobacilli . f . sanfranciscensis has typically not been identified in spontaneous sourdoughs , even after multiple cycles of back-slopping ; it was rapidly introduced in wheat sourdoughs , however , when plant materials were used to start the fermentation . investigations of wheat sourdough found that s . cerevisiae died off after two refreshment cycles . s . cerevisiae has less tolerance to acetic acid than other sourdough yeasts . continuously maintained , stable sourdough can not be unintentionally contaminated by s . cerevisiae . . type ii sourdough . in type ii sourdoughs , baker 's yeast or saccharomyces cerevisiae is added to leaven the dough ; l . pontis and limosilactobacillus panis in association with lactobacillus species are dominant members of type ii sourdoughs . they have a ph less than 3.5 , and are fermented within a temperature range of for several days without feedings , which reduces the flora 's activity . this process was adopted by some in industry , in part , due to simplification of the multiple-step build typical of type i sourdoughs . in type ii sourdoughs , yeast growth is slowed or stopped due to higher fermentation temperatures . these doughs are more liquid and once fermented may be chilled and stored for up to a week . they are pumpable and used in continuous bread production systems . . type iii sourdough . type iii sourdoughs are type ii sourdoughs subjected to a drying process , usually either spray or drum drying , and are mainly used at an industrial level as flavoring agents . they are dominated by '' drying-resistant lactic acid bacteria such as pediococcus pentosaceus , l . plantarum , and l . brevis . '' the drying conditions , time and heat applied , may be varied in order to influence caramelize and produce desired characteristics in the baked product . . types of bread . there are many breads that use techniques similar to that used in the making of sourdough bread . danish rugbrød ( rye bread ) is a dense , dark bread best known from its use in the danish smørrebrød ( open-faced sandwiches ) . the mexican birote salado started out in the city of guadalajara as a short french baguette that replaces the yeast with a sourdough fermentation process , yielding a bread that is crunchy outside but soft and savory inside . amish friendship bread uses a sourdough starter that includes sugar and milk . it is also leavened with baking powder and baking soda . an amish sourdough is fed with sugar and potato flakes every 3–5 days . german pumpernickel is traditionally made from a sourdough starter , although modern pumpernickel loaves often use commercial yeasts , sometimes spiked with citric acid or lactic acid to inactivate the amylases in the rye flour . flemish desem bread ( the word means 'starter ' ) is a whole-wheat sourdough . in azerbaijan , whole-wheat sourdough flatbreads are traditionally eaten . in ethiopia , teff flour is fermented to make injera . a similar variant is eaten in somalia , djibouti , and yemen ( where it is known as lahoh ) . in india , idlis and dosa are made from a sourdough fermentation of rice and vigna mungo . . qualities affecting health . sourdough fermentation and lactic acid bacteria may be useful to improve the quality of gluten-free breads , such as by enhancing texture , aroma , and shelf life , which can be extended by inhibition of mycotoxins associated with fungus . sourdough bread has a relatively low glycemic index compared with other types of bread . the activity of cereal enzymes during sourdough fermentation hydrolyses phytates , which affect the absorption of some dietary minerals . sourdough bread made from whole grains was recommended as a key daily food in the italian mediterranean diet . sourdough fermentation also reduces fermentable oligosaccharides , disaccharides , monosaccharides , and polyols ( fodmaps ) as well as the amylase trypsin inhibitor ( ati ) , wheat components that are thought to contribute to non-celiac wheat sensitivity and irritable bowel syndrome , and increases the concentration or bio-availability of bioactive compounds , particularly phenolic compounds . . see also . list of sourdough breads biga herman cake history of california bread kyselo , czech soup made from sourdough . list of microorganisms found in sourdough salt-rising bread żurek , polish soup made with rye flour soured in the same process that occurs in the forming of sourdough injera . notes . references . external links .