Albert Bridge, Brisbane

history . the first albert bridge on the site was completed in july 1875 and enabled the main line railway from grandchester to ipswich to be extended to reach brisbane itself . in the early days of settlement , the brisbane river at indooroopilly provided an obstacle to the construction of a railway between brisbane and the mining centre of ipswich . at this time , a river boat service linked the two centres . the completion of the first albert bridge enabled the ipswich railway line to open in 1875 . the first bridge was destroyed in the 1893 flood . in the meantime , ferries were used to transport people and goods across the busy river . this , however , led to the capsize of the ferry pearl disaster in 1896 with the loss of more than 40 lives . the second and current albert bridge was built in 1895 . it was designed by henry charles stanley , queensland 's chief engineer of railways from 1891 to 1901 and is considered his major work . he designed a '' hogsback '' steel truss bridge on masonry piers . in designing the bridge as two long spans with one central pier , he tried to minimise the obstruction to flood waters created by multiple piers , which had been the downfall of the first bridge . innovations in the design included the attachment of cross girders , protection against derailment , provision against strong wind gusts , and provision for free expansion under varying temperatures . the working drawings and specification were prepared by fl keir of the chief engineer 's office , and were completed by mid-1893 . keir was also the resident engineer on the site . in august 1893 the contract was let to brisbane contractors john mccormick & son , with a price of . mccormick & son also later won the contract for the ironwork on the second permanent victoria bridge , 1896-97 . expiry date for the albert bridge contract was set at 14 december 1894 , but it was not opened to traffic until august 1895 . a scottish coal strike held up delivery of the rolled steel for eight months , and removal of the river bedrock for the central pier alone took four months . a condition of the construction contract was that as much of the work as possible be done in queensland . messrs mccormick erected a workshop adjacent to the site at indooroopilly , and imported machinery necessary for constructing the superstructure and the caisson for the central pier . up to 240 persons were employed on site at any one time , and quarry workers provided freestone from pearson 's quarries at helidon , the bluestone in the concrete from jenkin 's bundamba quarry , and the granite for the bedstones and cutwater quoins from mount crosby . in 1895 the bridge was the largest in australia of local manufacture . the most difficult aspect of the work was the construction of the central pier and its foundation caisson . the latter weighed about , rested below high water mark , and was sunk into the rock . the riverbed sand and gravel could be dredged , but divers extracted the rock manually . the southern span was erected above what remained of the former bridge , and was extended to the centre pier . the old pylons were then removed . the northern truss was floated into position . the shore end rested on two trolleys , and when the tide was at its highest , specially constructed staging on an old barque took the weight of the other end of the truss from temporary piles . winches were then used to pull the hulk across the river toward the centre pier , to which the truss was attached . the cores of the earlier bridge abutments were widened and heightened to take the new superstructure . parapets were constructed after the trusses had been fixed in place , and were completed in november 1895 . when opened the bridge also catered for pedestrian traffic , until the construction of the nearby walter taylor bridge in 1937 . the albert bridge remains one of australia 's largest truss bridges . at the time of its completion , as a metal truss bridge it was second only to the first hawkesbury rail bridge ( 1889 ) in span length . the albert bridge is still australia 's third longest span metal truss bridge , after brisbane 's story bridge ( 1940 ) ( story bridge ) and the second hawkesbury rail bridge ( 1945 ) . the bridge was integral to the southwest railway system linking brisbane with ipswich , the darling downs , and southeast queensland . with increased traffic it was supplemented with an adjacent upstream rail bridge in 1957 , which together remained the only brisbane river rail crossing prior to construction of the merivale bridge in 1978 . the albert bridge currently handles only passenger traffic . a second unnamed railway bridge is located between the albert bridge and the walter taylor bridge . this second crossing was constructed in 1957 as part of the quadruplication of the ipswich railway line . . description . the albert bridge spans the brisbane river from indooroopilly to chelmer , at the junction of the chelmer and indooroopilly reaches . it is a fully riveted structure consisting of two arched '' hogsback '' mild steel trusses supported on stone abutments either side , and on a central concrete pier . this pier is encased in an elliptical wrought- iron caisson to low water level , then built up with masonry to the truss bearings . each truss is long , high in the middle , wide , and weighs approximately . their design employs a double-intersection web system of diagonal members , based on the linville system developed in the united states in the 1860s . they are strengthened by horizontal wind bracing at roadway level , and by elaborate overhead cross bracing . the double railroad is carried by four longitudinal steel trough girders , with the sides of the troughs acting as guards against derailment . these are supported by massive cross-girders riveted to the underneath of the vertical struts and lower booms of the main trusses , at intervals . the decking consists of ironbark longitudinals bedded on bitumen and sand , and bolted to steel tee bars which connect the trough girders transversely . a cantilevered wrought iron footway is carried on the upstream side of the bridge . . heritage listing . the albert bridge was registered on the ( now defunct ) register of the national estate in 1988 . it was listed on the queensland heritage register on 21 october 1992 having satisfied the following criteria . the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland 's history . albert bridge at indooroopilly is significant as an early , large span metal truss bridge in australia , and remains the country 's third longest span metal truss bridge . at the time of construction , albert bridge was the largest bridge in australia to be manufactured locally . albert bridge is significant for its contribution to the railway system linking the capital with southern and western queensland , remaining for over six decades part of the only railway link across the brisbane river . the place is important in demonstrating the principal characteristics of a particular class of cultural places . the bridge is highly intact , and provides important physical evidence of late 19th century railway bridge design and construction in australia . the place is important because of its aesthetic significance . the bridge is important also for its landmark quality and aesthetic contribution to the riverscape along the indooroopilly reach of the brisbane river . the place is important in demonstrating a high degree of creative or technical achievement at a particular period . it is important for its innovations in design and implementation , and remains a major example of the design skills of engineer hc stanley , and of the work of brisbane contractors john mccormick & son . the place has a special association with the life or work of a particular person , group or organisation of importance in queensland 's history . it is important for its innovations in design and implementation , and remains a major example of the design skills of engineer hc stanley , and of the work of brisbane contractors john mccormick & son . . see also . bridges over the brisbane river . references . attribution . . external links .