Postgraduate education

professional programs . there are many professional programs such as medical and dental school require a previous bachelors for admission and are considered graduate or graduate entry programs even though they culminate in a bachelor 's degree . example , the bachelor of medicine ( mbbs ) or dentistry . there has also been some confusion over the conversion of the different marking schemes between british , us , and australian systems for the purpose of assessment for entry to graduate programmes . the australian grades are divided into four categories : high distinction , distinction , credit , and pass ( though many institutions have idiosyncratic grading systems ) . assessment and evaluation based on the australian system is not equivalent to british or us schemes because of the '' low-marking '' scheme used by australian universities . for example , a british student who achieves 70+ will receive an a grade , whereas an australian student with 70+ will receive a distinction which is not the highest grade in the marking scheme . funding . the australian government usually offer full funding ( fees and a monthly stipend ) to its citizens and permanent residents who are pursuing research-based higher degrees . there are also highly competitive scholarships for international candidates who intend to pursue research-based programmes . taught-degree scholarships ( certain master 's degrees , grad . dip . , grad . cert . , d.eng . , d.b.a . ) are almost non-existent for international students , so they are usually required to be self-funded . degree requirements . requirements for the successful completion of a taught master 's programme are that the student pass all the required modules . some universities require eight taught modules for a one-year programme , twelve modules for a one-and-a-half-year programme , and twelve taught modules plus a thesis or dissertation for a two-year programme . the academic year for an australian postgraduate programme is typically two semesters ( eight months of study ) . requirements for research-based programmes vary among universities . generally , however , a student is not required to take taught modules as part of their candidacy . it is now common that first-year ph.d . candidates are not regarded as permanent ph.d . students for fear that they may not be sufficiently prepared to undertake independent research . in such cases , an alternative degree will be awarded for their previous work , usually an m.phil . or m.sc . by research . brazil . admission . in brazil , a bachelor 's , licenciate or technologist degree is required in order to enter a graduate program , called pós-graduação . generally , in order to be accepted , the candidate must have above average grades and it is highly recommended to be initiated on scientific research through government programs on undergraduate areas , as a complement to usual coursework . funding . the competition for public universities is very large , as they are the most prestigious and respected universities in brazil . public universities do not charge fees for undergraduate level/course . funding , similar to wages , is available but is usually granted by public agencies linked to the university in question ( i.e . fapesp , capes , cnpq , etc . ) , given to the students previously ranked based on internal criteria . degree requirements . there are two types of postgraduate ; lato sensu ( latin for '' in broad sense '' ) , which generally means a specialization course in one area of study , mostly addressed to professional practice , and stricto sensu ( latin for '' in narrow sense '' ) , which means a master of science or doctorate , encompassing broader and profound activities of scientific research . . canada . types of programs . graduate certificates ( sometimes called '' postgraduate certificates '' ) master 's degree ( course-based and thesis-based ) doctoral degree . admission . admission to a graduate certificate program requires a university degree ( or in some cases , a diploma with years of related experience ) . english speaking colleges require proof of english language proficiency such as ielts . some colleges may provide english language upgrading to students prior to the start of their graduate certificate program . admission to a master 's ( course-based , also called '' non-thesis '' ) program generally requires a bachelor 's degree in a related field , with sufficiently high grades usually ranging from b+ and higher ( note that different schools have different letter grade conventions , and this requirement may be significantly higher in some faculties ) , and recommendations from professors . admission to a high-quality thesis-type master 's program generally requires an honours degree or canadian honours degree , samples of the student 's writing as well as a research thesis proposal . some programs require graduate record exams ( gre ) in both the general examination and the examination for its specific discipline , with minimum scores for admittance . at english-speaking universities , applicants from countries where english is not the primary language are required to submit scores from the test of english as a foreign language ( toefl ) . nevertheless , some french speaking universities , like hec montreal , also require candidates to submit toefl score or to pass their own english test . admission to a doctoral program generally requires a thesis-type master 's degree in a related field , sufficiently high grades , recommendations , samples of writing , a research proposal , and typically an interview with a prospective supervisor . requirements are often set higher than those for a master 's program . in exceptional cases , a student holding an honours bachelor or canadian bachelor with honours with sufficiently high grades and proven writing and research abilities may be admitted directly to a ph.d . program without the requirement to first complete a master 's . many canadian graduate programs allow students who start in a master 's to '' reclassify '' into a ph.d . program after satisfactory performance in the first year , bypassing the master 's degree . high-performing students may be admitted to the '' ph.d.2 '' ( 2nd ph.d . year ) of a five-year ph.d . program if they are holders of one of the rare thesis-type m.a . degrees which require a combined '' m.a./ph.d.1 '' program . graduate students must usually declare their research goal or submit a research proposal upon entering grad school ; in the case of master 's degrees , there will be some flexibility ( that is , one is not held to one 's research proposal , although major changes , for example from premodern to modern history , are discouraged ) . in the case of ph.d.s , the research direction is usually known as it will typically follow the direction of the master 's research . master 's degrees can possibly be completed in one year but normally take at least two , or in the case of a required research-based thesis a maximum of three ; they typically do not exceed five years . doctoral degrees require a minimum of three years but frequently take much longer , not usually exceeding six years . funding . graduate students may take out student loans , but instead they often work as teaching or research assistants . students often agree , as a condition of acceptance to a programme , not to devote more than twelve hours per week to work or outside interests . funding is available to first-year masters students whose transcripts reflect exceptionally high grades ; this funding is normally given in the second year . funding for ph.d . students comes from a variety of sources , and many universities waive tuition fees for doctoral candidates . funding is available in the form of scholarships , bursary and other awards , both private and public . degree requirements . graduate certificates require between eight and sixteen months of study . the length of study depends on the program . graduate certificates primarily involve coursework . however , some may require a research project or a work placement . both master 's and doctoral programs may be done by coursework or research or a combination of the two , depending on the subject and faculty . most faculties require both , with the emphasis on research , and with coursework being directly related to the field of research . master 's candidates undertaking research are typically required to complete a thesis comprising some original research and ranging from seventy to two-hundred pages . some fields may require candidates to study at least one foreign language if they have not already earned sufficient foreign-language credits . some faculties require candidates to thesis defence , but many do not . those that do not , often have a requirement of taking two additional courses , at minimum , in lieu of preparing a thesis . ph.d . candidates undertaking research must typically complete a thesis , or dissertation , consisting of original research representing a significant contribution to their field , and ranging from two-hundred to five-hundred pages . most ph.d . candidates will be required to sit comprehensive examinations—examinations testing general knowledge in their field of specialization—in their second or third year as a prerequisite to continuing their studies , and must defend their thesis as a final requirement . some faculties require candidates to earn sufficient credits in a third or fourth foreign language ; for example , most candidates in modern japanese topics must demonstrate ability in english , japanese , and mandarin , while candidates in pre-modern japanese topics must demonstrate ability in english , japanese , classical chinese , and classical japanese . at english-speaking canadian universities , both master 's and ph.d . theses may be presented in english or in the language of the subject ( german for german literature , for example ) , but if this is the case an extensive abstract must be also presented in english . in exceptional circumstances , a thesis may be presented in french . one exception to this rule is mcgill university , where all work can be submitted in either english or french , unless the purpose of the course of study is acquisition of a language . french-speaking universities have varying sets of rules ; some ( e.g . hec montreal ) will accept students with little knowledge of french if they can communicate with their supervisors ( usually in english ) . the royal military college of canada is a bilingual university , and allows a thesis to be in either english or french , but requires the abstract to be in both official languages . . france . specific context . prior to 2004 , when the european system of lmd bologna process was founded , the french equivalent of a post graduate degree was called a '' maitrise . '' for historical reasons dating back to the french revolution of 1789 , france has a dual education system , with grandes écoles on one side , and universities on the other hand , with the grandes écoles being considered as much more prestigious . some grandes écoles deliver the french diplôme d'ingénieur , which is ranked as a master 's degree . note that france ranks a professional doctorate in health sciences ( i.e . physician , surgeon , pharmacist , dentist , veterinarian diplomas ) as equivalent to a master 's degree in any other discipline , to account for the difficulty gap between getting a medical degree and getting non health related doctoral degrees , the latter requiring original research . admission . there are 87 public universities in france , and also some private universities , and they are based upon the european education ladder including bachelors , masters , and ph.d.s . students gain each degree though the successful completion of a predetermined number of years in education , gaining credits via the european credit transfer system ( ects ) . there are over 300 doctoral programs that collaborate with 1200 research laboratories and centers . each degree has a certain set of national diplomas that are all of equal value , irrespective of where they were issued . there are also other diplomas that are exclusive to france and are very hard to attain . germany and the netherlands . germany and the netherlands introduced the bologna process with a separation between bachelor and master programmes in many fields , except for education studies , law and other specially regulated subjects . ireland . in the republic of ireland higher education is operated by the higher education authority . nigeria . admission to a postgraduate degree programme in nigeria requires a bachelor 's degree with at least a second class lower division ( not less than 2.75/5 ) . admission to doctoral programmes requires an academic master 's degree with a minimum weighted average of 60 % ( b average or 4.00/5 ) . in addition to this , applicants may be subjected to written and oral examinations depending on the school . most universities with high numbers of applicants have more stringent admission processes . unn nigeria general entry qualifications for postgraduate programmes postgraduate degrees in nigeria include m.a . , m.sc . , m.ed . , m.eng . , ll.m , m.arch . , m.agric . , m.phil . , phd . the master 's degree typically take 18–36 months with students undertaking coursework and presenting seminars and a dissertation . the doctoral degree is for a minimum of 36 months and may involve coursework alongside the presentation of seminars and a research thesis . award of postgraduate degrees requires a defence of the completed research before a panel of examiners comprising external and internal examiners , head of department , departmental postgraduate coordinator , representative ( s ) of faculty and postgraduate school , and any other member of staff with a phd in the department/faculty . united kingdom . admission . admission to undertake a research degree in the uk typically requires a strong bachelor 's degree or scottish m.a . ( at least lower second , but usually an upper second or first class ) . in some institutions , doctoral candidates are initially admitted to a masters in research philosophy ( m.phil . or m.res . ) , then later transfer to a ph.d./d.phil . if they can show satisfactory progress in their first 8–12 months of study . candidates for the degree of doctor of education ( ed.d ) are typically required to hold a good bachelor 's degree as well as an appropriate master 's degree before being admitted . funding . funding for postgraduate study in the uk is awarded competitively , and usually is disseminated by institution ( in the form of a certain allocation of studentships for a given year ) rather than directly to individuals . there are a number of scholarships for master 's courses , but these are relatively rare and dependent on the course and class of undergraduate degree obtained ( usually requiring at least a lower second ) . most master 's students are self-funded . funding is available for some ph.d./d.phil . courses . as at the master 's level , there is more funding available to those in the sciences than in other disciplines . such funding generally comes from research councils such as the engineering and physical sciences research council ( epsrc ) , arts and humanities research council ( ahrc ) , medical research council ( mrc ) and others . masters students may also have the option of a postgraduate loan introduced by the uk government in 2016 . for overseas students , most major funding applications are due as early as twelve months or more before the intended graduate course will begin . this funding is also often highly competitive . the most widely available , and thus important , award for overseas students is the overseas research student ( ors ) award , which pays the difference in university fees between an overseas student and a british or eu resident . however , a student can only for one university apply for the ors award , often before he or she knows whether they have been accepted . as of the 2009/2010 academic year , the hefce has cancelled the overseas research student award scheme for english and welsh universities . the state of the scheme for scottish and northern irish universities is currently unclear . students studying part-time for a master 's degree can apply for income-based jobseeker 's allowance provided their timetabled hours are fewer than 16 hours per week . this also entitles the student to housing benefit provided by their local council . full-time students ( of any type ) are not normally eligible for state benefits , including during vacation time . eligibility guidelines from jobcentre plus website . united states . degree requirements . additionally , doctoral students who have advanced to candidacy but not filed a dissertation ( '' abd , '' for '' all but dissertation '' ) often receive master 's degrees and an additional master 's called a master of philosophy , or m.phil . , or c.phil . '' candidate in philosophy '' degree . the master 's component of a doctorate program often requires one or two years , and some students , because doctoral programs are sometimes better-funded , apply for doctoral programs while only intending to earn a master 's degree . this is generally not acceptable and , if a student 's advisor learns of the student 's plans , can result in early termination . many graduate programs require students to pass one or several examinations in order to demonstrate their competence as scholars . dale bloom , jonathan karp , nicholas cohen , the ph.d . process : a student 's guide to graduate school in the sciences , oxford university press , 1998 , . in some departments , a comprehensive examination is often required in the first year of doctoral study , and is designed to test a student 's background undergraduate-level knowledge . examinations of this type are more common in the sciences and some social sciences , and relatively unknown in most humanities disciplines . some graduate students perform teaching duties , often serving as graders , tutors , or teaching assistants . in some departments , they can be promoted to lecturer status , a position that comes with more responsibilities . doctoral students generally spend roughly their first two to three years doing coursework , and begin research by their second year if not before . many master 's and all specialist students will perform research culminating in a paper , presentation , and defense of their research . this is called the master 's thesis ( or , for educational specialist students , the specialist paper ) . however , many us master 's degree programs do not require a master 's thesis , focusing instead primarily on course work or on '' practicals '' or '' workshops . '' such '' real-world '' experience may typically require a candidate work on a project alone or in a team as a consultant , or consultants , for an outside entity approved or selected by the academic institution , and under faculty supervision . in the second and third years of study , doctoral programs often require students to pass more examinations . programs often require a qualifying examination ( '' quals '' ) , a ph.d . candidacy examination ( '' candidacy '' ) , or a general examination ( '' generals '' ) designed to test the students ' grasp of a broad sample of their discipline , or one or several special field examinations ( '' specials '' ) which test students in their narrower selected areas of specialty within the discipline . if these examinations are held orally , they may be known colloquially as '' orals . '' for some social science and many humanities disciplines , where graduate students may or may not have studied the discipline at the undergraduate level , these exams will be the first set , and be based either on graduate coursework or specific preparatory reading ( sometimes up to a year 's work in reading ) . in all cases , comprehensive exams are normally both stressful and time-consuming and must be passed to be allowed to proceed on to the thesis . passing such examinations allows the student to stay , begin doctoral research , and rise to the status of a doctoral candidate while failing usually results in the student leaving the program or re-taking the test after some time has passed ( usually a semester or a year ) . some schools have an intermediate category , passing at the master 's level , which allows the student to leave with a master 's without having completed a master 's thesis . for the next several years , the doctoral candidate primarily performs his or her research . usually this lasts three to eight years , though a few finish more quickly and some take substantially longer . in total , the typical doctoral degree takes between four and eight years from entering the program to completion though this time varies depending upon the department , thesis topic , and many other factors . for example , astronomy degrees take five to six years on average , but observational astronomy degrees take six to seven due to limiting factors of weather , while theoretical astronomy degrees take five . though there is substantial variation among universities , departments , and individuals , humanities and social science doctorates on average take somewhat longer to complete than natural science doctorates . these differences are due to the differing nature of research between the humanities and some social sciences and the natural sciences , and to the differing expectations of the discipline in coursework , languages and length of thesis . however , time required to complete a doctorate also varies according to the candidate 's abilities and choice of research . some students may also choose to remain in a program if they fail to win an academic position , particularly in disciplines with a tight job market ; by remaining a student , they can retain access to libraries and university facilities , while also retaining an academic affiliation , which can be essential for conferences and job-searches . traditionally , doctoral programs were only intended to last three to four years and , in some disciplines ( primarily the natural sciences ) , with a helpful advisor , and a light teaching load , it is possible for the degree to be completed in that amount of time . however , increasingly many disciplines , including most humanities , set their requirements for coursework , languages and the expected extent of thesis research by the assumption that students will take five years minimum or six to seven years on average ; competition for jobs within these fields also raises expectations on the length and quality of theses considerably . in some disciplines , doctoral programs can average seven to ten years . archaeology , which requires long periods of research , tends towards the longer end of this spectrum . the increase in length of degree is a matter of great concern for both students and universities , though there is much disagreement on potential solutions to this problem . there are also discipline-specific differences . a person applying for a doctoral program in biblical studies or theology from a seminary or theological school must already hold a first professional degree in the field , known as the master of divinity degree ( m.div . ) . the m.div . is a three-year master 's program , however , a thesis is usually not required before completion . the m.div . is the entry degree for the doctor of ministry degree ( d.min . ) or the ph.d . the d.min . degree is a second professional degree , which includes two years of study and one to two years of research and a project in the candidates local area of work . the ph.d . degree in this area follows other ph.d . programs with two years of seminars , comprehensive exams ( usually not oral ) , and then if a person passes the exam , a dissertation . an alternative terminal degree after the m.div . is a master 's of theology ( th.m ) . a th.m is one year of seminary study followed by a shorter thesis ( usually around one hundred pages ) that does not necessarily have to be a unique contribution to the field ( unlike a dissertation ) . a person who fails the comprehensive exam in this discipline may also be awarded a th.m . funding . many departments , especially those in which students have research or teaching responsibilities , offer tuition-forgiveness and a stipend that pays for most expenses . at some elite universities , there may be a minimum stipend established for all ph.d . students , as well as a tuition waiver . the terms of these stipends vary greatly , and may consist of a scholarship or fellowship , followed by teaching responsibilities . at many elite universities , these stipends have been increasing , in response both to student pressure and , especially , to competition among the elite universities for graduate students . in some fields , research positions are more coveted than teaching positions because student researchers are typically paid to work on the dissertation they are required to complete anyway , while teaching is generally considered a distraction from one 's work . research positions are more typical of science disciplines ; they are relatively uncommon in humanities disciplines , and where they exist , they rarely allow the student to work on their own research . departments often have money for limited discretionary funding to supplement minor expenses such as research trips and travel to conferences . a few students can attain outside scholarship such as the national science foundation ( nsf ) and national physical science consortium ( npsc ) . funding differs greatly by departments and universities ; some universities give five years of full funding to all ph.d . students , though often with a teaching requirement attached ; other universities do not . foreign students are typically funded the same way as domestic ( us ) students , although federally subsidized student and parent loans and work-study assistance are generally limited to us citizens and nationals , permanent residents , and approved refugees . moreover , some funding sources ( such as many nsf fellowships ) may only be awarded to domestic students . other factors contributing to possible financial difficulties include high costs to visit their families back home , supporting one 's family who is not allowed to work due to immigration laws , tuition that is steep by world standards , and large fees : visa fees by us citizenship and immigration services , surveillance fees ( such as student and exchange visitor information systems , or sevis ) by the united states congress and the united states department of homeland security .