Leaves of Grass

publication history and origin . initial publication , 1855 . leaves of grass has its genesis in an essay by ralph waldo emerson called '' the poet '' ( publ . 1844 ) , which expressed the need for the united states to have its own new and unique poet to write about the new country 's virtues and vices . whitman , reading the essay , consciously set out to answer emerson 's call as he began working on the first edition of leaves of grass . whitman , however , downplayed emerson 's influence , stating , '' i was simmering , simmering , simmering ; emerson brought me to a boil . '' reynolds , 82 on may 15 , 1855 , whitman registered the title leaves of grass with the clerk of the united states district court , southern district of new jersey , and received its copyright . kaplan , 198 the title was a pun , as grass was a term given by publishers to works of minor value , and leaves is another name for the pages on which they were printed . the first edition was published on july 4 , 1855 , in brooklyn , at the printing shop of two scottish immigrants , james and andrew rome , whom whitman had known since the 1840s . reynolds , 310 the shop was located at fulton street ( now cadman plaza west ) and cranberry street , now the site of apartment buildings that bear whitman 's name . whitman paid for and did much of the typesetting for the first edition himself . the book did not include the author 's name , and instead offered an engraving by samuel hollyer depicting whitman in work clothes and a jaunty hat , arms at his side . callow , 227 early advertisements for the first edition appealed to '' lovers of literary curiosities '' as an oddity . reynolds , 305 sales on the book were few , but whitman was not discouraged . the first edition was very small , collecting only twelve unnamed poems in 95 pages . loving , 179 whitman once said he intended the book to be small enough to be carried in a pocket . '' that would tend to induce people to take me along with them and read me in the open air : i am nearly always successful with the reader in the open air '' , he explained . reynolds , 352 about 800 were printed , reynolds , 311 though only 200 were bound in its trademark green cloth cover . the only american library known to have purchased a copy of the first edition was in philadelphia . the poems of the first edition , which were given titles in later issues , included : '' song of myself '' '' a song for occupations '' '' to think of time '' '' the sleepers '' '' i sing the body electric '' '' faces '' '' song of the answerer '' '' europe : the 72d and 73d years of these states '' '' a boston ballad '' '' there was a child went forth '' '' who learns my lesson complete ? '' and '' great are the myths '' whitman sent a copy of the first edition of leaves of grass to emerson , who had inspired its creation . in a letter to whitman , emerson wrote , '' i find it the most extraordinary piece of wit and wisdom america has yet contributed . '' he went on , '' i am very happy in reading it , as great power makes us happy . '' miller , 27 . republications , 1856–89 . there have been held to be either six or nine editions of leaves of grass , the count depending on how they are distinguished : scholars who hold that an edition is an entirely new set of type will count the 1855 , 1856 , 1860 , 1867 , 1871–72 , and 1881 printings ; whereas others will include the 1876 , 1888–1889 , and 1891–1892 ( the '' deathbed edition '' ) releases . the editions were of varying length , each one larger and augmented from the previous version , until the final edition reached over 400 poems . the 1855 edition is particularly notable for its inclusion of '' song of myself '' and '' the sleepers '' . 1856–1860 . it was emerson 's positive response to the first edition that inspired whitman to quickly produce a much-expanded second in 1856 , now 384 pages with a cover price of a dollar . this edition included a phrase from emerson 's letter , printed in gold leaf : '' i greet you at the beginning of a great career . '' emerson later took offense that this letter was made public callow , 236 and became more critical of the work . reynolds , 343 this edition included '' crossing brooklyn ferry '' , a notable poem . the publishers of the 1860 edition , thayer and eldridge , declared bankruptcy shortly after its publication and were almost unable to pay whitman . '' in regard to money matters , '' they wrote , '' we are very short ourselves and it is quite impossible to send the sum . '' whitman received only 250 , and the original plates made their way to boston publisher horace wentworth . reynolds , 405 when the 456-page book was finally issued , whitman said , '' it is quite 'odd ' , of course , '' referring to its appearance : it was bound in orange cloth with symbols like a rising sun with nine spokes of light and a butterfly perched on a hand . kaplan , 250 whitman claimed that the butterfly was real in order to foster his image as being '' one with nature . '' in fact , the butterfly was made of cloth and was attached to his finger with wire . the major poems added to this edition were '' a word out of the sea '' and '' as i ebb 'd with the ocean of life '' . 1867–1889 . the 1867 edition was intended to be , according to whitman , '' a new & much better edition of leaves of grass complete — that unkillable work ! '' reynolds , 474 he assumed it would be the final edition . loving , 314 the edition , which included the drum-taps section , its sequel , and the new songs before parting , was delayed when the binder went bankrupt and its distributing firm failed . when it was finally printed , it was a simple edition and the first to omit a picture of the poet . reynolds , 475 in 1879 , richard worthington purchased the electrotyping and began printing and marketing unauthorized copies . the 1889 ( eighth ) edition was little changed from the 1881 version , but it was more embellished and featured several portraits of whitman . the biggest change was the addition of an '' annex '' of miscellaneous additional poems . miller , 55 . sections . by its later editions , leaves of grass had grown to 14 sections . inscriptions & nbsp ; children of adam calamus birds of passage sea-drift by the roadside & nbsp ; drum-taps memories of president lincoln autumn rivulets whispers of heavenly death from noon to starry night songs of parting first annex : sands at seventy & nbsp ; second annex : good-bye my fancy earlier editions contained a section called '' chants democratic '' ; later editions omitted some of the poems from this section , publishing others in calamus and other sections . deathbed edition , 1892 . as 1891 came to a close , whitman prepared a final edition of leaves of grass , writing to a friend upon its completion , '' l . of g . at last complete — after 33 y'rs of hackling at it , all times & moods of my life , fair weather & foul , all parts of the land , and peace & war , young & old . '' reynolds , 586 this last version of leaves of grass was published in 1892 and is referred to as the deathbed edition . miller , 36 in january 1892 , two months before whitman 's death , an announcement was published in the new york herald : walt whitman wishes respectfully to notify the public that the book leaves of grass , which he has been working on at great intervals and partially issued for the past thirty-five or forty years , is now completed , so to call it , and he would like this new 1892 edition to absolutely supersede all previous ones . faulty as it is , he decides it as by far his special and entire self-chosen poetic utterance . kaplan , 51 by the time this last edition was completed , leaves of grass had grown from a small book of 12 poems to a hefty tome of almost 400 poems . as the volume changed , so did the pictures that whitman used to illustrate them—the last edition depicts an older whitman with a full beard and jacket . analysis . whitman 's collection of poems in leaves of grass is usually interpreted according to the individual poems contained within its individual editions . discussion is often focused upon the major editions typically associated with the early respective versions of 1855 and 1856 , to the 1860 edition , and finally to editions late into whitman 's life . these latter editions would include the poem '' when lilacs last in the dooryard bloom 'd '' , whitman 's elegy to abraham lincoln after his death . while whitman has famously proclaimed ( in '' song of myself '' ) his poetry to be '' nature without check with original energy '' , scholars have discovered that whitman borrowed from a number of sources for his leaves of grass . for his drum-taps , for instance , he lifted phrases from popular newspapers dealing with civil war battles . genoways , ted . '' civil war poems in 'drum-taps ' and 'memories of president lincoln , ' '' a companion to walt whitman , ed . donald d . kummings . malden , ma : blackwell , 2006 : 522–538 . he also condensed a chapter from a popular science book into his poem '' the world below the brine '' . in a constantly changing culture , whitman 's literature has an element of timelessness that appeals to the american notion of democracy and equality , producing the same experience and feelings within people living centuries apart . originally written at a time of significant urbanization in america , leaves of grass also responds to the impact such has on the masses . reynolds , 332 the title metaphor of grass , however , indicates a pastoral vision of rural idealism . particularly in '' song of myself '' , whitman emphasizes an all-powerful '' i '' who serves as narrator . the '' i '' attempts to relieve both social and private problems by using powerful affirmative cultural images ; reynolds , 324 the emphasis on american culture in particular helped reach whitman 's intention of creating a distinctly american epic poem comparable to the works of homer . miller , 155 as a believer in phrenology , whitman , in the 1855 preface to leaves of grass , includes the phrenologist among those he describes as '' the lawgivers of poets . '' borrowing from the discipline , whitman uses the phrenological concept of adhesiveness in reference to one 's propensity for friendship and camaraderie . mackey , nathaniel . 1997 . '' phrenological whitman . '' conjunctions 29 ( fall ) . archived from the original on february 2 , 2016 . . thematic changes . whitman edited , revised , and republished leaves of grass many times before his death , and over the years his focus and ideas were not static . one critic has identified three major '' thematic drifts '' in leaves of grass : the period from 1855 to 1859 , from 1859 to 1865 , and from 1866 to his death . in the first period , 1855 to 1859 , his major work is '' song of myself '' , which exemplifies his prevailing love for freedom . '' freedom in nature , nature which is perfect in time and place and freedom in expression , leading to the expression of love in its sensuous form . '' the second period , from 1859 to 1865 , paints the picture of a more melancholic , sober poet . in poems like '' out of the cradle endlessly rocking '' and '' when lilacs last in the dooryard bloom 'd '' , the prevailing themes are of love and of death . from 1866 to his death , the ideas whitman presented in his second period had experienced an evolution : his focus on death had grown to a focus on immortality , the major theme of this period . whitman became more conservative in his old age , and had come to believe that the importance of law exceeded the importance of freedom . his materialistic view of the world became far more spiritual , believing that life had no meaning outside of the context of god 's plan . . critical response and controversy . when the book was first published , walt whitman was fired from his job at the department of the interior , after secretary of the interior james harlan read it and said he found it offensive . an early review of the first publication focused on the persona of the anonymous poet , calling him a loafer '' with a certain air of mild defiance , and an expression of pensive insolence on his face . '' another reviewer viewed the work as an odd attempt at reviving old transcendental thoughts , '' the speculations of that school of thought which culminated at boston fifteen or eighteen years ago . '' emerson approved of the work in part because he considered it a means of reviving transcendentalism , loving , 186 though even he urged whitman to tone down the sexual imagery in 1860 . reynolds , 194 poet john greenleaf whittier was said to have thrown his 1855 edition into the fire . thomas wentworth higginson wrote , '' it is no discredit to walt whitman that he wrote leaves of grass , only that he did not burn it afterwards . '' the saturday press printed a thrashing review that advised its author to commit suicide . critic rufus wilmot griswold reviewed leaves of grass in the november 10 , 1855 , issue of the criterion , calling it '' a mass of stupid filth , '' loving , 184 and categorized its author as a filthy free lover . reynolds , 347 griswold also suggested , in latin , that whitman was guilty of '' that horrible sin not to be mentioned among christians , '' one of the earliest public accusations of whitman 's homosexuality . loving , 185 griswold 's intensely negative review almost caused the publication of the second edition to be suspended . reynolds , 348 whitman incorporated the full review , including the innuendo , in a later edition of leaves of grass . not all responses were negative , however . critic william michael rossetti considered leaves of grass a classic along the lines of the works of william shakespeare and dante alighieri . loving , 317 a woman from connecticut named susan garnet smith wrote to whitman to profess her love for him after reading leaves of grass and even offered him her womb should he want a child . reynolds , 404 although he found much of the language '' reckless and indecent , '' critic and editor george ripley believed '' isolated portions '' of leaves of grass radiated '' vigor and quaint beauty . '' whitman firmly believed he would be accepted and embraced by the populace , especially the working class . years later , he regretted not having toured the country to deliver his poetry directly by lecturing : reynolds , 339 if i had gone directly to the people , read my poems , faced the crowds , got into immediate touch with tom , dick , and harry instead of waiting to be interpreted , i 'd have had my audience at once . . 1882 . on march 1 , 1882 , boston district attorney oliver stevens wrote to whitman 's publisher , james r . osgood , that leaves of grass constituted '' obscene literature . '' urged by the watch and ward society , his letter said : we are of the opinion that this book is such a book as brings it within the provisions of the public statutes respecting obscene literature and suggest the propriety of withdrawing the same from circulation and suppressing the editions thereof . stevens demanded the removal of the poems '' a woman waits for me '' and '' to a common prostitute '' , as well as changes to '' song of myself '' , '' from pent-up aching rivers '' , '' i sing the body electric '' , '' spontaneous me '' , '' native moments '' , '' the dalliance of the eagles '' , '' by blue ontario 's shore '' , '' unfolded out of the folds '' , '' the sleepers '' , and '' faces '' . loving , 414 whitman rejected the censorship , writing to osgood , '' the list whole & several is rejected by me , & will not be thought of under any circumstances . '' osgood refused to republish the book and returned the plates to whitman when suggested changes and deletions were ignored . the poet found a new publisher , rees welsh & company , which released a new edition of the book in 1882 . whitman believed the controversy would increase sales , which proved true . its banning in boston , for example , became a major scandal and it generated much publicity for whitman and his work . though it was also banned by retailers like wanamaker 's in philadelphia , this version went through five editions of 1,000 copies each . loving , 416 its first printing , released on july 18 , sold out in a day . reynolds , 543 . legacy . its status as one of the more important collections of american poetry has meant that over time various groups and movements have used leaves of grass , and whitman 's work in general , to advance their own political and social purposes . for example : in the first half of the 20th century , the popular little blue book series introduced whitman 's work to a wider audience than ever before . a series that backed socialist and progressive viewpoints , the publication connected the poet 's focus on the common man to the empowerment of the working class . during world war ii , the american government distributed for free much of whitman 's poetry to their soldiers , in the belief that his celebrations of the american way would inspire the people tasked with protecting it . whitman 's work has been claimed in the name of racial equality . in a preface to the 1946 anthology i hear the people singing : selected poems of walt whitman , langston hughes wrote that whitman 's '' all-embracing words lock arms with workers and farmers , negroes and whites , asiatics and europeans , serfs , and free men , beaming democracy to all . '' similarly , a 1970 volume of whitman 's poetry published by the united states information agency describes whitman as a man who will '' mix indiscriminately '' with the people . the volume , which was presented for an international audience , attempted to present whitman as representative of an america that accepts people of all groups . nevertheless , whitman has been criticized for the nationalism expressed in leaves of grass and other works . in an essay regarding whitman 's nationalism in the first edition , nathanael o ’ reilly claims that '' whitman 's imagined america is arrogant , expansionism , hierarchical , racist and exclusive ; such an america is unacceptable to native americans , african-americans , immigrants , the disabled , the infertile , and all those who value equal rights . '' o ’ reilly , nathanael . '' imagined america : walt whitman 's nationalism in the first edition of 'leaves of grass ' . '' irish journal of american studies . in popular culture . film and television . '' the untold want '' features prominently in the academy award-winning 1942 film now , voyager , starring claude rains , bette davis , and paul henreid . before his book , ray bradbury used the title of '' i sing the body electric '' for a 1962 episode he wrote for the twilight zone . dead poets society ( 1989 ) makes repeated references to the poem '' o captain ! my captain ! '' , along with other references to whitman . leaves of grass plays a prominent role in the american television series breaking bad . episode eight of season five ( '' gliding over all '' , after poem 271 of leaves of grass ) pulls together many of the series ' references to leaves of grass , such as the fact that walter white has the same initials as walt whitman ( as noted in episode four of season four , '' bullet points '' , and made more salient in '' gliding over all '' ) , that leads hank schrader to realize walt is heisenberg . numerous reviewers have analyzed and discussed the various connections among walt whitman/leaves of grass/ '' gliding over all '' , walt , and the show . in peace , love & misunderstanding ( 2011 ) , leaves of grass is read by jane fonda and elizabeth olsen 's characters . in season 3 , episode 8 , of the byutv series granite flats , timothy gives madeline a first-edition copy of leaves of grass as a christmas gift . american singer lana del rey quotes some verses from whitman 's '' i sing the body electric '' in her short film tropico ( 2013 ) . in season 1 , episode 3 of ratched ( 2020 ) lily cartwright is seen reading leaves of grass while on psychiatric admission for '' sodomy . '' . literature . '' i sing the body electric '' was used by author ray bradbury as the title of both a 1969 short story and the book it appeared in ( i sing the body electric ! ) , after first appearing as the title of an episode bradbury wrote in 1962 for the twilight zone ( i sing the body electric ) . leaves of grass features prominently in lauren gunderson 's american theatre critics association award-winning play i and you ( 2013 ) . roger zelazny 's time-travel novel roadmarks features a cybernetically-enhanced edition of leaves of grass , one of two such in the story , that acts as a side character giving the protagonist advice and quoting the original . the other '' book '' is baudelaire 's les fleurs du mal . leaves of grass appears in john green 's novel paper towns , in which the poem '' song of myself '' plays a particularly noteworthy role in the plot . . music . '' a sea symphony '' ( symphony no.1 ) by ralph vaughan williams contains text from leaves of grass , written between 1903 and 1909 . i sing the body electric ( 1972 ) is the second album released by weather report . leaves of grass : a choral symphony was composed by robert strassburg in 1992 . folsom , ed . '' in memorium : robert strasburg 1915–2003 '' . walt whitman quarterly review . university of iowa press , volume 21 , november 3 , 2004 : 189–191 american singer lana del rey references walt whitman and leaves of grass in her song '' body electric '' , from her ep paradise ( 2012 ) . '' drei hymnen von walt whitman '' ( 1919 ) by paul hindemith uses translated german text from '' ages and ages , returning at intervals '' ; '' when lilacs last in the dooryard bloom 'd '' ; '' beat ! beat ! drums ! '' . references . bibliography . . external links . fan site .