Southern Ireland (1921–22)

home rule and partition . the government of ireland act 1920 , also known as the fourth home rule act , was intended to provide a solution to the problem that had bedevilled irish politics since the 1880s , namely the conflicting demands of irish unionists and nationalists . nationalists wanted a form of home rule , believing that ireland was poorly served by parliament at westminster , the british government at whitehall and the irish government at dublin castle . many unionists feared that a nationalist government in dublin would impose tariffs that would unduly burden the north-eastern counties of the province of ulster , which were not only predominantly protestant but also the only industrial area of a largely agricultural island . they also feared a nationalist government rome rule against protestants after gaining political power . unionists bought and imported arms and assorted weapons from german arms dealer bruno spiro geoffrey lewis , carson : the man who divided ireland , p . 148 and established the ulster volunteer force ( uvf ) to prevent home rule in ulster . joseph mckenna , guerrilla warfare in the irish war of independence , 1919-1921 , p . 3 in response to this , nationalists also imported arms and established the irish volunteers . partition , which was introduced by the government of ireland act , was intended as a temporary solution , allowing northern ireland and southern ireland to be governed separately as regions of the united kingdom of great britain and ireland . one of those most opposed to this partition settlement was the leader of irish unionism , dublin-born sir edward carson , who felt that it was wrong to divide ireland in two , and felt this would badly affect the position of southern and western unionists . government of ireland act 1920 . the government of ireland act , passed at the end of december 1920 , envisaged that southern ireland would have the following institutions : a parliament of southern ireland , consisting of the king , the senate of southern ireland , and the house of commons of southern ireland ; a government of southern ireland ; the supreme court of judicature of southern ireland ; the court of appeal in southern ireland ; and his majesty 's high court of justice in southern ireland . it was also envisaged that southern ireland would share the following institutions with northern ireland : the lord lieutenant of ireland – existing throughout the life of southern ireland , with the incumbent , lord fitzalan of derwent , continuing in office as lord lieutenant ; a council of ireland – established '' with a view to the eventual establishment of a parliament for the whole of ireland '' , but subsequently abolished during 1925 after the termination of the boundary commission ; and a irish court of appeal – which was established , austen morgan , belfast agreement , pg . 34 wherein the author notes : '' one all-ireland institution – the high court of appeal for ireland in section 38 [ of the 1920 act – did exist briefly . and heard a small number of cases before its abolition by the uk 's irish free state ( consequential provisions ) act 1922 . 1921 parliamentary elections . while northern ireland did become a functioning entity , with a parliament and government that existed until 1972 , southern ireland 's parliament , although established legally , never functioned ( for example , it never passed an act ) . the house of commons of southern ireland met just once with only four members present . an irish republic had been proclaimed by the parliament known as dáil éireann , formed by sinn féin member of parliament ( mps ) elected from ireland in the united kingdom general election of 1918 . 1921 irish elections in ireland , effected by the government of ireland act 1920 , were held during may 1921 . the first general election to the house of commons of southern ireland in 1921 , and the simultaneous general election to the house of commons of northern ireland , was used by sinn féin to produce a single extrajudicial parliament , the second dáil . in the southern ireland constituencies sinn féin won 124 of the 128 seats , all without contest , while in the contested elections in northern ireland constituencies it secured six of the 52 seats , another six going to non-sinn féin nationalists . ( the other four southern seats were won by unionists from dublin and the university of dublin , who along with the forty unionists elected in the north refused to participate with the second dáil . ) when the new parliament of southern ireland was called into session on 28 june 1921 , only the four unionist members of the house of commons of southern ireland , and a few appointed senators , arrived in the government buildings in dublin , where the meeting was scheduled to occur ; most of the other members met elsewhere as the dáil . treaty and free state . the anglo-irish treaty was further ratified for the irish on 14 january 1922 by '' a meeting summoned for the purpose of approving the treaty of the members elected to sit in the house of commons of southern ireland '' anglo-irish treaty . the treaty , in specifying a '' meeting of members '' , did not state that the treaty needed to be approved by the house of commons of southern ireland as such . hence , when that '' meeting '' was convened , it was convened by arthur griffith in his capacity as '' chairman of the irish delegation of plenipotentiaries '' ( who had signed the treaty ) . notably , it was not convened by viscount fitzalan , the lord lieutenant of ireland , who , by the government of ireland act 1920 , was the office-holder with the entitlement to convene a meeting of the house of commons of southern ireland . the provisional government established by the treaty was constituted on 14 january 1922 at the above-mentioned meeting of members of the parliament elected for constituencies in southern ireland . it began office two days later when michael collins became chairman of the provisional government . collins assumed charge of dublin castle at a ceremony attended by lord fitzalan . the new government was not an institution of southern ireland as provided by the government of ireland act . instead , it was a government established by the anglo-irish treaty , and was a necessary transitional entity before the establishment of the irish free state on 6 december 1922 . southern ireland was self-governing but was not a sovereign state . its constitutional derived from the acts of union , two complementary acts , one passed by the parliament of great britain , the other by the parliament of ireland . on 27 may 1922 ( some months before the establishment of the irish free state ) lord fitzalan , as lord lieutenant of ireland , in accordance with the irish free state ( agreement ) act 1922 dissolved the parliament of southern ireland and by proclamation called '' a parliament to be known as and styled the provisional parliament '' . macardle ( 1999 ) , p718 and dcu website . from that date , the parliament of southern ireland ceased to exist . with the establishment of the irish free state on 6 december 1922 by the terms of the treaty , southern ireland ceased to exist . see also . southern unionists republic of ireland . references .