Evesham

demography . at the 2001 uk census , evesham had a total population of 22,304 . for every 100 females , there were 96.7 males . the average household size was 2.3 . of those aged 16–74 in evesham , 57.5 % had no academic qualifications or one general certificate of secondary education ( gcse ) , above the figures for all of the wychavon district ( 44.2 % ) and england ( 45.5 % ) . according to the census , 2.4 % were unemployed and 9.4 % were economically inactive . 20.1 % of the population were under the age of 16 and 7.7 % were aged 75 and over ; the mean age of the people of the civil parish was 38.2 . 69.9 % of residents described their health as '' good '' , similar to the average of 69.1 % for the wider district . . economy . due to its exceptionally fertile soil , market gardening is carried out on a commercial scale in the surrounding area , known as the vale of evesham , which is known for its production of fruit and vegetables . a distinctive form of leasehold tenure , known as the evesham custom , still regulates market garden tenancies in the area . a decline in the second half of the 20th century resulted in the closing of evesham 's smithfield market while the central market stopped being used for produce auctions . between 1983 and 2008 , evesham was home to computer manufacturer evesham micros , later renamed evesham technology . it was a significant contributor to the united kingdom 's domestic computer and digital television market . at its peak , the company employed up to 300 people with a chain of 19 retail stores in towns and cities throughout the uk . it went into liquidation in 2008 . retail and food outlets are provided for in the traditional high street and the riverside shopping centre , and four pools lane retail park . the valley ( formerly evesham country park ) , is a large retail and leisure park located out of town with a diversity of stores , restaurants and cafés . transport . in 1728 the london to worcester road through evesham was turnpiked as was the evesham to alcester road in 1778 improving communications in the area . evesham is at the junction of the a46 and a44 trunk roads & ndash ; the £7 million , a46 single-carriageway bypass to the east of the town opened in july 1987 as the a435 . the river avon is a navigable waterway linking the river severn at tewkesbury to the stratford-upon-avon canal at stratford-upon-avon . the river between the town and stratford is managed by the upper avon navigation trust , and below by the lower avon navigation trust , reflecting the administration of the river since the restoration , when the lower avon required only modest repairs , but significant investment was required above the town . j . davies , shakespeare 's avon : the history of a navigation ( oakwood press , 1996 ) , 25-9 . the ancient hampton ferry links the town to hampton . in 1845 an act of parliament was passed for the oxford , worcester and wolverhampton railway and evesham railway station opened between honeybourne and pershore . the station is on the cotswold line from oxford to worcester , great malvern and hereford . there are trains every 45 & ndash ; 55 minutes to london paddington that take approximately 1 hour 45 minutes and trains to birmingham take around 90 minutes ( changing at worcester ) . the nearest major airport is birmingham international about 40 minutes away by trunk roads and the m42 motorway . gloucestershire airport at staverton is a general aviation airport used for pilot training , private charter and scheduled flights to jersey and the isle of man . work began in september 2013 to replace the abbey bridge and was completed in march 2014 . bus services in evesham are operated by a number of operators including diamond bus , stagecoach in warwickshire and first midland red providing links to worcester , redditch and various rural communities . diamond bus service 247 to redditch is the remaining section of once hourly midland red service 146 to birmingham . passengers for birmingham must now change at redditch on to johnsons service 150 to continue their journey . education . schools in evesham follow the three-tier education model of first school ( ages 5–10 ) , middle school ( ages 10–13 ) , and high school ( ages 13–18 ) adopted by wychavon 1974 and completed by 1977 . twelve first ( primary ) schools which include state non-denominational schools as well as church of england bengeworth academy and roman catholic school feed four middle schools which in turn send their pupils to complete their secondary education at the de montfort school and prince henry 's high school which originated as a grammar school established by the monastery and was re-founded by henry viii after the dissolution . the vale of evesham school , operated by worcestershire county council , caters for children from the area aged 2 – 19 with special needs , and learning disabilities . further education is provided by evesham college , part of the warwickshire college group following the merger with south worcestershire college ( previously known as evesham and malvern hills college ) which caters mainly for students studying at the nvq and btec level or undertaking practical vocational courses . the nearest higher education providers are the university of worcester and the university of gloucestershire . a university of the third age was established in 2003 and in 2010 had 600 members . . places of worship . it is possible that the 8th-century anglo-saxon minster church of evesham abbey was founded on the site of an even older church . the medieval town had two parish churches , all saints and st lawrence built within the abbey precinct . religious establishments in evesham include all saints church , evesham baptist church , evesham evangelical church , evesham methodist church , st andrew 's c of e church , st mary & saint egwin 's church , st peter 's church , vale of evesham christian centre , the unitarian chapel in oat street and a quaker meeting place . culture . evesham had a distinctive dialect , which locals called '' asum grammar '' , or '' asum grammer '' . the editor of the local newspaper quoted extracts from a fictitious dictionary of the language . in 1891 , a glossary was published of words and phrases in south-east worcestershire , comprising the district around evesham and pershore . this publication itself built on that of an 1882 author identified only as '' mrs chamberlain '' . prior to the 1882 book , little attention had been paid to the dialect of '' the old worcestershire folks '' , despite it being '' interesting and peculiar '' . a decline in the dialect was already being noted , attributed at that time to standardisation of english schooling , something noted also by later writers on english dialects . the dialect continues to decline , but is stronger in older generations . more recent factors in its decline are attributed to changes in the market gardening scene , where the dialect was to be heard at its fullest , and the impact of television . in the local dialect , '' asum '' is a contraction of the town 's name . asum was an ale produced by the now defunct evesham brewery . '' eve-shum '' is the more common phonetic pronunciation , but '' eve-uh-shum '' is not uncommon . evesham arts centre was built in 1979 and is staffed and operated by volunteers . it provides a venue for professional and amateur performance . events hosted include drama , stand-up comedy , brass bands , orchestras , pantomime to ballet . the centre has a raked 300-seat auditorium , full technical facilities and film projection and a 60-seat studio space for smaller productions . the centre 's foyer it is an exhibition space for local artists . the centre is managed by the evesham arts association , a registered charity . the regal cinema reopened in december 2009 . its grade ii listed building was designed in 1932 by architect hurley robinson . who was responsible for several public buildings in classical and art deco styles , including 55 other cinemas . the regal is the most important surviving example . in 2009 the cinema signed a contract to show all universal studios films . it also serves as a community arts centre , offering a programme of music and stand-up comedy . medieval evesham , and the earl of evesham , inspired a novel winning his spurs by historical fiction author g . a . henty . a more recent novel by m.c . beaton entitled agatha raisin and the wizard of evesham , takes place largely in evesham , and two of the main characters visit the local sights , with descriptions . beaton , m.c . , agatha raisin & the wizard of evesham , robinson publishing , local folklore is provided for by the legend of evesham surrounding the life of eof , an 8th-century swineherd credited with the founding of the town , and st egwin the bishop of worcester who founded the abbey and who whose feet had been fettered and the key thrown in the river avon . according to the legend , the key turned up in rome inside a fish . on returning to evesham , egwin declared that a monastery be built on the spot where the key had been cast in the river . a major landmark is the statue of eof by the sculptor john mckenna that was funded by the townsfolk and unveiled in the market place in june 2008 . . amenities and media . the evesham library , managed by worcestershire libraries & learning division of worcestershire county council , is located in the town centre and was completely modernised following a closure for refurbishment in january 2011 . it offers community services that include an online catalogue , wi-fi internet access , public internet terminals , and a mobile library . a local museum opened in 1957 and is funded by the council , the almonry museum and heritage centre , and the tourist information centre are housed in a 14th-century half timbered building that was the home of the almoner of evesham abbey . exhibits include many items of local interest including an exhibition themed on the battle of evesham . evesham has a 97-bed community hospital in waterside , outside the town centre , used mainly by the elderly and for convalescence , although consultants from major worcester nhs hospitals hold clinics there . the hospital maintains a minor injuries unit ( open from 9am to 9pm 7 days a week ) . the town has three health centres providing general practitioner first care services , and a dental centre . evesham also has several nursing and retirement homes for the care of senior citizens . the evesham area is covered by the midlands air ambulance service , which has operated from the site of strensham services since 1991 . evesham local news has been served since 1860 by the evesham journal , now part of the newsquest ( midlands south ) ltd . subsidiary of gannett corporation , which is predominantly a weekly free newspaper that is distributed over four counties . in 2007 the weekly free newspaper evesham observer was launched by midlands-based observer-standard series of newspapers , now the family-owned bullivant media . commercial radio stations that provide music and local news include wyvern ( radio ) broadcasting on 96.7 fm , bbc hereford & worcester broadcasting on 104 fm and 94.7 fm . sport . the evesham leisure centre comprises two swimming pools , a climbing wall , a 100-station fitness room to our health and a beauty salon . sport in evesham is represented by evesham united f.c . which plays in the southern football league division one south & west , and rugby union & ndash ; senior and youth sections at evesham rugby club . there is also a cricket ground . the town also has a pétanque team , and a cycling club , evesham & district wheelers , which was founded in 1947 . because of its situation on the river , the town is home to various watersports including evesham rowing club , kayaking & canoeing provided by the evesham paddle monsters club , and evesham sailing club . the town includes two golf courses , evesham golf club , which is situated outside fladbury , and twyford golf club , which is situated just outside lenchwick . evesham vale running club hold the evesham vale 10k race event very year . . notable people . alfred john agg , australian colonial public servant and commissioner of railways in victoria . john aldridge , a professional english and international cricketer who also played for worcestershire . born in evesham in 1935 . john randall cbe , union leader . ariel bender , guitarist for mott the hoople and spooky tooth , was born and raised in evesham . molly badham who was awarded the mbe was a co-founder of twycross zoo . she trained the chimpanzees who appeared on the famous brooke bond pg tips tv ads for tea . born in evesham in 1914 . jim capaldi , songwriter and founding member of traffic was born and raised in evesham . muzio clementi was a celebrated classical composer , pianist , pedagogue , conductor , music publisher , and piano manufacturer . he spent his final years in evesham where he died in 1832 . simon de montfort , leader of the barons war against the crown , died at the battle of evesham , and was buried in evesham abbey , now largely demolished . daniel flynn , the actor who plays superintendent john heaton in the long-running itv1 police drama the bill was born in evesham in 1961 but whose family moved to bromley , kent when an infant . sir henry fowler , chief mechanical engineer of the midland railway and subsequently the london , midland and scottish railway was born in evesham , on 29 july 1870 . edmund hort new , was an artist who was born and grew up in evesham in 1871 . in 1905 , he moved to oxford where he began work on a series of drawings of the university of oxford colleges , a project which occupied him for the rest of his life . harry king ( 1886–1968 ) was a professional english footballer who was born in northampton , and began his career at evesham star f.c . robert lanchbury , is a former england cricketer who played first-class cricket for gloucestershire and worcestershire in the early 1970s . born in evesham in 1950 . alistair mcgowan , impressionist and actor . born in evesham on 24 november 1964 . andy preece , a part-time professional english footballer and manager . he began his career as a junior with worcester city . he subsequently played for evesham united . born in evesham in 1967 . p j proby ( american pop singer ) lives in evesham . edward righton ( 1884 & ndash ; 1964 ) was an england cricketer who played first-class cricket matches for worcestershire between 1911 and 1913 . born in evesham john watson was born in evesham around 1491 and was a bishop of winchester , and a chancellor of st pauls cathedral , london . today 's evesham hotel is a tudor mansion he built as the family home . guy whittingham is a retired professional footballer with over 450 appearances for a number of english clubs including premier league aston villa and sheffield wednesday . born in evesham in 1964 . c.h . waddington biologist john watson , seventeenth-century bluemantle pursuivant at the college of arms alex gregory , double olympic gold winning rower , at london 2012 , and rio 2016 rob austin is a racing driver from evesham , most notable for his spell in the british touring car championship . . twin towns . evesham is twinned with : dreux , france . melsungen , germany . evesham township , new jersey , united states . references . bibliography . burne , a . h . ( 1950 , reprint 2002 ) , the battlefields of england london : penguin english heritage ( 1995 ) . english heritage battlefield report : evesham 1265 . john maddicott ( 1994 ) , simon de montfort , cambridge : cambridge university press f . m . powicke ( 1953 ) , the thirteenth century : 1216-1307 , oxford : clarendon . michael prestwich ( 1988 ) , edward i , london : methuen london prestwich , michael ( 2005 ) , plantagenet england : 1225-1360 , oxford : oxford university press cox , benjamin g . ( 1977 ) , the book of evesham , chesham : barracuda books . external links . evesham town council evesham - a 1904 book about the town , by edmund h . new , from project gutenberg