Lothair I

early life and reign . lothair was born in 795 , to louis the pious and ermengarde of hesbaye . his father was the son of the reigning emperor , charlemagne . little is known of lothair 's early life , which was probably passed at the court of his grandfather charlemagne . in 814 , the elderly emperor died , and left his sole surviving legitimate son louis the pious as successor to his vast empire . the next year , lothair would be sent to govern bavaria for his father , the new emperor . in 817 , louis the pious drew up his ordinatio imperii . in this , louis designated lothair as his principal heir and ordered that lothair would be the overlord of louis ' younger sons pippin of aquitaine ( who was 20 ) and louis the german ( who was 13 ) , as well as his nephew ( lothair 's cousin ) bernard of italy . lothair would also inherit their lands if they were to die childless . lothair , aged 22 , was then crowned joint emperor by his father at aachen . at the same time , aquitaine and bavaria were granted to his brothers pippin and louis , respectively , as subsidiary kingdoms . following the death of bernard , brought on by his plotting against and blinding by louis the pious , lothair also received the kingdom of italy . in 821 , lothair married ermengarde ( d . 851 ) , daughter of hugh the count of tours . in 822 , he assumed the government of italy , and at easter , 5 april 823 , he was crowned emperor again by pope paschal i , this time at rome . in november 824 , lothair promulgated a statute , the constitutio romana , concerning the relations of pope and emperor , which reserved the supreme power to the secular potentate , and he afterwards issued various ordinances for the good government of italy . on lothair 's return to his father 's court , his stepmother judith won his consent to her plan for securing a kingdom for her son charles , a scheme which was carried out in 829 , when the young prince was given alemannia as king . lothair , however , soon changed his attitude and spent the succeeding decade in constant strife over the division of the empire with his father . he was alternately master of the empire , and banished and confined to italy , at one time taking up arms in alliance with his brothers and at another fighting against them , whilst the bounds of his appointed kingdom were in turn extended and reduced . . breaking kingdom . the first rebellion began in 830 . all three brothers fought their father , whom they deposed . in 831 , their father was reinstated and he deprived lothair of his imperial title and gave italy to charles . the second rebellion was instigated by angilbert ii , archbishop of milan , in 833 , and again louis was deposed in 834 . lothair , through the loyalty of the lombards and later reconciliations , retained italy and the imperial position through all remaining divisions of the empire by his father . when louis the pious was dying in 840 , he sent the imperial insignia to lothair , who , disregarding the various partitions , claimed the whole of the empire . he was 45 years old when his father died . negotiations with his brother louis the german and his half-brother charles , both of whom resisted this claim , were followed by an alliance of the younger brothers against lothair . a decisive battle was fought at fontenay-en-puisaye on 25 june 841 , when , in spite of his and his allied nephew pepin ii of aquitaine 's personal gallantry , lothair was defeated and fled to aachen . with fresh troops he began a war of plunder , but the forces of his brothers were too strong , and taking with him such treasure as he could collect , he abandoned his capital to them . he met with the leaders of the stellinga in speyer and promised them his support in return for theirs , but louis and then the native saxon nobility put down the stellinga in the next years . peace negotiations began , and in june 842 the brothers met on an island in the saône . they agreed to an arrangement which developed , after much difficulty and delay , into the treaty of verdun , signed in august 843 . by this , lothair received the imperial title as well as northern italy and a long stretch of territory from the north sea to the mediterranean , essentially along the valleys of the rhine and the rhône ; this territory includes the regions lorraine , alsace , burgundy , and provence . he soon ceded italy to his eldest son , louis , and remained in his new kingdom , engaging in alternate quarrels and reconciliations with his brothers and in futile efforts to defend his lands from the attacks of the northmen ( as vikings were known in frankish writings ) and the saracens ( as those loyal to the various fatimids , umayyads and abbasides are known in frankish writings ) . in 845 the count of arles , fulcrad , led a rebellion in provence . the emperor put it down and the count joined him in an expedition against the saracens in italy in 846 . death and aftermath . in 855 he became seriously ill , and despairing of recovery renounced the throne , divided his lands among his three sons , and on 23 september entered the monastery of prüm , where he died six days later . he was buried at prüm , where his remains were found in 1860 . it was at prüm that lothair was most commemorated . the same year , lothair 's kingdom was divided between his three sons in a deal called the treaty of prüm : the eldest , louis ii , received italy and the title of emperor ; the second , lothair ii , received lotharingia ; the youngest , charles , received provence . family . he married ermengarde of tours in 821 , who died in 851 . louis ii ( 825–875 ) crowned as king of italy in 844 by pope sergius ii . crowned emperor in 850 . married engelberga . hiltrude ( 826–865 ) married berengar of spoleto . bertha ( c . 830–852 ) married to an unknown man , but later abbess of avenay . gisela ( c . 830–856 ) abbess of san salvatore at brescia constance brittain bouchard , those of my blood : creating noble families in medieval francia , ( university of pennsylvania press , 2001 ) , 106 . lothair ii ( 835–869 ) succeeded his father . married teutberga , daughter of boso the elder , count of arles . rotrude ( c . 840 ) married lambert iii of nantes . charles ( 845–863 ) invested with provence , lyon and transjuranian burgundy . one illegitimate child is known . carloman ( ? – d . 853 )