Viktor Frankl

career . psychiatry . between 1928 and 1930 , while still a medical student , he organized youth counselling centers to address the high numbers of teen suicides occurring around the time of end of the year report cards . the program was sponsored by the city of vienna and free of charge to the students . frankl recruited other psychologists for the center , including charlotte bühler , erwin wexberg and rudolf dreikurs . in 1931 not a single viennese student died by suicide . after obtaining his m.d . in 1930 , frankl gained extensive experience at steinhof ( vienna ) where he was responsible for the treatment of suicidal women . in 1937 , he began a private practice , but the anschluss in 1938 limited his ability to treat patients . in 1940 he joined rothschild hospital , the only hospital in vienna still admitting jews , as head of the neurology department . prior to his deportation to the concentration camps , he helped numerous patients avoid the nazi euthanasia program that targeted the mentally disabled . following the war , he became head of the neurology department of the vienna polyclinic hospital and established a private practice in his home . he actively worked with patients until his retirement in 1970 . in 1948 , frankl earned a phd in philosophy from the university of vienna . his dissertation , the unconscious god , examines the relation of psychology and religion . boeree , george . '' personality theories : viktor frankl . '' shippensburg university . accessed 18 april 2014 . in this , frankl advocates for the use of the socratic dialogue ( self-discovery discourse ) to be used with clients , to get in touch with their spiritual unconscious . lantz , james e . '' family logotherapy . '' contemporary family therapy 8 , no . 2 ( 1986 ) : 124-135 . in 1955 , frankl was awarded a professorship of neurology and psychiatry at the university of vienna , and as visiting professor , he lectured at harvard university ( 1961 ) , at southern methodist university , dallas ( 1966 ) , and at duquesne university , pittsburgh ( 1972 ) . throughout his career , frankl argued that the reductionist tendencies of early psychotherapeutic approaches dehumanised the patient , and advocated for a rehumanisation of psychotherapy . the american psychiatric association awarded frankl the 1985 oskar pfister award for his contributions to religion and psychiatry . . man 's search for meaning . soon after his return to vienna , he wrote man 's search for meaning over a nine-day period . the book , originally titled a psychologist experiences the concentration camp , was released in german in 1946 . the first edition cover does not identify author , because frankl felt he could express himself more freely that way . the english translation of man 's search for meaning was published in 1959 and became an international bestseller . frankl saw this success as a symptom of the '' mass neurosis of modern times '' since the title promised to deal with the question of life 's meaningfulness . in 1991 , man 's search for meaning was listed as '' one of the ten most influential books in the u.s '' . by the library of congress . . logotherapy and existential analysis . frankl developed logotherapy and existential analysis , which are based on philosophical and psychological concepts , particularly the desire to find a meaning in life and free will . frankl identified three main ways of realizing meaning in life : by making a difference in the world , by having particular experiences , or by adopting particular attitudes . the primary techniques offered by logotherapy and existential analysis are : paradoxical intention : clients learn to overcome obsessions or anxieties by self-distancing and humorous exaggeration . dereflection : drawing the client 's attention away from their symptoms , as hyper-reflection can lead to inaction . socratic dialogue and attitude modification : asking questions designed to help a client find and pursue self-defined meaning in their life . his acknowledgement of meaning as a central motivational force and factor in mental health is his lasting contribution to the field of psychology . it provided the foundational principles for the emerging field of positive psychology . viktor frankl ’ s meaning-seeking model and positive psychology chapter from book 'meaning in positive and existential psychology ' ( pp.149-184 ) accessed 26 may 2020 . decorations and awards . 1956 : promotion award for public education of the ministry of education , austria 1962 : cardinal innitzer prize , austria 1969 : austrian cross of honour for science and art , 1st class 1976 : prize of the danubia foundation 1980 : : de : ehrenring der stadt wien 1981 : austrian decoration for science and art 1985 : oskar pfister award , usa 1986 : honorary doctorate from the university of vienna , austria 1986 : honorary member of the association kaufering concentration camp 1988 : great silver medal with star for services to the republic of austria 1995 : hans prinzhorn medal 1995 : list of honorary citizens of vienna 1995 : great gold medal with star for services to the republic of austria . personal life . in 1941 he married tilly grosser , who was a station nurse at rothschild hospital . soon after they were married she became pregnant , but they were forced to abort the child . tilly died in the bergen belsen concentration camp . his father gabriel died in the theresienstadt ghetto concentration camp on 13 february 1943 , aged 81 , from starvation and pneumonia . his mother and brother , walter , were both killed in auschwitz . his sister , stella , escaped to australia . in 1947 he married eleonore '' elly '' katharina schwindt . she was a practicing catholic , and the couple respected each other 's religious backgrounds , going to both church and synagogue , and celebrating christmas and hanukkah . they had one daughter , gabriele , who went on to become a child psychologist . frankl died of heart failure in vienna on 2 september 1997 and was buried in the jewish section of the vienna central cemetery . . bibliography . his books in english are : man 's search for meaning . an introduction to logotherapy , beacon press , boston , ma , 2006 . ( originally published in 1946 ) the doctor and the soul , ( originally titled ärztliche seelsorge ) , random house , 1955 . on the theory and therapy of mental disorders . an introduction to logotherapy and existential analysis , translated by james m . dubois . brunner-routledge , london-new york , 2004 . psychotherapy and existentialism . selected papers on logotherapy , simon & schuster , new york , 1967 . the will to meaning . foundations and applications of logotherapy , new american library , new york , 1988 the unheard cry for meaning . psychotherapy and humanism , simon & schuster , new york , 2011 viktor frankl recollections : an autobiography . ; basic books , cambridge , ma 2000 . man 's search for ultimate meaning . ( a revised and extended edition of the unconscious god ; with a foreword by swanee hunt ) . perseus book publishing , new york , 1997 ; . paperback edition : perseus book group ; new york , july 2000 ; . yes to life : in spite of everything beacon press , boston , ma , 2020 . see also . existential therapy list of logotherapy institutes , many named after frankl meaning-making . references . external links . viktor frankl institute vienna viktor frankl institute of america who was viktor frankl ? by henry abramson