Evolutionary algorithm

implementation . the following is an example of a generic single-objective genetic algorithm . step one : generate the initial population of individuals randomly . ( first generation ) step two : repeat the following regenerational steps until termination : evaluate the fitness of each individual in the population ( time limit , sufficient fitness achieved , etc . ) select the fittest individuals for reproduce . ( parents ) breed new individuals through crossover and mutation operations to give birth to offspring . replace the least-fit individuals of the population with new individuals . types . similar techniques differ in genetic representation and other implementation details , and the nature of the particular applied problem . genetic algorithm – this is the most popular type of ea . one seeks the solution of a problem in the form of strings of numbers ( traditionally binary , although the best representations are usually those that reflect something about the problem being solved ) , by applying operators such as recombination and mutation ( sometimes one , sometimes both ) . this type of ea is often used in optimization problems . genetic programming – here the solutions are in the form of computer programs , and their fitness is determined by their ability to solve a computational problem . evolutionary programming – similar to genetic programming , but the structure of the program is fixed and its numerical parameters are allowed to evolve . gene expression programming – like genetic programming , gep also evolves computer programs but it explores a genotype-phenotype system , where computer programs of different sizes are encoded in linear chromosomes of fixed length . evolution strategy – works with vectors of real numbers as representations of solutions , and typically uses self-adaptive mutation rates . differential evolution – based on vector differences and is therefore primarily suited for numerical optimization problems . neuroevolution – similar to genetic programming but the genomes represent artificial neural networks by describing structure and connection weights . the genome encoding can be direct or indirect . learning classifier system – here the solution is a set of classifiers ( rules or conditions ) . a michigan-lcs evolves at the level of individual classifiers whereas a pittsburgh-lcs uses populations of classifier-sets . initially , classifiers were only binary , but now include real , neural net , or s-expression types . fitness is typically determined with either a strength or accuracy based reinforcement learning or supervised learning approach . comparison to biological processes . a possible limitation of many evolutionary algorithms is their lack of a clear genotype-phenotype distinction . in nature , the fertilized egg cell undergoes a complex process known as embryogenesis to become a mature phenotype . this indirect encoding is believed to make the genetic search more robust ( i.e . reduce the probability of fatal mutations ) , and also may improve the evolvability of the organism . g.s . hornby and j.b . pollack . '' creating high-level components with a generative representation for body-brain evolution '' . artificial life , 8 ( 3 ) :223–246 , 2002 . jeff clune , benjamin beckmann , charles ofria , and robert pennock . '' evolving coordinated quadruped gaits with the hyperneat generative encoding '' . proceedings of the ieee congress on evolutionary computing special section on evolutionary robotics , 2009 . trondheim , norway . such indirect ( a.k.a . generative or developmental ) encodings also enable evolution to exploit the regularity in the environment . j . clune , c . ofria , and r . t . pennock , '' how a generative encoding fares as problem-regularity decreases '' , in ppsn ( g . rudolph , t . jansen , s . m . lucas , c . poloni , and n . beume , eds . ) , vol . 5199 of lecture notes in computer science , pp . 358–367 , springer , 2008 . recent work in the field of artificial embryogeny , or artificial developmental systems , seeks to address these concerns . and gene expression programming successfully explores a genotype-phenotype system , where the genotype consists of linear multigenic chromosomes of fixed length and the phenotype consists of multiple expression trees or computer programs of different sizes and shapes . ferreira , c . , 2001 . '' gene expression programming : a new adaptive algorithm for solving problems '' . complex systems , vol . 13 , issue 2 : 87–129 . . related techniques . swarm algorithms include ant colony optimization – based on the ideas of ant foraging by pheromone communication to form paths . primarily suited for combinatorial optimization and graph problems . the runner-root algorithm ( rra ) is inspired by the function of runners and roots of plants in nature f . merrikh-bayat , '' the runner-root algorithm : a metaheuristic for solving unimodal and multimodal optimization problems inspired by runners and roots of plants in nature '' , applied soft computing , vol . 33 , pp . 292–303 , 2015 artificial bee colony algorithm – based on the honey bee foraging behaviour . primarily proposed for numerical optimization and extended to solve combinatorial , constrained and multi-objective optimization problems . bees algorithm is based on the foraging behaviour of honey bees . it has been applied in many applications such as routing and scheduling . cuckoo search is inspired by the brooding parasitism of the cuckoo species . it also uses lévy flights , and thus it suits for global optimization problems . electimize optimization - based on the behavior of electron flow through electric circuit branches with the least electric resistance . particle swarm optimization – based on the ideas of animal flocking behaviour . also primarily suited for numerical optimization problems . other population-based metaheuristic methods . hunting search – a method inspired by the group hunting of some animals such as wolves that organize their position to surround the prey , each of them relative to the position of the others and especially that of their leader . it is a continuous optimization method adapted as a combinatorial optimization method . adaptive dimensional search – unlike nature-inspired metaheuristic techniques , an adaptive dimensional search algorithm does not implement any metaphor as an underlying principle . rather it uses a simple performance-oriented method , based on the update of the search dimensionality ratio ( sdr ) parameter at each iteration . hasançebi , o . , kazemzadeh azad , s . ( 2015 ) , '' adaptive dimensional search : a new metaheuristic algorithm for discrete truss sizing optimization '' , computers and structures , 154 , 1–16 . firefly algorithm is inspired by the behavior of fireflies , attracting each other by flashing light . this is especially useful for multimodal optimization . harmony search – based on the ideas of musicians ' behavior in searching for better harmonies . this algorithm is suitable for combinatorial optimization as well as parameter optimization . gaussian adaptation – based on information theory . used for maximization of manufacturing yield , mean fitness or average information . see for instance entropy in thermodynamics and information theory . memetic algorithm – a hybrid method , inspired by richard dawkins 's notion of a meme , it commonly takes the form of a population-based algorithm coupled with individual learning procedures capable of performing local refinements . emphasizes the exploitation of problem-specific knowledge , and tries to orchestrate local and global search in a synergistic way . examples . in 2020 , google stated their automl-zero can successfully rediscover classic algorithms such as the concept of neural networks . the computer simulations tierra and avida attempt to model macroevolutionary dynamics . gallery . file : two-population ea search ( 2 ) . gif a two-population ea search over a constrained rosenbrock function with bounded global optimum . file : two-population ea search ( 3 ) . gif a two-population ea search over a constrained rosenbrock function . global optimum is not bounded . file : estimation of distribution algorithm animation.gif estimation of distribution algorithm over keane 's function file : two population ea animation.gif a two-population ea search of a bounded optima of simionescu 's function .