Battle of Fuentes de Oñoro

background . in 1810 , masséna had followed the british-portuguese back to lisbon before arriving at the lines of torres vedras , but was determined to avoid storming the extensive double line of interlocking fortifications . after starving outside lisbon through a miserable winter , the french withdrew to the spanish border with the british-portuguese army in pursuit . wellington first secured portugal and then set about re-taking the fortified frontier cities of almeida , badajoz , and ciudad rodrigo . whilst wellington besieged almeida , masséna reformed his battered army and marched to relieve the french garrison in the city . wellington chose to check the relief attempt at the small village of fuentes de oñoro , leaving his line of retreat exposed in order to cover all routes to almeida . he felt this risk was justified because the french would not have more than a few days supplies , whereas he had more than that . the british-portuguese army had 34,000 infantry , 1,850 cavalry , and 48 guns . the french had 42,000 infantry , 4,500 cavalry , and 38 guns . organisation . the french army of portugal . masséna 's army was organised into four corps and a cavalry reserve . louis henri loison 's vi corps had three divisions , led by jean gabriel marchand , julien augustin joseph mermet , and claude françois ferey . in jean andoche junot 's viii corps , only jean baptiste solignac 's division was present . jean-baptiste drouet 's ix corps included the divisions of nicolas françois conroux and michel marie claparède . louis pierre , count montbrun headed the cavalry reserve . jean reynier 's ii corps hovered off to the northeast , threatening almeida with its two divisions under pierre hugues victoire merle and étienne heudelet de bierre . an 800-man cavalry force , comprising squadrons of the élite imperial guard grenadiers à cheval and empress dragoons , was also present at the battle under the command of marshal jean-baptiste bessières . the reinforcements that bessières brought were almost symbolic , even though masséna had requested that he bring the entirety of his army corps into battle . sokolov , p . 455 . . the british-portuguese army . wellington commanded six infantry divisions , charles ashworth 's independent portuguese brigade , and three cavalry brigades . brent spencer commanded the 1st division , thomas picton the 3rd , william houston the 7th , and robert craufurd the light division . stapleton cotton commanded john slade 's and frederick von arentschildt 's brigades of cavalry . edward howorth supervised four british ( ross rha , bull rha , lawson 's ra , thompson 's ra ) and four portuguese ( arentschildt ( 2 ) , da cunha , rozierres ) 6-gun batteries . william erskine ( 5th division ) , alexander campbell ( 6th division ) , and 300 portuguese cavalry under count barbacena were detached , facing the french ii corps . battle . on 3 may , masséna launched a frontal assault against the british-portuguese pickets holding the barricaded village , while bombarding the british-portuguese on the heights east of the village with heavy artillery . the fight in the center of the village lasted all that day , with french soldiers of ferey 's and marchand 's divisions clashing with the british redcoats of the 1st and 3rd divisions . at first , the british-portuguese were driven back under immense pressure , but a charge that included men of the 71st highland light infantry reclaimed the streets and buildings lost earlier in the day . as the sun sank , the french withdrew and the village remained in british hands , with the former suffering 650 casualties against only 250 for the british . both sides spent 4 may recovering from the ferocity of the previous day of fighting and reconsidered their options and battle plans . a french reconnaissance revealed that wellington 's right flank was weakly held by a unit of partisans near the hamlet of poco velho . action began again at dawn on 5 may . wellington had left the 7th division exposed on his right flank . masséna launched a heavy attack on the weak british-portuguese flank , led by montbrun 's dragoons and supported by the infantry divisions of marchand , mermet , and solignac . right away , two 7th division battalions were roughed up by french light cavalry . this compelled wellington to send reinforcements to save the 7th division from annihilation . this was only achieved by the efforts of the light division and the british and king 's german legion chartrand p.77 cavalry . on the threatened british-portuguese right flank , the elite light division , well supported by cavalry and artillery , made a textbook fighting withdrawal . for trifling casualties , they covered the retreat of the 7th division and fell back into a stronger position selected by wellington . during the retreat , whenever french artillery ventured too close , the british cavalry charged or feinted a charge . this allowed the infantry time to retreat out of range . if the french cavalry pressed the outnumbered british cavalry back , the british-portuguese infantry formed squares and their volleys drove off the french . montbrun then requested help from the imperial guard cavalry , which were present but had not yet been committed to battle . time was of the essence and masséna at once sent one of his aide-de-camp , charles oudinot , the son of marshal duke of reggio , with orders to bring forward the guard cavalry . the young oudinot hastily set off and masséna was impatiently checking his watch , pressed to commit this cavalry to what he believed was a decisive action of the battle . much to the general staff 's stupefaction , oudinot was soon seen returning without any cavalry following him . as soon as he saw him , masséna furiously shouted from afar : '' where is the cavalry of the guard ? '' . the sweaty , dust-covered oudinot needed a moment to catch his breath after his exhausting gallop but then explained that he was not able to fetch it . oudinot had encountered the guard cavalry second-in-command , general louis lepic , who sharply refused to commit his men , saying that he only recognised the duke of istria ( bessières ) as commander and that without explicit orders from its commander , the guard horse grenadiers and dragoons would not draw their swords . in a staggering display of treachery , bessières was absent from the field of battle , needlessly inspecting a series of ditches where the french army had passed a few days before . unable to find the commander of the guard in time , masséna was forced to admit that the opportunity was lost . two incidents spoiled this otherwise fine accomplishment for the british-portuguese . one occurred when a british 14th light dragoon squadron pressed home a frontal attack on a french artillery battery and was mauled . in the second case , french cavalry caught some companies of the scots guards in skirmish order and inflicted 100 casualties . masséna , however , still aimed primarily to secure fuentes de oñoro . he sent forward massed columns of infantry from ferey 's division . the village , filled with low stone walls , provided excellent cover for the british line infantry and skirmishers , while the french were severely restricted in the little narrow streets . at first , the french had some success , wiping out two companies of the 79th highland regiment and killing the regiment 's commander , lieutenant-colonel philips cameron . but a counterattack chased ferey 's men out of the town . drouet launched a second attack on the town . this time , it was led by three battalions of converging grenadiers from the ix corps . with their old-fashioned bearskin hats , the grenadiers were mistaken for the imperial guard . again , the british fell back . drouet threw in about half of the battalions from both conroux and claparède 's divisions , seizing almost the entire town . in response , wellington counterattacked with units from the 1st and 3rd divisions , plus the portuguese 6th caçadores . led by the 88th connaught rangers foot . this broke drouet 's attack , and the tide began to turn . low on ammunition , the french had to resort to the bayonet in a futile attempt to drive the british back . one party of 100 grenadiers was trapped in a tight spot and killed . facing murderous volleys , the french halted and retreated back to the dos casas , leaving their casualties behind . gates p 269 by sunset , french morale had plummeted and many companies were down to 40 % strength . the french artillery tried to bombard the new british line into submission , but they were outgunned by wellington 's cannons . finally , with their artillery ammunition dangerously low , the french attacks came to an end . wellington 's men entrenched during the evening . after spending the next three days parading before the british position , masséna gave up the attempt and retreated to ciudad rodrigo . he was furious because bessières had refused to fetch ammunition from the citadel . longford p.300 . consequences . wellington had repelled the army of portugal , inflicting a great number of casualties , and was able to continue his blockade of almeida . the numbers of losses vary according to different sources , from 2,200 paget p.133 to 3,500 oman p.630 french compared to the loss of 1,500 british-portuguese , while another historian stated there were 2,800 french and 1,800 british-portuguese losses . however , he acknowledged how dangerous the situation had been , saying later , '' if boney had been there , we should have been beat . '' glover , p.155 russian historian oleg sokolov noted that wellington had committed a serious strategic error by following the french into northern portugal , and that this decision could have had grievous consequences for the british-portuguese . sokolov adds that , despite the various setbacks that he encountered before and during the battle , masséna was still able to check wellington 's position at fuentes de oñoro . wellington himself did not mark the battle as a victory ; he also considered that he had unnecessarily extended his line , putting the 7th division and light division in danger . two nights after masséna 's withdrawal , antoine brenier 's 1,400-man french garrison of almeida slipped through the british-portuguese lines during the night . about 360 french troops were captured , but the rest escaped when their british pursuers ran into a french ambush . this fiasco was blamed on erskine and others . an infuriated wellington wrote , '' i have never been so much distressed by any military event as by the escape of even a man of them . '' glover , p.156 on reaching ciudad rodrigo , masséna was recalled to paris by a furious napoleon to explain his actions ( although napoleon had issued the order to return prior to the battle ) . he was replaced by marshal auguste marmont . masséna set off for france with a vast sum of gold , looted from portugal and spain . the defeated french marshal complained that wellington '' had not left him one black hair on his body—he had turned grey all over . '' glover , p.149 this battle also included a notable friendly fire incident when a french infantry unit mistook their allies , the , for an english battalion and opened fire on them . the unfortunate hanoverians retreated hastily past the village , leaving over 100 dead . napoleonistyka the confusion came about because the hanoverian legion wore red coats , and in the smoke and heat of battle the finer details of uniforms that might have distinguished them from british line infantry were easily overlooked . wellington commended his troops for their generosity after the battle , writing , '' the village of fuentes de oñoro having been the field of battle the other day , and not having been much improved by this circumstance , they immediately and voluntarily subscribed to raise a sum of money , to be given to the inhabitants as a compensation for the damage which their properties have sustained in the contest . '' . in fiction . bernard cornwell , sharpe 's battle , harpercollins , 1995 , . the book includes most of the events of the battle and includes a description of the british right-wing withdrawal conducted under the light division 's commander robert craufurd . the novel has several fictional characters , but includes actual historic people , such as wellington and massena . notes . references . . external links . brief account of the battle including british order of battle napoleonistyka : infantry tactics and combat during the napoleonic wars ( 2 )