Clonaid

company founding . on may 31 , 1997 , an issue of the popular science magazine new scientist said that the international raëlian movement was starting a company to fund the research and development of human cloning . this alarmed bioethicists who were opposed to such plans . they warned lawmakers against failing to regulate human cloning . at the time , european countries such as britain had banned human cloning , but the united states had merely a moratorium on the use of federal funds for human cloning research . u.s . president bill clinton requested that private companies pass their own moratorium . claude vorilhon , the founder of raëlism , was opposed to this move and denied that the technology used to clone was inherently dangerous . cohen , philip , cult 's bizarre vision rekindles cloning debate , new scientist . 31 may 1997 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . on june 15 , 1998 , brigitte boisselier said the headquarters of clonaid was located in las vegas and that clonaid did not have enough funds for human cloning research . is cloning spot the next step towards cloning human being ? clonaid betting on it , transplant news . 15 june 1998 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . ( highlight ) on december 19 , 1998 , a new scientist article said the cost of clonaid cloning services would be 200,000 , much lower than the 2.3 million that researchers at texas a & m university planned to use for cloning a dog named missy . mainstream scientists said it was unlikely that clonaid would be able to clone anything in the near future . from little seeds… , new scientist . 19 december 1998 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . although the project 's ultimate objective was human cloning , boisselier said that pet cloning would help finance the operations . . premise . on june 9 , 1997 , clonaid stated its intention to offer homosexual and/or infertile couples the chance to have a genetically identical child and take a step toward immortality . according to an internet announcement , the raëlian leader and a group of investors founded a company in the bahamas and called it valiant venture ltd . , whose project mission was named clonaid . valiant venture expected to have one million potential customers . swiss group launches firm to market human cloning , san jose mercury news . 9 june 1997 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . ( highlight ) claude vorilhon held a meeting in a montreal hotel on september 21 , 2000 , where he announced that a wealthy american couple was willing to fund the clonaid project . the first pending clone , according to vorilhon at the time , was the couple 's 10-month-old girl , who had died due to a medical mistake . he said that the couple was willing to pay 1,500,000 to clone their deceased daughter , but the wife was not willing to be the surrogate mother . jamie grifo , a fertility specialist at the new york university school of medicine , and nobel laureate paul berg of stanford university said that vorilhon was providing a false hope that the child was going to be the same one . boisselier revealed the roles of four scientists she says were involved— '' a biochemist , a geneticist , a cell fusion expert and a french medical doctor '' —but without revealing their identity . she did not identify the wealthy american couple . weiss , rick , human cloning 's 'numbers game ' , the washington post . 10 october 2000 . retrieved 21 march 2011 . . responses by scientists . according to cloning specialist and physiologist george seidel of colorado state university , cloning a human being would not be difficult if many people donated their eggs or offered their wombs for implantation of clone embryos . lee silver , a molecular biologist from princeton university , noted the advantages that raëlians had , as a pro-cloning religious group , in finding willing surrogates . a biotechnology company called advanced cell technology had cloned human embryo cells for medical purposes , and its ceo michael d . west said that the directions for cloning a human being were available in published scientific literature . experts knowledgeable of the scientific advances in the field have noted that human reproductive chemistry is better understood than that of most animals . for this reason , they thought that a higher rate of success was possible in human cloning compared with animal cloning . brigitte boisselier anticipated that the work could begin on the preserved cells as soon as october , but there was no evidence that clonaid had medical knowledge necessary for its success . there was no evidence that the clonaid claim was more than a publicity stunt . if fact , all claims of cloning are not legitimate as there has not been any verification or evidence that show that a successful clone has been made as of late 2018 . year before the alleged clone baby claim . in the spring of 2001 , 'raelian ' biochemist insists she will clone human , cnn . 30 june 2001 . retrieved 11 october 2007 . the food and drug administration office of criminal investigations inspected clonaid 's lab in the small city of nitro in west virginia . kolata , gina , and chang kenneth , for clonaid , a trail of unproven claims , the new york times . retrieved 11 october 2007 . it was located inside a rented room within a former high school . staff scientists reviewed the lab 's research documentation and found them inadequate , the work of a graduate student extracting ovum from cow ovaries from a slaughterhouse . the fda said that the equipment in lab was state-of-the-art and had been bought by mark hunt , a former west virginia state legislator , who wanted to clone his 10-month-old son , andrew , who died in 1999 due to congenital heart disease . following investigation of the west virginia lab , mark hunt made an agreement with the fda-oci to not clone his dead son within the united states . on march 2001 , boisselier said that a woman would be pregnant with a cloned fetus in april . she said that cells had reached the blastocyst stage , but she refused to speak of any specific implantation or pregnancy associated with them . according to a cnn article that november , the clonaid laboratory was outside the united states . clonaid claimed that it had developed human cloned embryos before advanced cell technology was able to do the same . pro-cloning group claims to have embryos , cnn . 28 november 2001 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . cnn could not confirm the unpublished work . due to clonaid 's association with raëlians and the lack of evidence for cloning , authorities remained skeptical as to whether clonaid could clone anything at all . clonaid claims it has cloned a baby girl , cnn . 27 december 2002 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . . alleged clone baby eve . on friday , december 27 , 2002 , boisselier , a raëlian bishop and ceo of clonaid , announced at a press conference in hollywood , florida that clonaid had successfully performed the first human reproductive cloning . boisselier said that the mother delivered eve by caesarean section somewhere outside the united states and that both were healthy . dr . boisselier did not present the mother or child , or dna samples that would allow for confirmation of her claim at the press conference . it has subsequently become apparent that she announced the birth before genetic testing to evaluate whether the child in question is actually a clone : dr . boisselier was therefore stating her belief that her procedure had resulted in a clone , not announcing results showing that the child was a clone . young , emma , first cloned baby '' born on 26 december '' , macneil/lehrer productions . 27 december 2002 . retrieved 12 september 2007 . shortly after the announcement , korean prosecutors raided the offices of clonaid 's korean branch , biofusion tech . in the process , the prosecutors removed records from homes and offices while barring two representatives of biofusion tech from leaving the country . an official company statement revealed that three korean women applied to become surrogate mothers . officials of biofusion tech told the prosecutors that 10 korean women wanted to clone themselves and have filled out applications . goodenough , partrick , korea will cooperate with fda probe into human cloning cult , cybercast news service . 6 january 2003 . retrieved 11 october 2007 . the food and drug administration stated its intention to investigate clonaid to see if it had done anything illegal . the fda contended that its regulations forbid human cloning without prior agency permission . however , some members of the united states congress believed that the jurisdiction of the fda on human cloning matters was shaky and decided to push congress to explicitly ban human cloning . fda probes sect 's human cloning , wired news . 26 december 2002 . retrieved 11 october 2007 . . responses by politicians and ethicists . president george w . bush said that human cloning was '' deeply troubling '' to most americans . kansas republican sam brownback said that congress should ban all human cloning , while some democrats were worried that clonaid announcement would lead to the banning of therapeutic cloning . fda biotechnology chief dr . phil noguchi warned that the human cloning , even if it worked , risked transferring sexually transmitted diseases to the newly born child . the white house was also critical of the claims . panos zavos , a former professor of the university of kentucky , at the time had plans to create human clone embryos , but he stated to the effect that clonaid 's claims were without merit and that eve did not exist . vatican slams 'brutal ' clone claim , cnn . 28 december 2002 . retrieved 29 april 2007 . severino antinori , who had worked with zavos on the development of human clone embryos , was critical of klondyke 's announcement , and said of it that , '' an announcement of this type has no scientific corroboration and risks creating confusion . '' robert lanza of advanced cell technologies said that clonaid has no record of accomplishment for cloning anything , but he said that if clonaid actually succeeded , there would be public unrest that may lead to the banning of therapeutic cloning , which has the capacity to cure millions of patients . the vatican said that the claims expressed a mentality that was brutal and lacked ethical consideration . the christian coalition of america urged a human cloning ban and saw the alleged clone baby as an '' aberration '' . university of wisconsin–madison bioethicist alta charo said that even in other ape-like mammals , the risk for miscarriage , birth defects , and life problems remains high . arthur caplan , the director of the center for bioethics at the university of pennsylvania , expressed concerns that many dead and sick children could result from the cloning of human beings . . request for a temporary guardian . clonaid spokeswoman nadine gary claimed that eve went home with her mother on 30 december 2002 , clone maybe baby goes home , wired news . 31 december 2002 . retrieved 11 october 2007 . but florida attorney bernard siegel filed a petition as a private citizen in the broward county circuit court requesting that a temporary guardian be appointed for the purported cloned child . two local attorneys , barry wax and jonathan schwartz were retained to represent clonaid in the matter . as the court case played out over the next month , dr . boisselier testified under oath that there was a cloned child born outside of the u.s . living in israel . however , clonaid did not present demonstrative evidence that the child really existed . where is the clone ? , cnn . 29 january 2003 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . boisselier said that eve would travel to the united states that day for dna tests . she said that a pediatrician saw eve and her mother in good condition , but she refused to mention the location of the surrogate birth , the testing lab , or the biological mother 's home , which she wanted to reveal at a later time . the mother was said to be 31 years old with an infertile husband . siegel subpoenaed thomas kaenzig , a vice president of clonaid , to appear on a civil proceeding set to occur on 22 january 2003 . siegel 's office sent summonses to thomas kaenzig and '' jane doe '' , the purported mother of eve . siegel hoped that the action would coax those involved to provide some answers . he believed the child , if she existed , needed an appointed guardian and would need extensive medical treatment which he doubts clonaid could offer . he wanted the court to make a decision on how to best protect her . however , clonaid prevented scientists from meeting the purported child and mother . clonaid summoned to u.s . court , cnn . 12 january 2003 . retrieved 11 october 2007 . . request for a dna verification test . michael guillen , a former abc news science editor , made an agreement with boisselier for him to choose independent experts to test for a dna match . clonaid refused to identify the independent experts , because if revealed too soon , others could track the baby from the testing place into the mother 's house . clonaid said the parents had the final say on whether they want to test the baby and that a dutch lesbian couple would be the parents of the next cloned baby . wired news : clonaid baby : a clone or a fake ? , wired news . 30 december 2002 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . boisselier said she would hand over the evidence to show that a clone had in fact been born but was concerned that the details of clonaid 's cloning procedure might leak out . the next day , vorilhon claimed that the baby was healthy . he said those who are against cloning for ethical reasons would be dismayed if the clone baby was in good condition . cnn.com – clonaid : baby 'clone ' returns home – 1 january 2003 , cnn . 1 january 2003 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . thomas kaenzig refused to testify in a court hearing , but florida judge john frusciante sr . , father of musician john frusciante , was able to convince kaenzig through a telephone to reveal some of the details . kaenzig testified that clonaid left him ignorant of the cloning project and that it was not even a corporation . the judge summoned kaenzig and brigitte boisselier to a florida court and warned the two that they would be condemned if they did not show there on 29 january 2003 . clonaid exec expected in court wednesday , cnn . 28 january 2003 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . as the court case played out , dr . boisselier testified under oath that she saw videos of a cloned child born in israel . michael guillen was disappointed when he discovered that clonaid withdrew their offer to provide the tests . the company said that before the tests were done , the parents wanted to be sure that their baby would not be sent away , but florida attorney bernard siegel asked that a guardian for eve be appointed and threatened the company with a lawsuit . guillen , who remained skeptical , said it would be unwise to dismiss the clonaid project without proper confirmation . reporter caught in the wreckage of clonaid story , usa today . 7 january 2003 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . . claims of further human clones . the day after boisselier made her announcement , she added that four more human clones were to be born within a few weeks , clonaid claims of human clone scoffed at by most scientist , cnn international . 28 december 2002 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . boisselier claimed that clonaid had a list of couples who were ready to have a cloned child . and that 20 more implantations of human clones were on the way after the first 10 which happened in the previous year . she said that other companies have used cloning procedures with different specifics that lead to their high failure rate . boisselier argued that failed attempts at human cloning would be like those of in vitro fertilisation where early miscarriages occurred more frequently than abortions . nevertheless , she said that if deformities were detected in eve , someone would abort her . raëlian spokesman bart overvliet claimed that another cloned baby was born to a dutch lesbian couple in the netherlands the previous day and that the mother and baby were in good health . a dutch raëlian spokeswoman could not comment on any further details about the mother , but boisselier said that the mother gave birth to her own clone . an official from the dutch health ministry told reuters that the netherlands forbade human cloning but not the birth of baby clones . dutch lesbian 'has clone baby 2 ' , cable news network . 4 january 2003 . retrieved 10 february 2007 . on 5 january 2003 , brigitte boisselier said to the bbc that her medical team produced hundreds of human clone embryos before proceeding to ten implantations , two of which led to births . the head of the uk roslin institute was critical of the assertion , '' clonaid has no track record but claims to have cloned hundreds of embryos – it just does n't ring true . '' dutch clone claimed – but no proof , new scientist . 6 january 2002 . retrieved 11 october 2007 . a raëlian spokeswoman from japan claimed that a baby boy , cloned from a comatose two-year-old of a japanese couple , was born the previous day . boisselier said that a surrogate participated since the biological mother was 41 and more likely to have a miscarriage . scientists knew that many cloned animals suffer arthritis and ailments with the lungs and liver , and they were concerned that too many unanswered questions surround the prospect of cloning of humans safely . clonaid set up press conferences in which they described their method of cloning , but they did not give any details . however , they did say that the third cloning was different in that it did not involve a mother 's egg , but the surrogate 's egg with the injection of the boy 's dna . clonaid says it 's cloned first boy , cnn . 23 january 2003 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . according to boisselier , mark and tracy hunt , who were seeking to clone their dead son , invested 500,000 in the former clonaid lab in west virginia and its equipment , which the food and drug administration shut down . the clonaid ceo proposed a cloning lab on brazilian island for creating the next generation of clone babies . clonaid claimed that five baby clones were born between 26 december 2002 and 4 february 2003 which had developed normally . 5 babies update , clonaid.com . 15 october 2003 . retrieved 3 february 2007 . in late july 2002 , clonaid 's branch in south korea , biofusion tech , said a woman became pregnant with a human clone . however , in the week of 27 september 2002 , south korea 's ministry of health and welfare announced that it would ban human cloning and sentence violators to a 10-year prison term . branch spokesman kwak gi-hwa said that the surrogate mother , unmarried at 26 years old , moved out of south korea into another country . the spokesman said he had no knowledge of which country that was and that only a few people in clonaid knew . he described himself as simply a volunteer for the branch which had closed under government pressure following their claim . he accused the government of korea of considering christian opinions of human cloning over those of scientists who criticized the proposed human cloning ban . he was later summoned to witness in front of the korean parliament . woman claiming to carry cloned baby flees s . korea ahead of ban , cybercast news service . 27 september 2002 . retrieved 11 october 2007 . in february 2004 , clonaid claimed that a sixth clone baby was born in australia . sixth cloned baby born down-under ! , clonaid.com . 9 february 2004 . retrieved 3 february 2007 . additionally , it claimed to have produced human embryos in south korea . the small number of companies that have access to cloning technology has resulted skepticism by cloning experts in korea , who accused clonaid of defaming the now debunked stem cell work of doctor hwang woo-suk . clonaid claims embryos needed for human cloning produced in korea , chosun ilbo . 24 february 2004 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . by march 2004 , clonaid claimed that eight extra baby clones had been brought to term for a total of thirteen baby clones . alive and well , clonaid.com . 28 march 2004 . retrieved 3 february 2007 . in september 2018 , rapper kid buu claimed he was a human clone produced by clonaid . however , this is commonly perceived as a publicity stunt . . embryonic cell fusion machine . besides offering cloning services , clonaid has developed one product , an '' embryonic cell fusion device '' called the rmx 2010 . cnn money has listed the rmx 2010 as the fourth '' dumbest moment in business 2003 '' , stating '' clonaid sells the rmx 2010 , a 9,220 contraption that . well , nobody 's quite sure what it does . to help clarify the matter , clonaid lends one to a british science museum—under strict orders not to open it to find out what 's inside . '' the 101 dumbest moments in business 2003 edition , cnn money . 1 april 2003 . retrieved 10 march 2007 . . additional skepticism . scientists interviewed about the announcement expressed skepticism regarding both the authenticity and the ethics of clonaid 's procedures . these included lord robert winston , suroor , hasan , scepticism , concern over clonaid 's claims , the hindu . retrieved 17 february 2008 . head of the ivf research team at london 's hammersmith hospital , and tanja dominko cloning news received with widespread skepticism , the times of india . retrieved 10 february 2007 . of the oregon regional primate center 's monkey cloning project . scientists with experience in animal cloning have encountered low rates of success per implantation , where cloned fetuses are often malformed and dead before birth . regardless , people continue to be surprised that clonaid appears to have overcome those problems ; either clonaid has been extremely lucky in discovering a superior method of cloning , or the company is making false claims . clonaid charges up to 200,000 for its '' cloning '' services . clonaid has not shown verifiable evidence of any human cloning , despite claims that they would do this within days of their initial announcement . they claim that the parents of the first cloned child had second thoughts about submitting their child to scientific tests after attorney bernard siegel filed suit . according to sealed court documents received by the boston globe which were reported on 27 april 2003 , clonaid had two employees but no address or board of directors . little behind clonaid , files reveal , milwaukee journal sentinel . 27 april 2003 . retrieved 9 september 2007 . cbs news reported that clonaid was not a company . boisselier revealed that in a strict sense , clonaid was just the product name , even though clonaid 's website the first human cloning company , clonaid.com . retrieved 10 september 2007 . had touted it as the company name . . in popular culture . saturday night live parodied the claim of clonaid creating eve , depicting the baby as deformed . . references . . further reading . raël , intelligent design . nova distribution , 2005 . raël , yes to human cloning : immortality thanks to science . tagman press , 2001 . ; . gregory stock , redesigning humans : choosing our genes , changing our future . houghton mifflin books , 2002 . tandy , charles , doctor tandy 's first guide to life extension and transhumanity universal-publishers.com , 2001 . external links . rael.org the philosophy behind the clonaid project . bbc news story : clonaid ordered to reveal 'clone' reflections on the cloning case