1938 in literature

events . january the john dos passos trilogy u.s.a . is published , containing his novels the 42nd parallel ( 1930 ) , 1919 ( 1932 ) , and the big money ( 1936 ) . samuel beckett is stabbed in the chest in paris and nearly killed . february 21 – the gay american writer and composer paul bowles marries the lesbian american writer jane auer at a reformed church in manhattan . march 7 – samuel beckett 's first completed novel murphy is published in london . july 11 – the first live drama adaptation in orson welles ' the mercury theatre on the air series on cbs radio in the united states is broadcast : bram stoker 's dracula . august – muslims protest in london against passages they see as disrespectful to their religion in h . g . wells ' a short history of the world ( 1922 ) . september 13 – the first production in britain of a play by bertolt brecht , mrs carrar 's rifles , opens at the unity theatre , london . october 30 – orson welles ' the war of the worlds ( radio drama ) ( with script by howard koch ) is broadcast in the mercury theatre on the air series . december 24 – jorge luis borges is injured in an accident and develops blood poisoning . while recovering the following year he will write the first short story in his later characteristic style . uncertain dates the first complete performance of both parts of goethe 's faust ( 1808/32 ) is given at the goetheanum in dornach , switzerland . the avant-garde musician and theoretician pierre schaeffer begins his writing career as an essayist for a number of french musical journals . new books . fiction . margery allingham – the fashion in shrouds eric ambler cause for alarm epitaph for a spy vladimir bartol – alamut elizabeth bowen – the death of the heart edgar rice burroughs – tarzan and the forbidden city taylor caldwell – dynasty of death john dickson carr the four false weapons , being the return of bencolin to wake the dead the crooked hinge the judas window ( as carter dickson ) death in five boxes ( as carter dickson ) peter cheyney – can ladies kill ? agatha christie hercule poirot 's christmas appointment with death albert cohen – nailcruncher rené daumal – a night of serious drinking ( la grande beuverie ) john dos passos – the big money ( completing the u.s.a . trilogy ) daphne du maurier – rebecca lawrence durrell – the black book mircea eliade – marriage in heaven ( nuntă în cer ) william faulkner – the unvanquished rachel field – all this and heaven too c . s . forester a ship of the line flying colours julien gracq – the castle of argol ( au château d'argol ) robert graves – count belisarius graham greene – brighton rock xavier herbert – capricornia robin hyde – the godwits fly ( semi-autobiographical ) emilio lussu – un anno sull'altopiano c . s . lewis – out of the silent planet norman lindsay – age of consent henry miller – tropic of capricorn vladimir nabokov the gift ( дар ) invitation to a beheading ( приглашение на казнь ; serialization concludes ) kate o'brien – pray for the wanderer john o'hara – hope of heaven ellery queen the devil to pay the four of hearts graciliano ramos – vidas secas ( barren lives ) ayn rand – anthem marjorie kinnan rawlings – the yearling clayton rawson – death from a top hat joseph roth – the emperor 's tomb jean-paul sartre – nausea ( la nausée ) georges simenon – the man who watched the trains go by ( l'homme qui regardait passer les trains ) esphyr slobodkina – caps for sale : a tale of a peddler , some monkeys and their monkey business eleanor smith – the spanish house howard spring – my son , my son john steinbeck – the long valley rex stout – too many cooks kressmann taylor – address unknown ( short story ) phoebe atwood taylor the annulet of gilt banbury bog the cut direct ( as by alice tilton ) murder at the new york world 's fair ( as by freeman dana ) b . traven – the bridge in the jungle s . s . van dine – the gracie allen murder case – na krásné samotě winifred watson – miss pettigrew lives for a day evelyn waugh – scoop t . h . white – the sword in the stone gale wilhelm – torchlight to valhalla francis brett young – dr . bradley remembers . children and young people . claire huchet bishop – the five chinese brothers enid blyton – the secret island eleanor graham – the children who lived in a barn joan kahn – '' ladies and gentlemen , '' said the ringmaster eric knight – lassie come home marjorie kinnan rawlings – the yearling kate seredy – the white stag noel streatfeild – the circus is coming t . h . white – the sword in the stone john f . c . westerman – john wentley takes charge ( first in the john wentley series of three books ) ursula moray williams – adventures of the little wooden horse . drama . jean anouilh – thieves ' carnival ( le bal des voleurs ) robert ardrey – casey jones paul claudel – l'histoire de tobie et de sara ( the history of tobit and sara , first version ) molly keane – spring meeting patrick hamilton – gaslight esther mccracken – quiet wedding kaj munk – han sidder ved smeltediglen ( he sits by the melting pot ) j . b . priestley – when we are married robert e . sherwood – abe lincoln in illinois dodie smith – dear octopus stephen spender – trial of a judge arnold sundgaard spirochete : a history with marc connelly – everywhere i roam rodolfo usigli – el gesticulador theodore ward – big white fog thornton wilder – our town emlyn williams – the corn is green tennessee williams – not about nightingales ( written ; first performed 1998 ) w . b . yeats – purgatory . poetry . alfred kreymborg – the planets : a modern allegory ( radio play in verse ) mary pettibone poole – a glass eye at a keyhole . non-fiction . crane brinton – the anatomy of revolution hall caine ( died 1931 ) – life of christ cyril connolly – enemies of promise geoffrey faber – the romance of a bookshop 1904–1938 robert newton flew – jesus and his church . a study of the idea of the ecclesia in the new testament edgar innes fripp ( died 1931 ) – shakespeare , man and artist elie halévy – the era of tyrannies agnes hunt – this is my life ( autobiography of pioneer orthopedic nurse ) a . e . sankey : '' hunt , dame agnes gwendoline ( 1866–1948 ) '' , oxford dictionary of national biography . retrieved 31 december 2017 . c . l . r . james – the black jacobins : toussaint l'ouverture and the san domingo revolution claude scudamore jarvis – desert and delta . an account of modern egypt jomo kenyatta – facing mount kenya anne morrow lindbergh – listen ! the wind robert mcalmon – being geniuses together , 1920–1930 thomas mann – the coming victory of democracy george orwell – homage to catalonia derek a . traversi – an approach to shakespeare virginia woolf – three guineas . births . january 2 – hans herbjørnsrud , norwegian short story writer january 5 – ngũgĩ wa thiong ' o ( also known as james ngigi ) , kenyan novelist january 6 – mario rodríguez cobos ( '' silo '' ) , argentine author and spiritualist ( died 2010 ) january 20 – liz calder , english publisher and editor february 7 – andrea newman , english novelist and screenwriter ( died 2019 ) february 9 – jovette marchessault , french canadian writer and artist ( died 2012 ) february 12 judy blume , american children 's author tor obrestad , norwegian novelist , poet and documentary writer ( died 2020 ) february 22 – ishmael reed , american poet , essayist and novelist march 1 – michael kurland , american author of sci-fi and detective fiction march 14 – eleanor bron , english humorous writer and actress march 24 – ian hamilton , english critic , biographer and poet ( died 2001 ) march 27 – hansjörg schneider , swiss novelist ( died 2016 ) april 20 – chiung yao , taiwanese romance novelist april 29 – larry niven , american sci-fi author may 13 – norma klein , american author ( died 1989 ) may 15 – nancy garden , american author ( died 2014 ) may 16 – marco aurelio denegri , peruvian literature critic , television host and sexologist ( died 2018 ) may 25 raymond carver , american short-story writer and poet ( died 1988 ) margaret forster , english novelist and biographer ( died 2016 ) may 26 – lyudmila petrushevskaya , russian novelist and playwright june 5 – m . k . wren ( martha kay renfroe ) , american novelist ( died 2016 ) june 16 – joyce carol oates , american novelist june 24 – lawrence block , american crime fiction writer june 26 – maria velho da costa , portuguese writer ( died 2020 ) july 15 – josephine cox , english novelist ( died 2020 ) july 19 nicholas bethell , english historian and politician ( died 2007 ) dom moraes , indian poet and columnist ( died 2004 ) tom raworth , english poet ( died 2017 ) mary-kay wilmers , american-born editor july 28 – robert hughes , australian critic and historian ( died 2012 ) august 15 – janusz zajdel , polish writer ( died 1985 ) august 21 – mudrooroo ( colin johnson ) , australian novelist ( died 2019 ) september 3 – caryl churchill , english dramatist september 12 – richard booth , welsh bookseller ( died 2019 ) september 15 – charles l . mee , american dramatist september 18 – poornachandra tejaswi , kannada writer ( died 2007 ) september 19 – keorapetse kgositsile , south african poet laureate ( died 2018 ) october 12 – anne perry ( juliet marion hulme ) , english historical novelist october 13 – hugo young , english journalist ( died 2003 ) october 17 – les murray , australian poet ( died 2019 ) october 19 – allan massie , singapore-born scottish writer november 3 – terrence mcnally , american playwright ( died 2020 ) november 4 – daniel snowman , english non-fiction writer and historian december 9 – willi glasauer , german artist and illustrator december 14 – leonardo boff ( genézio darci boff ) , brazilian philosopher and theologian december 21 – frank moorhouse , australian journalist , author and screenwriter december 31 – basudeb dasgupta , bengali novelist ( died 2005 ) unknown date – gabriel ruhumbika , tanzanian novelist . deaths . january 4 – paola drigo , italian writer ( born 1876 ) january 16 – sarat chandra chattopadhyay ( sarat chandra chattergee ) , bengali novelist ( born 1876 ) january 19 – branislav nušić , serbian novelist and dramatist ( born 1864 ) january 29 – armando palacio valdés , spanish novelist and critic ( born 1853 ) february 13 – momčilo nastasijević , serbian poet , novelist and dramatist ( born 1894 ) march 1 – gabriele d'annunzio , italian poet and novelist ( born 1863 ) march 31 – willem kloos , dutch poet and critic ( born 1859 ) april 19 – sir henry newbolt , english poet ( born 1862 ) april 21 – lady ottoline morrell , english literary hostess ( born 1873 ) may 26 – james forbes , canadian american dramatist and screenwriter ( born 1871 ) june 9 – ovid densusianu , romanian poet , philologist , and literary historian ( born 1873 ) june 26 james weldon johnson , american politician , poet and activist ( born 1871 ) e . v . lucas , english essayist and biographer , 70 july 21 – owen wister , american western fiction writer and historian ( born 1860 ) august 7 – konstantin stanislavski , russian theatre director ( born 1863 ) august 26 – millosh gjergj nikolla , albanian poet and writer ( tuberculosis , born 1911 ) september 15 – thomas wolfe , american novelist ( tuberculosis , born 1900 ) october 3 – olivia shakespear , british novelist , playwright and patron of the arts ( born 1863 ) october 27 – lascelles abercrombie , english poet and literary critic ( born 1881 ) december 23 – robert herrick , american realist novelist ( born 1868 ) december 25 – karel čapek , czech science fiction author and dramatist ( pneumonia , born 1890 ) december 27 – osip mandelstam , russian poet and essayist ( in detention , born 1891 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : noel streatfeild , the circus is coming hawthornden prize – david jones , in parenthesis james tait black memorial prize for fiction : c . s . forester , a ship of the line and flying colours james tait black memorial prize for biography : sir edmund chambers , samuel taylor coleridge newbery medal for children 's literature : kate seredy , the white stag newdigate prize : michael thwaites nobel prize in literature : pearl s . buck pulitzer prize for drama : thornton wilder , our town pulitzer prize for poetry : marya zaturenska , cold morning sky pulitzer prize for the novel : john phillips marquand , the late george apley . references .