Hexokinase

variation . genes that encode hexokinase have been discovered in every domain of life , and exist among a variety of species that range from bacteria , yeast , and plants to humans and other vertebrates . they are categorized as actin fold proteins , sharing a common atp binding site core that is surrounded by more variable sequences which determine substrate affinities and other properties . several hexokinase isoforms or isozymes that provide different functions can occur in a single species . reaction . the intracellular reactions mediated by hexokinases can be typified as : : hexose-ch 2 oh + mgatp → hexose-ch 2 o-po + mgadp + h + where hexose-ch 2 oh represents any of several hexoses ( like glucose ) that contain an accessible -ch 2 oh moiety . consequences of hexose phosphorylation . phosphorylation of a hexose such as glucose often limits it to a number of intracellular metabolic processes , such as glycolysis or glycogen synthesis . this is because phosphorylated hexoses are charged , and thus more difficult to transport out of a cell . in patients with essential fructosuria , metabolism of fructose by hexokinase to fructose-6-phosphate is the primary method of metabolizing dietary fructose ; this pathway is not significant in normal individuals . size of different isoforms . most bacterial hexokinases are approximately 50 kd in size . multicellular organisms including plants and animals often have more than one hexokinase isoform . most are about 100 kd in size and consist of two halves ( n and c terminal ) , which share much sequence homology . this suggests an evolutionary origin by duplication and fusion of a 50kd ancestral hexokinase similar to those of bacteria . types of mammalian hexokinase . there are four important mammalian hexokinase isozymes that vary in subcellular locations and kinetics with respect to different substrates and conditions , and physiological function . they are designated hexokinases i , ii , iii , and iv or hexokinases a , b , c , and d . hexokinases i , ii , and iii . hexokinases i , ii , and iii are referred to as '' low-k m '' isozymes because of a high affinity for glucose ( below 1 mm ) . hexokinases i and ii follow michaelis-menten kinetics at physiologic concentrations of substrates . all three are strongly inhibited by their product , glucose-6-phosphate . molecular weights are around 100 kd . each consists of two similar 50kd halves , but only in hexokinase ii do both halves have functional active sites . hexokinase i/a is found in all mammalian tissues , and is considered a '' housekeeping enzyme , '' unaffected by most physiological , hormonal , and metabolic changes . hexokinase ii/b constitutes the principal regulated isoform in many cell types and is increased in many cancers . it is the hexokinase found in muscle and heart . hexokinase ii is also located at the mitochondria outer membrane so it can have direct access to atp . the relative specific activity of hexokinase ii increases with ph at least in a ph range from 6.9 to 8.5 . hexokinase iii/c is substrate-inhibited by glucose at physiologic concentrations . little is known about the regulatory characteristics of this isoform . hexokinase iv ( '' glucokinase '' ) . mammalian hexokinase iv , also referred to as glucokinase , differs from other hexokinases in kinetics and functions . the location of the phosphorylation on a subcellular level occurs when glucokinase translocates between the cytoplasm and nucleus of liver cells . glucokinase can only phosphorylate glucose if the concentration of this substrate is high enough ; its km for glucose is 100 times higher than that of hexokinases i , ii , and iii . hexokinase iv is monomeric , about 50kd , displays positive cooperativity with glucose , and is not allosterically inhibited by its product , glucose-6-phosphate . hexokinase iv is present in the liver , pancreas , hypothalamus , small intestine , and perhaps certain other neuroendocrine cells , and plays an important regulatory role in carbohydrate metabolism . in the beta cells of the pancreatic islets , it serves as a glucose sensor to control insulin release , and similarly controls glucagon release in the alpha cells . in hepatocytes of the liver , glucokinase responds to changes of ambient glucose levels by increasing or reducing glycogen synthesis . in glycolysis . glucose is unique in that it can be used to produce atp by all cells in both the presence and absence of molecular oxygen ( o 2 ) . the first step in glycolysis is the phosphorylation of glucose by hexokinase . by catalyzing the phosphorylation of glucose to yield glucose 6-phosphate , hexokinases maintain the downhill concentration gradient that favors the facilitated transport of glucose into cells . this reaction also initiates all physiologically relevant pathways of glucose utilization , including glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway . the addition of a charged phosphate group at the 6-position of hexoses also ensures 'trapping ' of glucose and 2-deoxyhexose glucose analogs ( e.g . 2-deoxyglucose , and 2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose ) within cells , as charged hexose phosphates can not easily cross the cell membrane . association with mitochondria . hexokinases i and ii can associate physically to the outer surface of the external membrane of mitochondria through specific binding to a porin , or voltage dependent anion channel . this association confers hexokinase direct access to atp generated by mitochondria , which is one of the two substrates of hexokinase . mitochondrial hexokinase is highly elevated in rapidly growing malignant tumor cells , with levels up to 200 times higher than normal tissues . mitochondrially bound hexokinase has been demonstrated to be the driving force for the extremely high glycolytic rates that take place aerobically in tumor cells ( the so-called warburg effect described by otto heinrich warburg in 1930 ) . hydropathy plot . the potential transmembrane portions of a protein can be detected by hydropathy analysis . a hydropathy analysis uses an algorithm that quantifies the hydrophobic character at each position along the polypeptide chain . one of the accepted hydropathy scales is that of kyte and doolittle which relies on the generation of hydropathy plots . in these plots , the negative numbers represent hydrophilic regions and the positive numbers represent hydrophobic regions on the y-axis . a potential transmembrane domain is about 20 amino acids long on the x-axis . a hydropathy analysis of hexokinase in yeast has been created by these standards . it appears as if hexokinase possesses a single potential transmembrane domain located around amino acid 400 . therefore , hexokinase is most likely not an integral membrane protein in yeast . bowen , r . a . molecular toolkit : protein hydrophobicity plots . colorado state university , 1998 . web . 15 november 2010 . . deficiency . hexokinase deficiency is a genetic autosomal recessive disease that causes chronic haemolytic anaemia . chronic haemolytic anaemia is caused by a mutation in the hk gene , which codes for the hk enzyme . the mutation causes a reduction of the hk activity , which causes hexokinase deficiency .