Yellow brick road

road 's history . the following is an excerpt from the third chapter of the wonderful wizard of oz , in which dorothy sets off to see the wizard : there were several roads near by , but it did not take dorothy long to find the one paved with yellow bricks . within a short time she was walking briskly toward the emerald city ; her silver shoes tinkling merrily on the hard , yellow road-bed . the road is first introduced in the third chapter of the wonderful wizard of oz . the road begins in the heart of the eastern quadrant called munchkin country in the land of oz . it functions as a guideline that leads all who follow it , to the road 's ultimate destination—the imperial capital of oz called emerald city that is located in the exact center of the entire continent . in the book , the novel 's main protagonist , dorothy , is forced to search for the road before she can begin her quest to seek the wizard . this is because the cyclone from kansas did not release her farmhouse closely near it as it did in the various film adaptations . after the council with the native munchkins and their dear friend the good witch of the north , dorothy begins looking for it and sees many pathways and roads nearby , ( all of which lead in various directions ) . thankfully it does n't take her too long to spot the one paved with bright yellow bricks . later in the book , dorothy and her companions , the scarecrow , tin woodman and cowardly lion discover that the road has fallen into disrepair in some parts of the land , having several broken chasms ending at dangerous cliffs with deadly drops . in the end of the book we learn the road 's history ; unlike in walt disney prequel film oz the great and powerful ( 2013 ) , the emerald city and yellow brick road did not exist prior to oz 's arrival . when oscar diggs arrived in oz via hot air-balloon that had been swept away in a storm , the people of the land were convinced he was a great '' wizard '' who had finally come to fulfill oz 's long-awaited prophecy . since the recent fall of oz 's mortal king pastoria , and the mysterious disappearance of his baby daughter princess ozma , oscar immediately proclaimed himself as oz 's new dominant ruler and had his people build the road as well as the city in his honor . in the second oz book , the marvelous land of oz , tip and his companion jack pumpkinhead , likewise follow a yellow brick road to reach emerald city while traveling from oz 's northern quadrant , the gillikin country . l . frank baum , michael patrick hearn , the annotated wizard of oz , p 107 , in the book the patchwork girl of oz , it is revealed that there are two yellow brick roads from munchkin country to the emerald city : according to the shaggy man , dorothy took the longer and more dangerous one in the wonderful wizard of oz . in the classic 1939 film , a red brick road can be seen starting at the same point as the yellow brick road and is entwined with it , despite seemingly going in a different direction . this version of the road does not exist in baum 's books . also , at the cornfield where dorothy meets and befriends the scarecrow , there is a fork in the yellow brick road leading in different directions . luckily they choose the correct one of the three branches that leads to emerald city . in disney 's 1985 live action semi-sequel to the 1939 movie return to oz , dorothy returns to oz six months after being sent back home to kansas from her first visit . upon her second arrival she finds the yellow brick road in ruins by the hands of the evil nome king who also conquered the emerald city . in the end , it is presumed that after she defeats him and saves the city and its citizens , the road is restored as well . real yellow brick roads . the actual road is believed to be one in peekskill , new york , where l . frank baum attended peekskill military academy . according to a local legend , the yellow brick road was derived from a road paved with yellow bricks near holland , michigan , where baum spent summers . ithaca , new york , also makes a claim for being frank baum 's inspiration . he opened a road tour of his musical , the maid of arran , in ithaca , and he met his future wife maud gage baum while she was attending cornell university . at the time , yellow bricks paved local roads . yellow brick roads can also be found in aberdeen , south dakota ; albany , new york ; rossville , maryland ; montclair , new jersey ( parkhurst place and afterglow way ) ; bronxville , new york ( on prescott and valley roads ) ; chicago , illinois ; liberal , kansas ; sedan , kansas and chittenango , new york , as well as a school in abington , pennsylvania , and abroad in sofia , bulgaria . in addition , portions of u.s . route 54 within the state of kansas have been designated '' the yellow brick road '' . two direct , and the only published , references to the origin of the yellow brick road came from baum 's own descendants : his son frank joslyn baum in to please a child and the other by roger s . baum , the great-grandson of l . frank baum who stated , '' most people do n't realize that the wizard of oz was written in chicago , and the yellow brick road was named after winding cobblestone roads in holland , michigan , where great-grandfather spent vacations with his family . '' dallas , texas makes a claim that baum once stayed at a downtown hotel during his newspaper career ( located near what is now the triple underpass ) at a time when the streets were paved with wooden blocks of bois d'arc also known as osage orange . supposedly , after a rainstorm the sun came out and he saw a bright yellow brick road from the window of his room . the vision oz fund was established in november 2009 to raise funds that will be used to help increase the awareness , enhancement , and further development of oz-related attractions and assets in wamego , kansas . the first fundraiser is underway and includes selling personalized engraved yellow bricks , which will become part of the permanent walkway ( aka '' the yellow brick road '' ) in downtown wamego . . in popular culture . inspired the title , artwork , and title song of elton john 's 1973 album goodbye yellow brick road , as well as john 's farewell yellow brick road tour . inspired the title of the song by american musician , artist and poet don van vliet , also known as captain beefheart , on his 1967 album safe as milk . inspired the title of the 2010 horror film yellowbrickroad . in the song of engelbert humperdinck named follow my heartbeat there is a reference : '' to the end of the rainbow/on a yellow bricked road/and see what kind of magic we make '' . a song by arctic monkeys is called '' old yellow bricks '' . in the chorus of the song by debby boone , are you on the road to lovin ' me again there 's a reference : '' did the trail of yellow brick come to an end ? '' commenting on the song '' the sweet escape , '' singer gwen stefani stated that it would put her '' on the yellow brick road to the no doubt record i might do . '' oprah winfrey has referred to her success as a '' yellow brick road of blessings '' during both the announcement of the decision to end her talk show and the farewell episode . in the video game wizard101 , there is a sidequest named '' yellow brick road '' in which players check up on dorothy gale . it is followed by the quest '' not in kansas anymore '' . angus and julia stone also referred to the yellow brick road in a song of the same name . the american band breaking benjamin also referred to the yellow brick road in their song '' home '' . in '' gypsy '' , a song from lady gaga 's artpop , she sings '' so i just packed my baggage and / said goodbye to family and friends / and took a road to nowhere on my own / like dorothy on the yellow brick / hope my ruby shoes get us there quick . '' the band muse use a sample of '' follow the yellow brick road '' in the outro of their 2015 song reapers . inspired the title of the famous ice cream shop yellow brick road in brick , nj . eminem used '' yellow brick road '' as title to the track number 4 from his album encore , which portrays his childhood . the road also appears in lego dimensions , where the main characters : batman , gandalf , and wyldstyle arrive at and they encounter dorothy and her group along with the wicked witch of the west . later , fragments of the road were summon to help the trio reach foundation prime 's palace . in the song : '' down where i am '' by demons & wizards , the yellow brick road is mentioned in the refrain : '' farewell to you yellow brick road '' . there are several references to the wizard of oz and the yellow brick road in the stargate franchise , particularly in stargate sg-1 and stargate atlantis the expression 'where is the yellow brick road when you need it ' or ' i see the yellow brick road ' has transiently passed into and out of the vernacular , the 'yellow brick road ' being analogous to 'light at the end of the tunnel ' , the phrase can be used optimistically , sarcastically , or cynically . see also . political interpretations of the wonderful wizard of oz . notes . further reading . dighe , ranjit s . ed . the historian 's wizard of oz : reading l . frank baum 's classic as a political and monetary allegory ( 2002 ) hearn , michael patrick ( ed ) . ( 2000 , 1973 ) the annotated wizard of oz . w . w . norton & co . ritter , gretchen . '' silver slippers and a golden cap : l . frank baum 's the wonderful wizard of oz and historical memory in american politics . '' journal of american studies ( august 1997 ) vol . 31 , no . 2 , 171–203 . online at jstor rockoff , hugh . '' the 'wizard of oz ' as a monetary allegory , '' journal of political economy 98 ( 1990 ) : 739-60 online at jstor