Lee Lawrie

early work . left lee lawrie was born in rixdorf , germany , in 1877 and immigrated to the united states in 1882 as a young child with his family ; they settled in chicago . it was there , at the age of 14 , that he began working for the sculptor richard henry park . at the age of 15 , in 1892 lawrie worked as an assistant to many of the sculptors in chicago , for their part in constructing the '' white city '' for the world 's columbian exposition . following the completion of that work , lawrie went east , where he became an assistant to william ordway partridge . during the next decade , he worked with other established sculptors : augustus saint-gaudens , philip martiny , alexander phimister proctor , john william kitson and others . his work at the louisiana purchase exposition , under karl bitter , the foremost architectural sculptor of the time , allowed lawrie to develop both his skills and his reputation as an architectural sculptor . lawrie received a bachelor 's degree in fine arts from yale university in 1910 . he was an instructor in yale 's school of fine arts from 1908 to 1919 and taught in the architecture program at harvard university from 1910 to 1912 . civic art : a centennial history of the u.s . commission of fine arts . collaborations with cram and goodhue . lawrie 's collaborations with ralph adams cram and bertram goodhue brought him to the forefront of architectural sculptors in the united states . after the breakup of the cram , goodhue firm in 1914 , lawrie continued to work with goodhue until the architect died in 1924 . he next worked with goodhue 's successors . lawrie sculpted numerous bas reliefs for el fureidis , an estate in montecito , california designed by goodhue . the bas reliefs depict the arthurian legends and remain intact at the estate today . the nebraska state capitol and the los angeles public library both feature extensive sculptural programs integrated with the surface , massing , spatial grammar , and social function of the building . lawrie 's collaborations with goodhue are arguably the most highly developed example of architectural sculpture in american architectural history . lawrie served as a consultant to the 1933-34 century of progress international exposition in chicago . he was a member of the national institute of arts and letters , the american academy of arts and letters , the national academy of design , and the architectural league of new york . among his many awards was the aia gold medal of the american institute of architects in 1921 and 1927 , a medal of honor from the architectural league of new york in 1931 , and an honorary degree from yale university . he served on the u.s . commission of fine arts in washington , dc from 1933 to 1937 and again from 1945 to 1950 ; it oversees federal public works and artwork in the city . thomas e . luebke , ed . , civic art : a centennial history of the u.s . commission of fine arts ( washington , d.c . : u.s . commission of fine arts , 2013 ) : appendix b , p . 548 . . commissions related to goodhue . image : sculpture at the entrance to rockefeller chapel uofchicago.jpg right upright 1 thumb lawrie 's work at rockefeller chapel , university of chicago , circa 1929 marble reliefs above the windows of the deborah cook sayles public library , pawtucket , rhode island , 1902 ( cram , goodhue & ferguson ) chapel at west point , west point , new york ( cram and goodhue ) church of st . vincent ferrer , new york city ( cram and goodhue ) pulpit and lectern and apse carvings at st . bartholomew 's episcopal church , ( cram and goodhue ) reredos at saint thomas church on fifth avenue in new york city ( cram and goodhue ) reredos at st . john 's episcopal church ( west hartford , connecticut ) ( goodhue ) nebraska state capitol , lincoln , nebraska ( goodhue ) los angeles public library , los angeles , california ( goodhue ) trinity english lutheran church , fort wayne , indiana ( goodhue ) national academy of sciences building in washington , d.c . ( goodhue ) rockefeller chapel , university of chicago , chicago , illinois ( goodhue ) christ church cranbrook , in bloomfield hills , michigan ( goodhue ) church of the heavenly rest , new york city ( mayers murray & phillip ) . commissions after goodhue 's death . rockefeller center . left after goodhue 's death , lawrie produced important and highly visible work under raymond hood at rockefeller center in new york city , which included the atlas in collaboration with rene paul chambellan . by november 1931 hood said , '' there has been entirely too much talk about the collaboration of architect , painter and sculptor . '' he relegated lawrie to the role of a decorator . lawrie 's most noted work is not architectural : it is the freestanding statue of atlas , on fifth avenue at rockefeller center , standing a total 45 feet tall , with a 15-foot human figure supporting an armillary sphere . dianne l . durante , outdoor monuments of manhattan : a historical guide 2007:139ff . at its unveiling , some critics were reminded of benito mussolini , while james montgomery flagg suggested that it looked as mussolini thought he looked . durante 2007:141 offers this and some further negative quotes from artists and critics in new york during the forties . the international character of streamline moderne , embraced by fascism as well as corporate democracy , lost favor during the second world war . featured above the entrance to 30 rockefeller plaza and axially behind the golden prometheus , lawrie 's wisdom is one of the most visible works of art in the complex . an art deco piece , it echoes the statements of power shown in atlas and paul manship 's prometheus . other commissions . allegorical relief panels called courage , patriotism and wisdom over the entry doors to united states senate chamber ( done as part of the 1950 federal-period remodeling of the senate ) , washington , d.c . education building ( a.k.a . forum building ) in harrisburg , pennsylvania louisiana state capitol in baton rouge , louisiana peace memorial at gettysburg , pennsylvania sculptural elements of the fidelity mutual life building in philadelphia , pennsylvania ( now perelman building of the philadelphia museum of art , including the owl of wisdom , the dog of fidelity , the pelican of charity , the possum of protection , and the squirrel of frugality ) , architects zantzinger , borie and medary statue of george washington , national cathedral , washington , d.c . friezes for the ramsey county courthouse in saint paul , minnesota whatsoever a man soweth , fifth issue of the long running society of medalists . two egyptian bas-reliefs for the 1924 hale solar laboratory in pasadena , california national shrine of the immaculate conception and the bronze doors of the john adams building at the library of congress annex , both in washington , d.c . harkness tower at yale university , new haven , connecticut sterling memorial library at yale university beaumont tower at michigan state university in east lansing , michigan kirk in the hills presbyterian in bloomfield hills , michigan bok singing tower in mountain lake , florida , architects zantzinger , borie and medary designed sculptures for the brittany american cemetery and memorial in brittany , france , executed by jean juge of paris and the french sculptor , augustine beggi . hubbard bell grossman pillot memorial gravestone . world war i memorial flagstaff , pasadena , california visited and photographed , september 2012 soldiers and sailors memorial bridge , harrisburg , pennsylvania , 1930 lawrie , lee , lee lawrie : sculpture , j.h . jansen , cleveland , ohio , 1936 , plate 6 . in popular culture . his atlas was featured on the cover of the new yorker magazine for december 20 and 27 , 2010 . gallery . image : lee lawrie washington.jpg george washington statue - national cathedral , washington , dc image : hubbard bell grossman pillot memorial - rock creek cemetery , washington , d.c . - stierch - b.jpg hubbard bell grossman pillot memorial , rock creek cemetery , washington , dc file : soldiers_and_sailors_memorial_bridge , _harrisburg , _pa , _usa.jpeg soldiers and sailors memorial bridge , harrisburg , pennsylvania , ( 1930 ) image : adams-east-doors-lawrie-highsmith.jpeg east doors , library of congress john adams building ( 1939 ) image : hermes-itzamna-lawrie-highsmith.jpeg sculpted bronze figures of hermes and itzamna ( 1939 ) image : nabu-tahmurath-lawrie-highsmith.jpeg sculpted bronze figures of nabu and tahmurath ( 1939 ) image : odin-quetzalcoatl-lawrie-highsmith.jpeg sculpted bronze figures of odin and quetzalcoatl ( 1939 ) image : ogma-sequoyah-lawrie-highsmith.jpeg sculpted bronze figures of ogma and sequoyah ( 1939 ) file : ts'ang-chieh-lawrie-highsmith.jpeg sculpted bronze figures of cangjie ( 1939 ) . see also . edward ardolino , collaborating sculptor list of saltus award winners . notes and references . notes . . references . bok , edward w . , america 's taj mahal : the singing tower of florida , the georgia marble company , tate , georgia c . 1929 . brown , elinor l . , architectural wonder of the world , state of nebraska , building division , lincoln , nebraska 1978 . fowler , charles f . , building a landmark : the capitol of nebraska , nebraska state building division , 1981 . garvey , timothy joseph , lee lawrie : classicism and american culture , 1919 - 1954 , phd . thesis university of minnesota 1980 . gebhard , david , the national trust guide to art deco in america , john wiley & sons , new york , new york 1996 . kvaran & lockley , guide to architectural sculpture of america , unpublished manuscript . lawrie ; lee , sculpture - 48 plates with a foreword by the sculptor , j.h . hanson cleveland , ohio 1936 . luebke , frederick c . editor , a harmony of the arts : the nebraska state capitol , university of nebraska press , lincoln , nebraska 1990 . masters , magaret dale , hartley burr alexander—writer-in-stone , margaret dale masters 1992 . nelson , paul d . , courthouse sculptor : lee lawrie , ramsey county history quarterly v43 4 , ramsey county historical society , st paul , mn , 2009 . oliver , richard , bertram grosvenor goodhue , the architectural history foundation , new york & the mit press , cambridge , massachusetts 1985 . whitaker , charles harris , editor , text by lee lawrie et al . bertram grosvenor goodhue , architect-and master of many arts , press of the american institute of architects , inc . , nyc 1925 . whitaker , charles harris and hartley burr alexander , the architectural sculpture of the state capitol at lincoln nebraska , press of the american institute of architects , new york 1926 . external links . leelawrie.com - additional website of gregory paul harm . features additional lawrie works recently added by harm to the smithsonian institution 's art inventory catalog . lee lawrie - stalking lawrie : america 's machine age michelangelo . lee lawrie page on philart.net - pictures of artistic details on the perelman building article on greg harm 's research and discoveries about lawrie and his work on the nebraska state capitol lawrie collection in process . held by the department of drawings & archives , avery architectural & fine arts library , columbia university .