Frederick V of the Palatinate

youth , 1596–1610 . image : locator electoral palatinate within the holy roman empire ( 1618 ) . svg thumb right 200px map showing the electoral palatinate in the holy roman empire . as son and heir of frederick iv , elector palatine ( 1574–1610 ) , frederick was the hereditary ruler of the palatinate . frederick was born on 26 august 1596 at the ( a hunting lodge ) near amberg in the upper palatinate . his father , frederick iv , was the ruler of electoral palatinate ; his mother was louise juliana of nassau , the daughter of william i of orange and charlotte of bourbon . frederick was related to almost all of the ruling families of the holy roman empire and a number of diplomats and dignitaries attended his baptism at amberg on 6 october 1596 . the palatine simmerns , a cadet branch of the house of wittelsbach , were noted for their attachment to calvinism ; this was in marked contrast to the other main line of wittelsbachs , headed by duke maximilian , which was deeply devoted to the roman catholic church . the capital of the palatinate , heidelberg , was suffering from an outbreak of bubonic plague at this time , so frederick spent his first two years in the upper palatinate before being brought to heidelberg in 1598 . in 1604 , at his mother 's urging , he was sent to sedan to live in the court of his uncle henri de la tour d'auvergne , duke of bouillon . during his time at sedan , frederick was a frequent visitor to the court of henry iv of france . his tutor was calvinist theologian daniel tilenus , a professor of theology at the academy of sedan . during the eighty years ' war and the french wars of religion , tilenus called for the unity of protestant princes , and taught that it was their christian duty to intervene if their brethren were being harassed . these views are likely to have shaped frederick 's future policies . controversy over guardianship , 1610–1614 . image : der junge friedrich v . c-b 011.jpg thumb left 200px portrait of frederick by michiel jansz . van mierevelt , 1613 . on 19 september 1610 , frederick 's father , frederick iv , died from '' extravagant living '' ; his son being 14 years old at the time . under the terms of the golden bull of 1356 , frederick 's closest male relative would serve as his guardian and as regent of the palatinate until frederick reached the age of majority . however , his nearest male relative , wolfgang william , count palatine of neuburg , was a catholic , so , shortly before his death , frederick iv had named another wittelsbach , john ii , count palatine of zweibrücken , as his son 's guardian . frederick v welcomed john to heidelberg , whereas wolfgang william was denied entry . this led to a heated dispute among the princes of the holy roman empire . in 1613 , matthias , holy roman emperor intervened in the dispute , with the result being that frederick v was able to begin his personal rule in the palatinate even though he was still underage . the dispute ended in 1614 , when frederick attained his eighteenth birthday . however , much bad blood among the houses was caused by this dispute . marriage to elizabeth stuart . frederick iv 's marriage policy had been designed to solidify the palatinate 's position within the reformed camp in europe . two of frederick v 's sisters were married to leading protestant princes : his sister luise juliane to his one-time guardian john ii , count palatine of zweibrücken , and his sister elizabeth charlotte to george william , elector of brandenburg . frederick iv had hoped that his daughter katharina would marry the future gustavus adolphus of sweden , although this never came to pass . image : elisabeth stuart winterkoenigin 1613 von anonymus.jpg thumb right 200px elizabeth stuart ( 1596–1662 ) , 1613 . in keeping with his father 's policy , frederick v sought a marriage to elizabeth stuart , daughter of james vi of scotland and i of england . james had initially considered marrying elizabeth to louis xiii of france , but these plans were rejected by his advisors . frederick 's advisors in the palatinate were worried that if elizabeth were married to a catholic prince , this would upset the confessional balance of europe , and they were thus resolved that she should marry frederick v . hans meinhard von schönberg , who had served as frederick v 's hofmeister since his return to heidelberg , was sent to london to court the princess in spring 1612 . after intense negotiations , a marriage contract was signed on 26 may 1612 , over the objection of her mother , queen anne . frederick travelled to london to collect his bride , landing on english soil on 16 october 1612 . mary anne everett green and s . c . lomas , elizabeth , electress palatine and queen of bohemia , 2nd edn ( methuen & company , 1909 ) . frederick and elizabeth , who had previously corresponded in french , now met each other for the first time , and got on well together . they were formally engaged in january 1613 and married on 14 february 1613 at the royal chapel at the palace of whitehall . the event was celebrated in john donne poetic masterpiece epithalamion , or mariage song on the lady elizabeth , and count palatine being married on st . valentines day . shortly before the ceremony , frederick was inducted into the order of the garter and he wore the order 's chain during the wedding ceremony . elaborate celebrations , organised by francis bacon , followed the ceremony ; these included a performance of the masque of the inner temple and gray 's inn by francis beaumont and the memorable masque of the middle temple and lincoln 's inn by george chapman . on their return trip to heidelberg , frederick and elizabeth travelled to the hague to visit maurice of nassau , prince of orange before leaving for germany on 5 may 1613 . the couple entered heidelberg on 12 june 1613 , amidst widespread celebration . elizabeth was popular with frederick 's subjects , and this popularity grew when , on 1 january 1614 , she gave birth to a son , frederick henry . as part of the marriage negotiations , frederick had agreed to expand heidelberg castle . these renovations were completed in 1615 and the '' elizabeth entrance '' to heidelberg castle was dedicated . electoral reign before the thirty years ' war , 1614–1618 . image : hortus palatinus und heidelberger schloss von jacques fouquiere.jpg thumb left 200px heidelberg castle and the hortus palatinus commissioned by frederick , and designed by english architect inigo jones ( 1573–1652 ) and french engineer salomon de caus ( 1576–1626 ) , painting by jacques fouquier . one of frederick 's first acts upon taking the reins of government was attendance at a meeting of the protestant union , during which he was struck by fever and nearly died . subsequently contemporaries described him as changed , melancholy and possibly depressed . as such , frederick transferred much responsibility to his chancellor , christian i , prince of anhalt-bernburg . concerning anhalt 's political aims and his secret diplomacy against the house of habsburg see : walter krüssmann , ernst von mansfeld ( 1580–1626 ) ; grafensohn , söldnerführer , kriegsunternehmer gegen habsburg im dreißigjährigen krieg ; berlin 2010 ( duncker & humblot , historische forschungen , 94 ; , especially pp . 81–86 , 98–100 , 134–139 , 170–176 . frederick undertook a large building campaign , designed to glorify his regime . in addition to the renovations to heidelberg castle mentioned above , he commissioned a courtyard garden , the hortus palatinus , designed by english gardener inigo jones and french engineer salomon de caus . frederick was depicted therein as apollo and as hercules . politically , frederick positioned himself as a leader of the protestant princes in the holy roman empire , and as a defender of the liberty of the german nobles against the catholic matthias , holy roman emperor . since the peace of augsburg , the empire had been delicately balanced between catholic , lutheran , and calvinist principalities ( although calvinism was not recognised in the peace of augsburg ) . the conflicts between princes of these three faiths developed into a deep struggle over the empire 's constitution . furthermore , the twelve years ' truce , a hiatus in the eighty years ' war , was set to expire in 1621 , and was likely to lead to renewed fighting between the dutch republic and the spanish empire . thumb with its central location in germany , the palatinate was vulnerable to incursions of imperial troops from the habsburg hereditary lands . unlike many principalities of the holy roman empire , the electoral palatinate was not a solid dominion , but instead consisted of two unconnected provinces surrounded by foreign lands . the lower palatinate centred on heidelberg , while the upper palatinate centred on amberg . the lower palatinate 's economy was dominated by agriculture , while the upper palatinate was a mining region with one of the most successful economies in europe . king of bohemia , 1619–20 . background and plans . the kingdom of bohemia was an elective monarchy , and despite being a kingdom , was a part of the holy roman empire . since 1526 , the kings of bohemia had all been members of the house of habsburg ; since 1555 , these kings had also been emperors . in the early seventeenth century , however , bohemia faced a political crisis . the estates of the realm of bohemia became worried that the habsburgs were planning to transform bohemia into an absolute monarchy . a large number of bohemian nobles were protestant and feared that a catholic emperor would attempt to impose catholicism on bohemia . thus , a substantial opposition movement developed to the rule of emperor rudolf ii . rudolf had waged the long war against the ottoman empire from 1593 to 1606 . dissatisfied with the outcome , rudolf sought to launch a new war against the ottomans . to gain bohemian support , rudolf agreed to guarantee bohemia 's religious liberty , issuing his so-called letter of majesty in 1609 . still , the bohemian nobles remained suspicious of rudolf and in contact with the protestant union . the bohemian estates elected the habsburg matthias as rudolf 's heir , and matthias became king of bohemia in 1611 and emperor in 1612 . yet in the latter year there was discussion within the protestant union about fielding a protestant candidate to supplant matthias as king of bohemia , and frederick 's name was discussed in this regard . strategists in the palatinate believed that if frederick became king , this would lead john george i , elector of saxony , to break his alliance with the habsburgs and come fully to the protestant cause . this assumption proved unfounded . image : christian i anhalt bernburg.jpg thumb left frederick 's chancellor christian i , prince of anhalt-bernburg ( 1568–1630 ) . meanwhile , the sectarian conflicts in bohemia continued . in 1617 , matthias prevailed on the bohemian estates to elect the habsburg ferdinand , duke of styria , as heir to the throne of bohemia . ferdinand was an intensely loyal catholic , and many protestant noblemen believed that ferdinand intended to withdraw the protections of rudolf ii 's letter of majesty . these suspicions were further aroused when imperial officials ordered protestants to stop erecting protestant churches on the '' stifts '' , lands held by prince bishop who were not subject to the bohemian estates . the protestants claimed the status of these lands fell under the term '' royal land '' , and thus were subject to bohemia 's authority by the letter of majesty – a very disputed legal interpretation which the habsburg government rejected . on 23 may 1618 , an assembly of protestant noblemen , led by count jindřich matyáš thurn , stormed prague castle , and seized two imperial governors , vilem slavata of chlum and jaroslav borzita of martinice . the rebels charged them with violating the letter of majesty , found them guilty , and threw them and their scribe philip fabricius out of the windows of the bohemian chancellery . this event – known as the second defenestration of prague – marked the beginning of the bohemian revolt , and with it , the beginning of the thirty years ' war . in these circumstances christian i , prince of anhalt-bernburg , frederick v 's governor of the upper palatinate , moved to intervene in bohemia . he did not initially propose nominating frederick as king because the young elector was still seen as politically inexperienced , and was a calvinist , while there were virtually no calvinists in bohemia . at any rate , frederick was not initially eager to defy the emperor , who had praised frederick 's loyalty . frederick did not publicly break with the emperor , but in a letter to his father-in-law , james i of england , he placed the blame for the bohemian vote on the jesuits and the spanish party at the habsburg court . this was a questionable evasion of the role played by frederick 's own agents . the first mention in prague of frederick 's name as a possible candidate as king of bohemia came in november 1618 . it is not known if frederick 's agents played a role in talking up his possible candidacy . palatine diplomat christoph von dohna approached james i of england with the possibility of frederick becoming king , but james reacted negatively to this idea . the princes of the protestant union similarly rejected the idea , fearing it might lead to religious war and the elector of saxony was staunchly opposed . behind the scenes , frederick authorised sending a force under count ernst von mansfeld to support the bohemian rebels . in august 1618 , forces under mansfeld entered bohemia and led the siege of pilsen , which saw pilsen fall to rebel forces on 21 november 1618 , leaving the entire kingdom in protestant hands . image : justus sustermans 028.jpg thumb right ferdinand ii , holy roman emperor ( 1578–1637 ) , who was elected king of bohemia in 1617 and who would later claim that frederick had usurped his rightful claim to the throne of bohemia . matthias , holy roman emperor died on 20 march 1619 . although his successor , the future emperor ferdinand ii , had previously been crowned king of bohemia , the estates of bohemia now refused to recognise him as their king . fearing an invasion by imperial forces , the estates sought an alliance with the other members of the lands of the bohemian crown ( silesia , lusatia , moravia ) and on 31 july 1619 at prague , these states formed the bohemian confederacy , dedicated to opposing the habsburgs ; under the terms of this agreement , protestantism became virtually the state religion of the bohemian lands . in august 1619 , the general parliament of all the bohemian lands declared that ferdinand had forfeited the bohemian throne . this formally severed all ties between bohemia and the habsburgs and made war inevitable . ferdinand of bavaria , archbishop of cologne predicted this decision would lead to twenty , forty , or sixty years of war . zitiert nach golo mann : wallenstein , s . 146m the preferred candidate of bohemians as their new king was the elector of saxony , but he let it be known he would not accept the throne . this left frederick as the most senior protestant prince available , since no one else was willing to risk conflict with the emperor . in august 1619 , the chances of frederick becoming king of bohemia became greater when gabriel bethlen launched an anti-habsburg revolt in royal hungary . this was also precisely the period when ferdinand was travelling to frankfurt for his coronation . frederick in prague . on 26 august 1619 , the states of the bohemian confederacy elected frederick as the new king of bohemia , frederick receiving news of his election on 29 august in amberg . s . hierzu s . unter literaturangabe : berning . s . 134 two days later , ferdinand ii was elected holy roman emperor . frederick was the only elector who voted against ferdinand ; even the protestant prince-electors john george i of saxony and john sigismund of brandenburg adhered to the tradition of supporting the habsburg imperial candidate . the electoral college also condemned the bohemian confederation 's attempt to remove ferdinand from the throne of bohemia and declared that the 1617 vote of the estates of bohemia , making ferdinand king of bohemia , was binding . left frederick 's decision to accept the bohemian crown has been the subject of much historical speculation . later catholic propaganda , in a view accepted by friedrich schiller , portrayed the decision as based mainly on elizabeth stuart 's desire to be a queen . friedrich schiller : geschichte des 30jährigen kriegs , teil 1 more recently , historians have concluded that frederick 's decision was based primarily on a sense of duty to his fellow protestants , although frederick wavered between his obligations to the emperor and his commitment to his religious brethren . there also seems to have been economic considerations ; the upper palatinate was at that time europe 's center for iron production , while bohemia was a focal point for the tin and glass trade . christian i , prince of anhalt-bernburg , told frederick that a union of the two areas could be commercially advantageous . on 12 september 1619 , the protestant union met at rothenburg ob der tauber and called on frederick not to intervene in bohemian affairs . other possible allies – the dutch republic , charles emmanuel i , duke of savoy , and the republic of venice – sent letters saying they would not be able to offer frederick assistance if he accepted the bohemian offer . only gabriel bethlen offered words of encouragement . between 24 september and 28 , frederick reached his decision '' not to resist the will of the almighty '' and thus decided to accept the bohemian crown . zitiert nach peter bilhöfer in der winterkönig . friedrich von der pfalz . bayern und europa im zeitalter des dreißigjährigen krieges , s . 24 24 the dutch republic , the republic of venice , denmark , and sweden recognised frederick as king of bohemia . on 29 september 1619 , frederick left heidelberg for prague . he travelled through ansbach , amberg , neumarkt , and waldsassen , where he was met by representatives from the bohemian estates . together , they then travelled through cheb , sokolov , žatec , louny , and slaný . finally on 31 october 1619 , frederick entered prague , along with 568 people and 100 cars , and was greeted enthusiastically . coronation . image : winterkönig friedrich von böhmen.jpg thumb right 200px coronation of frederick v in st . vitus cathedral , 4 november 1619 . frederick donned the crown of saint wenceslas in st . vitus cathedral on 4 november 1619 . the coronation was conducted not by the archbishop of prague but by the utraquist administrator of the diocese , georg dicastus , and a protestant elder , johannes cyrill von třebič . the liturgy was modelled on that used at the coronation of charles iv , with only a few parts altered . the litany was sung – per the catholic tradition – rather than spoken as was normally done by the calvinists . frederick was anointed with little objection . at the end of the coronation , the estates paid homage to frederick . although a large part of the country was already devastated by war , and many refugees were encamped in the town , the coronation was celebrated with lavish parties . für eine zeitgenössische darstellung des einzugs und die krönung siehe krönung friedrichs von der pfalz zum böhmischen könig . reign . frederick assumed a weak crown and a state torn with internal divisions . the state 's finances had been disrupted for years , and , at any rate , bohemian kings had only very limited ability to raise funds , being primarily dependent on the goodwill of the nobility and the tax allocations of the diets . the protestant nobles felt that higher taxes were necessary to pay for war against the german catholic league , but the country already felt overburdened in the wake of the long war . further limiting frederick 's ability to manoeuvre was the need to distribute royal bounty to supporters in order to ensure their loyalty to his regime . in prague , frederick soon came to be alienated from a portion of the nobility and the clergy . neither frederick nor his wife spoke czech , so court offices were staffed primarily with foreigners , while the administration of the localities was left to the local nobles . this made an alliance of the royal family with the corporate bodies of the realm difficult . further alienation was caused by frederick v 's court preacher , abraham scultetus , who was determined to use his new post to advance the cause of calvinism in bohemia . the utraquist churches had retained the use of relics and images in church , but scultetus now launched an iconoclastic crusade against images : beginning on 21 december 1619 , images were removed from st . vitus cathedral , and on 27–28 december , a famous altarpiece by lucas cranach the younger depicting the virgin mary was destroyed . there was even a rumour that the grave of st . wenceslaus was to be desecrated . scultetus ' iconoclasm was deeply unpopular , and frederick attempted to distance himself from it , claiming that his orders were not being carried out by his followers . image : chronogramm winterkönig c-l 032.jpg thumb left 200px this 1619 imperial pamphlet , containing a chronogram , was the first to dub frederick '' the winter king '' . the nickname '' the winter king '' appeared shortly after the beginning of frederick 's reign and our first printed reference using the term came in a 1619 imperial pamphlet that presented the phrase in the context of a royal chronogram . frederick 's propagandists attempted to respond to the phrase by arguing that frederick was in fact a '' winter lion '' who defended the crown of bohemia against troublemakers and liars , and that he would also be a '' summer lion . '' meanwhile , ferdinand ii rallied his forces against frederick . on 21 october 1619 , he signed a treaty with maximilian , duke of bavaria , leader of the catholic league . this treaty provided that maximilian would be commander of the forces against frederick , promised that maximilian would retain all of the occupied bohemian lands for himself , and that he would be granted frederick 's electoral title as well . the emperor was also able to obtain the support of elector john george i of saxony ; john george 's court preacher , matthias hoe von hoenegg , encouraged the emperor to smash frederick and the bohemians . quoted by wedgwood , p . 94 frederick 's chancellor , christian of anhalt , urged frederick to call a meeting of protestant princes at nuremberg in december 1619 . this conference was a fiasco , as few princes bothered to send representatives . john george of saxony declined to send a representative . those who did attend half-heartedly promised to secure frederick 's rhineland territories during frederick 's absence in bohemia . in march 1620 , during a meeting of the imperial party at mulhouse , frederick despatched a legal defense of his actions . he argued that he had not broken the public peace because bohemia was located outside of the holy roman empire and there was not , therefore , a conflict between an imperial prince and the emperor . frederick argued that it would therefore be illegal for ferdinand to use imperial power against him . this meeting , which included john george of saxony and maximilian of bavaria , rejected frederick 's argument , finding that bohemia was an indivisible part of the empire . image : reiterbild friedrichs v . c-j 171.jpg thumb right 200px frederick v on horseback with prague in the background . on 1 april 1620 , the imperial party issued an ultimatum calling on frederick to leave bohemia by 1 june . if frederick did not comply by this date , ferdinand threatened to enforce his right as holy roman emperor and rightful king of bohemia to overthrow the usurper . a little later , john george of saxony signed a treaty with ferdinand in which ferdinand guaranteed the practice of lutheranism in bohemia and recognized the secular areas in the netherlands . ferdinand also agreed to give john george lusatia , thus cementing john george 's dominance of the upper saxon circle . this was the context when the parliament of the bohemian confederacy met on 25 march 1620 . frederick called for massive tax increases and conscription to fight the impending imperial threat . to raise money for the bohemian forces , frederick used his private funds , pawned his jewels and , in may 1620 , drove the palatinate into insolvency when he decided to move two tons of gold to bohemia . bad news continued to arrive for frederick . james vi of scotland and i of england refused to support his son-in-law militarily . the netherlands sent only a small force and promised only 50,000 florins a month for frederick . worst of all for frederick , on 3 july 1620 , the protestant union signed the treaty of ulm ( 1620 ) , thereby withdrawing their support for frederick and declaring neutrality in the conflict between frederick and the catholic league . battle of white mountain , 8 november 1620 . with the signing of the treaty of ulm ambrogio spinola , 1st marquis of the balbases , began raising imperial troops in the spanish netherlands and in the alsace region . in early august 1620 , 25,000 troops , under the command of spinola , marched into bohemia . in the third week of august , they shifted their focus and marched into the nearly unarmed electoral palatinate , occupying mainz . the electoral palatinate was defended by only 2,000 english volunteers and the country was easily taken . imperial troops set up camp in frankenthal and mannheim . spinola crossed the rhine on 5 september 1620 and proceeded to capture bad kreuznach on 10 september and oppenheim on 14 september . from bohemia , frederick was powerless to stop the occupation of his ancestral homeland . image : schlacht am weißen berg c-k 063.jpg thumb left 200px depiction of the battle of white mountain by peter snayers ( 1592–1667 ) , 1620 . after capturing linz , upper austria , maximilian , duke of bavaria crossed the bohemian border on 26 september 1620 . at rokycany , maximilian 's forces first met with the 15,000 ragtag , poorly paid and poorly equipped troops that frederick had managed to raise . frederick visited his army on 28 september 1620 , but , lacking a military background , left the conduct of the war to his generals . frederick focused his attention on organizing supplies and preparing fortifications . after a series of skirmishes , on 5 november 1620 , frederick drew his forces back towards prague and imperial troops followed them . on 7 november , bohemian forces determined to make a stand at white mountain , just outside prague . the day before , king frederick had ridden down the lines and exhorted the soldiers . he then rushed to prague to implore the bohemian estates to raise money for his troops and to receive the envoys of the english king . however , it was too late . when , on 8 november 1620 , frederick wanted to ride back to the troops , he was met at the gates of prague by fleeing soldiers of his army and his chancellor , anhalt , who informed him of the disaster : the bohemian army had received a crushing defeat that morning in the battle of white mountain . escape . anhalt could recommend only one option to frederick : immediate flight . as such , on 9 november , frederick fled to the silesian capital of wrocław , along with his wife and child , some advisers , and not much more baggage than the bohemian crown jewels . maximilian took prague shortly after frederick 's departure . from silesia , frederick wanted to plan revenge for the battle of white mountain , but the silesian estates refused to support this project , and he was forced to leave silesia in early 1621 . image : eigentliche abbildung des winterkönigs 8.5-29.jpg thumb right 200px 1620 pamphlet mocking frederick 's flight from prague . contemporary pamphleteers – both catholic and protestant – were merciless in their portrayal of frederick 's flight from prague . after frederick 's garter was found in prague , pamphleteers routinely portrayed him with his stockings falling down . on 21 january 1621 , ferdinand issued a decree against frederick and anhalt , accusing them of breach of peace , supporting rebels , and treason . ferdinand decreed that frederick 's lands and titles within the holy roman empire were now forfeited . on 6 february 1621 , representatives of the protestant union met with ferdinand at heilbronn to protest , but they soon agreed to support the settlement in the palatinate , and the palatinate remained occupied by spanish troops . at this point , the protestant union had essentially ceased to exist . the twelve years ' truce ended on 9 april 1621 . on 14 april , frederick joined his wife at the hague . the dutch republic and frederick signed a contract in which he accepted the support of the netherlands for the reconquest of his dominions . in bohemia , the crushing of the bohemian revolt had terrible consequences . twenty-eight bohemian nobles were killed in the old town square executions on 21 june 1621 . afterwards , the heads of twelve nobles , along with the hand of joachim andreas von schlick , were nailed to the old town tower of charles bridge , where they remained for ten years . the elective monarchy was now abolished ; the role of the estates greatly curtailed ; and the letter of majesty was torn by ferdinand himself . only lutheranism remained tolerated in bohemia , and in the coming years , the rest of the population would be actively re-catholicized . bohemia would remain part of the habsburg monarchy until 1918 . fall of frederick 's ancestral lands , 1621–22 . image : peterernstiiofmansfield02.jpg thumb left 150px ernst von mansfeld ( 1580–1626 ) , soldier who held on to frederick 's palatine inheritance until 1622 . in summer 1621 , john ii , count palatine of zweibrücken , frederick 's former guardian who had served as regent of the electoral palatinate when frederick left for prague , resigned . however , ernst von mansfeld continued to occupy a portion of the upper palatinate and had successfully resisted efforts by johann tserclaes , count of tilly to dislodge him . mansfeld crossed into the palatinate region in early 1622 , and on 21 april 1622 , frederick joined mansfeld there . frederick attempted to convince other protestant princes to reconstitute the protestant union , but met with limited success . frederick 's cause was boosted by a 27 april 1622 victory over tilly 's forces at the battle of wiesloch , but this boost was short lived . frederick 's forces under the command of georg friedrich , margrave of baden-durlach were defeated at the battle of wimpfen on 6 may 1622 ; and then forces under christian the younger of brunswick were soundly defeated at the battle of höchst on 20 june 1622 . frederick was increasingly under mansfeld 's influence at this time , and was growing disillusioned with the protestant cause . with frederick 's knowledge , mansfeld raided darmstadt and captured louis v , landgrave of hesse-darmstadt and his son johann as hostages . this was clearly a violation of imperial law , and cost frederick whatever remaining sympathy he still had in europe . during his retreat into alsace , mansfeld burned a city and thirty villages . image : heidelberg während des 30jährigen krieges 1622.jpg thumb right 200px heidelberg is taken by the forces of johann tserclaes , count of tilly ( 1559–1632 ) on 19 september 1622 . frederick dismissed mansfeld after he became convinced he would be unable to reconquer his hereditary lands . frederick then spent the summer with his uncle , henri de la tour d'auvergne , duke of bouillon , in sedan . shortly thereafter , troops under tilly and gonzalo fernández de córdoba completed the spanish conquest of the electoral palatinate . after an eleven-week siege , heidelberg fell on 19 september 1622 ; mannheim similarly fell on 5 november 1622 . only the british garrison in frankenthal now held out . after the conquest of heidelberg , the protestant churches were closed , the university was closed , and at the request of maximilian , the great library , the famous bibliotheca palatina ( 3500 manuscripts ) , was presented as a gift of thanks to pope gregory xv in appreciation of the 620,000 guilders he had provided for financing the campaigns of the catholic league . image : reichsacht gegen friedrich v.jpg thumb left 150px 1623 edict by ferdinand ii , holy roman emperor ( 1578–1637 ) awarding frederick 's lands and titles to maximilian i , elector of bavaria ( 1573–1651 ) . on 23 february 1623 , ferdinand ii , holy roman emperor awarded frederick 's electoral title to maximilian of bavaria , who now became maximilian i , elector of bavaria . maximilian was also awarded the conquered territory of upper palatinate as a fief . other territories of the electoral palatinate ( parkstein , weiden in der oberpfalz , and peilstein im mühlviertel ) were awarded to wolfgang william , count palatine of neuburg . exile , 1622–1632 . in late 1622 and early 1623 , frederick organised a palatinate government-in-exile at the hague . this palatinate council was headed by ludwig camerarius . during the negotiations for the spanish match , frederick urged his father-in-law not to go through with the match . there were attempts at reconciling frederick with the emperor in 1624–25 and in 1627 , but these came to naught . frederick was willing to compromise with the emperor , but he wanted the restoration of his lands and electoral title , and the emperor was not inclined to restore these to frederick . frederick held out some hope that his lands might be retaken militarily , but these hopes were crushed on 27 august 1626 , when the forces of christian iv of denmark were crushed by tilly at the battle of lutter . frederick left most of the day-to-day business of his government-in-exile to his counselors , although he did take some interest in his finances . frederick was very stingy in funding his administration , and yet , in order to maintain the dignity of a royal court , he spent vast sums on building and entertainment , quickly blowing through donations from the english and dutch governments . for example , in 1629 , frederick commissioned bartholomeus van bassen to build him a large winter palace in rhenen . when completed in 1631 , this palace had a large central residence , a courtyard , a two-storey main building with two wings projecting to the south , and was surrounded by large gardens . frederick spent much of his time there in hunting and long walks . image : königshaus rhenen c-p 038.jpg thumb right 200px the winter palace constructed for frederick v at rhenen between 1629 and 1631 . frederick suffered a personal tragedy on 17 january 1629 . he was traveling to amsterdam to view the spanish treasure fleet captured by the dutch west india company when his boat capsized while crossing the haarlemmermeer , a body of water near haarlem . frederick survived the accident , but his eldest son , the fifteen-year-old frederick henry of the palatinate , did not . frederick himself sustained serious physical injuries in the accident , and would not fully recover for 15 months . at the diet of regensburg ( 1630 ) , frederick formally petitioned to be forgiven for having accepted the crown of bohemia and admitted his wrongdoing . but nothing came of this . in march 1631 , frederick despatched diplomat sir robert anstruther to hold discussions with ernst egon viii , count of fürstenberg , president of the imperial privy council , about restoring frederick 's lands , but frederick died before these could bear any fruit . death , 1632 . on 4 july 1630 , gustavus adolphus of sweden intervened in the thirty years ' war . on 16 september 1631 , gustavus adolphus ' forces defeated tilly 's forces at the battle of breitenfeld ( 1631 ) . tilly was defeated the following year , and gustavus adolphus ' forces swept into southern germany . when oppenheim was captured in december 1631 , frederick believed the time was ripe for him to reestablish himself in the palatinate , and he left for heidelberg . left in february 1632 , frederick met gustavus adolphus at frankfurt , with gustavus adolphus paying frederick full royal honours . however , gustavus adolphus was not prepared to offer frederick support for restoring him in the palatinate because england and the netherlands had not signed off on such a proposal . frederick subsequently took part in gustavus adolphus ' march into the duchy of bavaria , and was present for the march into munich on 17 may 1632 . upon frederick 's pressing his case with gustavus adolphus , gustavus adolphus told frederick that he would accept frederick 's restoration without dutch/british support only if frederick would agree to hold the palatinate as a fief of the king of sweden . the lands of the palatinate were simply too important strategically for gustavus adolphus to hand them over to frederick . gustavus adolphus also insisted that frederick would have to agree to establish equal rights for lutherans in his territories . frederick refused gustavus adolphus ' conditions and they parted , with frederick travelling to swedish-occupied mainz , intending to return to the hague . gustavus adolphus was killed at the battle of lützen ( 1632 ) on 16 november 1632 . about this time , the english finally determined to send an expeditionary force to participate in the thirty years ' war . unfortunately for frederick , it was too late . beginning in october 1632 , he had suffered from an infection that got worse in the following weeks . the famed physician peter spina was summoned from darmstadt to mainz , but nothing could be done for frederick . frederick died on the morning of 29 november 1632 , of a '' pestilential fever '' . frederick 's son and heir , charles louis , was only 15 years old . therefore , frederick 's brother ( charles louis ' uncle ) , ludwig philipp , louis philip , count palatine of simmern-kaiserslautern , served as regent . frederick 's internal organs were buried at st . catherine 's in oppenheim and his embalmed body was taken to frankenthal . on 9 june 1635 , with spanish troops approaching , ludwig philipp of pfalz-simmern-kaiserslautern fled to kaiserslautern with frederick 's body . it is believed that ludwig philipp of pfalz-simmern-kaiserslautern transferred frederick 's body to the sedan in september 1637 , but frederick 's final resting place is unknown . ancestry . family and children . he married elizabeth stuart , the daughter of james vi of scotland and i of england and of anne of denmark in the chapel royal , whitehall on 14 february 1613 and had the following children : frederick henry ( 1614–1629 ) — ( drowned ) charles louis ( 1617–1680 ) , became elector palatine in 1648 elisabeth ( 1618–1680 ) rupert ( 1619–1682 ) of english civil war fame . maurice ( 1620–1652 ) who also served in the english civil war . louise hollandine ( 1622–1709 ) louis ( 1623–1624 ) , died in infancy . edward ( 1625–1663 ) henriette marie ( 1626–1651 ) philip frederick ( 1627–1650 ) charlotte ( 1628–1631 ) sophia ( 1630–1714 ) , heir presumptive to the thrones of england and ireland by the act of settlement , 1701 . married ernest augustus , elector of hanover . her son became king george i of great britain in 1714 . gustavus ( 1632–1641 ) , died young , of epilepsy . notes . references . . external links . a declaration of the cavses , for the which , wee frederick , by the grace of god king bohemia , covnt palatine of the rhine , elector of the sacred empire , & c . haue accepted of the crowne of bohemia , and of the covntryes thereunto annexed .