Battle of Brienne

prelude . plans . in november 1813 , the 70,000 french survivors of the disastrous german campaign of 1813 crossed to the west bank of the rhine river . emperor napoleon left 100,000 french soldiers in german garrisons , trapped by enemy blockading forces and hostile populations . all of napoleon 's german allies switched sides and joined the sixth coalition . to the south , marshal jean-de-dieu soult 's 60,000 men and marshal louis gabriel suchet 's 37,000 defended the spanish border . napoleon 's step-son eugène de beauharnais with 50,000 troops defended the napoleonic kingdom of italy against the austrian empire . there were numerous french garrisons in belgium , the netherlands and eastern france , while 15,000 soldiers were isolated in mainz . czar alexander i of russia and king frederick william iii of prussia wished to dethrone napoleon , but emperor francis i of austria was not anxious to overthrow his son-in-law . francis also feared that weakening france would strengthen his rivals , russia and prussia . prince schwarzenberg followed his emperor 's wait-and-see policy while blücher burned to crush napoleon at the earliest opportunity . jean baptiste jules bernadotte , the crown prince of sweden and a former french marshal , led a third allied army . he secretly wished to replace napoleon as the leader of france and was not inclined to invade his former homeland . the allied leaders met at frankfurt-am-main to work out a plan to fight napoleon . in the allied plan that emerged , friedrich wilhelm freiherr von bülow with one of bernadotte 's corps would advance into the netherlands and be joined there by a british corps under thomas graham , 1st baron lynedoch . blücher would cross the middle rhine with 100,000 troops and occupy napoleon 's attention . meanwhile , schwarzenberg with 200,000 men would cross the upper rhine near basel and move toward langres , falling on the french right flank . to oppose this vast array , napoleon deployed marshal claude perrin victor with 10,000 troops on the upper rhine , marshal auguste de marmont with 13,000 and horace sebastiani with 4,500 on the middle rhine and marshal jacques macdonald with 11,500 on the lower rhine . holland and belgium were held by 15,000 troops led by nicolas joseph maison . in reserve were the old guard under marshal édouard mortier and two newly-formed young guard divisions under marshal michel ney . well to the south at lyon , marshal pierre augereau was directed to form a new army . operations . on 22 december 1813 , elements of schwarzenberg 's army crossed the upper rhine and moved into france and switzerland . blücher crossed the middle rhine on 29 december . napoleon 's cordon defense quickly collapsed in the face of the two allied armies . victor soon abandoned nancy and on 13 january 1814 marmont retreated to metz . by 17 january , marmont , ney and victor withdrew behind the meuse river . blücher 's army advanced in nine days and got across the meuse on 22 january . schwarzenberg reached langres on 17 january where the cautious austrian halted for a few days , convinced that napoleon was about to attack him with 80,000 troops . when schwarzenberg moved forward again , mortier 's imperial guard slowed his advance by carrying out skillful rearguard actions . the first battle of bar-sur-aube was fought on 24 january between mortier 's guardsmen and two of schwarzenberg 's corps . at first , napoleon grossly underestimated allied numbers , crediting schwarzenberg with 50,000 troops and blücher with 30,000 . by the end of january , he formed a more realistic estimate and resolved to prevent the armies of blücher and schwarzenberg from joining . in fact , the combined allied armies would number 120,000 soldiers for the battle of la rothière on 1 february . on that date , the two coalition armies brought 85,000 men and 200 guns into action against napoleon , who could only oppose them with 45,100 soldiers and 128 guns . leaving his brother joseph bonaparte in charge of the capital , napoleon departed from paris and reached châlons-sur-marne on 26 january 1814 . near châlons were the following forces . victor led 14,747 men from the ii corps and édouard jean baptiste milhaud 's v cavalry corps . marmont headed 12,051 troops from the vi corps and jean-pierre doumerc 's i cavalry corps . ney directed 14,505 soldiers in three young guard infantry divisions under claude marie meunier , pierre decouz and henri rottembourg and a guard cavalry division under charles lefebvre-desnouettes . macdonald and sebastiani were approaching from the north with about 10,000 men but were too distant to be available . mortier with 20,000 soldiers , including 12,000 imperial guards , retreated west to troyes after his clash with schwarzenberg 's army . napoleon directed that his presence at the front should be kept a secret . he issued four days ' rations to his army and marched it from châlons toward saint-dizier , where he believed blücher was located with about 25,000 soldiers and 40 guns . when his army reached saint-dizier , he found that his adversary had marched southwest to brienne-le-château . in a clash at saint-dizier on 27 january 1814 , milhaud 's 2,100 cavalrymen drove back 1,500 russians of sergey nikolaevich lanskoy 's 2nd hussar division . at brienne , blücher would be near parts of schwarzenberg 's army and napoleon hoped to drive the prussian field marshal 's forces into the aube river before he could be reinforced . napoleon was familiar with brienne ; he had entered the royal school of brienne at the age of nine on 23 april 1779 and studied there for five and a half years . on 28 january , napoleon advanced toward brienne in three columns . étienne maurice gérard 's right column marched south from vitry-le-françois and included the infantry divisions of étienne pierre sylvestre ricard ( of vi corps ) and georges joseph dufour plus cyrille simon picquet 's cavalry . the center column was made up of the imperial guard and marched southwest from saint-dizier through montier-en-der . the left column , consisting of victor and milhaud , marched south to wassy before turning west to join the center column at montier-en-der . marmont was left with joseph lagrange 's infantry division and the i cavalry corps near bar-le-duc to hold off ludwig yorck von wartenburg 's prussian i corps . napoleon sent messages to mortier at troyes , étienne tardif de pommeroux de bordesoulle at arcis-sur-aube and pierre david de colbert-chabanais at nogent-sur-seine to cooperate with his plan . russian cossacks captured all three couriers and delivered their dispatches to blücher . by the morning of 29 january , the prussian field marshal was aware that napoleon had gotten between him and yorck and was approaching him from the northeast with 30,000–40,000 soldiers . the roads were in poor condition because of a thaw , but napoleon 's soldiers managed to slog through the mud to reach montier-en-der and wassy by nightfall on 28 january . blücher was in brienne with zakhar dmitrievich olsufiev 's infantry corps while fabian gottlieb von osten-sacken 's russian army corps was farther west at lesmont . the allied vi corps under peter wittgenstein was approaching joinville but its cavalry under pyotr petrovich palen reached brienne . schwarzenberg 's headquarters was located at chaumont . the allied v corps under karl philipp von wrede was between chaumont and saint-dizier . the allied iii corps under ignaz gyulai and the iv corps under william i of württemberg were near bar-sur-aube . the allied i corps under hieronymus karl graf von colloredo-mansfeld was well to the south at châtillon-sur-seine and the reserve under michael andreas barclay de tolly was marching from langres to chaumont . battle . warned just in time of the impending french attack , blücher recalled sacken from lesmont to brienne . the prussian field marshal had olsufiev 's 6,000 infantry , pahlen 's 3,000 cavalry and lanskoy 's 1,600 hussars on hand until sacken arrived . olsufiev 's command was part of louis alexandre andrault de langeron 's russian army corps . blücher posted olsufiev in brienne , pahlen in the plain to the northeast and lanskoy near the bois d'ajou ( ajou woods ) . the 9th light cavalry division under hippolyte piré at the point of the french advance met three cossack regiments under nikolay grigoryevich scherbatov at maizières-lès-brienne . scherbatov also directed the 4th and 34th jäger regiments which were detached from the russian 4th division in the allied vi corps . piré was soon joined by the remainder of the v cavalry corps under the overall command of emmanuel de grouchy . the french horsemen pressed back scherbatov and pahlen after some skirmishing . lefebvre-desnouettes was wounded during the cavalry action . by 3:00 & nbsp ; pm pahlen retreated through brienne and reformed his horsemen on the russian right flank . the french pursuit by the divisions of samuel-françois lhéritier and andré briche stopped when it encountered three battalions of the 4th and 34th jägers deployed in square formation . sacken 's troops began arriving at brienne at this time and he sent his cavalry under ilarion vasilievich vasilshikov to the right flank . napoleon called a halt until 3:30 & nbsp ; pm when guillaume philibert duhesme 's ii corps infantry division reached the field . then the french emperor ordered a general attack . for an hour the soldiers of duhesme and olsufiev fought to a stalemate . between 4:00 and 5:00 & nbsp ; pm decouz 's division of ney 's corps reached the battlefield and was put in on duhesme 's right flank . at first decouz 's men were successful in forcing their way deeper into the town . however , ney called a halt when trouble developed elsewhere on the field . noticing that duhesme 's division was not supported by cavalry , blücher hurled 40 cavalry squadrons under pahlen and vasilshikov at the french left flank . the russian horsemen routed duhesme 's division and captured eight artillery pieces . in the confusion , a group of cossacks nearly captured napoleon , but right afterward the unruffled french emperor rallied his shaken soldiers and led them back into action . nightfall prevented a worse disaster to duhesme , which came about because the french cavalry was all deployed on the right flank . by this time , sacken 's troops were all on the field but his wagon train was still lumbering past brienne . blücher and his chief of staff , august neidhardt von gneisenau , thinking that the day 's fighting was ended , went to the château . they were nearly made prisoners when some of victor 's infantry led by louis huguet-chateau slipped up to the château by an unguarded road and seized the place . this coup was carried out by 400 soldiers of the 37th and 56th line infantry regiments . huguet-chateau 's men also captured four guns but lost them to a russian counterattack . napoleon ordered the divisions of decouz and meunier , supported by lefebvre-desnouettes ' cavalry , to storm brienne . the assault was completely unsuccessful ; decouz was mortally wounded and one of his brigadiers , rear admiral pierre baste , was killed outright . another brigadier , jean-jacques germain pelet-clozeau took temporary command of decouz 's division . to keep sacken 's trains from capture , blücher ordered sacken to clear the french from brienne and olsufiev to retake the château . after bitter fighting , sacken drove the french from most of the town , but olsufiev failed to recapture the château . finally , grouchy sent lhéritier 's horsemen into the town but this gallant effort was futile . at midnight , blücher ordered olsufiev 's troops to retreat and two hours later gave sacken instructions to withdraw . the russian cavalry held their positions until morning . the french did not initially notice the russian withdrawal and finally occupied brienne at 4:00 & nbsp ; am . result . historian francis loraine petre stated that both sides suffered about 3,000 casualties . he called the action '' scarcely a tactical victory for napoleon '' and noted that the french were unable to keep blücher from joining schwarzenberg . david g . chandler reported that the french lost 3,000 and the allies 4,000 casualties , but that the battle was '' inconclusive '' . digby smith asserted that napoleon had 36,000 troops while the allies had 28,000 . the french lost 3,500 casualties and 11 guns and the allies sustained 3,000 casualties . françois louis forestier , commanding victor 's 2nd division , lost his life . forestier died of his wounds on 5 february . decouz succumbed to his wounds on 18 february . george nafziger wrote that the french lost eight guns but found the russian claim to capturing three additional guns doubtful . nafziger gave combined casualties as 6,000 without specifying how many were lost on each side . notes . references . . further reading . . external links . description of the battle