John Lloyd Stephens

early life . john lloyd stephens was born november 28 , 1805 , in the township of shrewsbury , new jersey . person detail : john lloyd stephens , new york state literary tree . accessed december 4 , 2007 . he was the second son of benjamin stephens , a successful new jersey merchant , and clemence lloyd , daughter of an eminent local judge . harris 2006 , p . 1 ; hawks 1853 , pp . 64–65 . the following year the family moved to new york city . there stephens received an education in the classics at two privately tutored schools . at the age of 13 he enrolled at columbia college , graduating at the top of his class four years later in 1822 . harris 2006 , p . 1 after studying law with an attorney for a year , he attended the litchfield law school . he passed the bar exam after completing his course of study , and practiced in new york city . stephens embarked on a journey through europe in 1834 , and went on to egypt and the levant , returning home in 1836 . he later wrote several popular books about his travels and explorations . politics . he was recommended for the post of minister to the netherlands in 1837 , but martin van buren nominated harmanus bleecker , who served until 1842 . in 1846 stephens was a delegate to the state constitutional convention , where he was responsible for the introduction and adoption of a conciliation court ( small claims court ) . mesoamerican studies . stephens read with interest early accounts of ruined cities of mesoamerica by such writers and explorers as alexander von humboldt and juan galindo . in 1839 , president martin van buren commissioned stephens as special ambassador to central america . while there , the government of the federal republic of central america fell apart , in a civil war . he later published an account of the events he witnessed in central america , incidents of travel in central america , chiapas and yucatán . stephens and his travelling companion , architect and draftsman frederick catherwood first came across maya ruins at copán , having landed in british honduras ( now belize ) . they were astonished at their findings and spent two weeks mapping the site . they surmised that it must have been built by some long-forgotten people , as they could not imagine it was the native mayans . stephens was actually able to buy the city of copan for a sum of 50 and had dreams of floating it down the river and into museums in the united states . they went on to palenque , quiriguá and uxmal . they reached palenque on may 11 , 1840 , and left in early june . while there , they documented the temple of the inscriptions , the temple of the cross , the temple of the sun and the temple of the foliated cross . mcnally ( n.d . ) they continued investigating maya ruins with a return trip to yucatán in october 1841 . according to stephens 's book about the trip , they visited a total of 44 mayan sites such as mayapan , uxmal , kabah , the gateway at labná , sayil , xtampak , chichen itza , tulum , and izamal . in uxmal , they documented the governor 's house , the nunnery quadrangle and the pyramid of the magician . catherwood also drew a famous view of the well at bolonchén . fabio bourbon , the lost cities of the mayas , 1999 catherwood 's drawings and lithographs showed , without question , the maya to have been the authors of some of the most artistic and intellectual works of pre-columbian america . besides large constructions , they produced works of artistic refinement such as stone and plaster sculptures , frescoes , painted pottery and bas-reliefs in wood . as a result of their explorations , stephens and catherwood argued convincingly that the mayans built the ancient central american cities in contrast to the theory that ethnic groups from european or asian civilizations had built them . stephens 's books served to inspire edgar allan poe , harris 2006 , p.2 . who reviewed three of stephens 's books for the new york review and graham 's magazine . panama railroad company . at the time england enjoyed a monopoly over the ocean navigation to and from the united states . stephens obtained a charter from the state of new york , and incorporated the white star line . the company acquired two steam ships , the washington and the hermann which made journeys to europe . when the panama railroad company was founded in 1849 , stephens was chosen to be vice president . he visited panama and new granada to make arrangements for the laying of the railroad . on his way to bogotá , the capital of new granada , he fell off his mule and sustained severe injuries from which he never fully recovered . he returned to the united states , and was appointed president of the railroad . while in panama , he was struck down by malaria in the spring of 1852 . he recovered sufficiently to return to new york , only to have a recurrence of the disease . the path between the seas , david mccullough , ©1977 , pp 139-140 he died october 13 , 1852 . he was buried at new york city marble cemetery . stephens is the subject of the following works : maya explorer by victor wolfgang von hagen , first published in 1947 , and jungle of stone by william carlsen ( 2016 ) . bibliography . incidents of travel in egypt , arabia petraea , and the holy land ( 1837 ) incidents of travel in greece , turkey , russia and poland ( 1838 ) incidents of travel in central america , chiapas and yucatán , vols . 1 & 2 ( 1841 ) ( reissued by cambridge university press , 2010 . incidents of travel in yucatán , vols . 1 & 2 ( 1843 ) . notes . references . cabañas , miguel a . ( 2008 ) . '' chapter one : putting the world in order : john lloyd stephens ’ s narration of america . '' the cultural “ other ” in nineteenth-century travel narratives : how the united states and latin america described each other . lewiston , ny : edwin mellen press . carlsen , william ( 2016 ) jungle of stone : the true story of two men , their extraordinary journey , and the discovery of the lost civilization of the maya . external links . john lloyd stephens , a biography . guide to the john lloyd stephens at the bancroft library reed college website including all the illustrations of uxmal , kabah , sayil , and labná in stephens 's 1841 incidents of travel in central america and in stephens and catherwood 's 1843 incidents of travel in yucatán . works by john lloyd stephens at google books