Operant conditioning chamber

history . in 1905 , american psychologist , edward thorndike proposed a ‘ law of effect ’ , which formed the basis of operant conditioning . thorndike conducted experiments to discover how cats learn new behaviors . his most famous work involved monitoring cats as they attempted to escape from puzzle boxes which trapped the animals until they moved a lever or performed an action that triggered their release . he ran several trials with each animal and carefully recorded the time it took for them to perform the necessary actions to escape . thorndike discovered that his cats seemed to learn from a trial-and-error process rather than insightful inspections of their environment . learning happened when actions led to an effect and that this effect influenced whether the behavior would be repeated . thorndike ’ s ‘ law of effect ’ contained the core elements of what would become known as operant conditioning . about fifty years after thorndike ’ s first described the principles of operant conditioning and the law of effect , b . f . skinner expanded upon his work . skinner theorized that if a behavior is followed by a reward , that behavior is more likely to be repeated , but added that if it is followed by some sort of punishment , it is less likely to be repeated . purpose . an operant conditioning chamber permits experimenters to study behavior conditioning ( training ) by teaching a subject animal to perform certain actions ( like pressing a lever ) in response to specific stimuli , such as a light or sound signal . when the subject correctly performs the behavior , the chamber mechanism delivers food or other reward . in some cases , the mechanism delivers a punishment for incorrect or missing responses . for instance , to test how operant conditioning works for certain invertebrates , such as fruit flies , psychologists use a device known as a '' heat box '' . essentially this takes up the same form as the skinner box , but the box is composed of two sides : one side that can undergo temperature change and the other that does not . as soon as the invertebrate crosses over to the side that can undergo a temperature change , the area is heated up . eventually , the invertebrate will be conditioned to stay on the side that does not undergo a temperature change . this goes to the extent that even when the temperature is turned to its lowest point , the fruit fly will still refrain from approaching that area of the heat box . these types of apparatuses allow experimenters to perform studies in conditioning and training through reward/punishment mechanisms . structure . the structure forming the shell of a chamber is a box large enough to easily accommodate the animal being used as a subject . ( commonly used model animals include rodents—usually lab rats—pigeons , and primates ) . it is often sound-proof and light-proof to avoid distracting stimuli . operant chambers have at least one operandum ( or '' manipulandum '' ) , and often two or more , that can automatically detect the occurrence of a behavioral response or action . typical operanda for primates and rats are response levers ; if the subject presses the lever , the opposite end moves and closes a switch that is monitored by a computer or other programmed device . typical operanda for pigeons and other birds are telegraph key with a switch that closes if the bird pecks at the key with sufficient force . the other minimal requirement of a conditioning chamber is that it has a means of delivering a primary reinforcer ( a reward , such as food , etc . ) or unconditioned stimulus like food ( usually pellets ) or water . it can also register the delivery of a conditioned reinforcer , such as an led signal ( see jackson & hackenberg 1996 in the journal of the experimental analysis of behavior for example ) as a '' token '' . despite such a simple configuration ( one operandum and one feeder ) it is nevertheless possible to investigate a variety of psychological phenomena . modern operant conditioning chambers typically have multiple operanda , such as several response levers , two or more feeders , and a variety of devices capable of generating different stimuli including lights , sounds , music , figures , and drawings . some configurations use an lcd panel for the computer generation of a variety of visual stimuli . some operant chambers can also have electrified nets or floors so that shocks can be given to the animals ; or lights of different colors that give information about when the food is available . although the use of shock is not unheard of , approval may be needed in countries that regulate experimentation on animals . research impact . operant conditioning chambers have become common in a variety of research disciplines especially in animal learning . there are varieties of applications for operant conditioning . for instance , shaping a behavior of a child is influenced by the compliments , comments , approval , and disapproval of one 's behavior . an important factor of operant conditioning is its ability to explain learning in real-life situations . from an early age , parents nurture their children ’ s behavior by using rewards and by showing praise following an achievement ( crawling or taking a first step ) which reinforces such behavior . when a child misbehaves , punishments in the form of verbal discouragement or the removal of privileges are used to discourage them from repeating their actions . an example of this behavior shaping is seen by way of military students . they are exposed to strict punishments and this continuous routine influences their behavior and shapes them to be a disciplined individual . skinner ’ s theory of operant conditioning played a key role in helping psychologists to understand how behavior is learned . it explains why reinforcements can be used so effectively in the learning process , and how schedules of reinforcement can affect the outcome of conditioning . commercial applications . slot machines and online games are sometimes cited as examples of human devices that use sophisticated operant schedules of reinforcement to reward repetitive actions . social networking services such as google , facebook and twitter have been identified as using the techniques . critics use terms such as skinnerian marketing for the way the companies use the ideas to keep users engaged and using the service . gamification , the technique of using game design elements in non-game contexts , has also been described as using operant conditioning and other behaviorist techniques to encourage desired user behaviors . . skinner box . skinner is noted to have said that he did not want to be an eponym . skinner , b . f . ( 1959 ) . cumulative record ( 1999 definitive ed . ) . cambridge , ma : b.f . skinner foundation . p 620 further , he believed that clark hull and his yale students coined the expression : skinner stated he did not use the term himself , and went so far as to ask howard hunt to use '' lever box '' instead of '' skinner box '' in a published document . skinner , b . f . ( 1983 ) . a matter of consequences . new york , ny : alfred a . knopf , inc . p 116 , 164 . see also . behaviorism radical behaviorism . references . external links . from pavlov to skinner box - background and experiment