Arthur Rimbaud

life with verlaine ( 1871–1875 ) . rimbaud wrote to several famous poets but received either no reply or a disappointing mere acknowledgement ( as from theodore de banville ) ; so his friend , office employee charles auguste bretagne , advised him to write to paul verlaine , a rising poet who had published two well regarded collections ( and future leader of the symbolist movement ) . rimbaud sent verlaine two letters with several of his poems , including the hypnotic , finally shocking '' le dormeur du val '' ( the sleeper in the valley ) , in which nature is called upon to comfort an apparently sleeping soldier . verlaine was intrigued by rimbaud , and replied , '' come , dear great soul . we await you ; we desire you '' , sending him a one-way ticket to paris . rimbaud arrived in late september 1871 and resided briefly in verlaine 's home . verlaine 's wife , mathilde mauté , was seventeen years old and pregnant , and verlaine had recently left his job and started drinking . in later published recollections of his first sight of rimbaud at the age of sixteen , verlaine described him as having '' the real head of a child , chubby and fresh , on a big , bony , rather clumsy body of a still-growing adolescent '' , with a '' very strong ardennes accent that was almost a dialect '' . his voice had '' highs and lows as if it were breaking '' . rimbaud and verlaine soon began a brief and torrid affair . they led a wild , vagabond-like life spiced by absinthe , opium and hashish . the parisian literary coterie was scandalized by rimbaud , whose behaviour was that of the archetypal enfant terrible , yet throughout this period he continued to write poems . their stormy relationship eventually brought them to london in september 1872 , a period over which rimbaud would later express regret . during this time , verlaine abandoned his wife and infant son ( both of whom he had abused in his alcoholic rages ) . in london they lived in considerable poverty in bloomsbury and in camden town , scraping a living mostly from teaching , as well as with an allowance from verlaine 's mother . rimbaud spent his days in the reading room of the british museum where '' heating , lighting , pens and ink were free '' . the relationship between the two poets grew increasingly bitter , and verlaine abandoned rimbaud in london to meet his wife in brussels . rimbaud was not well liked at the time , and many people thought of him as dirty and rude . the artist henri fantin-latour wanted to paint first division poets at the 1872 salon , but they were not available . he had to settle for rimbaud and verlaine , who were described as '' geniuses of the tavern '' . the painting , by the table , shows rimbaud and verlaine at the end of the table . other writers , such as albert mérat , refused to be painted with verlaine and rimbaud , mérat 's reason being that he '' would not be painted with pimps and thieves '' , in reference to verlaine and rimbaud ; in the painting , mérat is replaced by a flower vase on the table . mérat also spread many rumours in the salons that verlaine and rimbaud were sleeping together ; the spread of those rumours was the commencement of fall for the two poets , who were trying to build a good reputation for themselves . in late june 1873 , verlaine returned to paris alone , but quickly began to mourn rimbaud 's absence . on 8 & nbsp ; july he telegraphed rimbaud , asking him to come to the hotel liège in brussels . the reunion went badly , they argued continuously , and verlaine took refuge in heavy drinking . on the morning of 10 & nbsp ; july , verlaine bought a revolver and ammunition . about 16:00 , '' in a drunken rage '' , he fired two shots at rimbaud , one of them wounding the 18-year-old in the left wrist . rimbaud initially dismissed the wound as superficial but had it dressed at the st-jean hospital nevertheless . he did not immediately file charges , but decided to leave brussels . about 20:00 , verlaine and his mother accompanied rimbaud to the gare du midi railway station . on the way , by rimbaud 's account , verlaine '' behaved as if he were insane '' . fearing that verlaine , with pistol in pocket , might shoot him again , rimbaud '' ran off '' and '' begged a policeman to arrest him '' . verlaine was charged with attempted murder , then subjected to a humiliating medico-legal examination . he was also interrogated about his correspondence with rimbaud and the nature of their relationship . the bullet was eventually removed on 17 july and rimbaud withdrew his complaint . the charges were reduced to wounding with a firearm , and on 8 august 1873 verlaine was sentenced to two years in prison . rimbaud returned home to charleville and completed his prose work une saison en enfer ( '' a season in hell '' ) —still widely regarded as a pioneering example of modern symbolist writing . in the work it is widely interpreted that he refers to verlaine as his '' pitiful brother '' ( frère pitoyable ) and the '' mad virgin '' ( vierge folle ) , and to himself as the '' hellish husband '' ( l'époux infernal ) , and described their life together as a '' domestic farce '' ( drôle de ménage ) . in 1874 , he returned to london with the poet germain nouveau . they lived together for three months while he put together his groundbreaking illuminations , a collection of prose poems , although he eventually did not see it through publication ( it only got published in 1886 , without the author 's knowledge ) . travels ( 1875–1880 ) . rimbaud and verlaine met for the last time in march 1875 , in stuttgart , after verlaine 's release from prison and his conversion to catholicism . by then rimbaud had given up literature in favour of a steady , working life . stéphane mallarmé , in a text about rimbaud from 1896 ( after his death ) , described him as a '' meteor , lit by no other reason than his presence , arising alone then vanishing '' who had managed to '' surgically remove poetry from himself while still alive '' . albert camus , in l'homme révolté , although he praised rimbaud 's literary works ( particularly his later prose works , une saison en enfer and illuminations — '' he is the poet of revolt , and the greatest '' ) , wrote a scathing account of his resignation from literature — and revolt itself — in his later life , claiming that there is nothing to admire , nothing noble or even genuinely adventurous , in a man who committed a '' spiritual suicide '' , became a '' bourgeois traficker '' and consented to the materialistic order of things . albert camus , l'homme révolté , '' surréalisme et révolution '' , p . 118-121 . after studying several languages ( german , italian , spanish ) , he went on to travel extensively in europe , mostly on foot . in may 1876 he enlisted as a soldier in the knil to get free passage to java in the dutch east indies ( now indonesia ) . four months later he deserted and fled into the jungle . he managed to return incognito to france by ship ; as a deserter he would have faced a dutch firing squad had he been caught . in december 1878 , rimbaud journeyed to larnaca in cyprus , where he worked for a construction company as a stone quarry foreman . in may of the following year he had to leave cyprus because of a fever , which on his return to france was diagnosed as typhoid . abyssinia ( 1880–1891 ) . rimbaud finally settled in aden , yemen , in 1880 , as a main employee in the bardey agency , going on to run the firm 's agency in harar , ethiopia . in 1884 , his report on the ogaden ( based on notes from his assistant constantin sotiro ) was presented and published by the société de géographie in paris . in the same year he left his job at bardey 's to become a merchant on his own account in harar , where his commercial dealings included coffee and ( generally outdated ) firearms . at the same time , rimbaud engaged in exploring and struck up a close friendship with the governor of harar , ras makonnen wolde mikael , father of future emperor haile selassie . he maintained friendly relationships with the official tutor of the young heir . rimbaud worked in the coffee trade . '' he was , in fact , a pioneer in the business , the first european to oversee the export of the celebrated coffee of harar from the country where coffee was born . he was only the third european ever to set foot in the city , and the first to do business there '' . in 1885 , rimbaud became involved in a major deal to sell old rifles to menelik ii , king of shewa , at the initiative of french merchant pierre labatut . the explorer paul soleillet became involved early in 1886 . the arms were landed at tadjoura in february , but could not be moved inland because léonce lagarde , governor of the new french administration of obock and its dependencies , issued an order on 12 april 1886 prohibiting the sale of weapons . when the authorization came through from the consul de france , labatut got ill and had to withdraw ( he died from cancer soon afterward ) , then soleillet died from embolism on 9 october . when rimbaud finally reached shewa , menelik had just scored a major victory and no longer needed these older weapons , but still took advantage of the situation by negotiating them at a much lower price than expected , also deducting presumed debts from labatut . letter to the vice-consul de france , émile de gaspary , 9 november 1887 , in œuvres complètes , bibliothèque de la pléiade , 1979 , p . 461 . the whole ordeal turned out to be a disaster . letter from 30 july 1887 . in the following years , between 1888 and 1890 , rimbaud established his own store in harar , but soon got bored and dismayed . letter from 4 august 1888 . he hosted explorer jules borrelli and merchant armand savouré . in their later testimonies , they both described him as an intelligent man , quiet , sarcastic , secretive about his prior life , living with simplicity , taking care of his business with accuracy , honesty and firmness . testimony from jules borelli to english biographer enid starkie and paterne berrichon ; testimony from armand savouré to georges maurevert and isabelle rimbaud ( j.-j . lefrère , arthur rimbaud , fayard , 2001 , p . 1047-1048 and 1074 ) . . sickness and death ( 1891 ) . in february 1891 , in aden , rimbaud developed what he initially thought was arthritis in his right knee . it failed to respond to treatment , and by march had become so painful that he prepared to return to france for better treatment . before leaving , rimbaud consulted a british doctor who mistakenly diagnosed tubercular synovitis , and recommended immediate amputation . rimbaud remained in aden until 7 may to set his financial affairs in order , then caught a steamer , l'amazone , back to france for a 13-day voyage . on arrival in marseille , he was admitted to the hôpital de la conception , where , a week later on 27 may , his right leg was amputated . the post-operative diagnosis was bone cancer—probably osteosarcoma . after a short stay at the family farm in roche , from 23 july to 23 august , he attempted to travel back to africa , but on the way his health deteriorated , and he was re-admitted to the hôpital de la conception in marseille . he spent some time there in great pain , attended by his sister isabelle . he received the last rites from a priest before dying on 10 november 1891 , at the age of 37 . the remains were sent across france to his home town and he was buried in charleville-mézières . on the 100th anniversary of rimbaud 's birth , thomas bernhard delivered a memorial lecture on rimbaud and described his end : '' on november 10 , at two o'clock in the afternoon , he was dead , '' noted his sister isabelle . the priest , shaken by so much reverence for god , administered the last rites . '' i have never seen such strong faith , '' he said . thanks to isabelle , rimbaud was brought to charleville and buried in its cemetery with great pomp . he still lies there , next to his sister vitalie , beneath a simple marble monument . bernhard , t . , '' jean-arthur rimbaud '' , the baffler , nr . 22 , pp . 148–156 , april 2013 . . poetry . the first known poems of arthur rimbaud were mostly emulating the style of the parnasse school and other famous contemporary poets like victor hugo , although he quickly developed an original approach , both thematically and stylistically ( in particular by mixing profane words and ideas with sophisticated verse , as in '' vénus anadyomène '' , '' oraison du soir '' or '' les chercheuses de poux '' ) . later on , rimbaud was prominently inspired by the work of charles baudelaire . this inspiration would help him create a style of poetry later labeled as symbolist . in may 1871 , aged 16 , rimbaud wrote two letters explaining his poetic philosophy , commonly called the lettres du voyant ( '' letters of the seer '' ) . in the first , written 13 may to izambard , rimbaud explained : i 'm now making myself as scummy as i can . why ? i want to be a poet , and i 'm working at turning myself into a seer . you wo n't understand any of this , and i 'm almost incapable of explaining it to you . the idea is to reach the unknown by the derangement of all the senses . it involves enormous suffering , but one must be strong and be a born poet . it 's really not my fault . '' lettre à georges izambard du 13 mai 1871 '' . abelard.free.fr . retrieved on may 12 , 2011 . the second letter , written 15 may—before his first trip to paris—to his friend paul demeny , expounded his revolutionary theories about poetry and life , while also denouncing some of the most famous poets that preceded him ( reserving a particularly harsh criticism for alfred de musset , while holding charles baudelaire in high regard , although , according to rimbaud , his vision was hampered by a too conventional style ) . wishing for new poetic forms and ideas , he wrote : i say that one must be a seer , make oneself a seer . the poet makes himself a seer by a long , prodigious , and rational disordering of all the senses . every form of love , of suffering , of madness ; he searches himself , he consumes all the poisons in him , and keeps only their quintessences . this is an unspeakable torture during which he needs all his faith and superhuman strength , and during which he becomes the great patient , the great criminal , the great accursed—and the great learned one ! —among men.—for he arrives at the unknown ! because he has cultivated his own soul—which was rich to begin with—more than any other man ! he reaches the unknown ; and even if , crazed , he ends up by losing the understanding of his visions , at least he has seen them ! let him die charging through those unutterable , unnameable things : other horrible workers will come ; they will begin from the horizons where he has succumbed ! '' a paul demeny , 15 mai 1871 '' . abelard.free.fr . retrieved on may 12 , 2011 . rimbaud expounded the same ideas in his poem '' le bateau ivre '' ( '' the drunken boat '' ) . this hundred-line poem tells the tale of a boat that breaks free of human society when its handlers are killed by '' redskins '' ( peaux-rouges ) . at first thinking that it is drifting where it pleases , the boat soon realizes that it is being guided by and to the '' poem of the sea '' . it sees visions both magnificent ( '' the awakening blue and yellow of singing phosphores '' , '' l'éveil jaune et bleu des phosphores chanteurs '' ) and disgusting ( '' nets where in the reeds an entire leviathan was rotting '' '' nasses / où pourrit dans les joncs tout un léviathan '' ) . it ends floating and washed clean , wishing only to sink and become one with the sea . archibald macleish has commented on this poem : '' anyone who doubts that poetry can say what prose can not has only to read the so-called lettres du voyant and bateau ivre together . what is pretentious and adolescent in the lettres is true in the poem—unanswerably true . '' while '' le bateau ivre '' was still written in a mostly conventional style , despite its inventions , his later poems from 1872 ( commonly called derniers vers or vers nouveaux et chansons , although he did n't give them a title ) further deconstructed the french verse , introducing odd rhythms and loose rhyming schemes , with even more abstract and flimsy themes . antoine adam , « notices , notes et variantes » , in œuvres complètes , gallimard , coll . « bibliothèque de la pléiade » , 1988 , p . 924-926 . after une saison en enfer , his '' prodigious psychological biography written in this diamond prose which is his exclusive property '' ( according to paul verlaine quoted in rodolphe darzens ' preface of the 1891 edition of arthur rimbaud 's poésies , page xi ( original source not provided ) . « et alors , en mai 1886 , une découverte inespérée , ma foi , presque incroyable ; celle de l'unique plaquette publiée par arthur rimbaud de la saison en enfer , « espèce de prodigieuse autobiographie psychologique écrite dans cette prose de diamant qui est sa propriété exclusive » , s'exclame paul verlaine . » ) , a poetic prose in which he himself commented some of his verse poems from 1872 , and the perceived failure of his own past endeavours ( '' alchimie du verbe '' ) , he went on to write the prose poems known as illuminations , forfeiting preconceived structures altogether to explore unchartered resources of poetic language , bestowing most of the pieces with a disjointed , hallucinatory , dreamlike quality . arthur rimbaud ( 1957 ) . '' introduction '' . illuminations , and other prose poems . translated by louise varèse . new york : new directions publishing . p . xii . rimbaud died without the benefit of knowing that his manuscripts had not only been published but were lauded and studied , having finally gained the recognition for which he had striven , peyre , henri , foreword , a season in hell and illuminations by arthur rimbaud , translated by enid rhodes , new york : oxford , 1973 , p . 14-15 , 19-21 . then he stopped writing poetry altogether . his friend ernest delahaye , in a letter to paul verlaine around 1875 , claimed that he had completely forgotten about his past self writing poetry . french poet and scholar gérard macé wrote : '' rimbaud is , first and foremost , this silence that ca n't be forgotten , and which , for anyone attempting to write themselves , is there , haunting . he even forbids us to fall into silence ; because he did , this , better than anyone . '' alain borer , rimbaud en abyssinie , seuil , 1984 , p . 358 . « rimbaud , c'est surtout ce silence qu'on ne peut oublier et qui , quand on se mêle d'écrire soi-même , est là , obsédant . il nous interdit même de nous taire ; car il l ' a fait , cela , mieux que personne . » french poet paul valéry stated that '' all known literature is written in the language of common sense—except rimbaud 's '' . his poetry influenced the symbolists , dadaists , and surrealists , and later writers adopted not only some of his themes , but also his inventive use of form and language . letters . rimbaud was a prolific correspondent and his letters provide vivid accounts of his life and relationships . rimbaud , trans . & ed . by w . mason , rimbaud complete ( new york : modern library , 2003 ) , pp . 361–375 . rimbaud , trans . & ed . by mason , i promise to be good : the letters of arthur rimbaud ( new york : modern library , 2004 ) . '' rimbaud 's letters concerning his literary life were first published by various periodicals . in 1931 they were collected and published by jean-marie carré . many errors were corrected in the 1946 pléiade edition . the letters written in africa were first published by paterne berrichon , the poet 's brother-in-law , who took the liberty of making many changes in the texts . '' rimbaud , trans . & ed . by w . fowlie , rimbaud : complete works , selected letters , a bilingual edition ( chicago & london : university of chicago press , 1966 ) , p . 35 . . works . works published before 1891 . '' les étrennes des orphelins '' ( 1869 ) – poem published in la revue pour tous , 2 january 1870 '' première soirée '' ( 1870 ) – poem published in la charge , 13 august 1870 ( with the more catchy title '' trois baisers '' , also known as '' comédie en trois baisers '' ) '' le rêve de bismarck '' ( 1870 ) – prose published in le progrès des ardennes , 25 november 1870 ( re-discovered in 2008 ) '' le dormeur du val '' ( the sleeper in the valley ) ( 1870 ) – poem published in anthologie des poètes français , 1888 '' voyelles '' ( 1871 or 1872 ) – poem published in lutèce , 5 october 1883 '' le bateau ivre '' , '' voyelles '' , '' oraison du soir '' , '' les assis '' , '' les effarés '' , '' les chercheuses de poux '' ( 1870-1872 ) – poems published by paul verlaine in his anthology les poètes maudits , 1884 '' les corbeaux '' ( 1871 or 1872 ) – poem published in la renaissance littéraire et artistique , 14 september 1872 '' qu'est-ce pour nous mon cœur… '' ( 1872 ) – poem published in la vogue , 7 june 1886 a season in hell ( 1873 ) – collection of prose poetry published by rimbaud himself as a small booklet in brussels in october 1873 ( '' a few copies were distributed to friends in paris . rimbaud almost immediately lost interest in the work . '' illuminations ( 1872-1875 ? ) – collection of prose poetry published in 1886 ( this original edition included 35 out of the 42 known pieces illuminations – premières publications ) rapport sur l'ogadine ( 1883 ) – published by the société de géographie in february 1884 . posthumous works . narration ( '' le soleil était encore chaud… '' ) ( c . 1864-1865 ) – prose published by paterne berrichon in 1897 lettre de charles d'orléans à louis xi ( 1869 or 1870 ) – prose published in revue de l'évolution sociale , scientifique et littéraire , november 1891 un coeur sous une soutane ( 1870 ) – prose published in littérature , june 1924 reliquaire - poésies – published by rodolphe darzens in 1891 poésies ( rimbaud ) ( c . 1869–1873 ) – published in 1895 with a preface from paul verlaine '' les mains de marie-jeanne '' ( 1871 ? ) – poem published in littérature , june 1919 ( it was mentioned by paul verlaine in his 1884 anthology les poètes maudits , along with other lost poems he knew about , some of which were never found ) lettres du voyant ( 13 & 15 may 1871 ) – letter to georges izambard ( 13 may ) published by izambard in la revue européenne , october 1928 – letter to paul demeny ( 15 may ) published by paterne berrichon in la nouvelle revue française , october 1912 album zutique ( 1871 ) – parodies – among those poems , the '' sonnet du trou du cul '' ( '' the arsehole sonnet '' ) and two other sonnets ( the three of them being called '' les stupra '' ) were published in littérature , may 1922 – others from this ensemble appeared later in editions of rimbaud 's complete works les déserts de l'amour ( deserts of love ) ( c . 1871–1872 ) – prose published in la revue littéraire de paris et champagne , september 1906 proses '' évangeliques '' ( 1872–1873 ) – three prose texts , one published in la revue blanche , september 1897 , the two others in le mercure de france , january 1948 ( no title was given by arthur rimbaud ) lettres de jean-arthur rimbaud – égypte , arabie , éthiopie ( 1880–1891 ) – published by paterne berrichon in 1899 ( with many contentious edits ) source . cultural legacy . university of exeter professor martin sorrell argues that rimbaud was and remains influential in not only literary and artistic circles but political spheres as well , having inspired anti-rationalist revolutions in america , italy , russia , and germany . arthur rimbaud : collected poems , martin sorrell , oxford university press , 2009 , p . 25 . sorrell praises rimbaud as a poet whose '' reputation stands very high today '' , pointing out his influence on musicians bob dylan , luis alberto spinetta and writers octavio paz and christopher hampton . rimbaud 's life has been portrayed in several films . italian filmmaker nelo risi 's film una stagione all'inferno ( 1971 ) ( '' a season in hell '' ) starred terence stamp as rimbaud and jean-claude brialy as paul verlaine . rimbaud is mentioned in the cult film eddie and the cruisers ( 1983 ) , along with the storyline that the group 's second album was entitled a season in hell . in 1995 , polish filmmaker agnieszka holland directed total eclipse , which was based on a play by christopher hampton who also wrote the screenplay ; the film starred leonardo dicaprio as rimbaud and david thewlis as paul verlaine . rimbaud is the protagonist of the opera lorenzo ferrero opera ( 1978 ) by italian composer lorenzo ferrero . in the 1981 brazilian film eu te amo sonia braga 's character is a young woman who has a degree in art history . she tells her lover , paulo , about her degree and that arthur rimbaud was '' a fag who threw shit on the wall and wrote poetry '' . '' eu te amo '' ( 1981 ) allmovie.com retrieved 25 february 2018 in 2012 , composer john zorn released a cd titled rimbaud , featuring four compositions inspired by rimbaud 's work— ' '' bateau ivre '' ( a chamber octet ) , '' a season in hell '' ( electronic music ) , '' illuminations '' ( piano , bass and drums ) , and conneries ( featuring mathieu amalric reading from rimbaud 's work ) . rimbaud is also mentioned in the cocorosie song '' terrible angels '' , from their album la maison de mon rêve ( 2004 ) . in his 1939 composition les illuminations british composer benjamin britten set selections of rimbaud 's work of the same name to music for soprano or tenor soloist and string orchestra . hans werner henze set one of the poems in illuminations , '' being beauteous '' , as a cantata for coloratura soprano , harp and four cellos in 1963 . in a scene in i 'm not there ( 2007 ) , a young bob dylan ( played by ben whishaw ) is portrayed identifying himself as arthur rimbaud by spelling rimbaud 's name and giving 20 october as his birthday . in bob dylan 's 1975 album blood on the tracks , '' you 're gon na make me lonesome when you go '' contains the following lyrics : the album liner notes written by pete hamill also made reference to rimbaud : '' dylan here tips his hat to rimbaud and verlaine , knowing all about the seasons in hell , but he insists on his right to speak of love , that human emotion that still exists , in faulkner 's phrase , in spite of , not because . '' over the span of his entire musical career ( 1961 thru present ) dylan has referred to rimbaud multiple times . polizzotti , m . , bob dylan 's highway 61 revisited ( new york & london : continuum , 2010 ) , pp . 38–39 . also from 1975 , in patti smith 's album horses , the song '' land '' refers to rimbaud by name . the artist and writer david wojnarowicz ’ s 1978-1979 incursion into photography , “ arthur rimbaud in new york ” , contrasts the young poet ’ s face with 1970s era new york . wojnarowicz chronicled his relationship with the city by photographing friends and lovers wearing an arthur rimbaud mask while they rode the subway , visited coney island , or stood in the middle of times square . jim jarmusch 's film the limits of control ( 2009 ) opens with the following quote from rimbaud 's poem le bateau ivre : on the clash 's 1982 album combat rock , beat poet allen ginsberg says rimbaud 's name as part of backing poetry recorded with the song . richard hell changed his surname to hell after rimbaud 's poem a season in hell .