Nichols Field

history . origins . camp nichols was established by the air service , united states army in 1919 . located near fort william mckinley , south of manila , it initially was the home of the 4th composite group , being activated on 14 august 1919 , nichols field became the headquarters of the philippine department air force , under the army philippine department . clay , steven e . ( 2011 ) . us army order of battle 1919–1941 . 3 the services : air service , engineers , and special troops 1919–1941 . fort leavenworth , ks : combat studies institute press . lccn 2010022326 . oclc 637712205 . maurer , maurer ( 1983 ) . air force combat units of world war ii . maxwell afb , alabama : office of air force history . the 1st group ( later 4th composite group ) consisted of the 2d , 3d and 28th aero squadrons in 1919 . the 2d aero squadron ( 2d observation squadron ) , having served in the philippines beginning in 1915 , was transferred back from rockwell field , california in 1920 after training duties in the united states during the war . the 3d aero squadron ( 3d pursuit squadron ) , also a stateside training unit during the war , was transferred from mitchel field , new york in 1920 . the 28th aero squadron ( 28th bombardment squadron ) , which had served in combat on the western front during the war , was transferred to the group in 1922 . the 3d pursuit squadron was moved to clark field upon its arrival in 1920 and nichols became home of air park no , 11 ( later 66th service squadron , which supported the group logistically with equipment , supplies and vehicles both at nichols and clark fields ) . it also became the home of the manila air depot , which provided maintenance support for all army and navy aircraft in the philippines . the primary operational mission of nichols field was tactical training for coastal defense of luzon . due to its proximity to manila , it also was the primary command and control base for the philippine department air force . exercises and maneuvers with army ground forces and naval forces were a regular and important part of its mission . another mission of nichols field during the 1920s was aerial mapping of the philippines ; the topography of many of the islands were largely unknown . the aerial mapping mission was the primary mission of the 2d observation squadron , which moved between clark and nichols during the 1920s and 1930s . . prelude to war . in 1940 , political relations between the united states and the japanese empire reached a crisis with the japanese occupation of french indochina . with war clouds forming , a reinforcement effort was made to the air corps units in the philippines . on or about 1 november 1940 , the 4th composite was reinforced by the 17th pursuit squadron from the 1st pursuit group , being transferred from selfridge field , michigan to nichols field . the 20th pursuit squadron , from the 35th pursuit group at hamilton field , california , also was transferred to nichols . both of these squadrons , however , had only sent their personnel and both were equipped in the philippines with the obsolete boeing p-26 peashooter . afhra document 00078307 24th pursuit group in may 1941 , the 17th and 20th squadrons were re-equipped with seversky p-35as that were manufactured for the swedish air force . on 24 october 1940 , president franklin roosevelt signed an executive order requisitioning all the undelivered p-35s sold to sweden and impressing them into the usaac . forty of the planes arrived at the manila air depot in swedish markings , with swedish language technical orders and swedish-marked instrumentation . these planes all required modification at the depot before being turned over to the squadrons for operational use . baugher , seversky p-35a the 28th bombardment squadron also received some douglas b-18 bolos . during summer 1941 , nichols field was undergoing construction of an east–west runway , making the north–south runway unusable due to a lack of drainage . all of the flying units at nichols were moved to clark field with the exception of the 17th pursuit squadron . the 17th was sent to iba airfield on the north coast of luzon where it was undergoing gunnery training . in september , the 17th was moved to the still uncompleted nichols field when word was received that space at clark was needed for b-17 flying fortresses of the incoming 19th bombardment group . the 3d squadron was sent up to iba for gunnery training to free up the space . however the 17th suffered from the ongoing construction at nichols , which caused several ground accidents . with the large number of units being deployed to the philippines during the buildup of forces in the summer and fall of 1941 , the 3rd , 17th and 20th squadrons were reassigned to the new 24th pursuit group , which was activated at clark field . the 2d observation squadron was assigned directly to far east air force headquarters . edmonds , walter d . they fought with what they had : the story of the army air forces in the southwest pacific , 1941–1942 ( 1951 , 1982 ) notice was received by the group on 15 november that due to the tense international situation between the united states and the japanese empire , all pursuit aircraft on the flight line would be placed on alert 24 hours each day , be armed , fully fueled with pilots available on 30 minutes ' notice . from 30 november to 6 december all squadrons underwent intensive training in day and night enemy interception and air-to-air gunnery . . battle of the philippines . on 8 december at about 03:30 the commercial radio station at clark field intercepted a message from pearl harbor , hawaii about the japanese attack there . however , the group was unable to verify this interception through official channels ; no other action was taken other than notifying the base commander . however , all squadrons were put on alert . at about 04:00 the radar at iba airfield on the north coast of luzon reported a formation of unidentified aircraft approximately 75 miles off the west coast of luzon heading towards corregidor . the 3d pursuit squadron was dispatched to intercept the formation , but no planes were sighted and the squadron returned to iba . however , the radar tracks showed the interception was successful and the unidentified aircraft swung off to the west out of the range of the radar . it was believed that the 3d went underneath the formation . at 04:45 notification was received of a state of war between the united states and the japanese empire . at approximately 09:30 , a large formation of japanese bombers was spotted over lingayen gulf reported heading towards manila . the 20th pursuit squadron from clark field was immediately dispatched to intercept the formation over roselas . the 17th pursuit squadron was ordered from nichols field to cover the airspace over clark . the interception was not successful , as the bombers turned to the northeast and attacked baguio and tagagarau then headed north off the radar . both squadrons returned to their stations and were refueled and put back on alert . the army air forces in world war ii , chapter 6 , pearl harbor and clark field again at approximately 11:30 a large formation of bombers was reported over the china sea heading towards manila . p-40 warhawks took off from nichols field to intercept enemy aircraft spotted on radar , but failed to make contact . in the afternoon , p-40s again took off from nichols field to patrol over bataan and manila . on 9 december shortly after midnight , telephonic communications were re-established with headquarters , feaf . intelligence reported that an unidentified number of enemy aircraft were approaching from the north . a flight of six p-40s from the 17th pursuit squadron was dispatched from del carmen field to intercept . however , two of the aircraft were demolished on takeoff due to an accident . the remaining planes proceeded to nichols field but were unable to accomplish any interception of enemy aircraft in the dark and the night bombing of nichols field began at 03:15 . in order to try and bring some of the units up to strength , feaf ordered the remainder of the 3d sent to nichols field to bring the 34th with its p-35s up to strength . at the end of the 10th , group fighter strength had been reduced to about 30 aircraft , with 8 being p-35s . due to the depleted strength of the group , orders were received from feaf headquarters that pursuit planes were not to be dispatched other than upon orders from headquarters . the planes would be employed mainly as reconnaissance aircraft to replace the 2d observation squadron , which was made inoperable after being mostly destroyed on the ground . its remaining planes were unarmed and sitting ducks if attacked . on the morning of 23 december the japanese made a landing in san miguel bay along the east coast of the lingayen gulf . the ground combat situation on luzon quickly became desperate when a second set of major landings occurred along the shore of lamon bay in southern luzon . with the landings , the units at nichols and clark field withdrew to dispersed bases on luzon , and with general douglas macarthur 's proclamation of manila as an open city on 26 december , all feaf personnel withdrew from nichols field . on the 28th japanese forces occupied the airfield . . japanese occupation . after its occupation , nichols field became a fighter base for the imperial japanese navy air service . it was attacked on several occasions by feaf fighters . on the night of 26/27 january 1942 fighters from bataan airfield , bombed and strafed nichols during the night inflicting considerable damage on japanese aircraft and fuel storage . it was also attacked by b-17 flying fortresses from australia , on 12 april 1942 staging though del monte field on mindanao . american missions against nichols field after the capitulation of american forces in the philippines , on 19 may 1942 the japanese had american prisoner of war ( pow ) pilots fly two p-40 warhawks and a pt-17 stearman biplane from davao airfield to nichols . one of the p-40s was delayed due to bad weather and landed at a small airstrip en route . pacific wrecks nichols field it was used as a prisoner of war camp ( '' philippine military prison camp 306 '' ) list of pow camps in the philippine islands and also used as a combat airfield by the ijnas 1021st kōkūtai flying mitsubishi g4m medium bombers . . battle of nichols field . after their defeat in the battle of leyte gulf , the japanese navy reconstituted itself as a land force and positioned their naval guns in fort mckinley to halt the allied advance on luzon . the japanese had transformed fort mckinley into one of the most heavily armed fortification of the pacific war . the japanese deployed their veteran japanese imperial marines , naval troops and some kempeitai to muster some 3,000 troops to defend fort mckinley and nichols field . the battle of fort mckinley and nichols field fifth air force flew air attacks against nichols field in late january and during february 1945 . during the battle of luzon , nichols field was recaptured by elements of the sixth united states army when paratroopers of the 11th airborne division attacked the base on 4 february . four days ' effort had effected little reduction in the amount of japanese fire originating from the nichols field defenses . support fires of mindoro-based a-20s and the division 's light artillery ( 75mm pack howitzers and the short 105mm howitzers ) had not destroyed enough japanese weapons to permit the infantry to advance without taking unduly heavy casualties . in fact , the volume of fire from japanese naval guns of various types was still so great that one infantry company commander requested : '' tell halsey to stop looking for the jap fleet . it 's dug in on nichols field '' . the attack on nichols field when direct communication began , the 11th airborne division and the xiv corps quickly co-ordinated artillery fire plans and established a limit of fire line to demark their support zones about midway between nichols field and the manila city limits . under the provisions of this plan xiv corps artillery fired sixteen 155mm and 8-inch howitzer concentrations in support of the airborne division 's attack at nichols field before the division passed to xiv corps control about 1300 on 10 february . for the time being , griswold directed swing , the 11th airborne division would continue to exert pressure against the japanese at nichols field but would mount no general assault . instead , the division would ascertain the extent and nature of the japanese defenses at and east of the airfield and prepare to secure the cavite naval base area , which the division had bypassed on its way north from nasugbu . further orders would be forthcoming once xiv corps itself could learn more about the situation south of manila . the attack was preceded by artillery and mortar concentrations and by an air strike executed by marine corps sbd 's from the lingayen gulf fields , support that succeeded in knocking out many japanese artillery positions . the 2d battalion , 187th infantry , attacked generally east from the northwest corner of the field ; the 188th infantry and the 1st battalion , 187th infantry , drove in from the south and southeast . by dusk the two regiments had cleared most of the field and finished mopping up the next day . nichols field was , however , by no means ready to receive allied air force planes . runways and taxiways were heavily mined , the runways were pitted by air and artillery bombardments , and the field was still subjected to intermittent artillery and mortar fire from the fort mckinley area . at the airfield , many wrecked japanese navy and army aircraft were captured , including several intact examples . . japanese surrender and postwar use . repaired , nichols was used by the air transport command ( atc ) and naval air transport service ( nats ) . on 19 august 1945 , a sixteen-man japanese delegation led by japanese lt . general kanabe secretly left kazarazu air base , japan , in two mitsubishi g4m '' betty '' bombers , painted white with green crosses , as ordered by general macarthur , to comply with the surrender of the philippines at manila . after landing at nichols field and met by general sutherland , they surrendered their swords . during the initial meeting , the japanese were instructed to have 400 trucks and 100 sedans at atsugi airfield , japan , in readiness to receive the 11th airborne as occupation forces . this caused much concern with the dignitaries . atsugi had been a training base for kamikaze pilots and many of them were refusing to surrender . there were also 300,000 well-trained troops on the kanto plain of tokyo , so macarthur moved the landing for the 11th a/b to 28 august ; five days later than originally planned . japanese delegation arrives at nichols field , manila , philippines during 1945–1946 the 6th troop carrier squadron ( jan-may 1946 ) ; 13th troop carrier squadron ( june–october 1946 ) and 22d troop carrier squadrons ( october 1946-april 1947 ) operated c-47 skytrains from nichols field . also a nats detachment of six officers operated dc-3 transports was based at nichols . . philippine independence . after philippine independence , on 4 july 1946 , the us surrendered to the republic of the philippines all rights of possession , jurisdiction , supervision and control over the philippine territory except the use of their military bases . nichols field later became the headquarters of the philippine air force . first named nichols air base , it is now named villamor air base . the base shares its site with the ninoy aquino international airport . up to this day , the name nichols or nichols field ( along with villamor ) is used as an accepted nickname or codename for the area surrounding it . commonly , nichols field is the codename for the entire naia complex . see also . geography of the philippines military history of the philippines military history of the united states united states army air forces in the south west pacific theatre . references . external links .