Jerky

preparation . jerky is made from domesticated animals as well as game animals . jerky from domesticated animals includes beef , pork , goat and mutton or lamb and game animals such as deer , kudu , springbok , kangaroo , and bison are also used . recently , other animals such as turkey , ostrich , salmon , alligator , crocodile , tuna , emu , horse , camel , and earthworm have entered the market . most fat must be trimmed from the meat prior to drying , as fat increases the chances of spoilage ( modern vacuum packing and chemical preservatives have served to help prevent these risks ) . the meat must be dried quickly to limit bacterial growth during the critical period where the meat is not yet dry . to accomplish drying quickly without the use of high temperature , which would cook the meat , the meat must be sliced or pressed thin . in industrial settings , large low-temperature drying ovens with many heater elements and fans make use of exhaust ports to remove the moisture-laden air . the combination of fast-moving air and low heat dries the meat to the desired moisture content within a few hours . the raw , marinated jerky strips are placed on racks of nylon-coated metal screens which have been sprayed with a light vegetable oil to allow the meat to be removed easily . the screen trays are placed closely in layers on rolling carts which are then put in the drying oven . chemical preservatives , such as sodium nitrite , are often used in conjunction with the historical salted drying procedure to prepare jerky . smoking is the most traditional method , as it preserves , flavors , and dries the meat simultaneously . salting is the most common method used today , as it both provides seasoning to improve the flavor as well as preserve the meat . while some methods involve applying the seasonings with a marinade , this can increase the drying time by adding moisture to the meat . packaging . after the jerky is dried to the proper moisture content to prevent spoilage , it is cooled , then packaged in ( often resealable ) plastic bags , either nitrogen gas flushed or vacuumed packed . to prevent the oxidation of the fat , the sealed packages often contain small pouches of oxygen absorber . these small packets are filled with iron particles which react with oxygen , removing the oxygen from the sealed jerky package , and from an opened and resealed unfinished packet . because of the necessary low fat and moisture content , jerky is high in protein . a 30 & nbsp ; g ( about 1 & nbsp ; oz ) portion of lean meat , for example , contains about 7 & nbsp ; g of protein . by removing 15 & nbsp ; g of water from the meat , the protein ratio is doubled to nearly 15 & nbsp ; g of protein per 30 & nbsp ; g portion . in some low moisture varieties , a 30 & nbsp ; g serving will contain 21 & nbsp ; g of protein , and only one g of fat . the price per unit weight of this type of jerky is higher than less-dried forms , as it takes 90 & nbsp ; g of 99 % lean meat to generate 30 & nbsp ; g of jerky . unpackaged fresh jerky made from sliced , whole muscle meat has been available in specialty stores in hong kong at least since the 1970s . the products are purchased by kilograms , and customers choose from 10 to 20 types of meat used to make the product . some are sold in strands instead of slices . macau has opened numerous specialty shops also , many of which are franchise extensions of stores from hong kong . compared to the sealed packaged versions , unpackaged jerky has a relatively short shelf life . this type of jerky has also become very popular in convenience stores in the usa under the name '' slab '' jerky ; it is usually sold in plexiglass containers . regulation . most nations have regulations pertaining to the production of dried meat products . there are strict requirements to ensure safe and wholesome production of jerky products . factories are required to have inspectors and sanitation plans . in the united states , the u.s . department of agriculture ( usda ) is responsible for that oversight . to comply with usda regulations , poultry jerky must be heated to an internal temperature of 160 & nbsp ; °f for uncured poultry or 155 & nbsp ; °f for cured poultry to be considered safe many european union countries presently prohibit the importation of meat products , including jerky , without additional and extensive customs documentation , and further inspections . for example the uk department for food and agriculture and food ban all meat imports for personal consumption from the usa . their data can be searched : defra search . availability . traditional jerky , made from sliced , whole muscle meat , is readily available in the united states , mexico and canada in varying meats , brands and qualities , both as packaged and unpackaged . these products are available in nearly every convenience store , gas station , supermarket , and variety shop in those countries , where there is a long history of jerky as a food of the pioneers . a similar , less expensive product is made with finely ground meat , mixed with flavors , then the mush is processed into thin dried strips . the finished item may be labeled as jerky , but with the qualifier '' ground and formed '' . this product is widely available in general interest stores , such as supermarkets and convenience stores . also popular is shredded dry jerky ( rousong ) sold in containers resembling snuff or dip . jerky made in the traditional style is also a ubiquitous staple of farmers ' markets in rural areas all over north america . in addition to being common in the united states , mexico and canada , jerky is also gaining popularity in supermarkets , convenience stores and online retailers in australia , new zealand , the united kingdom and germany . they are carried by some major supermarkets , and now also smaller stores . in china , in addition to the more traditional forms of jerky , there is also a similar product which is usually made from pork called pork chip . a similar product is quite popular in rome , italy , and its hinterland : it is called coppiette and was originally made with horse or donkey meat , but it is now generally made with pork . coppiette are seasoned with red pepper and fennel seeds . coppiette were usually eaten while drinking wine ( mostly white ) in roman osteria . in tamil nadu , india , the dish is known as uppu kandam which forms part of authentic non vegetarian cuisine . in ethiopia , jerky is called qwant ' a . in addition to salt , it is seasoned with black pepper and either berbere or awaze . d.j . mesfin . exotic ethiopian cooking . ethiopian cookbook enterprises , falls church , md , 2006 . p . 31 a similar product , biltong , is common in south african cuisine ; however , it differs very much in production process and taste . in hausa cuisine , kilishi is a form of dried meat , similar to jerky , that is heavily spiced with peppers . jerky ( or products closely related to it ) is commonly included in military rations . it is particularly attractive to militaries because of its light weight , high level of nutrition , long shelf life and edibility without further preparation . since 1996 , jerky has been selected by astronauts as space food several times for space flight due to its light weight and high level of nutrition . . nutrition . a typical 30 & nbsp ; g portion of fresh jerky contains 10–15 & nbsp ; g of protein , 1 & nbsp ; g of fat , and 0–3 & nbsp ; g of carbohydrates , although some beef jerky can have a protein content above 65 % . since traditional jerky recipes use a basic salt cure , sodium can be a concern for some people . a 30 & nbsp ; g serving of jerky could contain more than 600 & nbsp ; mg of sodium , which would be about 30 % of the recommended usrda . listed in the ingredients , sugar can be the second ingredient listed after beef . ch'arki . ch'arki ( quechua for dried , salted meat , hispanicized spellings charque , charqui , charquí ) is a dried , salted meat product . andean charqui , made in peru , bolivia and chile , is from alpaca , llama or alpaca-llama cross-breeds . peru is the world 's largest producer with approximately 450 tons produced per year . brazilian charque is made from beef . the manufacture of charqui principally consists of salting and sun-drying . in some regions , such as in puno , the meat is sliced before drying ; in others , like cusco , the meat is dried from whole bone-in carcass pieces , known as 'charqui completo' . it was industrialized in charqueadas ( in brazil ) or saladeros ( in argentina and uruguay ) . in the united states ch'arki was anglicised as jerky . when encountered by the spanish , the inca empire supplied tampu ( inns ) along the inca road system with llama ch'arki for travelers . the inca used a freeze drying process that took advantage of their cold dry mountain air and strong sun .