Judah Loew ben Bezalel

biography . image : praha staronova synagoga.jpg thumb the old new synagogue where he officiated the maharal was probably born in poznań , poland , —though perels lists the birth town mistakenly as worms in the holy roman empire—to rabbi bezalel ( loew ) , whose family originated from the rhenish town of worms . perels claimed that his grandfather chajim of worms was the grandson of judah leib the elder and thus a claimant to the davidic line , however modern scholars such as otto muneles have challenged this . many chabad rabbis believe this claim and use it as a central tenant of chabad messianism . the maharal 's birth year is uncertain , with different sources listing 1512 , 1520 and 1526 . his uncle jakob ben chajim was reichsrabbiner ( '' rabbi of the empire '' ) of the holy roman empire , his brother chaim of friedberg a famous rabbinical scholar . there is no documented evidence of his having received formal religious education , leading scholars to conclude that he was an extremely gifted autodidact . yivo encyclopedia - yehudah leib ben betsalel . his family consisted of his wife , pearl , six daughters , and a son , bezalel , who became a rabbi in kolín , but died early in 1600 . he was independently wealthy , probably as a result of his father 's successful business enterprises . he accepted a rabbinical position in 1553 as landesrabbiner of moravia at mikulov ( nikolsburg ) , directing community affairs but also determining which tractate of the talmud was to be studied in the communities in that province . he also revised the community statutes on the election and taxation process . although he retired from moravia in 1588 at age 68 , the communities still considered him an authority long after that . one of his activities in moravia was the rallying against slanderous slurs on legitimacy ( nadler ) that were spread in the community against certain families and could ruin the finding of a shidduch for the children of those families . this phenomenon even affected his own family . he used one of the two yearly grand sermons ( between rosh hashanah and yom kippur 1583 ) to denounce the phenomenon . he moved back to prague in 1588 , where he again accepted a rabbinical position , replacing the retired isaac hayoth . he immediately reiterated his views on nadler . on 23 february 1592 , he had an audience with emperor rudolf ii , which he attended together with his brother sinai and his son-in-law isaac cohen ; prince bertier was present with the emperor . the conversation seems to have been related to kabbalah ( jewish mysticism , hebrew : קַבָּלָה ) a subject which held much fascination for the emperor . in 1592 , the maharal moved to poznań , where he had been elected as chief rabbi of poland . in poznań he composed netivoth olam and part of derech chaim ( see below ) . towards the end of his life he moved back to prague , where he died in 1609 . he was buried in the old jewish cemetery , prague . his name . thumb his name '' löw '' or '' loew '' , derived from the german löwe , '' lion '' ( cf . the yiddish leib of the same origin ) , is a kinnui or substitute name for the hebrew judah or yehuda , as this name—originally of the tribe of judah—is traditionally associated with a lion . in the book of genesis , the patriarch jacob refers to his son judah as a gur aryeh , a '' young lion '' ( genesis 49:9 ) when blessing him . in jewish naming tradition the hebrew name and the substitute name are often combined as a pair , as in this case . the maharal 's classic work on the rashi commentary of the torah is called the gur aryeh al hatorah in hebrew , meaning '' young lion commenting upon the torah '' . the maharal 's tomb in prague is decorated with a heraldic shield with a lion with two intertwined tails ( queue fourchee ) , alluding both to his first name and to bohemia , the arms of which has a two-tailed lion . influence . disciples . it is unknown how many talmudic rabbinical scholars the maharal taught in moravia , but the main disciples from the prague period include rabbis yom-tov lipmann heller and david gans . the former promoted his teacher 's program of regular mishnah study by the masses , and composed his tosefoth yom tov ( a mishnah commentary incorporated into almost all published editions of the mishnah over the past few hundred years ) with this goal in mind . david ganz died young , but produced the work tzemach david , a work of jewish and general history , as well as writing on astronomy ; both the maharal and ganz were in contact with tycho brahe , the famous astronomer . jewish philosophy . maharal 's numerous philosophical works have become cornerstones of jewish thought ; sefaria.org , maharal ( 1520 - 1609 ce ) and , in the words of a modern writer , the maharal '' prevented the balkanization of jewish thought '' . yitzchok adlerstein 2000 , citing rabbi nachman bulman maharal was not a champion of the open study of kabbalah as such , and none of his works are in any way openly devoted to it . instead , what they attempt to do is to make the ideas of the kabbalah ( which he held to be the most deeply true of all the torah ) accessible to the average educated reader , by presenting them in a rigorously philosophical form , couched in terms that are accessible to the public . according to r . loew , only the greatest of torah scholars are able to perceive the full intent of the kabbalistic works in their complex entirety . therefore , although kabbalistic doctrine permeates his writings , it is always presented in a rational and philosophic form . as isaac luria had not by that time reached europe , his main kabbalistic influences appear to have been the zohar , sefer yetzirah , and traditions of the ashkenazi hasidim . faced with the aristotelian interpretation of talmudic aggadah by azariah dei rossi , he was indignant at what he termed the trivialization of the sages ' deep wisdom . in his work be'er ha-golah he vigorously disputes all of dei rossi 's theses , sternly upholding the subtly allegorical nature of aggadah and demonstrating its independence from ( and superiority to ) the superficial observations of natural science . at the same time he was entirely in favor of scientific research , so long as the researcher did not use his observations as permission to contradict the final authority of divine revelation . his constant thesis is that the talmudic , midrashic , and aggadic teachings refer always to matters far beyond the competence of natural science . see . his works inspired the polish branch of hasidism , as well as a more recent wave of torah scholars originating from lithuania and latvia , most markedly rabbi eliyahu eliezer dessler ( 1892–1953 ) as well as rabbi abraham isaac kook ( 1864–1935 ) . a more recent authority who had roots in both traditions was rabbi isaac hutner ( 1906–1980 ) . rabbi hutner succinctly defined the ethos of the maharal 's teachings as being nistar belashon nigleh , meaning ( in hebrew ) : '' the hidden in the language of the talmud '' . that is , the maharal couched kabbalistic ideas in non-kabbalistic language . as a mark of his devotion to the ways of the maharal , rabbi hutner bestowed the name of the maharal 's key work the gur aryeh upon a branch of the yeshiva he headed when he established its kollel ( a yeshiva for post-graduate talmud scholars ) which then became a division of the yeshiva rabbi chaim berlin in new york during the 1950s , known as kollel gur aryeh . both of these institutions , and the graduates they produce , continue to emphasize the intellectual teachings of the maharal . rabbi hutner in turn also maintained that rabbi samson raphael hirsch ( 1808–1888 ) ( 19th-century germany ) must also have been influenced by the maharal 's ideas basing his seemingly rationalism world view on the more abstract and abstruse teachings of the hard-to-understand jewish kabbalah . descendants . among his many descendants were schneur zalman of liadi , founder of chabad hasidism . through this paternal line , loew is the ancestor of many prominent later jewish individuals , including menachem mendel schneerson , seventh rebbe of lubavitch , and violinist yehudi menuhin . maharal is also a ( paternal ) ancestor of rebbe nachman of breslov ( who was also a maternal great-grandson of the baal shem tov , founder of hasidic judaism ) , and an ancestor of aerodynamic theoretician theodore von kármán . his descendants ' surnames include braude , leib , lev , lew , loewy , loeb , lowy , lowi , low-beer , loew , oppenheimer , pfaelzer , schneerson , lowenstein , gurary and keim . file : schneur zalman of liadi.jpg schneur zalman of liadi file : pikiwiki israel 19148 the lubavitcher rebbe in kfar habad.jpg menachem mendel schneerson file : yehudi menuhin 1937.jpg yehudi menuhin file : rabbi nahman tomb ( uman , ukraine ) . jpg rabbi nahman tomb ( uman , ukraine ) . legend of the golem . the maharal is the subject of the legend about the creation of a golem , a creature made out of clay to defend the jews of the prague ghetto from antisemitic attacks , particularly the blood libel . he is said to have used mystical powers based on the esoteric knowledge of how god created adam . the general view of historians and critics is that the legend is a german literary invention of the early 19th century . the earliest known source for the story thus far is the 1834 book der jüdische gil blas by friedrich korn . kohn , j . s . , der jüdische gil blas , leipzig , 1834 , p.20 it has been repeated and adapted many times since . works . he began publishing his books at a very late age . in 1578 , at the age of 66 , he published his first book , gur aryeh ( '' young lion '' , prague 1578 ) - an supercommentary in five volumes for rashi 's commentary on the torah , which goes well beyond that , and four years later he published his book gevuroth hashem ( '' god 's mighty acts '' , cracow 1582 ) anonymously . gur aryeh ( '' young lion '' , prague 1578 ) , a supercommentary on rashi 's pentateuch commentary gevuroth hashem ( '' god 's mighty acts '' , cracow 1582 ) , for the holiday of passover - on the exodus and the miracles . derech chaim ( '' way of life '' , cracow 1589 ) , a commentary on the mishnah tractate avoth derashot ( '' sermons '' , prague 1589 and 1593 ) , collected edition by haim pardes , tel aviv 1996 . netivoth olam ( '' pathways of the world '' , prague 1595-1596 ) , a work of ethics be'er ha-golah ( '' the well of exile '' , prague 1598 ) , an explanatory work on the talmudic and midrashic aggadah , mainly responding to interpretations by the italian scholar azariah dei rossi ( azariah min ha-adumim ) netzach yisrael ( '' the eternity of israel '' , prague 1599 ; netzach '' eternity '' , has the same root as the word for victory ) , on tisha b'av ( an annual day of mourning about the destruction of the temples and the jewish exile ) and the final deliverance tif'ereth yisrael ( '' the glory of israel '' , venice 1599 ) , philosophical exposition on the torah , intended for the holiday of shavuot or chadash ( '' a new light '' , prague 1600 ) , on purim ner mitzvah ( '' the candle of the commandment '' , prague 1600 ) , on hanukkah chiddushei aggadot ( '' novellae on the aggada '' , the narrative portions of the talmud ) , discovered in the 20th century divrei negidim ( '' words of rectors '' ) , a commentary on the seder of pesach , published by a descendant chiddushim al ha-shas , a commentary on talmud , recently published for the first time from a manuscript by machon yerushalayim on bava metzia ; shabbos , and eruvin ; others may be forthcoming . various other works , such as his responsa and works on the shabbat and the holidays of sukkot , rosh hashana and yom kippur , have not been preserved . his works on the holidays bear titles that were inspired by the biblical verse in i chronicles 29:11 : '' yours , o lord , are the greatness , and the might , and the glory , and the victory , and the majesty , for all that is in the heavens and on the earth is yours ; yours is the kingdom and you are he who is exalted over everything as the leader . '' the book of '' greatness '' ( gedula ) on the sabbath was not preserved , but the book of '' power '' ( gevurah ) is gevurath hashem , the book of glory ( tif'arah ) is tif'ereth yisrael , and the book of '' eternity '' or '' victory '' ( netzach ) is netzach yisrael . commemoration . in april 1997 , czech republic and israel jointly issued a set of stamps , one of which featured the tombstone of loew . jewish monuments in prague joint isuue , israelphilately.org.il in may 2009 , the czech post issued a stamp commemorating the 400th anniversary of loew 's death . rabbi judah loew , česká pošta in june 2009 the czech mint issued a commemorative coin marking the same milestone . 2009 czech 200kr silver proof '' judah loew '' . see also . kerem maharal , a moshav in northern israel named in his honour andré neher statue of judah loew ben bezalel , prague . notes and references . further reading . byron l . sherwin , mystical theology and social dissent : the life and works of judah loew of prague ( fairleigh dickinson university press , 1982 ) rivka schatz uffenheimer , '' maharal 's conception of law- antithesis to natural law '' jewish law annual vol . vi . rivka schatz uffenheimer , '' existence and eschatology in the teachings of the maharal '' immanuel 14 ( spring 1982 ) 66–97 ; immanuel 15 ( winter 1982-3 ) 62–72 . moshe zuriel '' numbers : their meaning and symbolism according to maharal '' hebrew hamaayan 18:3 ( 1978 ) 14–23 ; 18:4 ( 1978 ) 30–41 , reprinted in sefer ozrot gedolei yisroel ( jerusalem:2000 ) volume 1 , pp . & nbsp ; 204–228 . martin buber , '' the beginning of the national idea '' on zion : the history of an idea . ( new york , schocken books , 1973 ) . otto dov kulka , '' the historical background of the national and educational teachings of the maharal of prague '' hebrew zion 50 ( 1985 ) 277–320 . benjamin gross , netzah yisrael ( tel aviv : devir , 1974 ) mordechai breuer , '' the maharal of prague 's disputation with christians : a reappraisal of be'er ha-golah '' in tarbiẕ ( 1986 ) 253-260 adlerstein y . be'er hagolah : the classic defense of rabbinic judaism through the profundity of the aggadah . new york , ny : mesorah publications , 2000 . aharon kleinberger , the educational theory of the maharal of prague hebrew ( magnes : 1962 ) . andre neher , jewish thought and the scientific revolution : david gans ( 1541–1613 ) and his times ( oxford-new york : littman library , 1986 ) neher , faust et le maharal de prague : le mythe et le reel ( paris : presses universitaires de france , 1987 ) ; neher , le puits de l'exil : la theologie dialectique du maharal de prague ( paris : a . michel , 1996 ) neher , mishnato shel ha-maharal mi-prague , reʾuven mass , c2003 . gross , benjamin , yehi or ( reʾuven mass , 1995 ) . gross , benjamin , netsah yiśraʾel tel aviv : devir , 1974 . eliyahu yaakov deutsch , shabbos insights of the maharal jerusalem : targum , 2009 . external links . yivo encyclopedia - yehudah leib ben betsalel yehuda loew — the maharal jewishvirtuallibrary.org family tree shiurim on derech chaim at torah.org . resources . tiferet yisrael , hebrew full-text