Remembrance Sunday

history . the focus of remembrance for the dead of the first world war originally fell on armistice day itself , commencing in 1919 . as well as the national service in london , events were staged at town and village war memorials , often featuring processions of civic dignitaries and veterans . the first uk commemoration of the end of world war 1 at buckingham palace , with king george v hosting a '' banquet in honour of the president of the french republic '' . a two-minute silence was observed at 11am on 11 november 1919 . while the initial , spontaneous public reaction when the armistice was signed on the 11 november 1918 was jubilation and celebration , the 1919 banquet was criticised for being too celebratory . the following year , armistice day in 1920 , the funeral of unknown soldier took place at the london cenotaph and a two-minute silence was observed throughout the nation . buses halted , electricity was cut to tram lines , and even trading on the london stock exchange halted . starting in 1921 , the royal british legion began selling remembrance poppy to raise funds for ex-service men . throughout the 1920s and 1930s the character of the remembrance events became politicised . while for some , armistice day was a day for recognising the horrors of war , never to be repeated ; for others the day symbolised the honour of military service . in 1923 a christian pacifist mp was elected to parliament . in the middle 1930s the peace pledge union gained wide support . pacifism gained great publicity from a 1933 student debate in the oxford university union that voted for a resolution that 'tthe king and country debate ' . the first white poppy were sold by the co-operative women 's guild in 1933 . during the second world war , the commemorations were moved to the sunday preceding 11 november as an emergency measure to avoid disruption of the production of vital war materials . in may 1945 , just before ve day , the new government began consultation with the churches and the british legion on the future of remembrance . armistice day in 1945 actually fell on a sunday , avoiding the need to change the wartime practice . some thought that to continue with the 11 november would focus more on the first world war and downplay the importance of the second . other dates suggested were 8 may ( ve day ) , 6 june ( d-day ) , 15 august ( vj day ) , 3 september ( the declaration of war ) , and even 15 june ( the signing of the magna carta in 1215 ) . the archbishop of westminster proposed that the second sunday in november should be named remembrance sunday in commemoration of both world wars , a suggestion which was endorsed by the home office in january 1946 . in june of that year , the prime minister , clement attlee , announced in the house of commons that '' the government felt that this view would commend itself to all quarters of the country . i am glad to say that it has now found general acceptance here and has been approved by the king . '' cecil 1998 , pp . 357-358 . national ceremony in the united kingdom . the national ceremony is held in london at the cenotaph on whitehall , starting with two-minute silence at 11am and concluding with the end of the nation 's thank you procession at 1:30 & nbsp ; p.m . the main part of the ceremony consists of the laying of wreaths by members of the royal family and other dignitaries , prayers , music and a parade by thousands of military and other units . regional and local ceremonies . significant ceremonies also take place in the capitals of the nations and across the regions of the united kingdom . nation unites to remember fallen . most notably at the scottish national war memorial , in edinburgh in the grounds of edinburgh castle , services held to honour war dead . the welsh national war memorial in cardiff army band heads remembrance event . and at the northern ireland war memorial and cenotaph in belfast in the grounds of the belfast city hall . war dead are remembered across ni . typically , poppy wreaths are laid by representatives of the crown , the armed forces , and local civic leaders , as well as by local organisations such as ex-servicemen organisations , cadets , the scouts , guides , boys ' brigade , st john ambulance and the salvation army . the start and end of the silence is often also marked by the firing of an artillery . a minute 's or two minutes ' silence is also frequently incorporated into church services . . british overseas territories . in the past , the secretary of state for foreign and commonwealth affairs laid a wreath on behalf of all the british overseas territories . however , since 2001 there has been a campaign by britain 's overseas territories association for the right to lay a wreath themselves at the annual service at the cenotaph . in 2008 the labour government agreed that one wreath could be laid for all 14 territories by a representative of the territories . . northern ireland . in northern ireland , remembrance sunday has tended to be associated with unionists . most irish nationalism and republicans do not take part in the public commemoration of british soldiers organised by the royal british legion . this is partly due to the actions of the british army during the troubles and its role in irish war of independence . however , some moderate nationalists have attended remembrance day events as a way to connect with the unionist community . in 1987 a bomb was detonated by the provisional irish republican army ( ira ) just before a remembrance sunday ceremony in enniskillen , killing eleven people . the ira said it had made a mistake and had been targeting soldiers parading to the war memorial . the republic of ireland has its own national day of commemoration in july for all irish people who died in war . other ceremonies . from 1919 until 1945 , armistice day observance was always on 11 november itself . it was then moved to remembrance sunday , but since the 50th anniversary of the end of the second world war in 1995 , it has become usual to hold ceremonies on both armistice day and remembrance sunday . in 2006 , then chancellor of the exchequer gordon brown proposed that in addition to remembrance sunday , a new national day to celebrate the achievements of veterans should be instituted . the '' veterans day '' , to be held in the summer , would be similar to veterans day celebrations in the united states . this has now been renamed '' armed forces day '' , to include currently serving troops to service families , and from veterans to cadets . the first '' armed forces day '' was held on 27 june 2009 . submariners hold an additional remembrance walk and ceremony on the sunday before remembrance sunday , which has the submariners memorial as its focal point . outside the united kingdom . outside the united kingdom anglican and church of scotland churches often have a commemorative service on remembrance sunday . in the republic of ireland there is an ecumenical service in st patrick 's cathedral , dublin , the church of ireland 's national cathedral . since 1993 the president of ireland has attended this service . the state has its own national day of commemoration ( held in july ) for all irish men and women who have died in war . in the united states it is celebrated by many anglo-catholic churches in the episcopal church . the anglican church of korea also celebrates the day to commemorate , in particular , the commonwealth soldiers who fought in the korean war with a service at the seoul anglican cathedral . in new zealand an attempt was made to change armistice day to remembrance sunday after world war ii but it was a failure , partly owing to competition from anzac day . helen robinson , 'lest we forget ? the fading of new zealand war commemorations , 1946–1966 ' , new zealand journal of history , 44 , 1 ( 2010 ) . every year , the british deputy high commission in kolkata , india , organises a remembrance sunday commemoration at the glorious dead cenotaph in the maidan . . controversy . it is a common theme in british tabloid journalism in october and november to '' expose '' politicians and celebrities who have chosen not to wear a red royal british legion poppy . critics have labelled this '' poppy fascism '' , as persons who refuse to wear poppies on tv or at sporting events routinely receive death threats . a common criticism of remembrance sunday ceremonies and the royal british legion is that by focusing only on veterans and military persons who have died , the vast majority of the casualties of war ( civilians ) are forgotten . . see also . festival of remembrance ( performance in the royal albert hall on the saturday before remembrance sunday ) national service of remembrance remembrance day remembrance poppy two-minute silence . references . external links . royal british legion the commonwealth war graves commission the department for culture , media and sport – uk national service of remembrance