Bud Powell

life and career . early life . powell 's father was a stride pianist . gitler , p . 112 . powell started classical piano lessons at the age of five . his teacher , hired by his father , was a west indian man named rawlins . at 10 years of age , powell showed interest in the swing music that could be heard all over the neighborhood . he first appeared in public at a rent party , crawford , p . 12 . where he mimicked fats waller 's playing style . the first jazz composition that he mastered was james p . johnson 's '' carolina shout '' . pullman , chapter 1 . powell 's older brother , william , played trumpet and violin , and by the age of 15 powell was playing in william 's band . powell heard art tatum on the radio and tried to match his technique . powell 's younger brother , richie powell , was also a noted bebop pianist . early to mid-1940s . in his youth powell listened to the adventurous performances at uptown house , a venue near his home . this was where charlie parker first appeared as a solo act when he briefly lived in new york . patrick , pp . 159–161 . thelonious monk played at uptown house . when monk met powell hentoff p . 16 . he introduced powell to musicians who were starting to play bebop at minton 's playhouse . monk was a resident pianist , and he presented powell as his protégé . their mutual affection grew , and monk became powell 's greatest mentor . powell eagerly experimented with monk 's idea . monk 's composition '' in walked bud '' is a tribute to their time together in harlem . jazz : the first 100 years . henry martin and keith waters . cengage learning , 2005 . p . 215 . powell was engaged in a series of dance bands , his incubation culminating in becoming the pianist for the swing orchestra of cootie williams . in late 1943 he was offered the chance to appear at a nightclub with the quintet of oscar pettiford and dizzy gillespie , but powell 's mother decided he would continue with the more secure job with the popular williams . powell was the pianist on a handful of williams 's recording dates in 1944 . the last included the first recording of monk 's '' 'round midnight '' . his job with williams was terminated in philadelphia in january 1945 . after the band finished for the night , powell wandered near broad street station and was apprehended , drunk , by the private railroad police . he was beaten by them and incarcerated briefly by the city police . ten days after his release , his headaches persisted and he was hospitalized at bellevue , an observation ward , and then in a state psychiatric hospital sixty miles away . he remained there for two and a half months . pullman , p . 50 . powell resumed playing in manhattan after released . in 1945–46 he recorded with frank socolow , sarah vaughan , dexter gordon , j . j . johnson , sonny stitt , fats navarro , and kenny clarke . powell became known for his sight-reading and his skill at fast tempos . on january 10 , 1947 , powell recorded his first session as a leader , which included 8 pieces for de luxe records with max roach and curly russell as accompanists . the recordings were unreleased until 1949 , when roost records bought the masters and released them on a series of 78 rpm records . musicologist guthrie ramsey wrote of the session that '' powell proves himself the equal of any of the other beboppers in technique , versatility , and feeling . '' charlie parker chose powell to be his pianist on a may 1947 quintet recording session with miles davis , tommy potter , and max roach ; this was the only studio session in which parker and powell played together . . hospitalization ( 1947–1948 ) . the parker session aside , powell performed on two other records and seldom appeared at nightclubs in 1947 . in november , he had an altercation with a customer at a bar in harlem . in the ensuing fight , powell was hit over his eye with a bottle . when the staff at harlem hospital found him incoherent and rambunctious , they sent him to bellevue , which had a record of his previous confinements . he was sent to creedmoor state hospital , where he spent eleven months . powell adjusted to being in the hospital , though in psychiatric interviews he expressed feelings of persecution founded in racism . from february to april 1948 , he received electroconvulsive therapy after an outburst which may have been prompted by learning from his girlfriend that she was pregnant with their child . pullman , chapters 4,5 . the electroconvulsive therapy was considered ineffective , so the doctors gave him a second series of treatments in may . he was released in october 1948 . . solo and trio recordings ( 1949–1958 ) . after a brief hospitalization in early 1949 , powell made several recordings , most of them for blue note , mercury , norgran , and clef . the first blue note session in august 1949 included fats navarro , sonny rollins , tommy potter and roy haynes , and the compositions '' bouncing with bud '' and '' dance of the infidels '' . the second blue note session in 1951 was a trio with curley russell and max roach and included '' parisian thoroughfare '' and '' un poco loco '' . the latter was selected by literary critic harold bloom for his short list of the harold bloom the american sublime . modern critical interpretations : thomas pynchon 's gravity 's rainbow . ed . harold bloom . new york : chelsea house , 1986 . sessions for granz included ray brown , george duvivier , percy heath , roach , russell , lloyd trotman , art blakey , kenny clarke , osie johnson , buddy rich , and art taylor . powell 's rivalry with parker led to feuding and bitterness on the bandstand . contributing factors were powell 's worsening mental and physical health . powell recorded for blue note and granz throughout the 1950s , interrupted by another stay in a mental hospital from late 1951 to early 1953 after being arrested for possession of marijuana . he was released into the guardianship of oscar goodstein , owner of the birdland nightclub . a 1953 trio session for blue note with duvivier and taylor included powell 's composition '' glass enclosure '' , inspired by his near-imprisonment in goodstein 's apartment . on may 15 , 1953 he played at massey hall in toronto with the quintet , including charlie parker , dizzy gillespie , charles mingus , and max roach . the performance was recorded and released by debut records as the album jazz at massey hall . after being released from the hospital , his piano playing was negatively affected by the largactil he was taking as treatment for schizophrenia . in 1956 his brother richie powell and trumpeter clifford brown were killed in a car crash . . paris ( 1959–1963 ) . after several more periods in the hospital , powell moved to paris in 1959 with altevia '' buttercup '' edwards , whom he had met after an incarceration in 1954 . pullman , chapter 10 . the couple moved into the hotel la louisiane . she managed his finances and his medicine . powell continued to perform and record . last years ( 1964–1966 ) . in 1963 , powell contracted tuberculosis . during the next year , he returned to new york to perform at birdland with drummer horace arnold and bassist john ore . his performances during these years were adversely affected by his alcoholism . his emotions became unbalanced , and he was hospitalized in new york after months of erratic behavior and self-neglect . on july 31 , 1966 , he died of tuberculosis , malnutrition , and alcoholism . '' powell , earl 'bud ' ( 1924–1966 ) '' at blackpast.org . . music . development . bud powell was influenced primarily by thelonious monk and art tatum . . improvisation and comping . his solos imitated the attack of horn players , contained frequent arpeggios , and utilized much chromaticism . according to author alan morrison , '' powell freed the right hand for continuous linear exploration at the expense of developing the left . '' morrison , p . 69 . his comping often consisted of single bass notes outlining the root and fifth . he used voicings of the root and the tenth or the root with the minor seventh . . reception and influence . miles davis in his autobiography said of powell : '' he was one of the few musicians i knew who could play , write , and read all kinds of music . '' . '' bud was a genius piano player–the best there was of all the bebop piano players . '' . in 1986 francis paudras wrote a book about his friendship with powell , translated into english in 1997 as dance of the infidels : a portrait of bud powell . the book was the basis for round midnight , a film inspired by the lives of powell and lester young , in which dexter gordon played the lead role of an expatriate jazzman in paris . in february 2012 a biography titled wail : the life of bud powell by peter pullman was released as an ebook . powell influenced countless younger musicians , especially pianists . these included horace silver , wynton kelly , andre previn , bogdonov , p . 1364 . mccoy tyner , cedar walton , deardra shuler , '' cedar walton and barry harris to play jazz at lincoln center '' , new york amsterdam news , june 20 , 2013 . and chick corea . corea debuted a song called '' bud powell '' on his live album with gary burton , in concert , zürich , october 28 , 1979 , and in 1997 dedicated an entire album , remembering bud powell to him . bill evans , who described powell as his single greatest influence , evans paid the pianist a tribute in 1979 : '' if i had to choose one single musician for his artistic integrity , for the incomparable originality of his creation and the grandeur of his work , it would be bud powell . he was in a class by himself '' . herbie hancock said of powell , in a down beat magazine interview in 1966 : '' he was the foundation out of which stemmed the whole edifice of modern jazz piano '' . jazz pianist bill cunliffe said powell was '' the first pianist to take charlie parker 's language and adapt it successfully to the piano . '' this was , in part , due to his desire to see the pianist get the adulation usually reserved for the saxophonist or trumpeter . bishop , p . 41 . the drummer art taylor , who is listed among the personnel on about a dozen powell recordings , elicited comments concerning powell from numerous musicians in his 1993 book of interviews , notes and tones . among the comments were these : art blakey : '' i think there was a time when bud powell was playing more than charlie parker . '' don cherry : '' bud . could play the same thing differently each time . '' kenny clarke : '' an exceptional musician . '' erroll garner : '' bud was the second greatest thing to art tatum . bud was a genius on the piano . '' hampton hawes : '' bud powell was the greatest be-bop piano player in the world . nobody could phrase like him . '' freddie hubbard : '' to me , they bud powell and dizzy gillespie were true geniuses to create something that spontaneous . '' elvin jones : '' i always had the impression that bud had been hurt so much . he was like a very delicate piece of china . i think he was an extremely sensitive person , a very beautiful person . he was really nice , and i loved him . i thought he was a genius in what he was doing . his ideas about modern music were revolutionary . there are very few pianists even now who have approached the level of proficiency which bud powell attained and consistently maintained . he 's one of the masters . '' carmen mcrae : '' he was a phenomenal pianist , a cat whose potential never really got where it could have gotten to . i think our way of american life has a lot to do with it . '' max roach : '' bud powell played a major part in my development . '' sonny rollins : '' in my opinion , bud was a genius just like bird . they were untouchable as far as their musicianship was concerned . they could do no wrong in anything they did . '' randy weston : '' without a doubt he is one of our leaders . '' tony williams : '' i wish i had been born earlier because of that whole period with bud and bird . '' . discography . references . sources . . external links . bud powell discography '' bud powell anthology '' – essays and transcriptions by ethan iverson