New Bedford River

history . in the 1620s , there was discontent in the region through which the new bedford river now flows , as the land was regularly inundated by flood water . francis russell , 4th earl of bedford , who owned large tracts of land in the vicinity , agreed to carry out drainage works in 1630 , in return for of the land which would be reclaimed . he was joined in the project by thirteen other adventurers , who formed a corporation and obtained a charter to carry out the work in 1634 . the dutch engineer cornelius vermuyden was engaged to oversee the work , which included nine major drainage channels , including the bedford river , which ran from earith to salter 's lode . the tract of land through which it ran became known as the bedford level , and the scheme was declared to be complete in 1637 . however , in 1638 , that decision was reversed , and king charles i became the undertaker to ensure the work was completed . the adventurers were given for the work that had already been carried out , and further work was again to be overseen by vermuyden , but little work was done , as the english civil war intervened . the existing works were neglected , and some were deliberately damaged during the hostilities . in 1649 , interest in the drainage of the bedford level resumed , and a second drainage act was obtained . it became known as the 'pretended act ' , and authorised william russell , 1st duke of bedford , to carry out further work , the chief of which was a second channel parallel to the bedford river . vermuyden was again the engineer , and the new channel was completed in 1652 . the bedford river became known as the old bedford river , and the new channel became the new bedford river . sluices were built at earith and denver , and the river carried most of the flow of the river great ouse , resulting in its old course via ely becoming just a drainage channel . the corporation of the bedford level was set up , and took control of the river and the drainage channels , under the terms of the general drainage act , passed in 1663 . this move was not popular with those engaged in navigation on the great ouse , as the sluices were operated for the benefit of the drainage scheme , and boats often had to wait for days or weeks while the sluices remained closed . the destruction of the denver sluice in 1713 , caused by exceptional flood levels , was celebrated by the boatmen , but the resultant flooding led to the corporation building a new sluice between 1748 and 1750 . the concerns of the boatmen were placated by the provision of a navigation lock in the structure . some of the workers who built the new bedford river may have been scottish prisoners-of-war captured at the battle of dunbar , since a number of such prisoners were used on drainage schemes in the fens , because labourers were scarce . after 1652 , they were supplemented by dutch prisoners , as a result of sea battles between admiral blake and maarten tromp during the first anglo-dutch war , and probably by a colony of french workers stationed near thorney abbey . towards the northern end of the washes , the new bedford river is joined by the river delph at welmore lake sluice . the origins of this channel , which is sometimes called the thirty-foot drain , are obscure , although it was built to assist the removal of water from the washlands , according to c . n . cole writing in 1784 . prior to 1825 , there was a dam where the sluice is located , and water was let out of the washland by cutting a slot in it , which the flood water enlarged as it passed through . the cost of rebuilding the dam at the end of the process was considerable , and this unsatisfactory arrangement was replaced by a sluice . at the same time , the new bedford river was made wider and deeper , while some of the flood banks were also raised . at its southern end , the river delph is connected to the old bedford river at a double bend near welches dam . the northern half of the old bedford river is no longer connected to its southern half . it is not known exactly when this configuration was built , although it may have been between 1789 and 1821 , since cole 's map of 1789 shows the old bedford river proceeding in a straight line , and baker 's map of 1821 shows two rivers , each with a double bend . blair argues for a date soon after the new bedford river was built , however , since welches dam is named after edmund welche , who worked with vermuyden , and the dam in question was originally built across the old bedford river . . course . the new bedford river follows a fairly straight course , heading approximately north-east for from earith to denver sluice . while there are no real restrictions on the length or width of boats , draught is limited to and headroom to , although the river is tidal , and so these values can fluctuate depending on the state of the tide . the area between the two bedford rivers , long and wide at their greatest separation near welney , measured using google earth is below the rivers and below sea level , and is frequently flooded during winter . there is a sluice at earith which is used to control the waters of the river great ouse . it was built with nine openings in 1637 , but was subsequently rebuilt with seven openings in 1824 , and again with three openings in 1954 . when flows in the upper river are normal , the sluice gates are closed , and most of the flow is routed along the tidal new bedford river . as flows increase , the sluices are opened , and water flows along the old bedford river , which progressively floods the of washlands which comprise the ouse washes . at welney , these washes provide an ideal habitat for wildfowl and other birds , and the wildfowl and wetlands trust has established a nature reserve here , the wwt welney . the reserve occupies , and is accessible from the a1101 bridge by following a minor road to the carpark , and then crossing the new bedford river by a footbridge . it is important for its wild flowers , dragonflies and butterflies , as well as the birds , which are most numerous when the washland is flooded . there are public footpaths on both sides of the river for most of its length , the only exception being a short section of the western bank near earith . a long-distance footpath called the hereward way crosses the river by the a1101 bridge at welney , and then follows the eastern bank southwards almost to the march to ely railway line . it turns to the east a little before the bridge , following the north bank of the engine basin , a drainage channel which is pumped into the river by the hundred foot pumping station . ordnance survey , 1:25,000 map . bibliography . . references .