Agfa-Gevaert

history . 1867 the company aktiengesellschaft für anilinfabrikation ( corporation for aniline production ) was founded in rummelsburg ( now in the lichtenberg borough of berlin ) as a manufacturer of dyes and stains . it became a public limited company in 1873 . the founders were paul mendelssohn bartholdy ( son of composer felix mendelssohn bartholdy ) and carl alexander von martius . 1894 the company l . gevaert & cie was founded in antwerp , belgium , arising from the workshop for the manufacture of photographic paper belonging to lieven gevaert . 1897 appearance of the agfa trade mark . 1898 introduction of x-ray plates and film products . 1903 production of first cinematographic film . 1925 as part of the consolidation of the german chemical industry , agfa became part of ig farben . ernst bäumler : '' 100 jahre chemie '' , 1963 , issued on the 100th anniversary of the farbwerke hoechst ag the photographic activities are combined with those of bayer , including a camera factory in munich . 1928 acquired ansco , an american photographic manufacturer , whose products were sold under the agfa-ansco brand name . 1936 agfacolor neu a pioneering color film for amateurs and professionals . 1940 agfacolor negative-positive color material is used for the first time for a feature film frauen sind doch bessere diplomaten ( women make the best diplomats ) by the german ufa film studios . 1941 american assets were seized during world war ii as enemy property and became gaf materials corporation , whose photographic products reverted to the ansco brand name . 1942 introduction of intensifying screen products . 1945 when the allies broke up ig farben to reduce the size of german chemical industry , agfa reappeared as an individual business . an agfa plant located in what was to become east germany became the foundation of orwo . 1952 re-establishment of agfa ag as a wholly owned subsidiary of bayer in leverkusen . 1964 merger of agfa ag and gevaert photo-producten n.v . with bayer ag and gevaert each holding a 50 % interest in the new operating company . 1970 introduction of agfacontour professional sheet film . 1972 introduction of mammography film / screen products . 1981 bayer buys out gevaert and becomes 100 % owner . 1988 takeover of compugraphic corporation ( prepress systems ) . 1990 sale of magnetic tape business . introduction of computed radiography ( cr ) products . 1994 introduction of pacs products . 1996 acquisition of hoechst 's printing plate and proofing business . 1997 sale of the company 's film recorder division to german ccg digital image technology . about ccg digital image technology , definity35mm.com , retrieved 2009-01-11 . 1998 acquisition of dupont 's offset printing and graphic arts film business . sale of the company 's copier systems business to lanier worldwide inc . acquisition of cea ab ( x-ray film products ) . acquisition of monotype corporation 1999 acquisition of sterling diagnostic imaging ( x-ray film and equipment ) . separation of agfa from bayer . initial public offering of agfa-gevaert shares on june 1 . agfa listed on brussels and frankfurt stock exchanges . 2000 acquisition of krautkramer , a producer of ultrasound systems for non-destructive testing . acquisition of quadrat , a ghent-based european producer of radiology information systems . 2001 acquisition of autologic , an american producer of systems for prepress automation . acquisition of talk technology , a producer of medical voice recognition systems . acquisition of the german company seifert and the american company pantak , producers of industrial x-ray equipment for non-destructive testing applications . acquisition of a minority interest in medivision , a developer and manufacturer of digital imaging systems for ophthalmology . agfa stopped its desktop scanners and digital camera business in september 2001 . agfa does not provide any further support . 2002 acquisition of mitra imaging inc . , a developer of medical imaging and information systems for healthcare . bayer sells its remaining 30 % stake in agfa . 2003 opening of new printing plate factory in wuxi , china . sale of non-destructive testing business to general electric . 2004 acquisition of dotrix , a belgian producer of digital colour printing systems for industrial applications . acquisition of lastra , an italian manufacturer of plates , chemicals and equipment for the offset printing industry . sale of the consumer imaging division to a company founded via management buy out , named agfaphoto , and held by an investment company . after one year , agfaphoto files for bankruptcy . acquisition of proimage , an israeli developer of browser-based digital workflow solutions for the newspaper and printing industries . acquisition of symphonie on line , a french information technology company and developer of epr ( electronic patient record ) systems . sale of agfa monotype corporation , a provider of fonts and font-related software technology , to boston-based private equity investor ta associates . 2005 acquisition of gwi , a german developer of healthcare information systems for medical records , nursing , business management , and facility administration . acquisition of heartlab , inc . , a u.s . developer of cardiology image and information management systems . acquisition of med2rad an italian developer of radiology information systems . introduction of industrial inkjet products . 2009 acquisition of insight agents , a european developer and producer of contrast media . acquisition of gandi innovations , a producer of large-format inkjet systems . 2010 agfa graphics and shenzhen brothers create the agfa graphics asia joint venture to reinforce their position in the greater china and asean region . acquisition of the harold m . pitman company a us supplier of products and systems for the graphic industry . 2011 acquisition of wpd , a brazilian supplier of healthcare it systems . company structure . headquartered in mortsel , belgium , agfa has sales organisations in 40 countries . in countries where agfa does not have its own sales organisation , the market is served by a network of agents and representatives . at the end of 2011 , the company had 11,728 employees ( full-time equivalent permanent ) worldwide . agfa has manufacturing plants around the world . the largest production and research centres are based in belgium , the united states , canada , germany , france , italy and china . net sales for 2011 totalled 3,023 million euros . since january 1 , 2019 , two new entities emerged within the agfa-gevaert group : agfa healthcare ( itco ) and agfa ( mainco ) . agfa healthcare groups all it-related activities of the former agfa healthcare business group . the newer agfa includes the activities of the former agfa graphics and agfa specialty products business groups , as well as the imaging activities of the former agfa healthcare business group . . agfa healthcare . agfa healthcare is a developer of medical imaging information systems , with main offices in mortsel , ghent , belgium , waterloo , ontario , shanghai , vienna , trier and bonn . agfa division business groups . the activities of the agfa division have been subdivided into three groups : offset solutions ( the prepress business of the former agfa graphics business group ) , digital print & chemicals ( the inkjet business of the former agfa graphics business group and the activities of the former agfa specialty products business group ) and radiology solutions ( the imaging activities of the former agfa healthcare business group ) . . products . in 2004 , agfa-gevaert withdrew from the consumer market , including photographic film , cameras and other photographic equipment . because agfa-gevaert still produce photographic films for the aerial photography market , it is still possible to buy fresh , agfa-produced photographic films for use in consumer cameras . they are sold by the lomography society and rollei and are branded accordingly . this is because those companies purchase the aerial photography film from agfa-gevaert , and then cut and package it into consumer photographic formats . as of 2012 , such products carry a small agfa logo discreetly on their packaging , but are not sold as agfa branded products . by contrast , agfaphoto branded photographic films are not made by agfa-gevaert at all , originally having been made by the now closed ferrania plant in italy . agfaphoto films are now produced by fujifilm in japan for lupus imaging media . agfa cameras . agfa produced a range of cameras which included : ambiflex silette series clipper billy record isolette isola series click clack optima series , e.g . optima 1a optima sensor series , e.g . optima 1535 sensor and optima flash sensor selectronic s series agfamatic series agfamatic pocket series agfa mini matching accessories , such as flashguns . slr . agfa flexilette selectronic series ( rebranded products of chinon ) . agfa slide projectors . including , roughly in chronological order : agfa opticus 100 agfa agfacolor 50 automatic agfa diamator series , like models h , m , 1500 . agfa consumer and professional films . black & white films : agfa pd16 agfapan 25 , 100 and 400 agfapan apx 25 , 100 and 400 ( revivals of 100 and 400 emulsion were announced by adox ) isopan iss ( super special ) isopan f ( fine grain ) isopan ultra isopan record agfa vario-xl ( c-41 process chromogenic film ) dia-direct ( reversal film ) scala ( reversal film ) agfacontour professional film colour reversal film : agfacolor agfachrome ct 18 and ct 21 agfachrome series agfachrome r 100 s agfachrome 50 s and 50 l professional agfachrome rs and rs plus professional series agfachrome rsx and rsx ii professional series agfachrome ct , ctx and ct precisa series ( excluding new agfaphoto ct precisa 100 ) colour negative films : agfacolor cn14 , cn17 , cn17m , cn17 special , cns and cns2 agfacolor series agfacolor xr series agfacolor xrg series agfacolor xrs professional series agfacolor optima , optima ii and new optima professional series agfacolor portrait 160 professional agfacolor ultra 50 professional and ultra 100 agfacolor vista series ( excluding new agfaphoto vista 200 ) while agfa has retired from the photography branch , and the agfaphoto brand was sold to a reseller named lupus imaging , the surviving belgian industrial branch of agfa continues to produce , among other things , b/w , colour negative and colour reversal materials for aerial photography . some of these are cut to the usual 135 and 120 formats by maco and distributed under the brand name rollei . specifically , these re-branded agfa materials include rollei retro 80s , 200s and 400s , digibase cn200 and cr200 . scanners . agfa produced many image scanners in the arcus , duoscan , snapscan , studioscan and studiostar ranges . while they have all been discontinued and up-to-date drivers for them are not available from agfa , vuescan software supports many agfa scanners on current computer operating systems . lists 29 agfa scanners . . agfa darkroom equipment . agfa varioscop enlargers agfa variomat print easels for automatic exposure darkroom safety lights agfa rondinax and rondix daylight developing tanks . agfa papers . agfa photographic papers were of very high quality ; lines included : brovira portriga rapid lupex the production of material identical to the last generation of fibre-based and resin-coated photographic agfa multigrade papers has been resumed by adox . adox.de . see also . agfaphoto agfacolor gevacolor andré leysen list of photographic equipment makers christian reinaudo list of photographic films list of discontinued photographic films mixlink . references . external links . agfahealthcare - international website healthcare it agfaphoto gmbh - consumer imaging division which was sold off .