The Huntley–Brinkley Report

overview . background . by 1956 , nbc executives had grown dissatisfied with swayze in his role anchoring the network 's evening news program , which fell behind its main competition , cbs 's cbs evening news , in 1955 . network executive ben park suggested replacing swayze with chet huntley and david brinkley , who had garnered favorable attention anchoring nbc 's coverage of the national political conventions that summer . bill mcandrew , nbc 's director of news ( later nbc news president ) , had seen a highly rated local news program on nbc affiliate wsaz-tv in huntington , west virginia , with two anchors reporting from different cities . he replaced camel news caravan with the huntley-brinkley report , which premiered on october 29 , 1956 , with huntley in new york and brinkley in washington . producer reuven frank , who had advocated pairing huntley and brinkley for the convention coverage , thought using two anchors on a regular news program '' was one of the dumber ideas i had ever heard . '' nonetheless , on the day of the new program 's first broadcast , frank authored the program 's closing line , '' good night , chet . good night , david . and good night , for nbc news . '' this exchange became one of television 's most famous catchphrases even though both huntley and brinkley initially disliked it . huntley handled the bulk of the news most nights , with brinkley specializing in washington-area topics such as the white house , u.s . congress , and the pentagon . ( when one was on vacation the other would typically handle the full broadcast alone , leaving viewers with a familiar anchor instead of a little-known substitute such as a field reporter . ) the closing credits music for the broadcast was the second movement ( scherzo ) of symphony no . 9 ( beethoven ) , from the 1952 studio recording with arturo toscanini conducting the nbc symphony orchestra . enter texaco . initially , the program lost audience from swayze 's program , and president dwight d . eisenhower let it be known that he was displeased by the switch . in the summer of 1957 , the program had no advertisers . as its content improved , though , it began attracting critical praise and a larger audience , and by 1958 , it had pulled even with cbs 's program . the program received a big boost when , in june 1958 , texaco began purchasing all of its advertising , an arrangement that continued for three years . . critical reception . critics considered huntley to possess one of the best broadcast voices ever heard , and brinkley 's dry , often witty , newswriting presented viewers a contrast to the often sober output from cbs news . the program received a peabody award in 1958 for '' outstanding achievement in news , '' the awards committee noting that the anchors had '' developed a mature and intelligent treatment of the news that has become a welcome and refreshing institution for millions of viewers . '' the program received the award again two years later in the same category , the committee concluding that huntley and brinkley had '' dominated the news division of television so completely in the past year that it would be unthinkable to present a peabody award in that category to anybody else . '' by that time , the program had surpassed cbs 's evening news program , douglas edwards with the news , in ratings and maintained higher viewership levels for much of the 1960s , even after walter cronkite took over cbs 's competing program ( initially named walter cronkite with the news in 1962 and renamed the cbs evening news with walter cronkite in 1963 ) . it received eight emmy awards in its 14-year run . huntley and brinkley conveyed a strong chemistry , and a survey for nbc later found that viewers liked that the anchors talked to each other . in fact , aside from their sign-off , huntley and brinkley 's only communication came when one anchor finished a story and handed off to the other by saying the other 's name , a signal to an at & t technician to switch the long-distance transmission lines from new york to washington or vice versa . the anchors gained great celebrity , and surveys showed them better known than john wayne , cary grant , jimmy stewart , or the beatles . in 1961 , frank sinatra and milton berle entertained a crowd in washington by singing , to the tune of '' love and marriage , '' '' huntley , brinkley/huntley , brinkley/one is glum , the other quite twinkly . '' the anchors appeared on the cover of newsweek on march 13 , 1961 , with a similar tagline , '' tv 's huntley and brinkley : one is solemn , the other twinkly . '' the impact of the huntley–brinkley report on popular culture of the 1960s can be illustrated by a verse from the 1965 song '' so long , mom ( a song for world war iii ) '' by the satirist tom lehrer : : while we 're frontal assault , : watch brink-a-ley and hunt-a-ley : describing counterpoint : the cities we have lost . entertainer sammy davis , jr . was shown in a 1964 photograph watching the huntley–brinkley report on a television backstage in his dressing room in life magazine , who quoted him saying , '' my only contact with reality . whatever i 'm doing , i stop to watch these guys . '' . ratings . by 1965 , the program brought in more advertising revenue than any other on television . '' huntley-brinkley 's chunk of crinkly , '' time ( 1965-04-02 ) . on november 15 of that year , the huntley–brinkley report became the first weekday network evening news program broadcast in color . the network 's weekend programs , saturday 's scherer-macneil report and sunday 's frank mcgee report , were also broadcast in color at that time . the program 's ratings slipped late in the decade as cbs 's walter cronkite gained fame for his coverage of the space program , a field in which neither huntley nor brinkley had much interest ( although huntley and brinkley occasionally participated in space coverage , another nbc newsman , frank mcgee , was the prime anchor of nbc 's space coverage ) . some contemporary observers at nbc felt the program began to slip after a 1967 strike by members of aftra . brinkley honored the picket lines but huntley , who viewed himself as '' a newsman , not a performer '' did not , remaining at the anchor desk . this split puzzled viewers , who had come to admire them for their teamwork . unbeknownst to most viewers , that relationship was fairly limited—huntley and brinkley operated from different cities and rarely met in person , except for live coverage of political conventions , election nights , or a few other events . saturday evening broadcasts . for most of its run , the huntley–brinkley report aired only monday through friday , but in january 1969 , the network expanded it to saturday evenings , with huntley and brinkley working solo on alternating weeks , although sometimes , the other would be seen in a taped essay or commentary recorded on friday . on july 19 , 1969 , during the apollo 11 mission , both co-anchored live ( huntley and brinkley were commentators during nbc 's coverage of the historic moon landing , again with mcgee as anchor ) . after the saturday edition failed to garner sufficient ratings to justify two anchors , veteran correspondent frank mcgee took over as anchor , with sander vanocur substituting , although the broadcast kept the hbr name . the frank mcgee report , a documentary program not tied to the day 's news , aired on sundays in the time slot . huntley and brinkley 's final newscast . on february 16 , 1970 , nbc announced that huntley would retire later that year . huntley and brinkley concluded their final newscast together on july 31 , 1970 , with the following parting words : : :chet huntley : '' and so , this difficult moment is here . in leaving this post after almost 14 years , i recommend to you the nbc nightly news , which begins tomorrow . it will be in the most capable hands of david , john chancellor and frank mcgee . i 'll be watching , with interest and affection . i might also remind you that american journalism , all of it , is the best anywhere in the world . i want to thank the entire staff of nbc , for this nightly broadcast has not been an individual effort by any means . and as for you out there , i thank you first for your patience , then for your many kindnesses and the flattering things you have said and written . more difficult to take , to be sure , has been your criticism , but that , too , has been helpful , and , in most cases , valid . but you have bolsted my conviction that this land contains incredible quality and quantity of good , common sense , and it 's in no danger of being led down a primrose path by a journalist . at the risk of sounding presumptuous , i would say to all of you : be patient and have courage , for there will be better and happier news one day , if we work at it . and david , thanks for these years of happy association , and for being such an easy colleague to work with , and for all the kindnesses . '' : :david brinkley : '' chet , i , too , would like to thank all of those who tuned us in and put up with us , particularly including those who write the nasty letters ! mcgee and chancellor and i will be here every night , and we will miss you . last night , nbc had a dinner for chet and gave all of us a chance to say goodbye to him , and as a farewell gift , nbc gave him a horse . so chet , when you ride away to the west to montana on your new horse , i will have to admit to at least a mild envy , and when you 're out there under clear skies and clean air , maybe once in a while you will think of those of us still here , fighting the traffic , the transportation breakdowns , stress , pollution , and wondering what is left that we can eat , drink , smoke or breathe that will not kill us , and wondering what horror will be visited upon us next . in these years i have often been stopped in public by people , always polite , who knew i was either huntley or brinkley , but were n't sure which and so they have asked , so from now on , when somebody stops me in the street and says , 'are n't you chet huntley ? ' , i have an answer : it is 'no , ma'am , he is the one out west on a horse ! ' i really do n't want to say it , but the time has come , and so , for the last time , good luck.and good night , chet . '' : :chet huntley : '' good luck , david , and good night , for nbc news . '' upon huntley 's retirement , the network renamed the program the nbc nightly news . huntley died in 1974 . brinkley worked as co-anchor or commentator on nightly news until 1981 when he departed for abc news and its new weekly sunday morning news program this week . he died in 2003 . in popular culture . the program was parodied in one of the most oft-seen segments of the early jim henson program sam and friends . using audio from a broadcast of the show , puppet characters hank and frank lipsynch dialogue spoken by huntley and brinkley in response to original dialogue remarks by kermit . the segment was sponsored by esskay meats in a bit performed by harry the hipster and a loudmouthed professor madcliffe . see also . walter balderson robert conley . notes . ; inline citations ; bibliography johnston , lyle , good night , chet : a biography of chet huntley , jefferson , nc . , mcfarland publishers , 2003 . external links . youtube clips . youtube clip of august 1 , 1966 broadcast youtube clip of signoff of final huntley brinkley report , july 31 , 1970 . other . an atlanta residential neighborhood developed in 1960/61 features a huntley/ brinkley intersection