Guttural

meaning and etymology . the word guttural literally means 'of the throat ' ( from latin guttur , meaning throat ) , and was first used by phoneticians to describe the hebrew glottal ( א ) and ( ה ) , uvular ( ח ) , and pharyngeal ( ע ) . see oxford english dictionary entry the term is now commonly extended to include also velar consonants , which deviates from the strict etymology . as used in linguistics , such a definition includes all velar consonants , regardless of manner of articulation . the journal anthropos published a phonetic alphabet to be used in their articles ( see americanist phonetic notation ) , in which '' guttural '' included the velar and uvular consonants but not those further back . p . w . schmidt , p . g . schmidt and p . j . hermes , '' die sprachlaute und ihre darstellung in einem allgemeinen linguistischen alphabet ( schluß ) / les sons du langage et leur représentation dans un alphabet linguistique général ( conclusion ) '' , anthropos , bd . 2 , h . 5 . ( 1907 ) , insert at page 1098 the term is also commonly used non-technically by english speakers to refer to sounds that subjectively appear harsh or grating . this definition usually includes a number of consonants that are not used in english , such as epiglottal and , uvular , and , and velar fricatives and . however , it usually excludes sounds used in english , such as the velar stops and , the velar nasal , and the glottal consonants and . mccarthy , john j . 1989 . 'guttural phonology ' , ms . , university of massachusetts , amherst . mccarthy , john j . forthcoming . 'guttural transparency ' , ms . , university of massachusetts , amherst . . guttural languages . in popular consciousness , languages that make extensive use of guttural consonants are often considered to be guttural languages . english-speakers sometimes find such languages strange and even hard on the ear . hayward , k . m . and hayward , r . j . 1989 . ' '' guttural '' : arguments for a new distinctive feature ' , transactions of the philological society 87 : 179-193 . . examples of significant usage . some of the languages that extensively use x , χ , ʁ , ɣ and/or q are : afrikaans arabic armenian assamese assyrian neo-aramaic beyer , klaus ( 1986 ) . the aramaic language : its distribution and subdivisions . göttingen : vandenhoeck und ruprecht . sebastian brock ( 2006 ) . an introduction to syriac studies . piscataway , nj : gorgias press . azerbaijani shiraliyev , mammadagha . the baku dialect . azerbaijan ssr academy of sciences publ . : baku , 1957 ; p . 41 crimean tatar dutch friedrich maurer uses the term istvaeones instead of franconian ; see friedrich maurer ( 1942 ) , nordgermanen und alemannen : studien zur germanischen und frühdeutschen sprachgeschichte , stammes- und volkskunde , bern : verlag francke . french german for a history of the german consonants see fausto cercignani , the consonants of german : synchrony and diachrony , milano , cisalpino , 1979 . hebrew hindustani ( hindi , urdu ) irish manx mongolian language kartvelian languages ( i.e . georgian , mingrelian , laz , svan ) boeder ( 2002 ) , p . 3 boeder ( 2005 ) , p . 6 gamkrelidze ( 1966 ) , p . 69 fähnrich & sardzhveladze ( 2000 ) kurdish pashto persian lazard , gilbert , '' pahlavi , pârsi , dari : les langues d'iran d'apès ibn al-muqaffa '' in r.n . frye , iran and islam . in memory of the late vladimir minorsky , edinburgh university press , 1971 . scottish gaelic bauer , michael blas na gàidhlig - the practical guide to gaelic pronunciation ( 2011 ) akerbeltz spanish tajik persian a beginners ' guide to tajiki by azim baizoyev and john hayward , routledge , london and new york , 2003 , p . 3 tswana welsh in addition to their usage of q , x , χ , ʁ and ɣ , these languages also have the pharyngeal consonants of ʕ and ħ : berber languages ( i.e . kabyle , tamasheq ) cushitic languages ( i.e . somali , amharic , tigrinya , oromo ) richard hayward , '' afroasiatic '' , in heine & nurse , 2000 , african languages indo-aryan languages ( hindustani ) some kurdish dialects ( as a result of borrowings from arabic ) northeast caucasian languages ( i.e . chechen , lezgian , avar ) northwest caucasian ( i.e . abkhaz , adyghe , kabardian ) . nichols , j . 1997 nikolaev and starostin 's north caucasian etymological dictionary and the methodology of long-range comparison : an assessment paper presented at the 10th biennial non-slavic languages ( nsl ) conference , chicago , 8–10 may 1997 . row 7 in salishan and wakashan language families in british columbia semitic languages ( i.e . arabic , chaldean neo-aramaic , turoyo , hebrew , ge ’ ez ) . . examples of partial usage . in french , the only truly guttural sound is ( usually ) a uvular fricative ( or the guttural r ) . in portuguese , is becoming dominant in urban areas . there is also a realization as a , and the original pronunciation as an also remains very common in various dialects . in russian , is assimilated to the palatalization of the following velar consonant : лёгких . it also has a voiced allophone , which occurs before voiced obstruents . in romanian , becomes the velar in word-final positions ( duh 'spirit ' ) and before consonants ( hrean 'horseradish ' ) . in czech , the phoneme followed by a voiced obstruent can be realized as either or , e.g . abych byl . kučera , h . ( 1961 ) . the phonology of czech . s ’ gravenhage : mouton & co . in kyrgyz , the consonant phoneme has a uvular realisation in back vowel contexts . in front-vowel environments , is fricativised between continuants to , and in back vowel environments both and fricativise to and respectively . кызласов и . л . , рунические письменности евразийских степей ( kyzlasov i.l . runic scripts of eurasian steppes ) , восточная литература ( eastern literature ) , moscow , 1994 , pp . 80 on , , with further bibliography . in uyghur , the phoneme occurs with a back vowel . in the mongolian language , is usually followed by . the tuu and juu ( khoisan ) languages of southern africa have large numbers of guttural vowels . these sounds share certain phonological behaviors that warrant the use of a term specifically for them . there are scattered reports of pharyngeals elsewhere , such as in the nilo-saharan , tama language . in swabian german , a pharyngeal approximant is an allophone of in nucleus and coda positions . in onsets , it is pronounced as a uvular approximant . in danish , may have slight frication , and , according to , it may be a pharyngeal approximant . in finnish , a weak pharyngeal fricative is the realization of after the vowels or in syllable-coda position , e.g . 'star ' . see also . guttural r . references . bibliography . bauer , michael blas na gàidhlig - the practical guide to gaelic pronunciation ( 2011 ) , akerbeltz . beyer , klaus ( 1986 ) . the aramaic language : its distribution and subdivisions . göttingen : vandenhoeck und ruprecht . an introduction to syriac studies . piscataway , nj : gorgias press . kyzlasov i.l . runic scripts of eurasian steppes , восточная литература ( eastern literature ) , moscow , 1994 , pp . & nbsp ; 80 on ,