River Glen, Lincolnshire

naming . in the language of the ancient britons , which survives today as welsh , cornish and breton , the neighbouring rivers , the glen and the welland seem to have been given contrasting names . the welland flowed from the area underlain by the northampton sands which in many places are bound together by rust to form ironstone . in the roman period , the sands were easily worked as arable land and the ironstone was dug for smelting . in both cases , the ground was exposed to erosion which meant that silt was carried down to the fens by the river . in modern welsh , gwaelod ( from late proto-british woelǫd- ) schrijver , peter , studies in british celtic historical phonology , rodopi , 1995 , p . 115 means bottom and its plural , gwaelodion means sediment . among the medieval forms of the name 'welland ' is weolod ; the river could have thus been named from its silty nature . in contrast , the glen flowed from clays and limestone . areas with clay-based soils tended to remain as woodland whilst the limestone areas provided grassland for pasture . consequently , the river glen did not carry much sediment . the modern welsh for clean is glân . the relative amounts of silt deposited in the fens around maxey and around thurlby respectively , by the two rivers , support this view . course . the river has two sources , both in the low ridge of jurassic rocks in the west of the county . the east glen rises as a number of small streams near to ropsley and humby , close to the contour . it flows in a southerly direction , passing to the east of ingoldsby and to the west of bulby , to arrive at edenham . the east glen is sometimes called the river eden , derived as a back-formation from its passing through the parish of edenham . it continues south through toft , where a grade ii listed bridge built in the early 1800s crosses , and manthorpe , where there is another listed bridge with a single elliptical arch built in 1813 , before turning east to join the west glen at wilsthorpe , lincolnshire . the west glen also has a number of sources , near to the contour at old somerby and boothby pagnall . it flows more or less parallel to the east glen , passing through bitchfield , burton coggles , corby glen and creeton to reach essendine , where it turns east towards greatford . in the village , a two-arched stone bridge built in the late 1700s carries church lane over the river . most of the water from the west glen river no longer joins that from the east glen , as it now flows along the greatford cut to join the river welland upstream of market deeping . the re-routing was devised by e . g . taverner , the chief engineer for the welland and deepings drainage board , towards the end of the second world war , and was part of a much larger project which involved the digging of the coronation channel , a flood relief channel to divert the welland around the south-eastern edge of spalding , and the construction of fulney lock , to exclude tidal water from the upper welland . the whole scheme cost £723,000 , and the coronation channel , which was completed in 1953 , was named to commemorate the crowning of elizabeth ii in the same year . by the time the east and west rivers join , they are only just above the contour . once joined , the river flows in a northerly direction , past fletland mill , a former grain mill which was built in 1759 , and kate 's bridge weir , where a modern bridge carries the a15 road over it . this bypasses a single-arched bridge built in the late 1700s , which has a female head carved on the keystone of the western face , presumed to be the kate after whom the bridge is named . beyond the bridges , the river becomes a typical fens high level carrier , embanked on both sides and partially straightened , with counter drains on both sides of the channel , to collect seepage through the banks , as the normal water levels are higher than the surrounding land . at tongue end the waters of the bourne eau join . the river below here is navigable for its last , and there was once a navigable connection to the bourne eau , but the tongue end pumping station now sits between the two rivers , to aid drainage of the land to the west . the weir dyke drain runs along the north bank of the bourne eau and then the west bank of the glen , to join the south forty-foot drain near guthram gowt . for some distance either side of tongue end , the counter drain runs a considerable distance to the east of the channel , creating washlands between them which can be flooded if water is not able to dischange from the river into the welland estuary , as a result of the state of the tides . a little before guthram gowt , the counter drain turns to the east to reach pode hole pumping station , which plays an important part in the drainage of deeping fen . beyond guthram gowt , the river flows in a north-easterly direction , and is flanked on both sides by drainage ditches because the land is low-lying . it passes through pinchbeck and surfleet to reach the tide entrance sluice where it joins the river welland . the sluice is only navigable when the tidal level is the same as the river level . history . historia brittonum , an ancient history of britain traditionally attributed to nennius , a ninth-century welsh monk , records that arthur , the war leader of the britons fought his first battle against the anglo-saxons at the mouth of the river glein . thomas green presents a case for the glein being the glen , based on the identification of linnuis , the district for four subsequent battles , being lindsey , although he acknowledges that other locations , including the river glen , northumberland for example , have been suggested . this aerial photo shows the river glen at guthram , halfway between twenty and west pinchbeck . to the south , the roman road across the fen lies hidden , buried in baston fen and pinchbeck common . in arthur 's time , around the year 500 , the north-flowing section of the glen entered tidal flats lying in pinchbeck north fen , to the north-east of guthram . the line of the river to the east of guthram appears to have originated as a sea bank but when sedimentation and fen enclosure caused the sea no longer to reach it , the river was led away along the bank so that the sea bank became one of river 's banks instead . the section of the a151 road on the 'seaward ' side of the glen was not built until 1822 . close to the year 500 , the spread of angles had recently reached baston , at the other end of this roman road , on the landward side of this fen but burial at the urns farm cemetery alongside king street then stopped abruptly . thumb compared to its neighbour , the welland , there are few records of the history of the glen . dugdale , writing his book the history of imbanking and drayning of divers fenns and marshes in 1662 , which was based on personal observations he made during a trip to the fens in may 1657 , and the records of the fens office , most of which were destroyed in the great fire of london in 1666 , thought it was the least of the rivers he had seen , and recorded that it '' serveth almost to none other use , but to carry away so much of its own water , with the rill descending from burne , as can be kept between two defensible banks . '' the embanking of the lower river had thus already been done by the time of his account . both the bourne eau and the glen were affected by flooding , causing failure of the banks , which was addressed in the black sluice act of 1765 . the history of navigation is intimately tied up with that of the bourne eau , since bourne was the main centre of population above spalding . the bourne eau act of 1781 appointed trustees , who were to scour and cleanse the river , and could charge tolls to fund the operation . corn and wool passed down the river , bound for boston , while coal and groceries were the principal cargo in the opposite direction . in 1792 , thomas hawkes wrote about trade in timber , which was carried from bourne to spalding , and there was a boat which carried passengers to the market at spalding on tuesdays , but he comments that the service was erratic , as there was often too little or too much water for the vessels to operate . the black sluice commissioners installed flood doors between the glen and the bourne eau at tongue end , to prevent high water levels in the glen passing up the river to bourne . breaching of the banks by floodwater was a continual problem , with six breaches of the north bank recorded between 1821 and 1882 , and eight of the south bank in the same period . measurement showed that the river level rose by for every of rain falling on the river 's catchment area . the arrival of railways in the area resulted in a rapid decline of river traffic . a railway from boston to spalding opened in 1848 , while the line from spalding opened to bourne in 1866 and on to sleaford in 1872 . although occasional boats were still reaching bourne in 1857 , the self-acting doors at tongue end were replaced by a sluice in the 1860s , which prevented passage from the glen to the bourne eau , although the right of navigation was not officially revoked until 1962 , as part of flood defence measures which included the replacement of the sluice by a pumping station in 1966 . once the route to bourne was closed off , there was little trade on the river , although a short section of about was used by barges until the 1920s . although the present head of navigation is at tongue end , there is evidence that lighters capable of carrying 15 tons used to navigate to kate 's bridge , where the lincoln to peterborough turnpike road crossed the river , and there are the remains of moorings at greatford hall , although navigation to there must have ceased after kate 's bridge was rebuilt . in 1734 , john grundy , one of the pioneers in applying scientific principles to the solution of civil engineering problems , was asked by the adventurers of deeping fen to consider the drainage of of fenland to the west of spalding . his plans included the construction of a reservoir which covered , impounded by a sluice at surfleet . at low tide , the water would be released , and the scouring action would deepen the channel , with a consequent improvement in drainage . humphrey smith directed the construction , with grundy acting as engineer , which was completed in 1739 , according to a plaque fixed to it at the time . the sluice had three openings , each wide , with pointed doors on the downstream site , which closed as the tide rose , and lifting gates on the upstream side , which would be raised to discharge the water . the sluice was replaced by the present structure in 1824 . . development . left the environment agency are the navigation authority responsible for the river . they issue licences for its use , and operate surfleet sluice when required . while the river is navigable for to tongue end , the upper reaches above pinchbeck bars are only suitable for smaller boats , as there are no locations where it is possible to turn a boat which is over long . however , the section of the river from its source to guthram gowt forms part of the proposed fens waterways link , which will ultimately link the river witham to the river nene , via the south forty-foot drain , the river glen , the river welland and some upgraded drains near peterborough . phase one , the connection of the south forty-foot drain to the haven at boston by a new lock , iwa head office bulletin – march 2008 – issue 134 was completed by december 2008 , and was officially opened on 20 march 2009 . construction of the second phase of the project , which will involve making the south forty-foot drain navigable from donington to guthram gowt , where a connection with the river glen will be made , has been delayed by the change in the economic climate , and the complexity of the task . . water quality . the environment agency measure the water quality of the river systems in england . each is given an overall ecological status , which may be one of five levels : high , good , moderate , poor and bad . there are several components that are used to determine this , including biological status , which looks at the quantity and varieties of invertebrates , angiosperms and fish , and chemical status , which compares the concentrations of various chemicals against known safe concentrations . chemical status is rated good or fail . the water quality of the river glen system was as follows in 2016 . the reasons for the quality being less than good include sewage discharge affecting most of the river , physical modification of channels , ground water abstraction , and poor management of agricultural and rural land adjacent to the river system . points of interest . see also . rivers of the united kingdom . references . bibliography . british geological survey , ( solid & drift ) 1:50,000 series , sheet 144 . . external links . environment agency document explaining development plans environment agency map outlining proposed changes ( no real detail ) a case for placing arthur 's first battle outside lincolnshire