Alternative Tentacles

history . alternative tentacles subsequently released records of other bands of the alternative/punk scene including releasing records ( which were later released by other labels ) by bands including the dicks , 7 seconds , and the butthole surfers . in 1981 , alternative tentacles released the compilation let them eat jellybeans ! . some of the best known bands that have released albums through alternative tentacles are dead kennedys , nomeansno , d.o.a . and alice donut . in addition to musical acts , alternative tentacles also publishes spoken word albums , many by jello biafra himself . another common theme of alternative tentacles records over the years has been the artwork of winston smith , which has appeared on many of their records , catalogs , posters and shirts . smith also designed the alternative tentacles logo . a crash course in alternative tentacles . alternative tentacles . 2004 . web . in april 2019 kerrang ran a long form feature called '' an oral history of alternative tentacles '' . within that article were quotes on the modern political stance of the label : '' alternative tentacles has a long history of making political statements . two of their biggest selling t-shirts since america ’ s 2016 election are the ‘ nazi trumps fuck off ’ and ‘ trump hates me ’ designs . anti-trump sentiments have also been expressed on the a.t batcast podcast . so it came as a surprise to the staff to find out that there are trump supporters who are also fans of a.t . “ they think that trump is punk , ” chris sighs . “ he ’ s the chaos factor , so they see him as someone who ’ s fucking up the government . it ’ s amazing to me that people are surprised jello is anti-trump . like , where have you been ? ! ” this label has questioned every single president – including obama – since 1979 , ” adds dominic , “ and we will continue to do so . we support questioning everything , we are feminists , we like to challenge norms , and we aren ’ t afraid to take a side . i ’ ll say it again : if you support trump , fuck you . that shaking things up you love so much is destroying people ’ s lives . ” in march 2020 bandcamp ran a feature on their site entitled '' the lesser-known classics of alternative tentacles records '' as part of their label profile series . . united kingdom branch . in the early 1980s alternative tentacles opened an office in the uk with its final base being 64 mountgrove road in london to release special editions of american punk records that were unavailable in europe , many of which were licensed from other independent u.s . labels . among these were releases by sst records ' groups black flag and hüsker dü , the dischord records compilation flex your head , and an ep of tracks from the bad brains bad brains ( album ) , as well as u.k . pressings of all american dead kennedys releases . it was also a distribution hub for elemental records . legal trouble . in 1985 , los angeles prosecutors charged biafra with '' distributing harmful matter to minors '' for artwork contained in the dead kennedys album frankenchrist . the artwork was a poster reproduction of the painting '' work 219 : landscape xx '' , also known as '' penis landscape '' by h.r . giger . the case ended in a hung jury and charges were not re-filed . biafra presented a detailed account of the trial on his second spoken word album , high priest of harmful matter − tales from the trial . in early 2000 , the label and biafra were named in a lawsuit brought by his former dead kennedys bandmates . the suit claimed that biafra had failed to pay the band 's members a decade 's worth of royalties on the band 's albums , totaling some 76,000 . dead kennedys v . biafra , 46 f.supp.2d 1028 ( 1999 ) all sides agreed the initial underpayment of royalties was due to an accounting error . however , the jury ultimately ruled that alternative tentacles and biafra were '' guilty of malice , oppression and fraud '' by not promptly informing his former bandmates of the matter and instead withholding the information during subsequent discussions and contractual negotiations . the other dead kennedys members only learned of the royalty underpayment from a whistle blower at the record label . a 2003 appeal upheld the verdict and judgment against biafra and the record label of 200,000 in compensation and punitive damages . the end result of the case saw the rights to the dead kennedys albums turned over to the other band members , who licensed them to manifesto records in the united states ( and to other labels in the rest of the world ) . dead kennedys albums accounted for about half of all sales by alternative tentacles , leading to financial uncertainty for the label . jello biafra gets shot down by dead kennedys blabbermouth.com , accessed 2017-01-03 in october 2002 , the label moved to emeryville , california . artists . current artists . arnocorps the bellrays citizen fish cross stitched eyes the darts us dash rip rock dead ending death hymn number 9 disaster strikes ex-girl feral ohms itchy-o jello biafra jello biafra and the guantanamo school of medicine jucifer leftöver crack legendary shack shakers nardwuar the human serviette pansy division pins of light the silver machine skarp spindrift ( band ) subhumans tsunami bomb turn me on dead man unsane victim 's family witch hunt the world/inferno friendship society . former artists . 7 seconds akimbo alice donut amebix bad brains beatnigs black flag black kali ma blöödhag blowfly bgk brujeria brutal juice burning image buzzkill butthole surfers the causey way chill eb christian christian lunch comets on fire creeps on candy crucifucks dead kennedys the dicks d.o.a . doc corbin dart dog-faced hermans the dot wiggin band duh east bay ray eat eugene chadbourne evan johns and the h-bombs the evaporators ex-girl f-minus facepuller false prophets the fartz the flaming stars fleshies flipper free beer galloping coroners geza x michael gira god bullies grong grong grotus half japanese howard zinn hack the hanson brothers hissanol husker du jarboe jungle studs kepone klaus flouride lard les thugs life after life logical nonsense the looters los gusanos ludicra mat callahan mdc melvins m.i.a . michael gira mischief brew mojo nixon molotov cocktail nausea neurosis noam chomsky nomeansno no wto combo pachinko part time christians peligro pitchshifter porch ratos de porão tarantella the phantom limbs radiopuhelimet saturn 's flea collar sibling rivalry the skatenigs skrapyard slim cessna 's auto club snfu star fucking hipsters stickdog teddy & the frat girls thrall toxic reasons tragic mulatto triclops ! tribe 8 tumor circus t.s.o.l . ultra bide vhk voice farm ward churchill wesley willis white trash debutants the witch trials the yuppie pricks zeni geva zolar x . discography . alternative tentacles discography . see also . list of record labels virus 100 . references . . further reading . . external links . official site