Special district (United States)

definition of '' special district '' by the united states census . the united states census counts government units across all states . this includes '' special districts . '' to count the special districts the census must define the special districts so as to address all such governmental entities across the broad spectrum of 50 states ' definitions and interpretations . the census 's full definition is : special district governments are independent , special purpose governmental units , other than school district governments , that exist as separate entities with substantial administrative and fiscal independence from general purpose local governments . as defined for census bureau statistics on governments , the term ‘ ‘ special district governments ’ ’ excludes school district governments as they are defined as a separate governmental type . special district governments provide specific services that are not being supplied by existing general purpose governments . most perform a single function , but in some instances , their enabling legislation allows them to provide several , usually related , types of services . the services provided by these districts range from such basic social needs as hospitals and fire protection , to the less conspicuous tasks of mosquito abatement and upkeep of cemeteries . the census bureau classification of special district governments covers a wide variety of entities , most of which are officially called districts or authorities . not all public agencies so termed , however , represent separate governments . many entities that carry the designation ‘ ‘ district ’ ’ or ‘ ‘ authority ’ ’ are , by law , so closely related to county , municipal , town or township , or state governments that they are classified as subordinate agencies of those governments in census bureau statistics on governments , and are not counted as separate special district governments . in order to be classified as a special district government , rather than as a subordinate agency , an entity must possess three attributes—existence as an organized entity , governmental character , and substantial autonomy . each state description also lists various statutory authorities , commissions , corporations , and other forms of organizations that have certain governmental characteristics , but are subject by law to administrative or fiscal control by the state or by independent local governments ; therefore , they are classified as subordinate agencies of those governments . . characteristics . special districts serve limited areas and have governing boards that accomplish legislatively assigned functions using public funds . mitzanry , k , & manatt , a . ( 2002 , february ) . what 's so special about special districts ? a citizen 's guide to special districts in california . 3rd . ed . p . 2 . . governing body . each district is governed by a board of directors , commissioners , board of supervisors , or the like . these boards may be appointed by public officials , appointed by private entities , popularly elected , or elected by benefited citizens ( typically , property owners ) . sometimes , one or more public officials will serve as an ex officio member on the board . the board of a special district serves primarily as a managing board and often appoints a chief executive for day-to-day operations and decision making and policy implementation . in the new england states , special districts are often run in the same town meeting fashion as other local governments . most districts have employees , but some districts exist solely to raise funds by issuing bonds and/or by providing tax increment financing . functions . special districts perform many functions including airports , ports , highways , mass transit , parking facilities , fire protection , libraries , parks , cemeteries , hospitals , irrigation , conservation , sewerage , wastewater treatment , solid waste , optical fiber , stadiums , water supply , electric power , and natural gas utility . n . the formation of american local governments : private values in public institutions . oxford university press , 1994 , p . 14 . . legal basis . special districts are authorized by state law and must have public foundation , civil office , and public accountability . state law . special districts in the united states are founded by some level of government in accordance with state law u.s . advisory commission on intergovernmental relations . ( 1993 , march ) . state laws governing local government structure and administration . page 7 . ( either constitutional amendment , general law , or special acts ) mitzanry , k , & manatt , a . ( 2002 , february ) what 's so special about special districts ? a citizen 's guide to special districts in california . 3rd . ed . p . 4 . and exist in all states . special districts are legally separate entities with at least some corporate powers . districts are created by legislative action , court action , or public referendum . the procedures for creating a special district may include procedures such as petitions , hearings , voter or landowner approval , or government approval . tribal governments may create special districts pursuant to state law and may serve on the boards of special districts . public foundation . special districts , like all public entities , have public foundation . 15a am jur 2d colleges and universities § 2 16b am jur 2d constitutional law § 723 4b m.j . corporations § 26 the landmark case of the u.s . supreme court addressing public versus private charters was dartmouth college v . woodward in 1819 . newmyer , r . k . john marshall and heroic age of the supreme court . louisiana state university press : baton rouge , 2001 , pp . 244-253 . dartmouth established the fundamental differences between public and private organizations . critically , a government must be founded by all of the people of a governmental area or by their governmental representatives . allen v . mckean , 1 f . cas . 489 ( 1833 ) louisville v . university of louisville , 54 ky . 642 ( june 1855 ) ohio v . neff , 52 ohio st . 375 , 40 n.e . 720 ( 1895 ) currie , d . p . ( 1982 , fall ) . the constitution in the supreme court : state and congressional powers , 1801-1835 . university of chicago law review . 49 u . chi . l . rev . 887 . opinion no . 84-134 , 1984 okla . ag lexis 17 opinion no . 1007 , 1994 minn . ag lexis 2 . civil office . special districts possess some form of civil office , that is , the board has received a delegation of sovereign power from the state . commissioner v . shamberg 's estate , 144 f.2d 998 ( 1945 ) some boards may be appointed by only landowners . mitzanry , k , & manatt , a . ( 2002 , february ) . what 's so special about special districts ? a citizen 's guide to special districts in california . 3rd . ed . p . 7 ( box ) . burns , n . the formation of american local governments : private values in public institutions . oxford university press , 1994 , p . 12 . private entities may appoint some or all of the members of a special district ; scholle v . maryland 90 md . 729 , 46 a . 736 ( 1900 ) marks v . frantz , 179 ky . 638 ( 1956 ) palm beach county health care district v . everglades memorial hospital 658 so . 2d 577 ( fla . 1995 ) however , there must be evidence of civil office . in addition to special districts with privately appointed boards , a special district may have a privately founded board ; sharpless v . mayor 21 pa . 147 ( 1853 ) however , such a board could not be given the power to set a tax . accountability . there is a citizen-government fiscal accountability relationship . mead , d . m . ( winter 2002 ) . the role of gasb 34 in the citizen-government accountability relationship . state and local government review . vol 34 , no . 1 51-63 . to maintain accountability for special districts , states must maintain ultimate control ( the power to repeal the authorizing law at any time ) . hess v . port authority trans-hudson corporation , 513 u.s . 30 , 115 s . ct . 394 , 130 l . ed . 2d 245 ( 1994 ) meriwether v . garrett , 102 u.s . 472 , 26 l . ed . 197 ( 1880 ) palm beach county health care district v . everglades memorial hospital , 658 so . 2d 577 ( fla . 1995 ) hess v . port authority trans-hudson corporation , 513 u.s . 30,115 s . ct . 394 , 130 l . ed . 2d 245 ( 1994 ) vogt v . orleans levee district , 294 f.3d 684 ( 5th cir . 2002 ) reynolds v . sims , 377 u.s . 533 , 84 s . ct . 136 , 12 l . ed . 2d 506 ( 1964 ) due to public foundation and , thus , ultimate control , the state can freely delegate sovereign power ( such as the power to tax ) to special districts and can allow them to act autonomously with little supervision . history . there is little information available on the earliest special districts in the united states . it is known that park districts existed in the 18th century . toll road and canal corporations existed in the 19th century . advisory commission on intergovernmental relations . ( 1964 , may ) . the problem special districts in american government . washington , dc unt digital library the first general statute authorizing irrigation districts was adopted by california in 1887 . bollens , j . c . ( 1957 ) . special district government in the united states . university of california press , pp . 142-144 . the u.s . census bureau began identifying and collecting data on special districts in 1942 . under construction . english custom . special districts in the united states follow the english custom . the earliest known general law in england authorizing special purpose authorities was the statute of sewers of 1532 . webb , s . ( 1922 ) . english local government : statutory authorities for special purposes . p . 61 . single purpose authorities created by individual charters also existed at the time . however , the early authorities were temporary and unconnected to local government structure . webb , s . ( 1922 ) . english local government : statutory authorities for special purposes . p . 300 . the first laws authorizing permanent authorities connected to local governments were the incorporated guardians of the poor , which were created by special acts in the 17th century . webb , s . ( 1922 ) . english local government : statutory authorities for special purposes . p . 299 . turnpike trusts were an early and popular special purpose authority in england . webb , s . ( 1922 ) . english local government : statutory authorities for special purposes . internal drainage boards are current examples in parts of england and wales . trends . the state of illinois leads the nation in the number of special districts with california close behind . state counts of their special districts may differ from the federal count because the states may have different definitions of a special district than the u.s . census bureau . . examples . all of the following examples have been found by the u.s . census bureau to be special districts . u.s . census bureau 2012 census of governments governments organization see the census of governments government organization publications at a depository library or visit and select governments division . alabama : alabama municipal electric authority ( special act ) alaska : regional electrical authorities ( general law ) arizona : drainage districts ( general law ) arkansas : fire ant abatement districts ( general law ) california : in california a community services district ( csd ) is a special district providing multiple services , often for unincorporated communities , such as vandenberg village csd for vandenberg village . an example of a non-csd special district is the golden gate bridge , highway and transportation district colorado : ambulance districts ( general law ) connecticut : pomperaug valley water authority ( special act ) delaware : tax ditches ( general law ) florida : daytona beach racing and recreational facilities district ( special act ) ; reedy creek improvement district , which includes the walt disney resort and the cities of bay lake and lake buena vista ( special act ) ; the tohopekaliga water authority ( twa , or toho for short ) , which provides the majority of the public water , wastewater , and reclaimed water services for osceola county and some small parts of polk and orange counties ( special act ) georgia : airport authorities ( special acts ) hawaii : office of hawaiian affairs ( constitutional amendment ) idaho : auditorium districts ( general law ) illinois : chicago transit authority ( special act ) indiana : northwest indiana regional development authority ( special act ) iowa : library districts ( joint or regional ) ( general law ) kansas : industrial districts ( general law ) kentucky : louisville-jefferson county air pollution control district ( general law with special application ) louisiana : abbeville film and visitors commission district ( special act ) maine : cemetery districts ( special acts ) maryland : water and sewer authorities ( general law ) massachusetts : goose pond maintenance district ( special act ) michigan : recreation authorities ( general law ) minnesota : metropolitan mosquito control district ( special act ) mississippi : lighting districts ( special acts ) missouri : jackson county sports complex authority ( special act ) montana : county rail authorities ( general law ) nebraska : omaha metropolitan utilities district ( general law with special application ) new hampshire : housing authorities ( general law ) new jersey : port authority of new york and new jersey and new jersey turnpike authority - 1948 law ( joint or regional ) ( general law ) new mexico : cotton boll weevil control districts ( general law ) new york : hyde park fire and water district ( special act ) north carolina : research triangle regional public transit authority ( special act ) north dakota : vector control districts ( general law ) ohio : new community authorities , special improvement districts , transportation improvement districts ( general law ) oklahoma : public library systems ( general law ) oregon : geothermal heating districts , port authorities -1909 ( general law ) pennsylvania : philadelphia regional port authority ( special act ) rhode island : east providence special development district commission ( special act ) south carolina : myrtle beach air base redevelopment authority ( executive order ) south dakota : television translator districts ( general law ) tennessee : utility districts ( general law ) texas : palacios seawall commission ( special act ) utah : irrigation districts ( general law ) vermont : vermont public power supply authority ( special act ) virginia : buchanan county tourist train development authority ( special act ) washington : hydroelectric resources authorities ( general law ) west virginia : hatfield-mccoy regional recreation authority ( special act ) wisconsin : local professional baseball park districts ( general law ) wyoming : resort districts ( general law ) . see also . district focj joint powers authority local government in the united states public-benefit corporation special districts in illinois . references . further reading . friedman , l . m . a history of american law . ( 3rd ) . simon & schuster : new york . 2005 . krane , d . , rigos , p . n . , and hill , m . b . home rule in america : a fifty-state handbook . cq press . 2001 . mergent 's municipal and government manual zimmerman , j . f . the new england town meeting . greenwood publishing group . 1997 . external links . a citizen 's guide to special districts in california california special districts association special districts association of oregon oregon special districts fact sheets u.s . census bureau u.s . census bureau/governments organization/volume 1 government accounting standards board 2006 government finance and employment classification manual , u.s . census bureau 2007 governments integrated directory , u.s . census bureau irs tax-exempt bond information municipal research and services center of washington florida department of economic opportunity , special district accountability program state and local government review - current and past issues bloomberg news last week tonight with john oliver : special districts ( hbo )