Brinsley Schwarz

formation . nick lowe ( bass , guitars , vocals ) and brinsley schwarz ( guitar , piano , vocals ) originally met at woodbridge school where they played in school bands with barry landeman ( keyboards , vocals ) and phil hall ( guitar ) . in 1964 , whilst still at school , they toured raf bases in germany as '' sounds 4+1 '' . on leaving school , schwarz formed '' three 's a crowd '' with pete whale ( drums ) and dave cottam ( bass ) . landeman joined in 1967 and they renamed themselves '' kippington lodge '' . their first two singles , produced by mark wirtz , in a close-harmony pop style , both flopped . cottam left , and schwarz invited lowe to join . landeman then left to join vanity fare , bob andrews joined on keyboards , and finally , whale was replaced by billy rankin on drums . although the next three singles also failed , they had a residency as support band at the marquee . the band 's style was changing from pop into '' a folk-rock band with psychedelic pretentions '' . allmusic biography of brinsley schwarz by stephen thomas erlewine retrieved 19 march 2009 in 1969 they renamed the band after their guitarist , and performed their new music under this name , whilst continuing to play pop as kippington lodge . one of the band 's first managers , john schofield , was at the time the lover of hattie jacques ( who would occasionally make bacon sandwiches for the band members when they visited schofield 's home ) . in the early part of their career the band shared a communal home in a large old house in beaconsfield and these premises were used as a rehearsal space by the band , who came to the uk as part of the warner brothers tour . the band borrowed brinsley schwarz 's instruments to rehearse . '' nick lowe , interviewed by mark ellen '' , word podcast 168 : nick lowe , posted 15 april 2011 . publicity campaign . brinsley schwarz signed a contract with manager dave robinson , of famepushers , who devised a plan to earn the band extensive publicity . they were to open for van morrison and quicksilver messenger service at the fillmore east in new york city , on 3 and 4 april 1970 . robinson would fly a plane full of british journalists to the show , so they could review it , along with the winners of a melody maker competition , arranged in order to get pre-publicity . though the band had planned on leaving a few days early , so they could rehearse , visa problems prevented this , so they went to canada and entered the us in a light aircraft . they arrived in new york shortly before they were due on stage , and had to use hired equipment with which they were unfamiliar . the journalists were due the following day , but their plane was delayed for four hours , so they had free use of the bar , and eventually arrived at the show either drunk or hung over . the show did not go over well , and the band received a flood of negative reviews over the following weeks , including bad reviews of their first album , brinsley schwarz , which was released shortly after their return to the united kingdom . this incident became known as the brinsley schwarz hype . casey kasem 's version of this story , in a september 1979 episode of american top forty , implied that the presence of the critics was a surprise to the band . pub-rock . later in 1970 , brinsley schwarz released their second album , despite it all , which had a definite country sound to it . they were heavily influenced by eggs over easy , who they first saw perform at 'the tally ho ' in kentish town , and admired their laid-back style and extensive repertoire . in 1971 , guitarist ian gomm joined the band , and they recorded their third album silver pistol . in response to '' the hype '' , they became anti-commercial and spent much of 1971 rehearsing , although they toured on the downhome rhythm kings package with help yourself & ernie graham ( ex eire apparent ) , who were all managed by dave robinson . this led to them backing ernie graham on his eponymous solo album . brinsley schwarz played at the second glastonbury festival ( 1971 ) , and one track , '' love song '' , appeared on the subsequent glastonbury fayre album . their solid live performances soon garnered the band a large fanbase in london , and , along with bands like eggs over easy , brinsley schwarz were soon dubbed '' pub rock '' by rock journalists . they sounded rather like the band , with schwarz 's guitar work influenced greatly by robbie robertson 's . in february 1972 they supported hawkwind and man at the greasy truckers party , which was issued as a double album , and brought critical acclaim . unfortunately , for a band known for its live performances , this was their only live album . 1972 's ironic take on country-rock , nervous on the road , also received excellent reviews . it did not reach the charts , but earned them a slot opening for paul mccartney 's wings 1973 uk tour . the same year , they also acted as frankie miller 's band for his debut album once in a blue moon . their fifth studio album please do n't ever change , issued in 1973 , was less well received by the critics , and achieved poor sales . however during this time they made successful appearances on the old grey whistle test with lowe on guitar and vocals , gomm on bass and schwarz on piano alongside andrews on keyboard and recorded sessions for john peel 's bbc radio 1 show . in 1974 they arranged for dave edmunds to produce their sixth album the new favourites of . brinsley schwarz which was more polished , and again received good reviews . this association also led to their touring as dave edmunds ' backing band , appearing on the live tracks of his subtle as a flying mallet album . in addition to the albums , brinsley schwarz also issued a series of singles under their own name , and various pseudonyms , such as '' the hitters '' , '' the knees '' , '' limelight '' and '' the brinsleys '' but these all failed . they recorded a final album , it 's all over now , in 1974 but this was not released at the time . they finally disbanded in 1975 . subsequent careers . brinsley schwarz and bob andrews joined the rumour , which functioned as a unit through 1981 . later andrews moved to new orleans . schwarz , meanwhile , continued playing as a sideman for various artists through the 1980s , 1990s and 2000s . schwarz joined a reunited ducks deluxe in 2009 , then both schwarz and andrews joined a reunited rumour in 2012 . billy rankin joined terraplane and then big jim sullivan 's tiger . he retired from the music industry in 1977 , though he was persuaded to play with a reunited ducks deluxe for their 30th anniversary reunion show in 2007 . nick lowe and ian gomm both began solo careers , achieving moderate mainstream success . lowe 's 1978 album jesus of cool received considerable critical acclaim and reached number 22 in the uk albums chart . it included the track '' i love the sound of breaking glass '' , which reached number 7 in the uk singles chart . the album also included bob andrews on keyboard and dave edmunds on guitar . lowe also co-wrote dr . feelgood 's top ten hit '' milk and alcohol '' , which reached number 9 in 1979 . lowe 's 1979 single and biggest worldwide hit '' cruel to be kind '' was co-written with gomm and originally recorded by brinsley schwarz for their unreleased final album . this version was included on the 2008 30th anniversary edition of the jesus of cool album . in 1979 gomm had a hit with '' hold on '' , which reached number 18 in the u.s . billboard hot 100 chart . the original version of '' ( what 's so funny 'bout ) peace , love , and understanding '' , which written by lowe and later would become a hit for elvis costello , was released by the band in 1974 on their album the new favourites of . brinsley schwarz . costello knew of the song as both a fan and part-time roadie for the band , which is where he and lowe first met . another rendition was featured on the multi-million-selling film soundtrack the bodyguard : original soundtrack album , performed by curtis stigers . bill murray 's character sang the song at a party in sofia coppola 's film lost in translation . . discography . studio albums . brinsley schwarz ( april 1970 ) despite it all ( december 1970 ) silver pistol ( february 1972 ) nervous on the road ( september 1972 ) please do n't ever change ( october 1973 ) the new favourites of . brinsley schwarz ( july 1974 ) . archive release . it 's all over now ( recorded 1974 , officially released 2017 ) . compilations . original golden greats ( 1974 ) ( includes two live tracks and two studio tracks not included on other albums ) ( lp ) 15 thoughts of brinsley schwarz ( 1978 ) ( includes two singles not included on other albums ) ( lp ) surrender to the rhythm ( 1991 ) ( cd ) nervous on the road/the new favourites of . brinsley schwarz ( 1995 ) ( cd ) hen 's teeth ( singles ) ( 1998 ) rarities ( july 2000 ) what is so funny about peace love & understanding ? ( bbc recordings ) ( 2001 ) cruel to be kind ( bbc recordings ) ( 2004 ) . various artists albums . glastonbury fayre ( april 1972 ) greasy truckers party ( april 1972 ) . as a backing band . ernie graham ( 1971 ) - ernie graham 's only solo album once in a blue moon ( 1973 ) - frankie miller 's debut album subtle as a flying mallet ( 1975 ) - only the live tracks . references . further reading . will birch ( 2003 ) , no sleep till canvey island : the great pub rock revolution , virgin books . external links . pete frame on the band 's fillmore east debut , zigzag magazine , may 1970 rolling stone 's brinsley schwarz discography performance of surrender to the rhythm on the old grey whistle test 1973