Mayapan

layout . mayapan is 4.2 square kilometers ( about 1.6 square miles ) and has over 4000 structures , most of them residences , packed into this compound within the city walls . built-up areas extend a half kilometer beyond the city walls in all directions . the stone perimeter wall has twelve gates , including seven major gates with vaulted entrances . the wall is 9.1 & nbsp ; km ( about 5.65 miles ) long and is roughly ovate with a pointed northeast corner . the ceremonial center of the site is located in square q of the city 's grid in the center of the wider western half of the walled enclosure . the ceremonial center has a tightly packed cluster of temples , colonnaded halls , oratories , shrines , sanctuaries , altars , and platforms ( for oration , dancing , or stela display ) . a.l . smith , an archeologist with the carnegie institute , estimated 10–12,000 people lived within the walled city . according to dr . gregory simons survey outside the city walls , there were numerous additional dwellings and he revised the total population estimate to between 15,000–17,000 people . his survey results are posted online at www.mayapanperiphery.net . people living outside of the city wall engaged in agriculture , animal-raising , and specialized activities such as lime production . russell also found a colonnaded hall outside the city wall , revealing much is still to be discovered regarding the complexity of this urban landscape . the temple of kukulcan , a large pyramid also known as the castillo , is the main temple in mayapan . it is located immediately to the east of the cenote ch'en mul , which has caves radiating from it . in form , the temple of kukulcan ( structure q-162 on the site map ) is a radial four-staircase temple with nine terraces ; it is generally similar to the temple of kukulcan at the earlier site of chichen itza . however , the mayapan temple appears to be an inferior imitation of the one at chichen itza , and the city 's buildings in general are not constructed as well as those in other mayan cities . for example , most or all of the vaulted roofs in mayapan have collapsed , while many of the better-built buildings at chichen itza remain intact . other major temples in the ceremonial center include three round ones , which are unusual for the maya area and are also linked to the deity kukulkan/quetzalcoatl in his wind god ( ehecatl ) aspect . unlike chichen itza , mayapan has no ballcourts . the extensive residential zones of the site are composed of dwellings and ancillary domestic structures , with those around the ceremonial district larger and of higher quality and those toward the fringes being generally poorer . the houses are often arranged in small patio groups surrounding small courtyards . houses were built haphazardly without organized streets . lanes wind among the residences and walls . the residential areas of the site contain many cenotes , perhaps as many as 40 . settlement was the most dense in the southwestern part of the city where cenotes are more numerous . historical overview . the ethnohistorical sources & nbsp ; – such as diego de landa 's relacion de las cosas de yucatan , compiled from native sources in the 16th century & nbsp ; – recount that the site was founded by kukulcan ( the mayan name of quetzalcoatl , the toltec king , culture hero , and demigod ) after the fall of chichen itza . he convened the lords of the region , who agreed to found a new capital at mayapan . the lords divided the towns of yucatán among them , and chose the chief of the cocom family as their leader . the ethnohistorical sources recount multiple different histories of the rise and fall of mayapan ( roys 1962 ) . these histories are often confusing , chronologically implausible , and difficult to reconcile . for example , some sources say that the maya revolted in 1221 against the maya-toltec lords of chichen itza . after a short civil war , the lords of various powerful cities and families met to restore a central government to yucatán . they decided to build a new capital city near the town of telchaquillo , hometown of hunac ceel , the general who defeated the rulers of chichen itza . the new city was built within a defensive wall and named mayapan , meaning '' standard of the maya people '' . the chief of the cocom family , a rich and ancient lineage that had taken part in the revolt against chichen , was chosen to be king , and all the other noble families and regional lords were to send members of their families to mayapan to play parts in the government ( and perhaps act as hostages for the good behavior of the subsidiary cities ) . mexican mercenaries from tabasco were also employed to keep order and maintain power . another family , the xiu , may have been living in the mayapan area prior to the arrival of the cocom ; the xiu claim to be a part of the lineage from uxmal . this arrangement lasted for over 200 years . ( an alternative account is given in a maya chronicle from the colonial era , claiming that mayapan was contemporary with chichen itza and uxmal and allied with those cities , but archeological evidence shows this version to be less likely . ) mayapan became the primary city in a group of allies that included much of the northern yucatán , and trade partners that extended directly to honduras , belize , and the caribbean island of cozumel , and indirectly to mexico . though mayapan was ruled by a council , the jalach winik and the aj k ’ in ( the highest ruler , and the high priest ) dominated the political sphere . below the two primary officials were many other officials with varying responsibilities . the range of classes went from the nobility , down to slaves , with intermediary classes in between . the social climate of mayapan was made complicated by the antagonistic relationship between the factions of nobles , which were often arranged by kinship ( pugh 2009 ; milbrath 2003 ) . in 1441 , ah xupan of the powerful noble family of xiu became resentful of the political machinations of the cocom rulers and organized a revolt . as a result , all of the cocom family , except one who was away in honduras conducting trade , were killed , mayapan was sacked , burned , and abandoned , all the larger cities went into decline , and yucatán devolved into warring city-states . archaeological evidence indicates that at least the ceremonial center was burned at the end of the occupation . excavation has revealed burnt roof beams in several of the major buildings in the site center . excavations and investigations . in 1841 john l . stephens was the first to document parts of the mayapan site with two important illustrations . the first was of the q-152 round temple , and the second was of the pyramid of kukulkan . he was the first in a long string of explorers who drew the ruins of mayapan . the first large-scale archeological site surveys were not conducted until 1938 by r.t . patton . these surveys mapped the main plaza group and the city wall , and were the basis of later maps ( russell 2008 ) . in the 1950s , archaeologists of the carnegie institution , including a . l . smith , robert smith , tatiana proskouriakoff , edwin shook , karl ruppert and j . eric thompson conducted five years of intensive archeological investigations at mayapan . their work was published in a mimeographed series of current reports . the current reports have recently been republished in their entirety by the university of colorado press ( john weeks 2009 ) . the final report was published by the carnegie institution as mayapan , yucatan , mexico , by h . e . d . pollock , ralph l . roys , a . l . smith , and tatiana proskouriakoff ( 1962 , publication 619 ) . robert smith published a two-volume monograph on the pottery of mayapan in 1971 ( papers of the peabody museum of archaeology and ethnology 66 , harvard university ) . in the early 1990s , clifford t . brown of tulane university carried out excavations in the residential zones of mayapan as part of his doctoral dissertation research . several years later , the national institute of anthropology and history ( inah ) of mexico began extensive architectural excavations and consolidation under the direction of archaeologist carlos peraza lope . this work continues to the present . it has resulted in the discovery of many important artifacts , murals , stuccoes , and architectural elements . from 2001 to 2009 , further investigations were begun at the site by a team under the direction of dr . marilyn masson from the state university new york at albany , carlos peraza lope of inah , and timothy s . hare of morehead state university . this '' economic foundations of mayapan '' ( pemy ) project performed mapping , surface survey and collection , test-pitting , and horizontal excavation across the city . major findings of this project include the identification of diverse occupational specialization among the city 's commoners , who worked as craftsmen , conscripted military personnel , farmers , and domestic servants . great variation is now recognized in the types of work performed by commoners of different households and their degrees of affluence . this project has also identified a probable major market plaza in square k ( between the site center and major north gate d ) ; richard terry , bruce dahlin , and daniel bair have analyzed soil samples from this location to test the function of this locality . in 2008 and 2009 , the pemy project focused excavations on an outlying ceremonial group by the far eastern city gate ( gate h ) , known as itzmal ch'en , as part of its study of the economic and social links between governing elites and distant neighborhoods within the city . chronology . before mayapan . some evidence suggests overlapping occupation of the area by different cultures . shook in 1954 said that there may have been a puuc '' city '' somewhere near mayapan prior to its post-classical settlement . the mixture of puuc pot sherds in the lower parts of mayapan lots may support this , but it is a very small percentage of the material ( 2 % in most cases and no more than 4 % in others ) . site chronology based on ceramics . according to robert smith , the ceramicist for the carnegie institution , there were two ceramic phases in mayapan : hocaba , which he said started around a.d . 1200 and may have included types named mama red and navula unslipped , more commonly associated with southern lowland settlements . ( milbrath and pereza argue that the hocaba phase starts in a.d . 1100 , which fits better with the chronology of the southern lowland sites . ) the second phase is tases , which has some overlapping typology with the hocaba phase . site chronology based on radiocarbon dates . . middle preclassical date . : in an alley fill between the templo redondo and an adjoining hall , some charcoal was found that yielded a calibrated date of 540–820 b.c . but , most of the pottery in this fill was post-classical . researchers think that this sample represented old charcoal that predated the context in which it was found . terminal classical dates . : a burial found on bedrock in the houselot soils of a post-classical solare dated between a.d . 600 and a.d . 780 . the burial appeared to be a secondary interment , and could not be completely excavated because it intruded into a wall . there was no pottery with the burial ; midden samples in this area suggest occupation prior to the construction of the post-classical houselots . : charcoal was found on the upper floor of one of the temples that was dated to a.d . 770-1020 . researchers think that this sample is not associated with the context in which it was found . the construction fill as well as the upper floors were of post-classical age . early mayapan occupation . three separate samples form the frame for early mayapan occupation . these dates are a.d . 990–1170 . however , two of these dates come from inexact sources . one was burned copal found in an unknown structure ( apparently the label had eroded off of the structure ) ; the researchers inferred that it was q-95 . the early date would suggest that this temple was built and in use in mayapan 's early history . carbon dating of the pits below what was assumed to be q-97 ( again the label had eroded ) dated from a.d . 990–1180 . charcoal found in the early construction phase of the site 's main pyramid was dated a.d . 1020–1170 . this sample was found in reliable context and is presumably the most accurate . it is important for suggesting that the post-classical phase in mayapan started earlier than a.d . 1200 . late mayapan occupation . mayapan 's settlement pattern radiated outwards to its fringes over time ; many of the later dates are from materials outside of the main group of ruins . the fall of the city is tentatively dated around a.d . 1461 , based on the lack of construction of altars and burial cists after this date . ( lope et al . 2006 ) . according to diego de landa calderon ( 1524 - 1579 ) , the city was abandoned following the country 's enslavement by a certain chieftain of the yucatecan nation ( in collusion with a garrison of mexica indians ) , and which abuse eventually led to internecine war , culminating in the city 's demise in circa 1441 . diego de landa calderon , yucatán before and after the conquest , 1937 ( reprinted in 2008 ) see : abridged history of yucatan , pp . 38-41 . yucatán before and after the conquest , by diego de landa . mayapan yucatan mexico , h.e.d . pollock , ralph l . roys , t . proskouriakoff & a . ledyard smith , publication 619 : carnegie institution of washington , washington , d.c . 1962 , ( introduction ) p . 8 kukulcan 's realm : urban life at ancient mayapán , marilyn masson & carlos peraza lope , university press of colorado 2014 , chapter 8 : militarism , misery and collapse . agriculture and animals . milpa , or mixed , fields may have been cultivated when mayapan was inhabited . there is evidence that the area around mayapan was regularly used for slash-and-burn agriculture . cenotes and underground limestone canals serve as the only source of freshwater in this area , making them essential to support agriculture . researchers have suggested that mayapan was an import/export center , and that they often traded luxury goods , such as cotton , salt , and honey , for products of obsidian and metal , which they would have forged . ( paris 2008 ) ( melbrath & peraza 2003:29 ) . today farmers use mixed fields , called the milpa fields , to cultivate maize , beans , squash , watermelons , mangoes , papayas and other crops . also , citrus fruit such as oranges and limes are often grown within the domestic house groups of the local residents ( russell 2008:16 ) . faunal remains indicate that the local population used varying methods of animal acquisition . a study done by m.a . masson and c . peraza lope in 2008 looked at faunal remains from two different middens , one located in the monumental center by some houses , and the other is located in the domestic area outside the monumental compound . the largest samples of recognized remains within the monumental center were from : white-tailed deer ( 23 % ) , dog ( 4.4 % ) , turkey ( 12.9 % ) , and iguana ( 10.2 % ) . the combined contributions of fish make up around 1.2 % of the samples . these percentages as well as the ones that will follow for the settlement zone are based on recognized remains . primary animals may have made up larger portions of the diet but their remains are too difficult to recognize . in the settlement zone , researchers found : white-tailed deer ( 8.4 % ) , dog ( 1.4 % ) , turkey ( 5.3 % ) , iguana ( 14.5 % ) , and fish ( 3.6 % ) . both turtle and rabbit remains were found in both sites , but they were consumed in small amounts ( less than 1.5 % ) . while excavating , the researchers noted many fish skeletons , but few fish heads . they concluded that the fish were being traded into mayapan , and not collected near the site . if the fish had been prepared at the site , the heads would have been common refuse . within the ceremonial center , numerous deer heads and teeth were found among the remains . ( m.a . masson , c . peraza lope 2008 ) . trade . mayapan was a major capital in the yucatán , and there is extensive evidence that it had far-reaching trade routes , as seen in architecture and artifacts of other settlements in the region . a wide variety of goods were traded , including maize , honey , salt , fish , game , cloth , and birds . peten . zacpeten on lake salpeten & nbsp ; – incense burners found at this site are nearly identical to those found at mayapan . the temple assemblages at zacpeten are very similar to those at mayapan . topoxte in lake yaxha , peten also shares similarities of architecture and artifacts of effigy censers . topoxte architectural remains show a similar stone carving style to mayapan . also , tiny “ dwarf ” shrines found at this site were very similar to shrines found at mayapan . the two sites appear to have been abandoned around the same time ; which may suggest a connection between their governments . highland guatemala . architectural and artifact connections are seen between mayapan and the utatlan in highland guatemala . examples are similar temple assemblages , the presence of skull imagery and squatting figures , extensive and lavish use of stucco combined with crude masonry , and effigy figure censers . yucatan east coast . this region also shows apparent influence of mayapan , in similar temple assemblages , similarities in architecture , effigy censers at some sites , and parallels between architectural decoration at mayapan and some east coast sites . the east coast sites exported products such as cotton , salt , and honey from the yucatán . sites in guatemala traded back cacao . el chayal in guatemala was the only source of the obsidian found at mayapan . aztecs , central mexico , and the campeche coast . the presence of matillas fine orange ceramics in mayapan suggests trade with tabasco . this area may have mediated trade between mayapan and the rest of central mexico . sculptures and murals at mayapan suggest that there was contact between mayapan and the rising aztec empire . some mayapan figures showed details of aztec dress , and what appears to be an aztec deity is carved on an altar in mayapan . this evidence suggests a : “ circum-yucatecan trade route that linked mayapan to peten , northern belize , and east-coast sites in the late postclassic period . ” ( melbrath & peraza lope 2003:24–31 ) . symbolism . the symbolism present in mayapan is particularly significant , partially because the center of the site is mainly used for ritual purposes . there are many similarities between the murals in mayapan and the art and iconography of the aztec and mixteca-puebla regions . symbols that they have in common include : : the sun disc ( there are varying interpretations of what this represents : : could represent the sun god : : however , the diving posture of the figure within the disc is a common motif used to represent a dead warrior , and because the figure is represented bound and with his heart removed it has been interpreted as a representation of a warrior sacrificed to the sun god . : representations of quetzalcoatl : murals in structure q.80 show reptile iconography which has been interpreted as participation in mixteca-puebla traditions . the dentition of the reptile indicate that they are serpents . there are similar representations found at coba and on some pottery in cholula dated to circa 1350–1550 ad . ( milbrath , susan . , carlos peraza lope , miguel delgado kú . 2010 ) serpent iconography is very common at mayapan , serpent balustrade carvings are common throughout the ritual center in the complexes that are associated with the cocom lineage like the castillo ( milbrath , susan . , carlos peraza lope , miguel delgado kú 2010 ) . in contrast depictions of the rain god chaac are common to the temples related to the xiu lineage . ( milbrath 2009:583 ) there are also depictions of the monkey-man god most of the iconography in mayapan is found either in murals on the temple walls , stone carving , or carved stone covered in plaster . evidence of inequality . directionality may have played a role in the representation of inequality among the powerful factions of mayapan . east and west were of primary importance because it represented the track of the sun through the sky . the east was associated with : life , males , and heat ; whereas the west was associated with : death , females , and cold . this has led many sources to believe that the itza and the xiw may have been associated with east and west . there was very little evidence for obvious separation of residence between classes . this is mostly due to the residential center of mayapan being located around the concentration of the water filled cenotes . most residences are tandem structures made of several building within a separating wall . many of these tandem structures include multiple residential buildings ; the size of these residential buildings , relative to each other , suggests that some of them were for slaves . the integration of classes extends to the outer edges of the residential areas probably due to the convenience of being close to the agricultural fields . some sources indicate that the analysis of oratarios or god-houses ( large house-like shrines ) show boundaries that were known to the people of mayapan . this is shown in relation to the analysis of household oratarios and those oriented around the ceremonial center of mayapan . unfortunately there is very little skeletal evidence found in this region because of the composition of the soil . the goods found in different house structures do suggest different levels of social status , mainly in regard to the specialization of housing structures . there are at least two examples of obsidian workshops in mayapan . the strongest evidence for inequality in mayapan is found in the presence of deep shafts full of sacrificial victims , this suggests that the noble class had enough power to condemn some people to death . abandonment . the site of mayapan was abandoned sometime in the 15th century . there has been some dispute over when the actual abandonment took place . however , written records state that the site was abandoned in a.d . 1441 . there appear to be several contributing factors to the abandonment of mayapan . around a.d . 1420 a riot was started by the xius against the cocom which culminated in the death of nearly all ( if not in fact all ) of the cocom lineage . pestilence may have been involved in the subsequent abandonment of the site by the remaining xiu inhabitants . there were several sources of evidence to support this interpretation . evidence of burned wood was found inside of structure y-45a as well as burned roofing material on many of the other structures that was dated to around the time of the collapse in k ’ atun 8 ahua ( roughly a.d . 1441–1461 ) . a mass grave in the main plaza , and bodies in a burial shaft covered in ash were dated to around the collapse and showed signs of violence , some of the bodies still had large flint knives in their chests or pelvises , suggesting ritualized sacrifice . smashed vessels litter the floors of the y-45a complex that date to around a.d . 1270–1400 , prior to the documented collapse of mayapan . a vessel bearing the glyph k ’ atun 8 ahua was found on the floor of this complex . from this they have posited that the complex was abandoned finally when the city fell ( lope 2006 ; milbrath 2003 ) . after a.d . 1461 there is little evidence of altars and burial cists being constructed after 1461 , suggesting that the site had been abandoned by this point ( lope 2006 ) . very little evidence has been found to support later usage of mayapan . copal from an altar was found in the templo redondo compound that may suggest later pilgrimages to the castillo de kukulkan . however , these samples date to the industrial era and may not be valid , so any assumptions based on this evidence would also not be valid ( lope 2006:168 ) . references . barrera rubio , alfredo and carlos peraza lope . ( 2001 ) '' la pintura mural de mayapán '' , in la pintura mural prehispánica en méxico : área maya , edited by leticia staines cicero , beatriz de la fuentes , project director , pp . & nbsp ; 419–446 . instituto de investigaciones estéticas , universidad autónoma de méxico , méxico , d.f . brown , clifford t . ( 1999 ) mayapán society and ancient maya social organization . ph.d . dissertation , dept . of anthropology , tulane university . brown , clifford t . ( 2006 ) '' water sources at mayapán , yucatán , méxico , '' in precolumbian water management : ideology , ritual , and power , edited by lisa lucero and barbara fash , pp 171–188 . tucson : university of arizona press . brown , clifford t . ( 2005 ) '' caves , karst , and settlement at mayapán , yucatán , '' in in the maw of the earth monster : mesoamerican ritual cave use , edited by james e . brady and keith m . prufer , pp . & nbsp ; 373–402 . austin : university of texas press ( linda schele series in maya and pre-columbian studies ) . bullard , william r . , jr . ( 1952 ) '' residential property walls at mayapán '' , in current reports no . 3:36–44 . carnegie institute of washington , department of archaeology , washington , d.c . bullard , william r . , jr . ( 1954 ) boundary walls and house lots at mayapán . current reports no . 13:234–253 . carnegie institute of washington , department of archaeology , washington , d.c . delgado kú , miguel angel , ( 2009 ) la pintura mural de mayapán , yucatán : una interpretación iconográfica , tesis profesional , facultad de ciencias antropológicas , universidad autnoma de yucatán , mérida , yucatán , méxico . delgado kú , pedro c . ( 2004 ) estudio de la arquitectura pública del núcleo principal de mayapán , yucatán , tesis profesional , facultad de ciencias antropológicas , universidad autnoma de yucatán , mérida , yucatán , méxico . landa , diego de . ( 1941 ) relaciones de las cosas de yucatán , translated by alfred tozzer . papers of the peabody museum of archaeology and ethnology 18 , harvard university press , cambridge . lope , carlos peraza , marilyn a . masson , timothy s . hare , pedro candelario delgado kú ( 2006 ) . '' the chronology of mayapán : new radiocarbon evidence '' , in ancient mesoamerica 17 ( 2 ) :153–175 . masson , marilyn a . ( 2009 ) '' appendix : inventory and lot descriptions '' carnegie institution current reports on mayapan . in the carnegie maya ii : carnegie institution of washington current reports , 1952–1957 , edited by john weeks , pp . & nbsp ; 553–609 . university of colorado press , boulder . marilyn a . masson , timothy s . hare , and carlos peraza lope ( 2006 ) . '' postclassic maya society regenerated at mayapán '' , in after collapse : the regeneration of complex societies , edited by glenn m . schwartz and john j . nichols , pp . & nbsp ; 188–207 . university of arizona press , tucson . masson , marilyn a . and carlos peraza lope 2007 kukulkan/quetzalcoat , death god , and creation mythology of burial shaft temples at mayapan . mexicon 29:77–85 . masson , marilyn a . and carlos peraza lope ( 2005 ) . '' nuevas investigaciones en tres unidades residenciales fuera del area monumental de mayapán '' , in investigadores de la cultura maya , tomo ii , pp . & nbsp ; 411–424 . universidad autónoma de campeche . campeche , mexico . masson , marilyn a . and carlos peraza lope ( 2008 ) . '' animal use at mayapan '' , quaternary international , 191:170–183 . masson , marilyn a . and carlos peraza lope ( 2010 ) . '' evidence for maya-mexican interaction in the archaeological record of mayapan '' , in astronomers , scribes , and priests : intellectual interchange between the northern maya lowlands and highland mexico in the late postclassic period , edited by gabrielle vail and christine hernandez , pp . & nbsp ; 77–114 . dumbarton oaks , washington , d.c . milbrath , susan and carlos peraza lope ( 2003 ) . '' revisting mayapan : mexico ’ s last maya capital '' , ancient mesoamerica 14:1–47 . milbrath , susan and carlos peraza lope 2003b mayapán ’ s scribe : a link with classic maya artists . mexicon xxv:120–123 . milbrath , susan . , carlos peraza lope 2009 survival and revival of terminal classic traditions at postclassic mayapán latin american antiquity : a journal of the society for american archaeology 20 ( 4 ) :581–606 . milbrath , susan , carlos peraza lope , and miguel delgado kú 2010 religious imagery in mayapan ’ s murals . the pari journal x:1–10 . morley , sylvanus griswold . the ancient maya ( 4th ed . ) . stanford , california : stanford university press , 1983 . paris , elizabeth h . 2008 metallurgy , mayapan and the postclassic world system . ancient mesoamerica 19:43–66 . peraza lope , carlos 1998 mayapán : ciudad-capital del postclasico . arqueología mexicana :48-53 . pollock , ralph l . roys , tatiana proskouriakoff and a . ledyard smith , pp . & nbsp ; 165–320 . occasional publication 619 . carnegie institution of washington . tatiana proskouriakoff ( 1962 ) civic and religious structures at mayapán , in “ introduction , ” in mayapán , yucatan , mexico , by harry e . d . pollock , ralph l . roys , tatiana proskouriakoff , and a . l . smith , pp . & nbsp ; 87–164 . washington , dc : carnegie institute of washington publication no . 619 tatiana proskouriakoff and charles temple ( 1955 ) a residential quadrangle & nbsp ; – structures r-85 to r-90 . current reports 29:289–362 . carnegie institute of washington , department of archaeology , washington , d.c . pugh , timothy 2001 flood reptiles , serpent temples and the quadripartite universe : the imajo mundi of late postclassic mayapán . ancient mesoamerica 12:247-258 . pugh , timothy w . 2003 a cluster and spatial analysis of ceremonial architecture at late postclassic mayapán journal of archaeological science 30 ( 8 ) :941-953 . restall , matthew 2001 the people of the patio : ethnohistoric evidence of yucatec maya royal courts . in royal courts of the maya , volume ii , edited by takeshi inomata y stephen d . houston , pp . & nbsp ; 335–390 . westview press , boulder . ring , trudy , ed . “ mayapan ” in international dictionary of historic places , volume i : americas . new york : routledge , 1996 . ringle , william m . y george j . bey iii 2001 post-classic and terminal classic courts of the northern maya lowlands . en royal courts of the maya , volume two : data and case studies , edited by takeshi inomata and stephen d . houston , pp . & nbsp ; 266–307 . westview press , boulder . roys , ralph l . ( 1962 ) . '' literary sources for the history of mayapan '' , in mayapan , yucatán , mexico . carnegie institute of washington publication no . 619 , by harry e.d . pollock , ralph l . roys , tatiana proskouriakoff , and a.l . smith , pp . & nbsp ; 25–86 . washington , d.c . russell , bradley w . and bruce h . dahlin ( 2007 ) . '' traditional burnt-lime production at mayapán , mexico '' , journal of field archaeology 32:407-423 . russell , bradley w . ( 2008 ) postclassic maya settlement on the rural urban fringe of mayapán , yucatán , mexico , ph.d . dissertation , department of anthropology , university at albany-suny . serafin , stanley . ( 2010 ) bioarchaeological investigation of violence at mayapan , ph.d . dissertation , department of anthropology , tulane university . a . ledyard smith ( 1962 ) '' residential and associated structures at mayapán '' , in mayapán yucatan mexico , edited by h.e.d . smith , robert e . ( 1971 ) the pottery of mayapan . papers of the peabody museum of archaeology and ethnology 66 . harvard university , cambridge . external links . mayapan at maya history - maya history grinnell college - mayapan project - mayapan archaeology mayapan visiting travel guide and photos mayapan photo essay suny albany - mayapan archaeology