Safeway (UK)

history . early years . safeway food stores was established in 1962 in the united kingdom by the american supermarket chain safeway inc . , with seven supermarkets and a few smaller stores in greater london , and its first purpose-built store was opened in bedford in 1963 . it brought many ideas from the us , including larger stores with wider aisles and delicatessens , and a much wider range of products . by 1987 , it had 133 shops around the united kingdom . andrew seth and geoffrey randall the grocers , london and dover , new hampshire : kogan , 2001 , p.108 . acquisition by argyll foods . in 1987 , safeway inc put safeway food stores up for sale . argyll foods eventually secured it for the sum of £681m , with £600m raised through a rights issue that was three times oversubscribed . geoffrey owen corporate strategy in uk food retailing 1980-2002 , p.8 the merger of argyll and safeway was hailed by commentators as one of the most successfully integrated retail combinations in the united kingdom , bringing together argyll 's experienced management team , with a strong but somewhat underdeveloped retail brand . argyll then began converting the larger presto supermarkets to the safeway brand . the presto name continued on smaller supermarkets in north east england and scotland for several years and even enjoyed a brief revival in the early 1990s , when several new presto shops began to open and a range of presto own label products was introduced . the last new presto shops opened in 1995 . the revival was short lived , as in 1995 , many smaller presto shops were sold to a consortium of spar retailers . over the next few years , competitive pressures intensified . pre tax profits fell by 13 % during the year ended 30 april 1994 , prompting a wide ranging strategic review known as '' safeway 2000 '' , led by the then chief executive , colin smith , with assistance from mckinsey & company . this involved the sale of the lo-cost discount operation , and the re design of the safeway shops to appeal to the family shopper . in july 1996 , argyll conducted a share buyback , and then renamed itself safeway plc . during 1997 , several presto stores were converted to safeway , and by the beginning of 1998 , the final presto shops were either converted or closed down . all shops traded simply as safeway , regardless of size . david webster , who had taken over as chairman in 1997 , after the retirement of alistair grant , decided to open merger talks with asda . these talks were called off after a few weeks following a leak to a sunday newspaper , and then briefly revived in the early months of 1998 , before breaking down again . the outcome , if the negotiations had been successful , would probably have been the disappearance of the safeway name , and the emergence of a stronger asda , still focussing on discount prices , but with a bigger volume to support it . this might have achieved a more secure future for safeway , than continuing the struggle to keep up with tesco and sainsbury's . safeway was the first of the large supermarket groups to introduce a loyalty card , which it launched in 1995 and called abc ( added bonus card ) . as this was initially only introduced into selected shops on a trial basis , however , tesco is able to claim the title for the first nationwide introduction of a loyalty card , with clubcard . safeway , in 1999 , started a rail container flow carrying goods to its far north shops , some as far as inverness , nairn , elgin and buckie . the train consisted of van wagons and containers . the train was operated by ews . food chain switches to let train take the strain press and journal , 24 november 1998 . '' new safeway '' . by the early months of 1999 , safeway was coming under renewed criticism from investors . its shares had under performed the food sector over the previous five years ; it had been pushed back into fourth position by asda and it did not have enough shops of adequate size , to offer a comprehensive non food range . in july 1999 , safeway announced the appointment a new chief executive , carlos criado-perez , who had held senior posts in wal-mart 's international division . the problem was how to distinguish safeway from tesco and sainsbury 's , and how to minimise its scale disadvantage . according to estimates made by the competition commission , tesco was able to negotiate significantly lower prices from its suppliers than safeway – averaging about 3 % on big selling branded items . competition commission , supermarkets , vol 2 , pages 247-249 criado-perez 's response was to introduce selective deep discounting , the so called high/low pricing formula , which was later branded as 'substantially discredited ' by morrisons management , making deep price cuts on a limited set of products for a limited period . criado-perez also abandoned safeway 's loyalty card , arguing that these cards were no longer an effective marketing tool . this project was branded 'new safeway' . the new approach to pricing was one of the four pillars of safeway 's strategy , the others being '' best for fresh foods '' , '' best for customer service '' , and '' best for product availability '' . criado-perez envisaged a five-year programme of developing the shops along these lines , to be completed by 2004 . in 2002 , safeway was the fourth largest supermarket chain by sales in the united kingdom . however , it was growing more slowly than other large chains in the united kingdom , and this was reflected in a share price below the values of the group 's assets , leading to the various takeover rumours that circulated during 2002 , indicating the city was unconvinced with the criado-perez strategy . morrisons takeover . on 9 january 2003 , the much smaller morrisons , with around 119 shops largely located in the north of england , made a surprise offer to purchase the chain , offering 1.32 new shares of morrisons for each share of safeway , with the co-operation of the safeway board . however , this served only to start a stampede of other potential buyers . sainsbury 's , asda , kkr ( the company which helped finance the sale of safeway to argyll in 1987 ) , trackdean investments limited ( controlled by philip green , owner of bhs and arcadia ) , and tesco all said they were considering making offers . they were all asked to make submissions to the office of fair trading ( oft ) for approval under the fair trading act 1973 . on 23 january , safeway 's board dropped its recommendation of the morrisons offer . kohlberg kravis roberts later dropped its proposal . on 19 march , the remaining proposals except for trackdean 's ( which was said to raise no competition issues ) were referred to the competition commission by the trade and industry secretary , patricia hewitt . the report of the competition commission was made public on 26 september . a takeover of safeway by sainsbury 's , asda or tesco was '' expected to operate against the public interest , and should be prohibited '' . however , a takeover by morrisons was held to be acceptable on the condition that fifty three shops of the combined operation be sold , due to local competition issues . patricia hewitt accepted these recommendations . philip green announced on 30 october that he was not proceeding with a takeover bid , on the basis that it was not clear whether approval could be obtained to sell off individual shops to other chains . on 15 december , morrisons , the only remaining bidder , made a new offer of one share of morrisons , plus sixty pence for each safeway share , again with the co-operation of the safeway board . on 11 february 2004 , shareholders of both wm morrison and safeway voted to approve the merger of the two companies , subject to the result of two high court rulings later in the month . shop disposals . originally , fifty-two shops were to be compulsorily divested after the takeover , but this was reduced to fifty after one shop in sunderland burned down , and the lease ended on another in the city centre of leeds . john lewis partnership purchased nineteen to be part of its waitrose chain , while sainsbury 's purchased a further fourteen , and tesco bought ten in october 2004 . unlike other operators , most notably tesco , sainsbury 's and the co-op , morrisons had chosen not to move into the convenience shop sector . further to this policy decision , it was announced in october 2004 that the 114 smaller shops of safeway compact were to be sold off to rival supermarket chain somerfield , in a two part deal worth £260.2 million in total . in northern ireland , morrisons sold former safeway shops to asda . these included a shop in bangor , which actually opened after the takeover by morrisons , in june 2005 . morrisons continued to sell and close shops not covered by the competition commission ruling , which it felt did not fit with the scale and layout of its format of market street . in total , 254 shops were sold off by october 2005 , which left the chain with around 367 shops by november 2005 . in all , seventy two shops were sold that were neither part of the original competition commission ruling nor part of the safeway compact portfolio . one of the largest single purchases in 2005 was that of five shops by waitrose in august . on 18 july 2005 , a further six shops were sold to waitrose , including the former safeway shop in hexham , northumberland , which became the most northerly waitrose branch in england . in may 2005 , morrisons announced the termination of safeway 's joint venture forecourt shop petrol station format with bp . under the deal , the premises were split 50/50 between the two companies . five sites were subsequently sold on to bp , while morrisons sold the rest of its sites to somerfield and tesco , which both maintain a presence in this market sector . morrisons also sold safeway 's channel islands shops , in guernsey and jersey , to ci traders , where they continued to trade under the safeway brand name , despite selling products from chains such as iceland . ci traders buy safeway in february 2011 , ci traders sold the channel island safeway shops to waitrose , and the safeway brand disappeared from the channel islands . on the isle of man , the douglas shop was sold to shoprite , and the ramsey shop was sold to the co-op . the shop in gibraltar was originally marketed for sale , but was then converted . in november 2005 , plans were submitted for the extension and redevelopment of the shop , in order to introduce the full morrisons format . in september 2005 , the company announced the closure of former safeway depots in kent , bristol and warrington , with the loss of around 2,500 jobs . the kent depot was later sold to upmarket rival waitrose , whilst the warrington depot was sold to frozen food rival iceland . part of the bristol depot was sold off to gist . dematic the shop conversion process was completed on 24 november 2005 , when the last safeway fascia disappeared from the united kingdom . . partial brand revival . in november 2016 , morrisons announced a revival of the safeway brand , on food products that it manufactures for independent retailers . however , these products would not be sold in morrisons . morrisons , which is also the fourth largest food producer in the united kingdom , is seeking to utilise more of the capacity within its food manufacturing sites , and sees safeway as the ideal brand to front products for sale through third party retailers . in august 2017 , mccolls signed an agreement to stock safeway-branded products in its nationwide chain of small-format convenience stores . items have since gone on sale and a new safeway website has been launched . see also . morrisons supermarkets in the united kingdom list of companies based in london . references . external links . safeway website - safeway website - archive from 2004 safeway plc archive website a store list from may 2003 , showing all the branches operated by safeway before the takeover - archive the last annual report to shareholders , as an independent company before the firm takeover speculation , the safeway plc annual report and accounts 2002 - archive the safeway plc annual report and accounts 2003 - archive