Arctium

description . plants of the genus arctium have dark green leaves that can grow up to long . they are generally large , coarse and ovate , with the lower ones being heart-shaped . they are woolly underneath . the leafstalks are generally hollow . arctium species generally flower from july through to october . burdock flowers provide essential pollen and nectar for honeybees around august when clover is on the wane and before the goldenrod starts to bloom . the roots of burdock , among other plants , are eaten by the larva of the ghost moth ( hepialus humuli ) . the plant is used as a food plant by other lepidoptera including brown-tail , coleophora paripennella , coleophora peribenanderi , the gothic , lime-speck pug and scalloped hazel . the prickly heads of these plants ( burrs ) are noted for easily catching on to fur and clothing . in england , some birdwatchers have reported that birds have become entangled in the burrs leading to a slow death , as they are unable to free themselves . burdock 's clinging properties , in addition to thus providing an excellent mechanism for seed dispersal , led to the invention of the hook and loop fastener . a large number of species have been placed in genus arctium at one time or another , but most of them are now classified in the related genus cousinia . the precise limits between arctium and cousinia are hard to define ; there is an exact correlation between their molecular phylogeny . the burdocks are sometimes confused with the cockleburs ( genus xanthium ) and rhubarb ( genus rheum ) . etymology . circa 16th century , from bur + dock , the latter meaning sorrel of the genus rumex . collins dictionary . uses . food and drink . the taproot of young burdock plants can be harvested and eaten as a root vegetable . while generally out of favour in modern european cuisine , it is popular in east asia . arctium lappa is known as in chinese , the same name having been borrowed into japanese as , and is eaten in japan , korea and taiwan . in korean , burdock root is called and sold as , or '' whole burdock '' . plants are cultivated for their slender roots , which can grow up to about one metre long and two centimetres across . burdock root is very crisp and has a sweet , mild , or pungent flavour with a little muddy harshness that can be reduced by soaking julienned or shredded roots in water for five to ten minutes . the roots have been used as potato substitutes in russia . immature flower stalks may also be harvested in late spring , before flowers appear ; their taste resembles that of artichoke , to which the burdock is related . the stalks are thoroughly peeled , and either eaten raw , or boiled in salt water . leaves are also eaten in spring in japan when a plant is young and leaves are soft . some a . lappa cultivars are specialized for this purpose . a popular japanese dish is , julienned or shredded burdock root and carrot , braised with soy sauce , sugar , mirin and/or sake , and sesame oil . another is burdock makizushi ( sushi filled with pickled burdock root ; the burdock root is often artificially coloured orange to resemble a carrot ) . in the second half of the 20th century , burdock achieved international recognition for its culinary use due to the increasing popularity of the macrobiotic diet , which advocates its consumption . it contains a fair amount of dietary fiber ( gdf , 6 & nbsp ; g per 100 & nbsp ; g ) , calcium , potassium , and amino acids , and is low in calories . it contains the prebiotic fiber inulin . it contains a polyphenol oxidase , extraction , partial characterization , and inhibition patterns of polyphenol oxidase from burdock ( arctium lappa ) . mie s . lee-kim , eun s . hwang and kyung h . kim , enzymatic browning and its prevention , chapter 21 , pp . 267–276 , which causes its darkened surface and muddy harshness by forming tannin-iron complexes . burdock root 's harshness harmonizes well with pork in miso soup ( tonjiru ) and with japanese-style pilaf ( takikomi gohan ) . dandelion and burdock is today a soft drink that has long been popular in the united kingdom , which has its origins in hedgerow mead commonly drunk in the mediæval period . burdock is believed to be a galactagogue , a substance that increases lactation , but it is sometimes recommended to be avoided during pregnancy based on animal studies that show components of burdock to cause uterus stimulation . in europe , burdock root was used as a bittering agent in beer before the widespread adoption of hops for this purpose . traditional medicine . folk herbalists considered dried burdock to be a diuretic , diaphoretic , and a blood purifying agent . the seeds of a . lappa are used in traditional chinese medicine under the name ; some dictionaries list the chinese as just . burdock is a traditional medicinal herb used for many ailments . burdock root oil extract , also called bur oil , is used in europe as a scalp treatment . in america , burdock leaves have been simmered in milk to antivenom from rattlesnake bites . . adverse effects . the green , above-ground portions may cause contact dermatitis in individual with allergies as the plant contains lactones . . symbolism . in turkish anatolia , the burdock plant was believed to ward off the evil eye , and as such is often a motif appearing woven into kilims for protection . with its many flowers , the plant also symbolizes abundance . during world war ii and earlier japanese soldiers were issued a 15-1/2-inch bayonet held in a black-painted scabbard , the juken . their nickname was the burdock sword ( gobo ken ) . burdock and velcro . after taking his dog for a walk one day in the late 1940s ( 1948 ) , george de mestral , a swiss inventor , became curious about the seeds of the burdock plant that had attached themselves to his clothes and to the dog 's fur . under a microscope , he looked closely at the hook system that the seeds use to hitchhike on passing animals aiding seed dispersal , and he realized that the same approach could be used to join other things together . his work led to the development of the hook and loop fastener , which was initially sold under the velcro brand name . serbo-croatian uses the same word , , for burdock and velcro ; turkish does the same with the name , while in the polish language means both '' burr '' and '' velcro '' . the german word for burdock is and velcro is ( burdock fastener ) . in norwegian burdock is and velcro , which translates to '' burdock lock '' . species . ; accepted species arctium atlanticum ( pomel ) h.lindb . - algeria , morocco arctium debrayi senay - france , belgium arctium lappa l . - much of europe + asia ; naturalized in north america , australia , new zealand arctium leiobardanum juz . & c.serg . ex stepanov - siberia arctium minus ( hill ) bernh . - europe + southwestern asia ; naturalized in north and south america , australia , new zealand arctium nemorosum lej . - europe , caucasus , greenland arctium neumani ( rouy ) rouy - central + eastern europe arctium nothum ( ruhmer ) j.weiss - central + eastern europe arctium palladini ( marcow . ) r.e.fr . & söderb . - turkey , iran , caucasus arctium palladinii grossh . - iran , caucasus arctium platylepis ( boiss . & bal . ) sosn . ex grossh . - turkey , iran , caucasus arctium pseudarctium ( bornm . ) duist . - afghanistan , tajikistan arctium sardaimionense rassulova & b.a.sharipova - tajikistan arctium scanicum ( rouy ) rouy - france , belgium arctium tomentosum mill . - northern and eastern europe , turkey , iran , caucasus , siberia , xinjiang ; naturalized in north america . references . external links .