Exercise

classification . physical exercises are generally grouped into three types , depending on the overall effect they have on the human body : aerobic exercise is any physical activity that uses large muscle groups and causes the body to use more oxygen than it would while resting . the goal of aerobic exercise is to increase cardiovascular endurance . examples of aerobic exercise include running , cycling , swimming , brisk walking , skipping rope , rowing , hiking , dancing , playing tennis , continuous training , and long distance running . anaerobic exercise , which includes strength and resistance training , can firm , strengthen , and increase muscle mass , as well as improve bone density , balance , and coordination . examples of strength exercises are push-ups , pull-ups , lunges , squats , bench press . anaerobic exercise also includes weight training , functional training , eccentric training , interval training , sprinting , and high-intensity interval training which increase short-term muscle strength . flexibility exercises stretch and lengthen muscles . activities such as stretching help to improve joint flexibility and keep muscles limber . the goal is to improve the range of motion which can reduce the chance of injury . physical exercise can also include training that focuses on accuracy , agility , power , and speed . types of exercise can also be classified as dynamic or static . 'dynamic ' exercises such as steady running , tend to produce a lowering of the diastole blood pressure during exercise , due to the improved blood flow . conversely , static exercise ( such as weight-lifting ) can cause the systolic pressure to rise significantly , albeit transiently , during the performance of the exercise . . health effects . other peripheral organs . developing research has demonstrated that many of the benefits of exercise are mediated through the role of skeletal muscle as an endocrine organ . that is , contracting muscles release multiple substances known as myokines which promote the growth of new tissue , tissue repair , and multiple anti-inflammatory functions , which in turn reduce the risk of developing various inflammatory diseases . exercise reduces levels of cortisol , which causes many health problems , both physical and mental . endurance exercise before meals lowers blood glucose more than the same exercise after meals . there is evidence that vigorous exercise ( 90–95 % of vo2 max ) induces a greater degree of physiological cardiac hypertrophy than moderate exercise ( 40 to 70 % of vo 2 max ) , but it is unknown whether this has any effects on overall morbidity and/or mortality . both aerobic and anaerobic exercise work to increase the mechanical efficiency of the heart by increasing cardiac volume ( aerobic exercise ) , or myocardial thickness ( strength training ) . ventricular hypertrophy , the thickening of the ventricular walls , is generally beneficial and healthy if it occurs in response to exercise . central nervous system . the effects of physical exercise on the central nervous system are mediated in part by specific neurotrophic factor myokine , including bdnf , igf-1 , and vegf . . public health measures . multiple component community-wide campaigns are frequently used in an attempt to increase a population 's level of physical activity . a 2015 cochrane review , however , did not find evidence supporting a benefit . the quality of the underlying evidence was also poor . however , there is some evidence that school-based interventions can increase activity levels and fitness in children . another cochrane review found some evidence that certain types of exercise programmes , such as those involving gait , balance , co-ordination and functional tasks , can improve balance in older adults . following progressive resistance training , older adults also respond with improved physical function . survey of brief interventions promoting physical activity found that they are cost-effective , although there are variations between studies . environmental approaches appear promising : signs that encourage the use of stairs , as well as community campaigns , may increase exercise levels . the city of bogotá , colombia , for example , blocks off of roads on sundays and holidays to make it easier for its citizens to get exercise . such pedestrian zones are part of an effort to combat chronic diseases and to maintain a healthy bmi . to identify which public health strategies are effective , a cochrane overview of reviews is in preparation . physical exercise was said to decrease healthcare costs , increase the rate of job attendance , as well as increase the amount of effort women put into their jobs . there is some level of concern about additional exposure to air pollution when outdoor fitness , especially near traffic . children will mimic the behavior of their parents in relation to physical exercise . parents can thus promote physical activity and limit the amount of time children spend in front of screens . children who are overweight and participate in physical exercise experience a greater loss of body fat and increased cardiovascular fitness . according to the centers for disease control and prevention in the united states , children and adolescents should do 60 minutes or more of physical activity each day . implementing physical exercise in the school system and ensuring an environment in which children can reduce barriers to maintain a healthy lifestyle is essential . the european commission 's directorate-general for education and culture ( dg eac ) has dedicated programs and funds for health enhancing physical activity ( hepa ) projects within its horizon 2020 and erasmus+ program , as research showed that too many europeans are not physically active enough . financing is available for increased collaboration between players active in this field across the eu and around the world , the promotion of hepa in the eu and its partner countries , and the european sports week . the dg eac regularly publishes a eurobarometer on sport and physical activity . exercise trends . worldwide there has been a large shift toward less physically demanding work . this has been accompanied by increasing use of mechanized transportation , a greater prevalence of labor-saving technology in the home , and fewer active recreational pursuits . personal lifestyle changes , however , can correct the lack of physical exercise . research published in 2015 suggests that incorporating mindfulness into physical exercise interventions increases exercise adherence and self-efficacy , and also has positive effects both psychologically and physiologically . . social and cultural variation . exercising looks different in every country , as do the motivations behind exercising . in some countries , people exercise primarily indoors , while in others , people primarily outdoor fitness . people may exercise for personal enjoyment , health and well-being , social interactions , competition or training , etc . these differences could potentially be attributed to a variety of reasons including geographic location and social tendencies . in colombia , for example , citizens value and celebrate the outdoor environments of their country . in many instances , they utilize outdoor activities as social gatherings to enjoy nature and their communities . in bogotá , colombia , a 70-mile stretch of road known as the ciclovía is shut down each sunday for bicyclists , runners , rollerbladers , skateboarders and other exercisers to work out and enjoy their surroundings . similarly to colombia , citizens of cambodia tend to exercise socially outside . in this country , public gyms have become quite popular . people will congregate at these outdoor gyms not only to utilize the public facilities , but also to organize aerobics and dance sessions , which are open to the public . sweden has also begun developing outdoor gyms , called utegym . these gyms are free to the public and are often placed in beautiful , picturesque environments . people will swim in rivers , use boats , and run through forests to stay healthy and enjoy the natural world around them . this works particularly well in sweden due to its geographical location . exercise in some areas of china , particularly among those who are retired , seems to be socially grounded . in the mornings , dances are held in public parks ; these gatherings may include latin dancing , ballroom dancing , tango , or even the jitterbug . dancing in public allows people to interact with those with whom they would not normally interact , allowing for both health and social benefits . these sociocultural variations in physical exercise show how people in different geographic locations and social climates have varying motivations and methods of exercising . physical exercise can improve health and well-being , as well as enhance community ties and appreciation of natural beauty . . nutrition and recovery . proper nutrition is as important to health as exercise . when exercising , it becomes even more important to have a good diet to ensure that the body has the correct ratio of macronutrients while providing ample micronutrients , in order to aid the body with the recovery process following strenuous exercise . active recovery is recommended after participating in physical exercise because it removes lactate from the blood more quickly than inactive recovery . removing lactate from circulation allows for an easy decline in body temperature , which can also benefit the immune system , as an individual may be vulnerable to minor illnesses if the body temperature drops too abruptly after physical exercise . . excessive exercise . excessive exercise or overtraining occurs when a person exceeds their body 's ability to recover from strenuous exercise . . history . the benefits of exercise have been known since antiquity . dating back to 65 bce , it was cicero , roman politician and lawyer , who stated : '' it is exercise alone that supports the spirits , and keeps the mind in vigor . '' exercise was also seen to be valued later in history during the early middle ages as a means of survival by the germanic peoples of northern europe . more recently , exercise was regarded as a beneficial force in the 19th century . in 1858 archibald maclaren opened a gymnasium at the university of oxford and instituted a training regimen for major frederick hammersley and 12 non-commissioned officers . this regimen was assimilated into the training of the british army , which formed the army gymnastic staff in 1860 and made sport an important part of military life . several mass exercise movements were started in the early twentieth century as well . the first and most significant of these in the uk was the women 's league of health and beauty , founded in 1930 by mary bagot stack , that had 166,000 members in 1937 . the link between physical health and exercise ( or lack of it ) was further established in 1949 and reported in 1953 by a team led by jerry morris . dr . morris noted that men of similar social class and occupation ( bus conductors versus bus drivers ) had markedly different rates of heart attacks , depending on the level of exercise they got : bus drivers had a sedentary occupation and a higher incidence of heart disease , while bus conductors were forced to move continually and had a lower incidence of heart disease . . other animals . studies of animals indicate that physical activity may be more adaptable than changes in food intake to regulate energy balance . mice having access to hamster wheel engaged in voluntary exercise and increased their propensity to run as adults . selective breeding of mice exhibited significant heredity in voluntary exercise levels , with '' high-runner '' breeds having enhanced vo2 max , hippocampus neurogenesis , and skeletal muscle morphology . the effects of exercise training appear to be heterogeneous across non-mammalian species . as examples , exercise training of salmon showed minor improvements of endurance , and a forced swimming regimen of yellowtail amberjack and rainbow trout accelerated their growth rates and altered muscle morphology favorable for sustained swimming . crocodiles , alligators , and ducks showed elevated aerobic capacity following exercise training . no effect of endurance training was found in most studies of lizards , although one study did report a training effect . in lizards , sprint training had no effect on maximal exercise capacity , and muscular damage from over-training occurred following weeks of forced treadmill exercise .