1982 in music

specific locations . 1982 in british music 1982 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1982 in country music 1982 in heavy metal music 1982 in hip hop music 1982 in jazz . events . january–march . january 15 – k.c . and the sunshine band 's harry wayne casey is seriously injured in an automobile accident in miami , florida . january 20 – ozzy osbourne bites the head off a live bat thrown at him during a performance in des moines , iowa . he thought it was rubber . top 10 crazy music myths january 21 – b . b . king donates his personal record collection , which includes nearly 7,000 rare blues records , to the university of mississippi 's center for the study of southern culture . january 22 – tommy tucker , writer of '' hi heel sneakers '' , dies of carbon tetrachloride poisoning sustained while finishing floors in his home . february 13 – a 300-pound ( 136 & nbsp ; kg ) gravestone from the grave of lynyrd skynyrd singer ronnie van zant is stolen from an orange park , florida cemetery . police find the gravestone 2 weeks later in a dry river bed . february 19 – ozzy osbourne is arrested after urinating on the alamo , in san antonio , texas . february 20 – pat benatar marries her guitarist , neil giraldo , on the hawaiian island of maui . february 24 – the 24th annual grammy awards are presented in los angeles , hosted by quincy jones ( who wins a total of five awards ) . john lennon and yoko ono 's double fantasy ( the final album released by lennon in his lifetime ) wins album of the year , while kim carnes ' '' bette davis eyes '' wins both record of the year and song of the year . sheena easton wins best new artist . february 27 – the d'oyly carte opera company gives its final performance at the adelphi theatre after more than 110 years . march 3 – the mamas & the papas begin a reunion tour with a show in the new york club the other end with original members john phillips and denny doherty , along with mackenzie phillips and spanky mcfarlane replacing michelle gilliam and mama cass respectively . march 4 – frank zappa 's son dweezil and daughter moon unit form fred zeppelin . march 5 – comedian and blues brother john belushi is found dead of an apparent drug overdose in the chateau marmont in los angeles . march 18 – teddy pendergrass is severely injured in a car accident in philadelphia . pendergrass 's injuries result in him being paralyzed from the chest down . march 19 – ozzy osbourne 's lead guitarist , randy rhoads , is killed in a freak accident in leesburg , florida when the plane in which he is riding buzzes osbourne 's tour bus and crashes into a house . the plane 's pilot and a female passenger are also killed . march 22 – iron maiden release the number of the beast , the critically acclaimed yet controversial album often hailed as iron maiden 's greatest . this was iron maiden 's first album to feature singer bruce dickinson and their first to hit number one in the uk charts . march 28 – in los angeles , david crosby is arrested for possession of quaaludes and drug paraphernalia , driving under the influence of cocaine and carrying a concealed weapon . april–august . april 13 – david crosby is arrested on drug charges for the second time in three weeks when dallas police catch him preparing cocaine backstage before a show . april 15 – billy joel is seriously injured in a motorcycle accident in long island , new york . joel spends over a month in the hospital undergoing physical therapy for his hand . april 17 – johnny cash hosts saturday night live with cash and elton john and his classic band as the musical guests . cash sings i walk the line , folsom prison blues , ring of fire and sunday morning coming down . john sings empty garden ( hey hey johnny ) and ball and chain . the latter would not appear on the nbc show again until 2011 . april 24 – germany wins the 27th annual eurovision song contest , held in the harrogate conference centre , north yorkshire , with the song '' ein bißchen frieden '' , sung by 17-year-old nicole . she also records the song in english as '' a little peace '' , which becomes the 500th chart-topping single in the uk . april 26 rod stewart is mugged in los angeles . stewart loses his 50,000 porsche to the mugger , but is not hurt . the car is recovered several days later . joe strummer vanishes , forcing the clash to postpone their u.k . tour . april 30 – influential rock journalist lester bangs dies in his new york apartment of an apparent accidental overdose of prescription drugs . may 10- the clash drummer topper headon is fired from the band when his heroin addiction became too prevalent . may 14 – the first prince 's trust charity concert is held at the national exhibition centre in birmingham . with the prince of wales in attendance , status quo , becomes the first contemporary band to play to british royalty . may 18 – three weeks after disappearing , joe strummer and his girlfriend are found living in paris , two days after they ran the paris marathon . may 21 – queen release their tenth studio album , hot space , to immense critical outcry . the decision to make a dance-pop album with prominent disco influences at the height of american backlash against the latter genre renders the band a pariah in the united states , and their shift from traditional rock alienates their fans in the united kingdom . queen would not recover from the resulting backlash in the united kingdom until after their live aid performance in 1985 , while they would remain unpopular in the united states until after freddie mercury 's death in 1991 . may 23 – pink floyd – the wall , a film adaptation of pink floyd 's 1979 album the wall , premieres at the cannes film festival ; the film 's wide release would later begin on july 15 . may 26 – the rolling stones open their european tour in aberdeen , scotland . june 11 – grease 2 , starring maxwell caulfield and michelle pfeiffer ( in her feature film debut ) , is released . june 16 – james honeyman-scott dies of heart failure caused by cocaine intolerance . he was 25 years old . june 19 – amy grant marries gary chapman . july 4 – ozzy osbourne marries his manager sharon arden in maui , hawaii . july 21 – a second prince 's trust charity concert is held at the dominion theatre in london . performers include pete townshend , robert plant , madness , phil collins , joan armatrading and kate bush . august 17 – in langenhagen near hanover , germany began the first mass production of the compact disc . august 18 – four streets in liverpool are named after each of the beatles . august 31 – ronnie james dio plays his final show with black sabbath ( until 1992 ) . september–december . september 3–5 – the first us festival is held over labor day weekend near devore , california . the police , tom petty & the heartbreakers , fleetwood mac , grateful dead , talking heads and the b-52 's are among the many performers . september 7 – the musical cats begins its 18-year run on broadway . september 22 – the who begin their only formally announced '' farewell '' tour in washington , d.c . october 1 – the first compact discs appear in music stores in japan . october 1 – the nightfly by donald fagen is released . the record has since been critically acclaimed , and was nominated for 7 grammys . october 6 – madonna 's debut single , '' everybody '' , is released on sire records . november 1 – the breakup of the band blondie is announced publicly . november 5 – the first edition of the tube is broadcast on channel 4 in the uk . guests on the first programme include the jam , making their last live tv appearance together . november 21 – joni mitchell marries producer and bassist larry klein in malibu . november 25–27 – the jamaica world music festival is held in montego bay , jamaica . acts over the three-day festival include peter tosh , rick james , the clash , grateful dead , aretha franklin and , in their final show before disbanding , squeeze . november 29 – sena jurinac appears on stage for the last time , with the vienna state opera . november 30 – michael jackson releases his sixth studio album thriller , which would go on to be the greatest selling album of all time at 110 & nbsp ; million units sold worldwide . december 3 – the most successful group of the 1970s , abba , release their final original single '' under attack '' . a split is never officially announced . december 31 – the eleventh annual new year 's rockin ' eve special airs on abc , with appearances by the go-go 's , hall & oates , ronnie milsap , barry manilow and jermaine jackson . also in 1982 . december – iron maiden drummer clive burr is fired and replaced by nicko mcbrain formerly of the french band trust . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1982 . bands disbanded . see : category : musical groups disestablished in 1982 . albums released . in the us , the riaa stated that 2,630 albums , 2,710 cassettes and 2,285 singles were released . january–march . . published popular music . how do you keep the music playing ? w . alan bergman & marilyn bergman m . michel legrand . from the film best friends . '' key largo '' w.m . sonny limbo & bertie higgins '' let 's go to the movies '' w . martin charnin m . charles strouse from the film version of the musical annie '' sandy ( dumb dog ) '' w . martin charnin m . charles strouse from the film version of the musical annie '' sign ! '' w . martin charnin w . martin charnin m . charles strouse from the film version of the musical annie '' st . elsewhere theme song '' m . dave grusin '' up where we belong '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w . will jennings m . buffy sainte-marie & jack nitzsche '' we got annie '' w . martin charnin m . charles strouse from the film version of the musical annie '' where everybody knows your name '' w.m . judy hart angelo & gary portnoy , theme from the tv series cheers '' without us '' w . tom scott m . jeff barry , theme from the tv series family ties . classical music . hans abrahamsen – nacht und trompeten george crumb pastoral drone for organ trio for strings mario davidovsky – string trio for violin , viola , violoncello ross edwards – piano concerto in a morton feldman three voices for john cage , for violin and piano lorenzo ferrero thema 44 ( ad honorem j . haydn ) my blues respiri soleils daron hagen – echo 's songs rudolf komorous – serenade for strings györgy ligeti – trio for violin , horn and piano mel powell – string quartet poul ruders manhattan abstraction for orchestra greeting concertino piano sonata no . 2 robert simpson – string quartet no . 9 , 32 variations and fugue on a theme of haydn tōru takemitsu rain coming for chamber orchestra rain spell for flute , clarinet , harp , piano and vibraphone jay ungar – ashokan farewell . ballet . see list of 1982 ballet premieres . opera . stephen paulus – the postman always rings twice peter sculthorpe – quiros . jazz . musical theater . andy capp ( alan price ) – london production opened at the aldwych theatre on september 28 and ran for 99 performances cats ( andrew lloyd webber ) – broadway production opened at the winter garden theatre on october 7 and ran for 7485 performances , the longest run in the history of broadway joseph and the amazing technicolor dreamcoat ( andrew lloyd webber and tim rice ) – broadway production opened at the royale theatre on january 27 and ran for 747 performances little shop of horrors ' – off-broadway production opened at the orpheum theatre on july 27 and ran for 2209 performances nine – broadway production opened at the 46th street theatre on may 9 and ran for 729 performances pirates of penzance – london revival seven brides for seven brothers ( saul chaplin , gene de paul and johnny mercer ) – broadway production opened at the alvin theatre on july 8 and ran for 5 performances song and dance ( andrew lloyd webber ) – london production opened at the palace theatre on april 7 and ran for 781 performances . musical films . alice annie the best little whorehouse in texas disco dancer grease 2 one from the heart parsifal patnam vachina pativrathalu pink floyd – the wall starstruck une chambre en ville victor victoria yes , giorgio . musical television . live at austin city limits sweeney todd liquid sky . births . january 6 – morgan lander , canadian musician ( kittie ) january 9 – isaac delahaye , belgian guitarist and composer january 11 – ashley taylor dawson , english actor and singer ( allstars ) january 12 – nicole morier , american singer-songwriter and producer january 14 – caleb followill , american musician ( kings of leon ) january 15 – ari pulkkinen , finnish pianist and composer january 17 – alex varkatzas , greek-american metalcore lead vocalist ( atreyu ) january 18 quinn allman , guitarist ( the used ) joanna newsom , american multi-instrumentalist , singer-songwriter and actress january 19 – angela chang , taiwanese singer and actress january 21 – andré lousada , portuguese conductor january 24 – daveed diggs , american rapper , actor and singer january 25 – sho sakurai , japanese singer january 28 – ryan sheridan , irish singer-songwriter and guitarist january 29 – adam lambert , american singer , songwriter , stage actor , american idol 8 finalist ( queen + adam lambert ) january 31 elena paparizou , greek-swedish singer yukimi nagano , swedish singer and songwriter ( little dragon ) february 1 – kim jong-wook , south korean singer february 3 – jessica harp , american singer and guitarist ( the wreckers ) february 4 – kimberly wyatt , american singer , dancer ( the pussycat dolls ) february 9 – ami suzuki , japanese singer february 10 – darren mcmullen , british-australian the voice tv host , actor , music critic and music journalist february 16 – lupe fiasco , american rapper february 17 – daniel merriweather , british r & b musician february 17 – february 18 – nervo ( djs ) , australian twin sister djs february 22 – danja , american record producer and songwriter ( britney spears , nelly furtado , justin timberlake , joe jonas ) february 25 – bert mccracken , lead singer of american rock band the used march 2 – jessica biel , american actress , model , voice actress , producer and singer march 4 – amanda shires , american singer-songwriter and violin player . march 13 – darbuka siva , indian percussionist and composer march 14 – kate maberly , english actress , director , writer , producer and musician march 20 – nick wheeler , rock guitarist ( the all-american rejects ) march 21 jocie kok , chinese-singaporean singer santino fontana , american actor and singer march 22 – pete bennett , english rock singer ( daddy fantastic ) and television personality ( big brother 2006 ) april 3 – cobie smulders , canadian singer and actress april 7 – kelli young , english pop singer ( liberty x ) april 8 – keegan dewitt , american singer-songwriter and actor ( wild cub ) april 18 – marie-élaine thibert , canadian singer april 21 – lynn hilary , irish singer-songwriter and guitarist ( celtic woman and anúna ) april 24 – kelly clarkson , american singer , songwriter , actress and author , first american idol winner april 26 nadja benaissa , german pop singer jon lee , english singer ( s club 7 ) april 30 – lloyd banks , african american/puerto rican rapper may 4 – vera schmidt , hungarian singer-songwriter may 11 – cory monteith , canadian actor and musician ( d . 2013 ) may 14 – dan nigro , american songwriter and producer ( as tall as lions ) may 15 – jessica sutta , american singer , dancer , songwriter , actress and choreographer ( the pussycat dolls ) may 23 – tristan prettyman , american singer-songwriter , musician and foxy model may 27 – louis bell , american musician , record producer and mixer june 2 – jewel staite , canadian actress and singer june 3 – dihan slabbert , south african singer-songwriter and producer june 4 – jin au-yeung , chinese-american rapper june 5 – scott speer , american filmmaker , music video director , television director and novelist . june 7 – amy nuttall , british actress and opera singer june 13 – jessica caban , american fashion model , actress , musician and muse of bruno mars june 14 – lang lang , chinese concert pianist june 17 – arthur darvill , english actor and musician ( doctor who ) june 21 – jussie smollett , american singer , actor , activist , director and photographer june 23 – candice alley , australian singer-songwriter ( '' falling '' , colorblind ) june 25 – lola ponce , argentinian-italian singer-songwriter and actress july 5 – dave haywood , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( lady antebellum ) july 6 – tay zonday , american musician and voice actor july 7 – cassidy , american hip hop recording artist and rapper july 10 – alex arrowsmith , american rock musician july 12 – mahalia barnes , australian singer-songwriter and manager , ( jimmy barnes , reece mastin ) july 14 – dmitry chaplin , russian so you think you can dance finalist july 15 – haley scarnato , american singer and american idol finalist july 17 – natasha hamilton , english pop singer-songwriter ( atomic kitten ) july 18 ryan cabrera , american singer-songwriter and musician ( ashlee simpson , lisa origliasso , riley keough , audrina patridge ) priyanka chopra , indian actress , singer , film producer and philanthropist july 19 – christopher bear , american drummer ( grizzly bear ) july 23 – claudette ortiz , american soul singer july 30 – rebecca stephens , english singer ( the pipettes ) august 7 – abbie cornish , australian actress and rapper under the pseudonym '' dusk '' august 10 – vincent rodriguez iii , american actor , singer and dancer august 19 – willy denzey , french singer august 22 – boys noize , german edm dj and producer august 27 – duke dumont , british record producer , songwriter , musician and dj august 28 – leann rimes , american singer , songwriter , actress and author . september 3 andrew mcmahon , american musician kaori natori , japanese singer and model september 7 – race wong , hong kong singer/actress ( 2r ) september 9 – ai otsuka , japanese singer september 14 – wes carr , australian singer-songwriter and multi-instrumentalist ( australian idol 8 ) september 17 – wade robson , american choreographer , songwriter and dancer ( britney spears , justin timberlake ) september 22 – billie piper , british singer and actress september 27 anna camp , american actress-singer ( pitch perfect ) jon mclaughlin , american pop rock singer-songwriter , producer and pianist lil wayne , american rapper september 28 – st . vincent ( musician ) , american singer-songwriter , multi instrumentalist and guitar designer september 29 – stephen '' twitch '' boss , american hip hip dancer , dj , actor and entertainer october 1 – sandra oxenryd , swedish pop singer october 6 – mc lars , american rapper october 7 – lockett pundt , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( deerhunter ) october 15 – paulini , fijian-born australian singer , songwriter and actress october 18 – ne-yo , american r & b singer october 27 – keri hilson , american singer november 12 – anne hathaway , american actress , musical star and singer november 13 michael copon , american actor model and singer kumi koda , japanese singer november 14 – joy williams ( singer ) , american singer-songwriter november 15 – jenifer ( singer ) , french singer and actress november 18 – aoife o'donovan , irish-american singer and songwriter november 22 charlene choi , hong kong singer and actress steve angello , greek swedish dj , music producer and november 23 – leah jenner , american musician december 3 – jaycee chan , hong kong actor and singer december 5 – keri hilson , american singer , songwriter and actress december 8 – nicki minaj , trinidadian-born american rapper , singer , songwriter , model and actress december 13 – anthony callea , australian singer december 14 – anthony way , british singer and actor december 20 david cook , american singer jason zhang , chinese pop singer december 23 – beatriz luengo , spanish singer , songwriter , actress , dancer and entrepreneur december 24 – robert carmine , vocalist ( rooney ) december 27 – terji skibenæs , faroese guitarist ( týr ) undated guanqun yu , chinese operatic soprano mai khôi , vietnamese singer and political dissident caroline shaw , american composer , violinist and singer . deaths . january – sudhin dasgupta , music director , lyricist , and singer , 52 january 16 – harald agersnap , danish classical musician , 92 january 17 – tommy tucker , songwriter , 48 ( carbon tetrachloride poisoning ) january 19 – elis regina , brazilian singer , 36 january 30 stanley holloway , english actor and singer , 91 lightnin ' hopkins , blues singer , 69 february 4 – alex harvey , rock singer and guitarist , 46 february 17 – thelonious monk , jazz pianist , 64 february 18 – nathaniel shilkret , composer and musician , 92 february 21 – murray the k , disc jockey , 60 february 25 – chao yuen ren , composer , 89 march 5 – john belushi , entertainer of the blues brothers fame , 33 ( drug overdose ) march 19 – randy rhoads , guitarist , 25 ( plane crash ) march 24 – aileen stanley , singer , 84 or 85 march 26 – ferdinando garimberti , violin maker , 88 march 29 – carl orff , german composer , famous for the choral work carmina burana , 86 april 2 – sam coslow , songwriter and singer , 79 may 1 – william primrose , violist , 77 may 5 – cal tjader , latin jazz musician , 56 may 8 – neil bogart , owner of casablanca records , 39 ( cancer ) may 12 – humphrey searle , composer , 66 may 13 – renzo rossellini , film composer , 74 may 15 – joëlle mogensen , french singer , 29 ( drug overdose ) may 16 – adriano correia de oliveira , portuguese composer and singer , 40 may 26 – nanny larsén-todsen , operatic soprano , 97 may 30 – leon rené , songwriter , 80 june 15 – art pepper , jazz saxophonist , 56 ( brain hemorrhage ) june 16 – james honeyman-scott , guitarist , 25 ( heart failure from cocaine use ) july 9 – wingy manone , jazz trumpeter , 82 july 10 – maria jeritza , operatic soprano , 96 july 15 – bill justis , american saxophonist , songwriter , and producer , 55 ( cancer ) july 15 – lionel daunais , canadian baritone and composer , 80 july 22 – sonny stitt , jazz saxophonist , 58 july 28 – keith green , gospel singer , 28 ( plane crash ) august 13 – joe tex , southern soul singer , 49 september 1 – clifford curzon , pianist , 75 september 12 – federico moreno torroba , composer , 91 september 14 – christian ferras , french violinist , 49 ( suicide ) september 17 – manos loïzos , greek composer , 44 september 29 – a . l . lloyd , folk song collector , 74 october 4 – glenn gould , pianist , 50 ( stroke ) october 16 jakov gotovac , composer and conductor , 87 mario del monaco , operatic tenor , 67 october 21 – radka toneff , norwegian jazz singer , 30 october 29 – william lloyd webber , british organist and composer , 68 november 16 – al haig , jazz pianist , 58 december 2 – david blue , folk singer , 41 december 8 – marty robbins , country singer , 57 december 10 – roy webb , film composer , 94 . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1982 . country music association awards . . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1982 . charts . list of no . 1 hits . hot 100 no . 1 hits of 1982