Don Norman

early academics . in 1957 , norman received a b.s . degree in electrical engineering from massachusetts institute of technology ( mit ) . norman received a m.s . degree in electrical engineering from the university of pennsylvania . he received a phd in psychology from the university of pennsylvania . he was one of the earliest graduates from the mathematical psychology group at university of pennsylvania and his advisor was duncan luce . after graduating , norman took up a postdoctoral fellowship at the center for cognitive studies at harvard university and within a year became a lecturer . after four years with the center , norman took a position as an associate professor in the psychology department at university of california , san diego ( ucsd ) . norman applied his training as an engineer and computer scientist , and as an experimental and mathematical psychologist , to the emerging discipline of cognitive science . norman eventually became founding chair of the department of cognitive science and chair of the department of psychology . at ucsd , norman was a founder of the institute for cognitive science and one of the organizers of the cognitive science society ( along with roger schank , allan collins , and others ) , which held its first meeting at the ucsd campus in 1979 . together with psychologist tim shallice , norman proposed a framework of attentional control of executive functioning . one of the components of the norman-shallice model is the supervisory attentional system . . cognitive engineering career . norman made the transition from cognitive science to cognitive engineering by entering the field as a consultant and writer . his article '' the truth about unix : the user interface is horrid '' in datamation ( 1981 ) catapulted him to a position of prominence in the computer world . soon after , his career took off outside of academia , although he still remained active at ucsd until 1993 . norman continued his work to further human-centered design by serving on numerous university and government advisory boards such as the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) . he currently serves on numerous committees and advisory boards like at motorola , the toyota national college of technology , ted conference , panasonic , encyclopædia britannica and many more . norman was also part of a select team flown in to investigate the 1979 three mile island accident . in 1993 , norman left ucsd to join apple computer , initially as an apple fellow as a user experience architect ( the first use of the phrase '' user experience '' in a job title , and then as the vice president of the advanced technology group . he later worked for hewlett-packard before joining with jakob nielsen to form the nielsen norman group in 1998 . he returned to academia as a professor of computer science at northwestern university , where he was co-director of the segal design institute until 2010 . in 2014 , he returned to ucsd to become director of the newly established the design lab housed at the california institute for telecommunications and information technology . in 2014 , norman returned to the university of california , san diego as newly appointed director of the design lab . . awards . norman has received many awards for his work . he received two honorary degrees , one '' s . v . della laurea ad honorem '' in psychology from the university of padua in 1995 and one doctorate in industrial design and engineering from delft university of technology . in 2001 , he was inducted as a fellow of the association for computing machinery ( acm ) and won the rigo award from sigdoc , the association for computing machinery 's special interest group ( sig ) on the design of communication ( doc ) . in 2006 , he received the benjamin franklin medal in computer and cognitive science . in 2009 , norman was elected an honorary fellow of the design research society . nielsen norman group . norman , alongside colleague jakob nielsen , formed the nielsen norman group ( nn/g ) in 1998 . the company 's vision is to help designers and other companies move toward more human-centered products and internet interactions , and are pioneers in the field of usability . . user-centered design . in 1986 , norman introduced the term '' user-centered design '' in the book user centered system design : new perspectives on human-computer interaction , a book edited by him and by stephen w . draper . in the introduction of the book , the idea that designers should aim their efforts at the people who will use the system is introduced : people are so adaptable that they are capable of shouldering the entire burden of accommodation to an artifact , but skillful designers make large parts of this burden vanish by adapting the artifact to the users . in his book the design of everyday things , norman uses the term '' user-centered design '' to describe design based on the needs of the user , leaving aside what he deems secondary considerations , such as aesthetics . user-centered design involves simplifying the structure of tasks , making things visible , getting the mapping right , exploiting the powers of constraint , designing for error , explaining affordances and the seven stages of action . in his book the things that make us smart : defending the human attribute in the age of the machine , norman uses the term '' cognitive artifacts '' to describe '' those artificial devices that maintain , display , or operate upon information in order to serve a representational function and that affect human cognitive performance '' . similar to his the design of everyday things book , norman argues for the development of machines that fit our minds , rather than have our minds be conformed to the machine . on the revised edition of the design of everyday things , norman backtracks on his previous claims about aesthetics and removed the term user-centered design altogether . in the preface of the book , he says : the first edition of the book focused upon making products understandable and usable . the total experience of a product covers much more than its usability : aesthetics , pleasure , and fun play critically important roles . there was no discussion of pleasure , enjoyment and emotion , emotion is so important that i wrote an entire book , emotional design , about the role it plays in design . he instead currently uses the term human-centered design and defines it as : '' an approach that puts human needs , capabilities , and behavior first , then designs to accommodate those needs , capabilities , and ways of behaving . '' . bibliography . he is on numerous educational , private , and public sector advisory boards , including the editorial board of encyclopædia britannica . norman published several important books during his time at ucsd , one of which , user centered system design , obliquely referred to the university in the initials of its title . this is a list of select publications . psychology books . . usability books . . other publications . direct manipulation interfaces ( 1985 ) about direct manipulation interfaces in collaboration with e . l . hutchins ( first author ) and j.d . hollan user centered system design : new perspectives on human-computer interaction ( 1986 ) ( editor in collaboration with stephen draper ) combining his books , design of everyday things , turn signals are the facial expressions of automobiles , things that make us smart , with various technical reports .