Cart

history . carts have been mentioned in literature as far back as the second millennium b.c . handcarts pushed by humans have been used around the world . in the 19th century , for instance , some mormons traveling across the plains of the united states between 1856 and 1860 used handcarts . lyndia carter , “ handcarts , ” in encyclopedia of latter-day saint history , 461–63 . the history of the cart is closely tied to the wheel history . carts were often used for judicial punishments , both to transport the condemned & ndash ; a public humiliation in itself ( in ancient rome defeated leaders were often carried in the victorious general 's triumph ) & ndash ; and even , in england until its substitution by the pillory under queen elizabeth i , to tie the condemned to the cart-tail and administer him or her a public whipping . tumbrils were commonly associated with the french revolution as a mobile stage elevating the condemned on the way to the guillotine : this was simply a continuation of earlier practice when they were used as the removable support in the gallows , before albert pierrepoint calculated the precise drop needed for instant severance of the nerve column . types of carts . larger carts may be drawn by animals , such as horses , mules , or oxen . they have been in continuous use since the invention of the wheel , in the 4th millennium bc . carts may be named for the animal that pulls them , such as horsecart or oxcart . in modern times , horsecarts are used in competition while draft horse showing . a dogcart , however , is usually a cart designed to carry hunting dogs : an open cart with two cross-seats back to back ; the dogs could be penned between the rear-facing seat and the back end . the term '' cart '' ( synonymous in this sense with chair ) is also used for various kinds of lightweight , two-wheeled carriages , some of them sprung carts ( or spring carts ) , especially those used as open pleasure or sporting vehicles . they could be drawn by a horse , pony or dog . examples include : cocking cart : short-bodied , high , two-wheeled , seat for a groom behind the box ; for tandem driving caaonline : carriage tour . the carriage association of america , inc . dead cart to carry victims of the plague pp . 61-62 . p . 279 . dogcart : light , usually one horse , commonly two-wheeled and high , two transverse seats set back to back donkey cart : underslung axle , two lengthwise seats ; also called pony cart , tub-cart float : a dropped axle to give an especially low loadbed , for carrying heavy or unstable items such as milk churns . the name survives today as a milkfloat . governess cart : light , two-wheeled , entered from the rear , body partly or wholly of wickerwork , seat for two persons along each side ; also called governess car , tub-cart ralli cart : light , two-wheeled , horse-drawn , for two persons facing forward , or four , two facing forward and two rearward . the seat is adjustable fore-and-aft to keep the vehicle balanced for two or four people . stolkjaerre : two-wheeled , front seat for two , rear seat for the driver ; used in norway tax cart : spring cart , formerly subject to a small tax in england ; also called taxed cart whitechapel cart : spring cart , light , two-wheeled , especially for family or light delivery service pushcart , a cart that is pushed by one or more persons : baggage cart , pushed by travelers to carry individual luggage serving cart , also known as pushcart or go-cart , is a handcart used for serving : food cart , a mobile kitchen that is set up on the street to facilitate the sale and marketing of street food to people from the local pedestrian traffic . food service cart , also named serving trolley , for serving the food in a restaurant pastry cart , for serving pastry tea cart , also named teacart , tea trolley and tea wagon , for serving tea or other drinks the builder of a cart may be known as a cartwright ; the surname '' carter '' also derives from the occupation of transporting goods by cart or wagon . carts have many different shapes , but the basic idea of transporting material ( or maintaining a collection of materials in a portable fashion ) remains . carts may have a pair of shafts , one along each side of the draught animal that supports the forward-balanced load in the cart . the shafts are supported by a saddle on the horse . alternatively ( and normally where the animals are oxen or buffalo ) , the cart may have a single pole between a pair of animals . the draught traces attach to the axle of the vehicle or to the shafts . the traces are attached to a collar ( on horses ) , to a yoke ( on other heavy draught animals ) or to a harness on dogs or other light animals . traces are made from a range of materials depending on the load and frequency of use . heavy draught traces are made from iron or steel chain . lighter traces are often leather and sometimes hemp rope , but plaited horse-hair and other similar decorative materials can be used . the dray is often associated with the transport of barrels , particularly of beer . of the cart types not animal-drawn , perhaps the most common example today is the shopping cart ( british english : shopping trolley ) , which has also come to have a metaphorical meaning in relation to online purchases ( here , british english uses the metaphor of the shopping basket ) . shopping carts first made their appearance in oklahoma city in 1937 . in golf , both manual push or pull and electric golf trolleys are designed to carry a golfer 's bag , clubs and other equipment . also , the golf cart , car , or buggy , is a powered vehicle that carries golfers and their equipment around a golf course faster and with less effort than walking . a porter ( carrier ) is a type of small , hand-propelled wheeled platform . this can also be called a baggage cart . since the 13th century . autocarts are a type of small , hand-propelled wheeled utility carts having a pivoting base for collapsible storage in vehicles . they eliminate the need for plastic or paper shopping bags and are also used by tradespersons to carry tools , equipment or supplies . a soap-box cart ( also known as a billy cart , go-cart , trolley etc . ) is a popular children 's construction project on wheels , usually pedaled , but also intended for a test race . similar , but more sophisticated are modern-day pedal cart toys used in general recreation and racing . an electric cart is an electric vehicle . the term '' go-kart '' , which exists since 1959 , also shortened as '' kart '' , an alternative spelling of '' cart '' , refers to a tiny race car with frame and two-stroke engine ; the old term go-cart originally meant a sedan chair or an infant walker . gallery . file : gonnet carretas 1864.jpg '' carreta '' , a type of cart of argentina , 1864 file : cart chinawal 2.jpg cart with iron wheels in a farm at chinawal village , india file : cart.jpg a charrette , a wooden french cart ( cévennes ) file : dirkvdm cuba horsecart.jpg a horsecart in santiago de cuba file : rusty cart wheel 2000px.jpg an iron-tyred wooden-spoked cart wheel file : australian cart.jpg a simple wooden cart in australia file : cernuschi museum 20060812 147.jpg a chinese sui dynasty ( 581 & ndash ; 618 ad ) cart figurine pulled by a bull file : plattcrossing.jpg mormon handcart pioneers crossing the platte river , modern reenactment of 1856 expedition file : walking cart at mackinac bridge.jpg a walking cart , used for long distance travel , seen at michigan 's mackinac bridge file : carts catacomb gim.jpg clay cart figurines , catacomb culture , 3 mill . bc . see also . araba baggage cart barouche bicycle trailer brougham bullock cart cabriolet carriage chariot dicycle dogcart ( dog-drawn ) float governess cart guard stone hand truck hansom cab hobcart horse-drawn vehicles jaunting car lorry ( horse-drawn ) ralli car red river ox cart rickshaw wagon serving cart shopping cart sicilian cart sling cart sprung cart sulky trolley ( horse-drawn ) tumbril un-sprung cart wain war wagon wheelbarrow . references . external links . hand and horse drawn firefighting apparatus history of the shopping cart