Freedonia

usage . 1800s . . as a name for the united states . dr samuel mitchill suggested that 'fredonian ' be used by citizens of the united states ( '' fredon '' ) after the american revolution in place of the demonym '' american '' , which was then being used as a pejorative term by the metropolitan english to refer to '' their inferior and far-removed colonists '' . in vol . vi , part iv , of the medical repository , 1803 , pp . & nbsp ; 449–50 , mitchill , wrote the following under the heading of '' medical and philosophical news '' : . republic of fredonia . in december 1826 , a group of anglo-american settlers and filibusters led by empresario haden edwards in what is now texas , declared the '' fredonian rebellion '' centered in the town of nacogdoches . this was the first attempt by anglo settlers in texas to secede from mexico and form an independent state . the republic was short-lived however , lasting only from december 21 , 1826 – january 23 , 1827 when mexican soldiers and anglo militia men from stephen f . austin 's colony put the rebellion down . . 1930s . in the marx brother 's film duck soup , the tiny fictitious county of freedonia ( '' land of the brave , and free '' ) is suffering from severe financial problems and government leaders request a loan from wealthy widow mrs . teasdale to keep things afloat . the widow agrees on the condition that rufus t . firefly , played by groucho marx , take control and run the country . in the musical number that accompanies firefly 's first day in office , groucho lets the audience know how things will run , singing lyrics such as '' the last man nearly ruined this place , he did n't know what to do with it / if you think this country 's bad off now , just wait 'til i get through with it . '' firefly insults and angers ambassador trentino from the neighboring nation of sylvania , which leads freedonia into war . when the film was first released , the village of fredonia , new york , complained about the possible negative impact the film might have on them . the marx brothers replied '' change the name of your town . it is hurting our picture . '' the satirical depiction of freedonia is said to have led benito mussolini to ban the film in italy . . 1960s . in the 1960s , woody allen , working on candid camera , used freedonia as a practical joke by asking passersby what they thought of the bid for independence for freedonia . 1970s . in the film jabberwocky ( 1977 ) , freedonia is one of the kingdoms conquered by the king bruno the questionable . 1980s . the american game publisher fasa 's name was originally supposed to stand for '' freedonian aeronautics and space administration . '' in their first publication ( a set of starship deck plans for the game traveller ) , the accompanying introduction was signed '' rufus t firefly , director '' . 1990s . in the sierra entertainment pc game quest for glory ii : trial by fire ( 1990 ) , the character ali chica is a parody of chico marx . if a non-player character is asked about ali chica after his disappearance , the player is told that he went to fredonia . in the 1990s , the satirical magazine spy pulled a practical joke on several members of the united states congress . impersonating a new york radio host ( henry rose ) , the magazine successfully convinced several newcomers to congress to comment on the '' ethnic cleansing '' in freedonia , without their realizing that freedonia was a fictional country . '' parliament of suckers : spy says 'welcome ' to freshman congress class . '' spy , '' july–august 1994 '' . ( the dating is obscure . the story itself is dated february 1992 . there is commentary on it dated early 1993 . ) nick smith urged caution ; jim talent supported action ; jay inslee warned that inaction would be unacceptable . the story drew commentary elsewhere . '' brisk wind of change looks more like faint breeze after magazine 's hoax '' sun sentinel , january 27 , 1993 . is n't freedonia next to oz ? , new york times , 13 january 1993 . retrieved 12 january 2011 . principality of freedonia . the principality of freedonia was a micronation based on libertarian principles . it was created as a '' hypothetical project '' by a group of teenagers in the united states in 1992 . the project was formalized as a new country project in 1997 , which included attempts in 2001 to lease territory in somaliland . the attempt to lease land was rejected . 2000s . duck soup is used as in-joke amongst characters portrayed as knowledgeable about the film in a season 3 ( 2001–2002 ) episode of the west wing , while another episode in season 6 ( 2004–2005 ) recalls the general plot details of duck soup . in '' enemies foreign and domestic '' , c.j . cregg , sam seaborn , and toby ziegler are discussing the relevancy of the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) in a post-soviet world . c.j . , being briefed by sam on a number of countries she has to mention as possible new candidates for nato membership , wonders why freedonia 's being left out of the mix . she goes on to reference groucho marx by singing '' hooray for captain spaulding '' ( which was his character in animal crackers ) under her breath . when upbraided by toby for not taking the briefing seriously , she asks why her attempt at humor is less valid than sam 's or his . toby responds that he 's heard her joke before , implying that he 's seen duck soup . determined that her marx brothers references be respected , she ends the sequences of references by offering to pay toby 500 if he will sing '' lydia the tattooed lady '' ( a song sung by j . cheever loophole ( groucho ) in '' at the circus '' ) . during season 6 the question of the '' situation in freedonia '' was asked of a candidate in a senate debate , and after the candidate said he was studying it , there was no allowed time for the other candidates to challenge him about the existence of the country . united kingdom games '' democracy '' ( 2005 ) and '' democracy 2 '' ( 2007 ) featured freedonia as a playable country . in the game nancy drew : the white wolf of icicle creek ( 2007 ) the character yanni volkstaia is an olympic skier from fredonia . in the doctor who episode '' the shakespeare code '' ( 2007 ) , the doctor claims his companion martha jones is from freedonia . he also claims this in the doctor who novel sting of the zygons ( 2007 ) . although the usage may be intended simply as a plausible name for a country of which the listener ( william shakespeare in the former case ) has not heard , it is specifically linked to duck soup in at least one official reference work . . 2010s . in the australian animated series the flamin ' thongs ( 2014 ) , the leader of freedonia declares war on australia after holden thong 's soccer ball lands in his birthday cake and destroys it . in the film despicable me 3 ( 2017 ) , gru 's brother dru lives in freedonia , and the place was shown to have a cheese festival . use in general english . '' freedonia '' is sometimes used in political editorials and news stories to illustrate a point about another , real country . sometimes the point being made is that a particular country is so small or remote as to be unknown to its readers . other times , the term may negatively connote that a real country is run by an autocratic leader who is out of step with his or her people . still other times the author may simply use '' freedonia '' to mean '' a fictitious country for the purposes of illustration '' . freedonia on the potomac mcnamee , mike . '' invest in freedonia ! '' business week website . . see also . fredonian rebellion fredonia ( disambiguation ) . references . external links .