Korçë District

geography . it had an area of 1,752 km² , making it the largest district in albania . it lied in the southeastern part of albania , from lat . 40°27 ' n to lat . 40°57 ' n and from long . 21°4 ' e to 20°19 ' e . it was bordered by pogradec district to the north , by greece with the florina regional unit ( greek macedonia ) to the east , devoll district to the southeast , by kolonjë district and përmet district to the southwest , and by gramsh district and skrapar district on the west . history . antiquity . the copper age lasted from 3000 bc to 2100 bc . mycenean pottery was introduced in the plain of korçë during the late bronze age ( helladic period ) , carol zerner , peter zerner , john winder , john winder . wace and blegen : pottery as evidence for trade in the aegean bronze age , 1939–1989 . j.c . gieben , 1993 , , p . 222 and has been claimed that the tribes living in this region before the dark age migrations , probably spoke a northwestern greek dialect . hammond nicholas geoffrey lemprière . migrations and invasions in greece and adjacent areas . noyes press , 1976 , p . 153 . the area was on the border between illyria and epirus and according to a historical reconstruction was ruled by an illyrian dynasty until 650 bc , after which by a chaonian dynasty . wilkes , j . j . the illyrians , 1992 , , page 47 , '' according to one reconstruction ( hammond ) we have the evidence of an illyrian dynasty being replaced by a chaonian regime from northern epirus '' the cambridge ancient history : the expansion of the . , tome 3 , part 3 , by john boardman , nicholas geoffrey lemprière hammond , page 263 , '' in the plain of korçë illyrian rule ended c . 650 bc , when the burials of '' the cambridge ancient history , tome 3 , part 3 , by john bagnell bury , '' in the plain of korçë illyrian rule ended c . 650 bc , when the burials of their chieftains in tumulus i at kuci zi came to an end '' during this period the area was inhabited by ancient greek tribes , possibly chaonians or molossians , two of the three major epirus tribes . john boardman . the cambridge ancient history : pt . 1 . the prehistory of the balkans ; and the middle east and the aegean world , tenth to eighth centuries b.c . cambridge university press , p . 266 : '' we may conclude , then , that the archaeological division corresponded to a tribal division : the illyrian tribes holding northern illyris , and the epirotic tribes , whether chaonian or molossian , holding the plain of korçë '' archaeologists have found a gravestone of the 2nd or 3rd century ad depicting two illyrian blacksmiths working iron on an anvil near modern korçë . . 19th century . yuriy venelin ( 1802–1839 ) a russian scholar who specialised in bulgarian studies noted that the korçë district in 1833 ( at which point its boundaries were quite different from the modern district , including all of devoll and various other differences ) had 50 villages with two thirds being muslim and a third being christian . settlements of significance during that time were moscopole , vithkuq , kamenicë , floq , boboshticë , drenovë , borje , voskop and so on . houses of the area numbered a total of 2400 containing some 22,000 people according to the ottoman census . the muslims and christians of the region were noted as being '' albanians by nationality — speaking the same language , having the same customs '' involved in agricultural employment , many unskilled and illiterate apart from those in korçë and moscopole that conduct trade . the villagers of moscopole were mainly aromanians in addition to greeks and albanians , while some bulgarians living nearby . '' the district of korcha includes some 50 villages . one third of them are christian , the others — mohammedan . more important are voskopol or moskopol , vitkuki , kamenitsa , flioki , boboshtitsa , drenovo , borya , boskopy and others . the total number of the houses is almost 2400 and the number of the inhabitants is 22,000 , according to the royal census taken in that district . both the turks ( the moslems ) and the christians are albanians by nationality — speaking the same language , having the same customs , illiterate and unskilled , poor farmers and shepherds , with the exception of the inhabitants of korcha and moskopol , who carry on some trade . the inhabitants of voskopol are walachians ; there also are some bulgarians in the vicinity . '' ; p.83 . '' юрий венелин , древние и нынешние болгаре ( yuril venelin , ancient and modern bulgarians ) , moscow , 1833 , pp.2–3 , 11–12 ; the original is in russian . '' . 20th century . in the 1908 statistics of amadore virgili as presented by nicholas cassavetes for the pan-epirotic union of northern epirus showed the entire kaza of korçë , which also included surrounding rural areas as well as the modern devoll district as having a muslim majority which was not differentiated by nationality alongside a christian minority of which there were 43,800 albanian speakers and 1,214 vlachs and no greek speakers found , while bulgarians were not counted for . cassavetes , nicholas j ( 1919 ) . the question of northern epirus in the peace conference . new york : pan-epirotic union of northern epirus , american branch , 1919 . page 77 . cited in psomas , lambros ( 2008 ) , the religious and ethnographic synthesis of the population of southern albania ( northern epirus ) in the beginning of the 20th century , discusses on pages 248–252 . for the same area , the 1913 statistics of destani , which did not differentiate subjects by faith but only language , found 89829 albanian speakers , 3190 vlach speakers , 3985 bulgarian speakers , no greek speakers and 527 '' others '' . psomas , lambros ( 2008 ) . the religious and ethnographic synthesis of the population of southern albania ( northern epirus ) in the beginning of the 20th century . statistics of destani discussed on 256–260 with regard to the vlach population , lambros psomas argues the study of virgili likely undercounted the vlach speakers while the study of destani is more reliable with regard to the vlachs psomas , lambros ( 2008 ) . synthesis of the population of southern albania ( northern epirus ) . page 259-260 : '' virgili 's analysis is not proved trustworthy as far as the vlach-speaking inhabitants are concerned . for instance , metsovo , a region which many people are vlach-speaking even nowadays , appears without vlach-speaking people at a1l . thus , the pro-albanian statistics of 1913 seem to be more as far as they are concerned . '' but he also argues the study of destani was pro-albanian in motive and drastically undercounted the number of greek speakers in the himara and leskovik kazas , while psomas also excludes korçë from the collection of regions with notable greek-speaking presence . psomas , lambros ( 2008 ) . the religious and ethnographic synthesis of the population of southern albania ( northern epirus ) in the beginning of the 20th century page 250 : '' greek-speaking people were located only in the cazas of gjirokaster , delvin and himara , from the western part of northern epirus , and leskovik , from the eastern . in all these cazas they constituted the majority of the orthodox christians ( table 2.1 ) . finally , there was a small minority of vlach-speaking inhabitants in the cazas of korcha and permet . surprisingly enough this , does not include the slav-speaking orthodox population of the caza of starovo . thus , except for the cazas in which a greek-speaking population was located , the albanian-speaking people were always the vast majority of the ottoman cazas . this agrees with the english statistic of 1877 , in which albanians were always the population in advance . '' british historian tom winnifrith states that during the delineation of the greek-albanian border a part of the local pro-greek element included communities whose native speech was greek . in 1919 , us diplomat joseph emerson haven on special detail in albania wrote a detailed report regarding the political circumstances in the country . haven wrote that the province of korçë numbered some 60,000 people of whom 18 % had a preference for union with greece and within that group half were doing so from fear or from being promised financial gain through attainment of muslim properties and land . '' one commissioner from the delegation sederholm noted the population of korçë being “ entirely albanian ” with “ the number of greeks there ” being “ quite insignificant ” . '' joseph emerson haven , a u.s . diplomat based in italy on special detail in albania during the spring of 1919 , had already come to a similar conclusion . in his detailed report on the political situation in the country , haven suggested that the disputed province of korçë had roughly 60,000 inhabitants , roughly 18 per cent of whom were in favour of greek sovereignty . of those 18 per cent , he argued , half were seeking that end out of fear or had been promised material gain in the form of moslem land and property . haven found that the ‘ most intense hatred and loathing exists in southern albania for greece , this hatred being shown by both orthodox christians and musselmen . the cry is “ we are albanians first and religionists second . ” with the exception of comparatively few residents in the province of coritsa korçë and a few towns in the region of chimara himarë , the country is absolutely albanian in sentiment . '' haven also noted that in 1919 there was a degree of antipathy shown by both muslims and christians in the district toward greece , and an ethnic affinity among albanians that , at the time , came before religious affinity . at the peace conference in paris , the greek delegation argued that all christians in north epirus , including those that spoke albanian , should be classified as greeks because , they argued , their sentiments were greek , and they had a common religion with greeks ; lambros psomas , however , argued that this did not apply in korçë kaza , where there were many orthodox albanian nationalists . psomas , lambros ( 2008 ) . synthesis of the population of southern albania ( northern epirus ) . page 253 , 268–269 , 280 . demographics . ethnicity . most of the population of the district of korçë are ethnic albanians , while a significant number of ethnic minorities ( aromanians ) also inhabit the district . aromanians are found residing in rural communities surrounding korçë and number some 5,000 people , although other figures exist that inflate those numbers . greek speakers are found in the city of korçë as well as in the surrounding region and especially in korçë plain . a slavic minority most concentrated in the municipality of pustec also exists , as does a scattered presence of romani people . religion . the religious composition of the district of korçë consists of muslims and orthodox christians while the muslims are divided between sunni , bektashi and halveti groups . additionally , among the christians , there is a presence of protestants , dating back to the actions of gjerasim qiriazi . finally , a presence of catholics was detected in the 2011 census . economy . during the 20th century , korçë gained a substantial industrial capacity in addition to its historic role as a commercial and agricultural centre . the plateau on which the city stands is highly fertile and is one of albania 's main wheat-growing areas . local industries include the manufacture of knitwear , rugs , textiles , flour-milling , brewing , and sugar-refining . deposits of lignite coal are mined in the mountains nearby such as mborje-drenovë . the city is home to the nationally famous birra korça . administrative divisions . the district consisted of the following municipalities : drenovë gorë korçë lekas libonik maliq moglicë mollaj pirg pojan pustec ( liqenas ) qendër bulgarec vithkuq voskop voskopojë vreshtaz . other communities and settlements . baban bickë boboshticë burim cerja dardhë diellas drenovë cangonj ekmeçi floq gollomboç goricë e madhë goricë e vogël kallamas kamenicë kapshticë kozeli kreshpanj lajthizë pustec mançurisht pepellash pilur plasë progër rakickë shtyllë sinicë voskopoja ( moscopole ) vreshtas vranisht zaroshkë zemblak zvedzë . notable residents . pellumb kulla , diplomat and author . references .