Trakai

names and etymology . the name of the town was first recorded in chronicles from 1337 in german as tracken ( later also spelt traken ) and is derived from the lithuanian word trakai ( singular : trakas meaning '' glade '' ) . since the time of the polish–lithuanian commonwealth , the city has been known as troki in polish . its other alternate names include трака́й ( trakáj ; belarusian ) , trok ( yiddish ) , troky , and traki . . demographics . the majority of trakai 's inhabitants ( 66.5 % ) are lithuanian , although the town also has a substantial polish minority ( 19 % ) , as well as russians ( 8.87 % ) . . geography . there are 200 lakes in the region , of which the deepest ( 46.7 m ) is galvė with its 21 islands . galvė covers an area of 3.88 & nbsp ; km 2 , vilkokšnis lake – 3.37 & nbsp ; km 2 , the lake of skaistis – 2.96 & nbsp ; km 2 . there are trakai historical national park and aukštadvaris regional park founded in the territory of the region . trakai historical national park was founded on 23 april 1991 to preserve trakai as a centre of lithuanian statehood as well as the park 's authentic nature . the territory of the park covers 82 & nbsp ; km 2 , 34 & nbsp ; km 2 of which are covered by forests , and 130 & nbsp ; km 2 are covered by lakes . aukštadvaris regional park was founded in 1992 to preserve the valuable landscapes of verknė and strėva upper reaches . the area of the park is 153.5 & nbsp ; km 2 , most of which is covered by forests . there are 72 lakes here , the biggest of which is vilkokšnis . trakai is a town built on water . the town is surrounded by the lakes of luka ( bernardinai ) , totoriškės , galvė , akmena , gilušis . there are a number of architectural , cultural and historical monuments in trakai . the history museum in the castle was established in 1962 . festivals and concerts take place in the island castle in summer . history . beginnings . the first settlements in this area appeared as early as the first millennium a.d . the town , as well as its surroundings , started developing in the 13th century in the place of senieji trakai ( old trakai ) . according to a legend after a successful hunting party , grand duke gediminas discovered a beautiful lake-surrounded place not far from kernavė , then capital of the grand duchy of lithuania , and decided to build a castle in the location . that is how the old trakai castle was built in senieji trakai . the name of trakai was first mentioned in teutonic knights chronicles in 1337 . this year is considered to be the official date of town 's foundation . when grand duke gediminas finally settled in vilnius , senieji trakai was inherited by his son kęstutis . duchy of trakai developed and the town entered its best decades . golden age . kęstutis moved the town from senieji trakai to its current location , which is sometimes known as naujieji trakai . the new location was a place of intensive construction : a new castle was built in the strait between lakes galvė and luka and known as the peninsula castle , and another one , known as the island castle , on an island in lake galvė . a village grew around the castles . vicinity of trakai was protected by senieji trakai , strėva , bražuolė , daniliškės and other hillforts from attacks of the teutonic knights . despite the protection , both wooden castles were successfully raided by the teutonic knights several times in a row . the town was in the center of a conflict between grand duke jogaila ( later to become king of poland ) with his uncle kęstutis . in 1382 jogaila 's and kęstutis 's armies met near trakai , but jogaila tricked kęstutis and imprisoned him in kreva . a few weeks later kęstutis died in captivity and jogaila transferred the castles to his brother skirgaila , who became the governor of lithuania proper . however , his rule was briefly interrupted when in 1383 joint forces of kęstutis 's son vytautas and the teutonic knights captured the town . in 1392 , vytautas and jogaila signed the astrava agreement ending their quarrel . vytautas became the grand duke of lithuania while jogaila technically remained his superior . vytautas also regained his father 's lands , including trakai . despite his official capital being in vilnius , vytautas spent more time in trakai . in early 15th century he replaced the older , wooden fortress with a stone-built castle . some design elements were borrowed from the castles of the teutonic knights as vytautas spent some time with the teutons forming an alliance against jogaila in earlier years . trakai became a political and an administrative centre of the duchy , sometimes named a de facto capital of lithuania . construction of the brick castles was finished and a catholic church was built . in 1409 , the town was granted with magdeburg rights ; it is one of the first towns in lithuania to get city rights . the village started rapidly developing into a town . in 1413 , it became a seat of the trakai voivodeship and a notable center of administration and commerce . decline and reconstruction . after the grand duchy of lithuania joined the kingdom of poland to form the polish–lithuanian commonwealth in 1569 , the castles remained a royal property , but the town 's importance gradually declined , with the nearby vilnius and the political center of the commonwealth in kraków being far more important . nevertheless , it continued to be the seat of local sejmik . in polish sources the town name was started to be referred to as troki . in 1477 , the castle on the lake was a meeting place of king casimir iv with venice envoys . after that the castle became a luxurious prison for political prisoners . sigismund i the old imprisoned the members of goštautai family , believed to be conspiring with michael glinski . also helena , widow of king alexander was kept there in order to prevent her escape to the grand duchy of moscow . the castle was refurbished by king sigismund i the old , who set up his summer residence there ; however , after his death in 1548 the castle gradually fell into disrepair . during the russo-polish war ( 1654–1667 ) between 1654 and 1667 , the town was plundered and burnt . in the aftermath of the war with the tsardom of russia in 1655 , both castles were demolished and the town 's prosperity ended . the castle ruins remained a historical landmark . during the great northern war ( 1700–1721 ) trakai was plundered again , as famine and plague swept the country . after the partitions of poland in 1795 , the area was annexed by the russian empire . after world war i , the area became part of the restored republic of poland . in 1929 , the polish authorities ordered reconstruction and restoration of the trakai island castle . the works in the upper castle were almost complete in 1939 , when the invasion of poland started and the area was soon annexed by the soviet union , then by nazi germany during operation barbarossa . during the war , more than 5,000 jews from the trakai region were murdered by the nazis . in 1944 , during operation tempest , the town was liberated by joint forces of the underground polish home army and soviet partisans . after world war ii it was again annexed by the soviet union and made part of the lithuanian ssr in the soviet union ; subsequently many of the city 's and area 's ethnic polish inhabitants left for the recovered territories of the polish people 's republic . in 1961 , the reconstruction of the upper castle and a high tower construction were completed ; however , the works came to a halt as a result of nikita khrushchev 's speech of 21 december 1960 , where the first secretary declared that reconstruction of the castle would be a sign of glorification of lithuania 's feudal past . works in the lower castle were not resumed until the 1980s and were completed by the lithuanian authorities in the early 1990s . today the island castle serves as the main tourist attraction , hosting various cultural events such as operas and concerts . karaim community . karaims ( or karaites ) are a small karaim language religious and ethnic group resettled to trakai by grand duke vytautas in 1397 and 1398 from crimea , after one of his successful military campaigns against the golden horde . both christian and karaim communities were granted separate self-government in accordance with the magdeburg rights . despite ever-increasing polonisation , trakai remained a notable center of karaim cultural and religious life . some famous scholars were active in trakai in the 16th and 17th centuries , such as isaac of troki ( c . 1533 – c . 1594 ) , joseph ben mordechai malinowski , zera ben nathan of trakai , salomon ben aharon of trakai , ezra ben nissan ( died in 1666 ) and josiah ben judah ( died after 1658 ) . some of the karaims became wealthy and noble . the local karaim community , the backbone of the town 's economy , suffered severely during the khmelnytsky uprising and the massacres of 1648 . by 1680 , only 30 karaim families were left in the town . their traditions , including not accepting neophytes , prevented the community from regaining its strength . early in the 18th century war , famine , and plague reduced the karaims to three families . by 1765 karaim community increased to 300 . trakai kenessa is a rare example of a surviving wooden synagogue with an interior dome . preserved wooden synagogues in lithuania , documented by the center for jewish art at hebrew university in 1996 and 2004 kibinai , traditional karaim pastry , became a local speciality and are mentioned in tourist guides . lonely planet estonia , latvia & lithuania , 2012 , p . 25 . . international relations . twin towns and sister cities . trakai is twinned with : acre , israel , since 2015 alanya , turkey , since 2006 avola , italy , since 2015 bernburg , germany borne , netherlands giżycko , poland , since 2005 ivano-frankivsk , ukraine , since 2006 jarosław , poland kondopoga , russia , since 2014 lida , belarus , since 2008 lutsk , ukraine , since 2010 malbork , poland , since 1997 mtskheta , georgia , since 2014 nowy sącz , poland polotsk , belarus , since 2004 qazax , kazakhstan , since 2017 rheine , germany , since 1996 schönebeck , germany , since 2003 târgoviște , romania yavoriv , ukraine . notable people . isaac of troki . references . external links . trakai town site trakai historical national park