McDonaldland

history . early years ( 1970–1972 ) . mcdonaldland was created by ddb worldwide in 1970–71 at the request of mcdonald 's for its restaurants . the first commercial aired in january 1971 . the early commercials were built on an upbeat , bubblegum-style tune and feature a narrator ; many have plots that involve various villains , like the hamburglar , evil grimace , and captain crook trying to steal a corresponding food item but are constantly foiled by ronald . in 1976 , remco created a line of action figures to celebrate the characters . . lawsuit ( 1973 ) . in 1973 , sid and marty krofft sued mcdonald 's by claiming that the entire mcdonaldland premise plagiarism their television show . the kroffts also claimed that the character mayor mccheese was an infringement on their copyrighted character '' h.r . pufnstuf '' ( a mayor himself ) . at trial , a jury found in favor of the kroffts and mcdonald 's was ordered to pay 50,000 . the case was appealed by both parties to the united states court of appeals for the ninth circuit . the appeals court , in the 1977 decision of sid & marty krofft television productions inc . v . mcdonald 's corp . , reassessed damages in favor of the kroffts to more than 1,000,000 . as a result , mcdonald 's was ordered to stop producing many of the characters and to stop airing commercials featuring the characters . . popularity ( 1980–1998 ) . in the 1980s and 1990s , the mcdonaldland commercials remained a popular marketing device . the characters that remained following the lawsuit were ronald mcdonald , grimace , hamburglar and the french fry gobblins ( renamed the fry guys and later the fry kids with the addition of the fry girls ) while mayor mccheese , officer big mac , captain crook and the professor were used until 1985 . ( however , they did return for a sears advertisement in 1987 ) . birdie the early bird would join the lineup soon after representing the restaurant 's new breakfast line in the early 1980s . some of the characters ' physical appearances were revised in later commercials ( notably hamburglar , grimace and birdie ) . from then on the characters lived in reality and interacted with real-life people , but commercials still took place in '' mcdonaldland '' . soon after the happy meal gang and the mcnugget buddies were prominent features in the commercials ( representing the restaurant 's happy meals and chicken mcnuggets respectively , being the menu items that mainly appealed to kids ) along with ronald . merchandise featuring the mcdonaldland characters included a kid-friendly magazine titled '' mcdonaldland fun times '' , which published six issues a year . a direct-to-video animated film titled the adventures of ronald mcdonald : mcdonaldland treasure island was released in 1989 , featuring much of the mcdonaldland characters from the 1980s . video games featuring the characters were also released , such as m.c . kids and mcdonald 's treasure land adventure . later years ( 1998–2003 ) . from 1998 until 2003 , rugrats creators klasky csupo and mcdonald 's released an animated direct-to-video series exclusively on vhs titled the wacky adventures of ronald mcdonald . the series depicted ronald , grimace , birdie , the hamburglar and a few new characters , like ronald 's pessimistic dog sundae . these videos would begin in live-action in what resembled a futuristic mcdonaldland . whenever the characters would enter down a tube or other means of travel , they would become animated . in all six episodes , ronald goes on adventures with his friends and they learn new things along the way . in the early 2000s , mcdonald 's experimented with the possibility of animating the characters to improve ratings . various spots featuring the hamburglar and other characters alongside celebrities were planned but were canceled . a conflict emerged between agencies regarding whether to continue using the characters or to follow through the desire of ad agency leo burnett by elevating the '' i 'm lovin ' it '' campaign and phasing out the characters , resulting in mcdonald 's choosing the latter option and completely retiring the mcdonaldland characters . legacy . in recent years , the mcdonaldland premise has largely been dropped out of advertising campaigns and happy meal toys . despite this , the characters continued to appear in mcdonald 's playplaces , decorative seats for children 's birthday parties and bibs , though only ronald mcdonald , birdie , grimace , hamburglar and the fry kids appear in them . they also appeared on some soft drink cups until 2008 and still appear as cookies in pouches titled '' mcdonaldland cookies '' . today , the characters also appear on the windows of some mcdonald 's restaurants . modern commercials nowadays depict ronald mcdonald alone in real-world situations with children , whether he visits a local mcdonald 's restaurant or to visit sick children at a ronald mcdonald house . grimace , however , had a non-speaking appearance in an advertisement for monsters vs . aliens happy meal toys while the hamburglar appeared in an adult-oriented commercial advertising the big mac . characters . ronald mcdonald – the primary cultural icon and official mascot of mcdonald 's . he is a clown with red hair and a big red smile who wears a yellow jumpsuit and red shoes . while his suit has gone through various changes over the years , it has basically remained the same . hamburglar ( performed by frank delfino from 1971-1992 , jerry maren in some commercials , tommy vicini from 1992 to 2003 , voiced by larry storch from 1971 to 1986 , howard morris from 1986 to 2003 , charlie adler in some commercials during the mid 1980s and in the wacky adventures of ronald mcdonald , and carl w . wolfe in some commercials during the 1990s mcdonald 's at voice chasers , vocal credits . ) – a pint-sized burglar who was introduced in 1971 as one of the first antagonists of the commercials where he often attempts to steal burgers from ronald . originally , hamburglar spoke in a gibberish language which had to be translated by captain crook . he was reintroduced in 1985 as one of the main protagonists where he spoke in normal sentences . in 2015 , mcdonald 's brought back the hamburglar as part of the promotion of a new sirloin burger . katie lobosco , '' mcdonald 's has a new hamburglar '' , cnnmoney ( may 7 , 2015 ) . grimace ( performed by patty saunders , voiced by lennie weinrib from 1971 to 1986 , frank welker and sometimes larry moran from 1986 to 2003 , kevin michael richardson in the wacky adventures of ronald mcdonald ) – a large purple monster who was first introduced in november 1971 as the '' evil grimace '' . in grimace 's first appearances , he was one of the original main antagonists and was depicted with two pairs of arms which were used to steal sodas and shakes . '' evil '' was soon dropped from grimace 's name and he was reintroduced in 1972 as a protagonist where he only has one set of arms . he is then a rather clumsy but still amiable monster from then on . mayor mccheese ( performed by billy curtis from 1971–1979 , jerry maren from 1980–1985 , voiced by howard morris impersonating ed wynn in the commercials , bob joles impersonating wynn in the wacky adventures of ronald mcdonald ) – an enormous cheeseburger-headed character who first appeared in 1971 and was removed in 1985 . he sported a top hat , a diplomat 's sash and a pair of pince-nez spectacles and was portrayed as mcdonaldland 's bumbling and incompetent mayor . he was the subject of a lawsuit filed by sid and marty krofft for similarities to h.r . pufnstuf . officer big mac ( performed by jerry maren , voiced by ted cassidy ) – introduced in 1971 and was dropped in 1985 , he is similar to mayor mccheese in appearance that he has a large burger for a head . in his case , his head is a big mac ( minus the vegetables and special sauce ) rather than a cheeseburger . officer big mac is the chief of police and as such he wears a constable uniform with a disproportionately small custodian helmet resting atop his head bun . as the main source of law and order in mcdonaldland , officer big mac spends most of his time chasing hamburglar and captain crook . captain crook ( performed by bob towers , voiced by larry storch in 1971-1983 , tim blaney in 1984-1985 ) – a piracy who was introduced in 1971 as one of the main antagonists and was dropped in 1985 . captain crook steals filet-o-fish sandwiches and often interprets hamburgler 's gibberish . he was revised in 1984 with a muppet-like appearance and later became simply known as '' the captain '' where he has a parrot and operates the s.s . filet-o-fish . the professor ( portrayed by lou wagner , voiced by john stephenson in the 1970s , andre stojka in the 1980s ) – a scientist who is mcdonaldland 's inventor and researcher . he was introduced in 1971 and has invented different devices throughout mcdonaldland like the psychedelic electronic hamburger machine ( which made only pumpkins for some reason ) , the dinner gong , an invisible car that helped ronald mcdonald get to mcdonald 's to meet with the kids , a magnetic bat , and the chicken mcnugget dip-o-matic . in his first appearance , he was a bespectacled man with a short beard , neck-length hair , and a hat . in later appearances in the 70s , he was a bespectacled man with a long beard . in the 80s , he was a bespectacled man with a moustache , a long nose , and a helmet with a lightbulb on it . the character was dropped in 1985 . fry kids ( various voices in the commercials , kath soucie , paul greenberg and nika futterman in the wacky adventures of ronald mcdonald ) – introduced in 1972 as '' gobblins '' , the fry kids are small , shaggy , ball-like creatures with legs and no arms who try to steal other characters ' french fries . birdie the early bird ( performed by patty maloney , voiced by russi taylor in the commercials , christine cavanaugh in the wacky adventures of ronald mcdonald ) – a yellow bird wearing a pink jumpsuit , flight cap and scarf who was introduced in 1980 as the first female character . made to promote the company 's new breakfast items , she is depicted as a poor flyer and a somewhat clumsy person in general . the happy meal gang – introduced in 1979 , they were joined by the mcnugget buddies in 1984 and the happy meal box and the under 3 toy in 1992 . they consist of the happy meal hamburger ( voiced by bob arbogast and later jim cummings ) , the happy meal fries ( voiced by jeff winkless and later voiced by bob bergen and then tress macneille ) and the happy meal drink ( voiced by hal smith and later voiced by bill farmer ) . uncle o'grimacey ( voiced by lennie weinrib ) – introduced in 1977 for an advertising narrative of mcdonald 's both in celebration of saint patrick 's day and to mark the annual appearance of the shamrock shake , he is depicted as grimace 's uncle . cosmc ( performed by tommy vicini , voiced by frank welker ) – an alien who appeared in commercials during the mid-1980s . cosmc was a character in the video game m.c . kids . the mcnugget buddies ( variously voiced by hal rayle , frank welker , katie leigh , greg berg , pat musick , don messick , and pat fraley in the commercials , pamela adlon , lisa raggio and charlie adler in the wacky adventures of ronald mcdonald ) – a bunch of anthropomorphic regular-sized chicken mcnuggets who were introduced in 1984 . bernice ( performed by tim blaney and tony urbano ) – a strange creature that was introduced in 1992 and that ate inedible things like the script in the three-part '' ronald mcdonald makin ' movies '' commercial . vulture – an unnamed vulture who spoke in a monotone voice . sundae ( performed by verne troyer , voiced by dee bradley baker ) – ronald 's dog who has appeared only in the wacky adventures of ronald mcdonald where he was animated with puppetry . iam hungry ( voiced by jeff lupetin ) – a short-lived mcdonaldland character who was introduced in 1998 and was dropped in 2001 . self-proclaimed as the '' vice president of snacking '' , the character is a floating , fast-moving green fuzzball with orange arms and a monstrous face . mike the microphone – a one-time character created especially for the kid rhino albums ronald makes it magic and ronald mcdonald presents silly sing along . in other media . ronald mcdonald appears during a child 's birthday party at a mcdonald 's in one scene of the film mac & me . he is portrayed by squire fridell , who played ronald in commercials during the latter half of the 1980s . mayor mccheese makes appearances in three episodes of the fox animated television series family guy : '' believe it or not , joe 's walking on air '' , '' road to the multiverse '' and '' valentine 's day in quahog '' ; in all three episodes , he is voiced by john viener . in '' believe it or not , joe 's walking on air , '' mayor mccheese is told by dr . hartman why they ca n't perform a specific surgery on him . in '' road to the multiverse , '' stewie and brian visit a post-apocalyptic alternate reality where frank sinatra was n't born to influence kennedy 's election , and as a result , richard nixon won the 1960 election and botched the cuban missile crisis , causing world war iii . when brian asks , due to the circumstances , if lee harvey oswald never shot kennedy , stewie replies , '' no , he shot mayor mccheese '' as a cutaway shows him getting shot in the head during a motorcade ; as the crowd gasps and screams , jacqueline kennedy onassis begins eating the hamburger meat splattered over the car . after the gag , brian questions stewie as to whether the joke was or was not in bad taste , stewie replies , '' who cares ? he 's a cheeseburger . '' in '' valentine 's day in quahog , '' mayor mccheese was revealed to be another mayor that had an affair with carol pewterschmidt after mayor adam west defeated the unnamed mayor of weekapaug . see also . mac tonight burger king kingdom – burger king 's answer for mcdonaldland . fast food advertising . references . external links .