The Tale of Genji (manga)

characters . the first part . volumes 1 to 10 hikaru genji - royal prince , 2nd son of emperor kiritsubo . because of his beauty and excellence , people called him the shining prince . his father , the emperor , loved this beautiful prince , and gave him a branch house , called gen . this meant he was no longer part of the royal family and lost the right to succeed the throne , since his mother was a concubine of low rank . therefore , he was called gen-ji , shining gen-ji ( hikaru genji ) . emperor kiritsubo - father of genji . he wished genji to become his successor , but it would be impossible since his mother kiritsubo-koui 's was of low rank and the mother of his 1st son , kokiden-nyougo , was of high rank . kiritsubo-koui - 2nd class concubine of emperor kiritsubo , mother of genji . the emperor loved her most , but it resulted in death of kiritsubo-koui under jealousy and hatred of other concubines in the palace . kokiden-nyougo - 1st class concubine , mother of 1st royal prince ( later , emperor suzaku ) of emperor kiritsubo . daughter of the minister at the right . fujitsubo-nyougo - royal princess and 1st class concubine of emperor kiritsubo . fujitsubo looked a lot like late kiritsubo-koui . emperor kiritsubo loved her and she became the empress consort ( chuuguu ) . lord genji loved and adored fujitsubo and he committed adultery with her . murasaki no ue - daughter of the prince lord minister of ceremony , niece of empress consort fujitsubo . lord genji first met her when she was 12 years old . later , genji married her and she was called murasaki no ue ( high dame murasaki ) . aoi no ue - daughter of the minister at the left . she was 4 years older than genji . aoi was the first spouse of genji - therefore she was called aoi no ue ( high dame aoi ) . she has been raised to be married to the next emperor , but was instead married to genji who was the second son of the emperor . this has made aoi cold and distant from her husband . aoi was killed by jealous living ghost of royal dame rokujou . rokujou-miyasudokoro - mother of princess umetsubo-nyougo , 1st class concubine of the former crown prince who was an elder brother of emperor kiritsubo . after her husband 's death , she has locked herself up in her mansion and only comes out during a poetry recital . considered to be very popular at court and carries the reputation of being both wise and beautiful . she became genji 's mistress . her love overwhelmed the prince genji which eventually drove him away from her . '' miyasudokoro '' is title of mother of royal prince/princess . yuugiri - 2nd son of genji . his mother was high dame aoi . emperor suzaku - 1st son of emperor kiritsubo . his mother was kokiden-nyougo . suzaku succeeded his father kiritsubo 's throne and became emperor . kokiden-nyougo was , then , grand empress consort . emperor reizei - son of empress consort fujitsubo . he was considered as the royal prince , son of emperor kiritsubo , but his real father was lord genji . he was a child of adultery . tou-no-chuujou - eldest son of the minister at the left , elder brother of aoi . he was a rival and good friend of genji . yuugao - a young lady from middle class but reputed to be beautiful and young . she was one of genji 's loves . she was killed by living ghost of jealous rokujou-miyasudokoro at the age of nineteen . her death left genji into a pit of depression . she left a girl baby , later called tamakadura , who was just a daughter of tou-no-chuujou . hana-chiru-sato - a young lady , sister of the concubine of emperor suzaku . one of genji 's loves . not so beautiful , but warm-hearted lady . oborodukiyo - daughter of the minister at the right , younger sister of grand empress consort kokiden . she was beautiful and brave lady . kokiden planned to make her 1st class concubine of emperor suzaku . but she had love affairs with lord genji . then , she became the chief lady of chamber ( naishi-no-kami ) of emperor suzaku . kokiden got anger , and genji retired to the seashore place at suma . akashi-no-okata - daughter of priest akashi . a beautiful , elegant , young lady . genji and his followers met with disaster by typhoon at suma . they moved to akashi according to invitation by priest akashi . genji , then , made love with her and begot a girl baby ( later , akashi-no-nyougo ) . ( shin ) -kokiden-nyougo - daughter of tou-no-chuujou , elder sister of kumoi-no-kari . she was a 1st class concubine of emperor reizei . umetsubo-nyougo - daughter of rokujou-miyasudokoro and the former crown prince . she was royal princess and entered into the palace of emperor reizei as nyougo ( 1st class concubine ) . royal dame rokujou had died . genji became her father in palace low . emperor reizei became aware that genji was his real father . reizei fell in agony , and at last accepted the fact . reizei raised umetsubo to the empress consort for she was genji 's daughter in low . umetsubo became akikonomu-chuuguu . genji became de facto ex-emperor , rokujou-in . kumoi-no-kari - daughter of tou-no-chuujou . younger sister of shin-kokiden-nyougo . she fell in love with yuugiri , the son of genji . she married yuugiri . tamakadura - daughter of tou-no-chuujou and yuugao . beautiful young lady . she left kyoto for dazai-fu at kyushu in her very young age . after having grown up and become a young lady she returned to kyoto . genji found her and announced she was her daughter . many high rank noblemen sent love-letters to her . royal army general at the left , kurohige , proposed her and kidnapped her . san-no-miya . relations maps of characters . characters appeared in the tale of genji are many and their relations are highly complicated . the following lists/maps show the rough overview of their relations . emperor kiritsubo and hikaru genji . emperor kiritsubo has many wives , representatively three ladies are important : kokiden-nyougo , 1st class concubine , mother of emperor suzaku , she is later grand empress consort kiritsubo-koui , 2nd class concubine , mother of genji fujitsubo-nyougo , royal princess , 1st class concubine , mother of emperor reizei , she is later empress consort : emperor kiritsubo has at least 10 sons , representatively five princes are important : 1st son , emperor suzaku , child of kokiden-nyougo 2nd son , hikaru genji , child of kiritsubo-koui ? th son , sochi-no-miya ( prince lord minister of dazaifu ) 8th son , hachi-no-miya ( eighth royal prince ) 9th son ( maybe ) , emperor reizei , child of fujitsubo-nyougo , really , son of genji hikaru genji has many wives and loves , representatively following ladies are important : 1st formal spouse , high dame aoi ( aoi no ue ) , mother of yuugiri , daughter of the minister at the left 2nd formal spouse , high dame murasaki ( murasaki no ue ) , no child , informal daughter of prince lord minister of ceremony 3rd formal spouse , royal princess san-no-miya ( third royal princess ) , mother of kaoru ( real father of kaoru is but kashiwagi ) , daughter of emperor suzaku spouse , dame hana-chiru-sato , no child spouse , dame akashi ( akashi-no-onkata ) , mother of akashi-no-nyougo , daughter of priest akashi love , rokujou-miyasudokoro , mother of umetsubo-nyougo ( her father is former crown prince ) love , lady oborodukiyo ( chief lady of chamber ) , no child , daughter of the minister at the right love , lady suetsumu-hana , no child , daughter of hitachi-no-miya ( royal prince hitachi ) love , lady utsusemi , no child , daughter of middle class nobleman love , lady yuugao , mother of tamakadura ( her father is tou-no-chuujou ) secret love , empress consort fujitsubo , mother of emperor reizei , daughter of the former emperor : hikaru genji has three children . officially his children are two . 1st son , emperor reizei , child of fujitsubo-chuuguu , child of adultery 2nd son , yuugiri , child of high dame aoi ( aoi no ue ) , 1st daughter , akashi-no-nyougo , child of dame akashi ( akashi-no-onkata ) daughter in law , umetsubo-nyougo , child of rokujou-miyasudokoro and former crown prince , later empress consort akikonomu of emperor reizei . other characters . the house of the minister at the left ( sa-daijin ) and the house of the minister at the right ( u-daijin ) are rival . genji 's first formal spouse ( high dame aoi ) is daughter of the sa-dijin and his love lady oborodukiyo is daughter of u-daijin , in addition oborodukiyo is love of emperor suzaku who is son of kokiden-nyougo . sa-daijin ( minister at the left ) has at least two children . tou-no-chuujou , rival and friend of genji aoi , ( high dame aoi ) , 1st formal spouse of genji , mother of yuugiri u-daijin ( minister at the right ) has at least two daughters . kokiden-nyougo , mother of emperor suzaku lady oborodukiyo , love of genji and emperor suzaku tou-no-chuujou has at least five children . kashiwagi , father of kaoru , kaoru 's mother is san-no-miya ( kaoru is child of adultery ) koubai-dainagon ( shin ) kokinden-nyougo , 1st class concubine of emperor reizei dame kumoi-no-kari , formal spouse of yuugiri dame tamakadura , daughter of yuugao , 2nd formal spouse of kurohige emperor suzaku has at least three children . tou-guu ( crown prince ) , later emperor 2nd daughter , ni-no-miya ( second royal princess ) alias ochiba-no-miya 3rd daughter , san-no-miya ( third royal princess ) , 3rd formal spouse of genji . terms in heian peers . basic terms tei , mikado ( 帝 ) : emperor official spouses of emperor : there are some classes of official spouses . chuuguu ( 中宮 ) , or kougou ( 皇后 ) : empress consort , formal spouse , highest rank , member of royal family nyougo ( 女御 ) : 1st class concubine , usually royal princess or daughter of highest rank house koui ( 更衣 ) : 2nd class concubine , usually daughter of middle rank house naishi-no-kami ( 尚侍 ) : chief lady of chamber , emperor 's secretary in chief , sometimes informal 1st class concubine naishi-no-suke ( 典侍 ) : deputy lady of chamber , emperor 's deputy secretary shinnou ( 親王 ) : royal prince , son of emperor/royal prince , authorized by emperor nai-shinnou ( 内親王 ) : royal princess , daughter of emperor/royal prince , authorized by emperor miya ( 宮 ) : royal prince/princess , house of emperor/royal family ichi-no-miya ( 一宮 ) : eldest royal prince/princess ni-no-miya ( 二宮 ) : second royal prince/princess san-no-miya ( 三宮 ) : third royal prince/princess joukou ( 上皇 ) : ex-emperor/ex-empress in ( 院 ) : title name of ex-emperor , palace of ex-emperor kiritsubo-tei ( 桐壺帝 ) : emperor kiritsubo kiritsubo-in ( 桐壺院 ) : ex-emperor kiritsubo suzaku-tei ( 朱雀帝 ) : emperor suzaku reizei-tei ( 冷泉帝 ) : emperor reizei rokujou-in ( 六條院 ) : ex-emperor rokujou ( de facto ex-emperor title of hikaru genji ) otodo , daijin ( 大臣 ) : minister dajou-daijin ( 太政大臣 ) : grand minister sa-daijin ( 左大臣 ) : minister at the left , higher rank than u-daijin u-daijin ( 右大臣 ) : minister at the right shikibukyou ( 式部卿 ) : lord minister of ceremony shikibukyou-no-miya ( 式部卿宮 ) : prince lord minister of ceremony ue ( 上 ) : literally '' up '' , '' the high '' , in the case of '' /female name/+no+ue '' , formal spouse of highest rank person , such as formal spouse of grand minister aoi-no-ue ( 葵の上 ) : formal spouse of hikaru genji , genji later became grand minister and ex-emperor murasaki-no-ue ( 紫の上 ) : de facto formal spouse of hikaru genji , murasaki is but not so high rank as that of aoi . aoi is a daughter of grand minister and royal princess . murasaki is an informal daughter of royal prince and a daughter of middle class peer . origin of title . the title '' asaki yume mishi '' comes from the iroha poem . : iro ha nihoheto chirinuru wo wakayo . uwi no okuyama kefu koete , asaki yume mishi wehi mo sesu .