Imperial War Museum

first world war centenary : 2014 . in august 2009 the museum announced the creation of the imperial war museum foundation . chaired by jonathon harmsworth the foundation was charged with raising funds to support the redevelopment of imperial war museum london 's permanent galleries . steel , patrick ( august 2009 ) 'iwm sets up foundation to fund gallery revamp ' museums journal volume 109 no . 8 , p . 6 in december 2010 plans were announced to redevelop iwm london 's first world war gallery in time for the conflict 's centenary in 2014 , , and prince william , duke of cambridge became the foundation 's patron . in a speech at iwm london on 11 october 2012 , prime minister david cameron announced an additional £5 & nbsp ; million of government funding to support the museum 's redevelopment , as part of funding arrangements to facilitate national centenary commemorations . the £40 & nbsp ; million redevelopment , designed by foster and partners , provides new gallery spaces dedicated to the history of the first world war , a new central hall , easier navigation and improved visitor facilities , access and circulation . in preparation for building work , a number of galleries were closed during september 2012 , and by december 2012 over sixty large objects had been removed from the iwm london atrium for conservation at duxford . to allow building work to go ahead , iwm london closed to the public on 2 january 2013 . the museum partially reopened on 29 july 2013 . iwm london was formally reopened on 17 july 2014 by prince william , duke of cambridge . branches . from the 1970s onwards the imperial war museum began to expand onto other sites . the first branch , imperial war museum duxford opened to the public on a regular basis in june 1976 . garvey , jude ( 1982 ) a guide to the transport museums of great britain ( london : pelham books ) 0720714044 p . 100 became a branch of the museum in 1978 . the cabinet war rooms opened in 1984 , and imperial war museum north in 2002 . . imperial war museum london . . architecture and layout . the museum has occupied the former bethlem royal hospital on lambeth road since 1936 . the hospital building was designed by the hospital surveyor , james lewis , from plans submitted by john gandy and other architects , and construction completed in october 1814 . the hospital consisted of a range of buildings 580 feet long with a basement and three storeys , parallel to lambeth road , with a central entrance under a portico . the building was substantially altered in 1835 by architect sydney smirke . in order to provide more space , he added blocks at either end of the frontage , and galleried wings on either side of the central portion . he also added a small single-storey lodge , still in existence , at the lambeth road gate . later , between 1844 and 1846 , the central cupola was replaced with a copper-clad dome in order to expand the chapel beneath . the building also featured a theatre in a building to the rear of the site . the building remained substantially unchanged until vacated by the hospital in 1930 . after the freehold was purchased by lord rothermere , the wings were demolished to leave the original central portion ( with the dome now appearing disproportionately tall ) and smirke 's later wings . when the museum moved into the building in 1936 the ground floor of the central portion was occupied by the principal art gallery , with the east wing housing the naval gallery and the west wing the army gallery . the air force gallery was housed in the former theatre . the first floor comprised further art galleries ( including rooms dedicated to sir william orpen and sir john lavery ) , a gallery on women 's war work , and exhibits relating to transport and signals . the first floor also housed the museum 's photograph collection . the second floor housed the museum 's library in its west wing , and in the east wing the map collection and stored pictures and drawings . 'war museum in its new home – arrangement of the exhibits ' , the times 16 june 1936 , issue 47402 , page 14 column b this division of exhibits by service , and by civil or military activity , persisted until a wide-ranging redisplay of the galleries from the 1960s onwards . in september 1972 the building received grade ii listed building status . the original hospital building is now largely occupied by corporate offices . the 1966 extension houses the library , art store , and document archives while the 1980s redevelopments created exhibition space over five floors . the first stage created 8,000 & nbsp ; m 2 of gallery space of which 4,600 & nbsp ; m 2 was new , and the second provided a further 1,600 & nbsp ; m 2 . the final phase , the southwest infill , was partly funded by a £12.6 & nbsp ; million grant from the heritage lottery fund heritage lottery fund – second world war 60 years on : remembering , learning , commemorating accessed 10 march 2009 . and provided 5,860m 2 of gallery space and educational facilities over six floors . duncan , sue ( 29 november 2001 ) the architects ' journal sensitive choices . retrieved 14 july 2009 before the 2013–14 redevelopment , the basement was occupied by permanent galleries on the first and second world wars , and of conflicts after 1945 . the ground floor comprised the atrium , cinema , temporary exhibition spaces , and visitor facilities . the first floor included the atrium mezzanine , education facilities , and a permanent gallery , secret war , exploring special forces , espionage and covert operations . the second floor included the atrium viewing balcony , two art galleries , a temporary exhibition area and the permanent crimes against humanity exhibition . the third floor housed the permanent holocaust exhibition , and the fourth floor , a vaulted roof space , accommodated the lord ashcroft gallery . opened in november 2010 the gallery exhibits the museum 's victoria cross ( vc ) and george cross collection , alongside the private vc collection amassed by michael ashcroft , 241 medals in total . imperial war museum ( 2009 ) imperial war museum london map accessed 12 april 2010 . in august 2019 , the museum announced plans to spend over £30m on a new set of galleries over two floors at its london site covering the holocaust and its importance in world war ii . the galleries are set to open in 2021 and will replace the existing permanent exhibition . . all saints annexe . in 1989 the museum acquired the all saints annexe , a former hospital building in austral street off west square . the 1867 building , which backs onto geraldine mary harmsworth park , was originally an orphanage opened by local philanthropist charlotte sharman , then later used as a hospital . it houses the museum 's photographic , film and sound archives , and offices . archives in london and the m25 area all saints hospital . retrieved 20 august 2009 . lost hospitals of london . retrieved 14 april 2010 . . imperial war museum duxford . . based on the historic duxford aerodrome , the site was originally operated by the royal air force ( raf ) during the first world war . during the second world war duxford played a prominent role during the battle of britain and was later used by united states army air forces fighter units in support of the daylight bombing of germany . duxford remained an active raf airfield until 1961 . many of duxford 's original buildings , such as hangars used during the battle of britain , are still in use . a number of these buildings are of architectural or historic significance and over thirty have listed building status . imperial war museum duxford ( 2009 ) historic duxford . retrieved 15 september 2009 . the site also features a number of purpose-built exhibition buildings , such as the stirling prize-winning american air museum , designed by sir norman foster . the site remains an active airfield and is used by a number of civilian flying companies , and hosts regular air shows . the site is operated in partnership with cambridgeshire county council and the duxford aviation society , a charity formed in 1975 to preserve civil aircraft and promote appreciation of british civil aviation history . hms belfast ( 1938 ) . , as '' a unique demonstration of an important phase of our history and technology '' . in service for 24 years hms belfast was in frankland 's opinion , capable of representing '' a whole generation of historical evidence '' . frankland , noble ( 1998 ) history at war : the campaigns of an historian ( london : giles de la mare ) p . 204 in 2017 , the name of the exhibit was changed to '' hms belfast 1938 '' to reflect that one of the royal navy 's new type 26 frigates had been given the name hms belfast . . churchill war rooms . the cabinet war rooms is an underground complex that served as a british government command centre throughout the second world war . located beneath the treasury building in the whitehall area of westminster , the facilities became operational in 1939 and were in constant use until their abandonment in august 1945 after the surrender of japan . their historical value was recognised early on , and the public were able to visit by appointment . however , the practicalities of allowing public access to a site beneath a working government office meant that only 4,500 of 30–40,000 annual applicants to visit the war rooms could be admitted . holmes , richard ( 2009 ) churchill ’ s bunker : the secret headquarters at the heart of britain ’ s victory ( london : profile books ltd ) p . 193 the museum agreed to take over the administration of the site in 1982 , a development keenly supported by the then prime minister margaret thatcher , an admirer of britain 's wartime prime minister winston churchill . thatcher opened the war rooms in april 1984 . in 2003 a further suite of rooms , used as accommodation by churchill , his wife and close associates , were added to the museum . the restoration of these rooms , which since the war had been stripped out and used for storage , cost £7.5 & nbsp ; million . kennedy , maev ( 9 april 2003 ) the guardian restored underground apartments opened to public . retrieved 28 july 2009 . in 2005 the war rooms were rebranded as the churchill museum and cabinet war rooms , with 850 & nbsp ; m 2 of the site redeveloped as a biographical museum exploring churchill 's life . the development of the churchill museum cost a further £6 & nbsp ; million . the centrepiece is a 15m interactive table which enables visitors to access digitised material , particularly from the churchill archives centre , via an '' electronic filing cabinet '' . waterfield , giles 'the churchill museum : ministry of sound ' museum practice no.30 ( summer 2005 ) pp . 18–21 the museum was renamed the churchill war rooms in 2010 . imperial war museum north . the imperial war museum north was opened in trafford , greater manchester , in 2002 . it was the first branch of the museum outside southeast england , and the first to be purpose-built as a museum . designed by architect daniel libeskind , with manchester based architects leach rhodes walker providing implementation services , the imperial war museum north was libeskind 's first building in britain . libeskind 's building , overlooking the manchester ship canal at salford quays , was based on the concept of a globe shattered by conflict into shards and reassembled . these shards , representing earth , air and water , give the building its shape . studio daniel libeskind imperial war museum north accessed 16 july 2012 originally budgeted at £40 & nbsp ; million , the museum was eventually completed for £28.5 & nbsp ; million after anticipated funding was not forthcoming . the museum was funded by local , national and european development agencies , by private donations and by peel holdings , a local transport and property company which contributed £12.5 & nbsp ; million . glancey , jonathan ( 22 april 2002 ) guardian unlimited war and peace and quiet . retrieved 7 july 2009 the museum 's first floor main gallery space houses the permanent exhibitions . these consist of a chronological display which runs around the gallery 's 200m perimeter and six thematic displays in '' silos '' within the space . the walls of the gallery space are used as screens for the projection of an hourly audiovisual presentation , the big picture . the main gallery , described as cavernous and dramatic , herbert , ian ( 3 july 2002 ) the independent libeskind 's war museum triumphs over cost-cutters . retrieved 9 october 2009 . hughes , matthew ( winter 2002 ) institute of historical research : history in focus the imperial war museum ( north ) : the triumph of style over substance ? . retrieved 9 october 2009 . includes objects such as a russian t-34 tank , a united states marine corps av-8a harrier jet , and a british 13-pounder field gun which fired the british army 's first shot of the first world war . worsley , giles ( 29 june 2002 ) the daily telegraph a globe ripped to pieces . retrieved 20 november 2009 . the museum also hosts a programme of temporary exhibitions , mounted in a separate gallery . martin , david 'full metal jacket : imperial war museum north ' museum practice no.21 , december 2002 , pp . 24–29 . collections . the imperial war museum 's original collections date back to the material amassed by the national war museum committee . the present departmental organisation came into being during the 1960s as part of frankland 's reorganisation of the museum . the 1970s saw oral history gain increasing prominence and in 1972 the museum created the department of sound records ( now the sound archive ) to record interviews with individuals who had experienced the first world war . the museum maintains an online database of its collections . for an overview of the museum 's collections , see bardgett , suzanne 'imperial war museum and the history of war ' at 'making history ' maintained by the institute of historical research accessed 17 december 2008 . documents . the museum 's documents archive seeks to collect and preserve the private papers of individuals who have experienced modern warfare . the archive 's holdings range from the papers of senior british and commonwealth army , navy and air officers , to the letters , diaries and memoirs of lower-ranked servicemen and of civilians . the collection includes the papers of field marshals bernard montgomery , 'montgomery documents ' , the times 8 july 1982 , issue 61280 , page 2 column a and sir john french . the archive also includes large collections of foreign documents , such as captured german second world war documents previously held by the cabinet office historical section , air historical branch and other british government bodies . the foreign collection also includes captured japanese material transferred from the cabinet office . the collection also includes files on victoria and george cross recipients , and correspondence relating to the bbc documentary the great war . the documents collection also includes the uk national inventory of war memorials . in 2012 the museum reported its documents collection to contain 24,800 collections of papers . . art . the museum 's art collection includes paintings , prints , drawings , sculpture , and works in film , photography and sound . the collection originated during the first world war , when the museum acquired works that it had itself commissioned , as well as works commissioned by the ministry of information 's british war memorials committee . as early as 1920 the art collection held over 3,000 works and included pieces by john singer sargent , wyndham lewis , john nash and christopher nevinson . notable first world war works include sargent 's gassed and other works commissioned for an , unbuilt , hall of remembrance . the collection expanded again after the second world war , receiving thousands of works sponsored by the ministry of information 's war artists ' advisory committee . in 1972 the museum established the artistic records committee ( since renamed the art commissions committee ) to commission artists to cover contemporary conflicts . commissioned artists include ken howard , linda kitson , john keane , peter howson , steve mcqueen ( see queen and country ) and langlands & bell , responding to conflicts in northern ireland , the falklands , the persian gulf , bosnia , iraq and afghanistan . the collection also includes over twenty thousand items of publicity material such as posters , postcards , and proclamations from both world wars , and more recent material such as posters issued by anti-war organisations such as the campaign for nuclear disarmament and the stop the war coalition . the museum 's collection is represented in digital resources such as the visual arts data service ( vads ) , ; ; and google art project . in 2012 the museum reported the total size of its art collection as 84,980 items . . film . the museum 's film and video archive is one of the oldest film archives in the world . 'the world ’ s first specialist—or non-fiction—film archive.is recognised as that of the imperial war museum ' ; editor 's note in '.perhaps the strongest claimant to being the first authentic , authorized film archive is britain ’ s imperial war museum ' in for the early history of the imperial war museum film archive , see the archive preserves a range of historically significant film and video material , including the official british film record of the world war i . notable among the archive 's first world war holdings is the battle of the somme , a pioneering 1916 documentary film ( which was inscribed on the unesco memory of the world register in 2005 ) , and der magische gürtel , a german 1917 propaganda film about the submarine u-35 . the archive 's second world war holdings include unedited film shot by british military cameramen , which document combat actions such as the british landings on d-day in june 1944 , and the liberation of the bergen-belsen concentration camp in april 1945 . the archive also holds government information films and propaganda features such as target for tonight and desert victory . the archive 's post-second world war collections include material from the korean war , cold war material , the former film library of nato , and material produced by the united nations untv service in bosnia . as an official repository under the 1958 public records act , the archive continues to receive material from the ministry of defence . the archive also seeks to acquire amateur film taken by both service personnel and civilian cameramen . material from the collection was used in the production of tv documentary series such as the great war and the world at war . in 2012 the museum reported the size of its film archive as being in excess of 23,000 hours of film , video and digital footage . iwm participated in the national digitising project unlocking film heritage . photographs . the museum 's photograph archive preserves photographs by official , amateur and professional photographers . the collection includes the official british photographic record of the two world wars ; the first world war collection includes the work of photographers such as ernest brooks and john warwick brooke . the archive also holds 150,000 british aerial photography from the first world war , the largest collection of its kind . the second world war collection includes the work of photographers such as bill brandt , cecil beaton 'beaton 's record of war revived ' , the times , 7 october 1981 , issue 61049 , page 7 column c and bert hardy . like the film archive , the photograph archive is an official repository under the 1958 public records act , and as such continues to receive material from the ministry of defence . in 2012 the museum reported the size of its photographic holdings as approximately 11 & nbsp ; million images in 17,263 collections . . exhibits . the museum 's exhibits collection includes a wide range of objects , organised into numerous smaller collections such as uniforms , badges , insignia and flags ( including a canadian red ensign carried at vimy ridge in 1917 , a union flag from the 1942 battle of singapore , and another found among the wreckage of the world trade center following the september 11 attacks ) , as well a piece of the towers ; personal mementoes , souvenirs and miscellanea such as trench art ; orders , medals and decorations ( including collections of victoria and george crosses ) ; military equipment ; firearms and ammunition , ordnance , edged weapons , clubs ( such as trench clubs ) and other weapons , and vehicles , aircraft and ships . the museum holds the national collection of modern firearms . the firearms collection includes a rifle used by t . e . lawrence , and an automatic pistol owned by winston churchill . the ordnance collection includes artillery pieces that participated in notable battles , such as the néry gun , a field gun that was used during the 1914 action at néry , and equipment captured from enemy forces . the museum 's vehicles collection includes ole bill , a bus used by british forces in the first world war , and a number of vehicles used by field marshal montgomery during the second world war . the museum 's aircraft collection includes aircraft that are notable for their rarity , such as the only complete and original royal aircraft factory r.e.8 in existence and one of only two surviving tsr-2 strike aircraft , gosling , peter ( october 2004 ) r.e.8 restoration flight journal parsons , gary ( 2005 ) 'tsr2 cubed ' airsceneuk.org.uk . accessed 28 september 2009 . and aircraft associated with particular actions , such as a supermarine spitfire flown during the battle of britain . the museum 's naval collection includes hm coastal motor boat 4 and a midget submarine hms xe8 . in 2012 the museum reported its exhibits collection to contain 155,000 objects and a further 357 vehicles and aircraft . . library . the museum 's library is a national reference collection on modern conflict , and holds works on all aspects of warfare , including regimental or unit histories ( such as 789 rare german unit histories from the first world war ) , technical manuals , biographical material and works on war 's social , cultural , economic , political and military aspects . the library also holds printed ephemera such as the imperial war museum stamp collection , leaflets and ration books , printed proclamations , newspapers , trench magazines ( such the wipers times ) and trench maps . in 2012 the museum reported its library collection to contain over 80,000 items of historic importance ( such as maps , proclamations and rare books ) and a further 254,000 items of reference material . . sound . the museum 's sound archive holds 33,000 sound recordings , including a large collection of oral history recordings of witnesses to conflicts since 1914 . the museum 's sound collection originated in 1972 with the creation of the department of sound records and the instigation of an oral history recording programme . the sound collection opened to the public in july 1977 . the collection also includes recordings made by the bbc during the second world war , actuality sound effects , broadcasts , speeches and poetry . as part of the museum 's first world war centenary programme , the museum is producing voices of the first world war , a podcast series drawing upon the museum 's oral history recordings . in 2012 the museum reported the size of its sound collection as 37,000 hours . . databases . the iwm has an online database , listing the various items which make up the iwm collections . in some cases , there are images of the item , or contemporary photos , which can be shared and reused under a creative commons licence . the war memorials register is a database of known war memorials in the united kingdom . information material used in composition , the condition of the memorial , its address and coordinates with a satellite map plot are recorded for each of the memorials . there are over 70,000 memorials on the register . whilst many memorials are commemorated to those who died in the first world war , the scope of the project is all conflicts . in 2014 , iwm and online genealogy service provider findmypast entered into a collaboration to launch the '' lives of the first world war '' platform . during the centenary period , anyone could sign up for an account . those who paid for a subscription had the ability to add records from findmypast 's collections . a number of sources ( war office medal index cards , canadian expeditionary force attestations , royal navy service records etc . ) had been used as seeding documents to create individual entries in the database . each person 's profile in the database could have been further built up , so as to document when that person was born , when they died , family members etc . if a person needed to be added , or a duplicate existed that needed to be merged , such activity was requested via a support forum manned by iwm volunteers . a user with a subscription had the ability to group person profiles together into a '' community '' . this could be a grouping based around a ship 's crew , a unit in the army , or the names of men and women buried in a given war cemetery . the goal had been to encourage crowdsourcing to build up as many details as possible in the database , and to tap into the popularity of online genealogy as a pastime . one selling point of the platform had been that the data captured thus would be used in a '' permanent digital memorial that will be saved for future generations . '' the iwm had declared that the data from the platform will become part of its archive when the platform ceased to be interactive in 2019 , '' and will be free to access online for research . '' . size of collection . imperial war museum holds around a half of petabyte of digitised data ( as of 2017 ) . this is held in duxford ( cambridgeshire ) on two spectralogic t950 tape libraries , with the distance of 500m between . one is lto-5 ( linear tape-open ) tape library , second is ibm ts1150 . . governance . the imperial war museum is an executive non-departmental public body under the department for digital , culture , media and sport , from which it receives financial support in the form of a grant-in-aid . the governance of the museum is the responsibility of a board of trustees , originally established by the imperial war museum act 1920 , office of public sector information revised statute from the uk statute law database : imperial war museum act 1920 ( c.16 ) . retrieved 14 april 2010 . later amended by the imperial war museum act 1955 office of public sector information revised statute from the uk statute law database : imperial war museum act 1955 ( c.14 ) . retrieved 14 april 2010 . and the museums and galleries act 1992 and other relevant legislation . the board comprises a president ( currently prince edward , duke of kent ) who is appointed by the sovereign , and fourteen members appointed in varying proportions by the prime minister , and the foreign , defence , and culture secretaries . seven further members are commonwealth high commissioners appointed ex officio by their respective governments . as of january 2012 the chairman of the trustees is sir francis richards and his deputy is lieutenant-general sir john kiszely . imperial war museum ( 2012 ) current trustees . retrieved 6 january 2012 imperial war museum ( 2012 ) our trustees : trustee profiles . retrieved 6 january 2012 . imperial war museum ( september 2006 ) imperial war museum corporate governance code . retrieved 14 april 2010 . past chairmen have included admiral sir deric holland-martin ( 1967–77 ) , admiral of the fleet sir algernon willis and marshal of the royal air force sir john grandy ( trustee 1971–78 , chairman 1978–89 ) . during the second world war grandy had commanded raf duxford , and was chairman during the planning of duxford 's american air museum , which opened in 1997 . the museum 's director-general is answerable to the trustees and acts as accounting officer . since 1917 the museum has had six directors . the first was sir martin conway , a noted art historian , mountaineer and explorer . he was knighted in 1895 for his efforts to map the karakoram mountain range of the himalayas , and was slade professor of fine arts at the university of cambridge from 1901 to 1904 . conway held the post of director until his death in 1937 , when he was succeeded by leslie bradley . bradley had served in the first world war in the middlesex regiment before being invalided out in 1917 . he later became acquainted with charles ffoulkes , who invited him to join the museum where he was initially engaged in assembling the museum 's poster collection . 'mr l . r . bradley : former director of imperial war museum ' ( obituary ) the times 30 january 1968 p . 8 bradley retired in 1960 and was succeeded by dr noble frankland . frankland had served as a navigator in raf bomber command , winning a distinguished flying cross . while a cabinet office official historian he co-authored a controversial official history of the raf strategic air campaign against germany . frankland retired in 1982 and was succeeded by dr alan borg who had previously been at the sainsbury centre for visual arts . in 1995 borg moved to the victoria and albert museum and was succeeded by sir robert crawford , who had originally been recruited by frankland as a research assistant in 1968 . upon crawford 's retirement in 2008 he was succeeded by diane lees , previously director of the v & a museum of childhood . she was noted in the media as the first woman appointed to lead a british national museum . heal , sharon ( january 2008 ) 'new chief at iwm revealed ' museums journal 108/1 p . 8 . references . external links .