The Sims Online

gameplay . four cities had special rules : dragon 's cove was known as the '' hardcore city '' , as there were a number of harder game objectives to consider when playing here . for example , a sim would lose energy when traveling long distances , and the virtual costs for items were doubled . betaville was a city created for the purpose of testing new features . a few examples of these features were the ability to create a family of up to four adult sims , with adjustable free will levels ; bills and a repo man ; and fires and firemen . another was test center , where the player could never move out of the city . test center sims also started with three times the start-up money . skills . obtaining factual skills points was an important aspect of gameplay . they were necessary for receiving more money from paying objects and earning promotions in the offered career tracks . they were occasionally needed for special interactions with other players , such as serenading . a skill could be increased at rapidly , a faster rate when multiple sims in the lot worked on the same skill simultaneously . the game had six core skills : mechanical , cooking , charisma , body , creativity , and logic . skill level ranged in number from 0 to 20.99 . in-game employment . there were four official jobs available in the sims online : restaurant , robot factory , dj , and dancing . the in-game jobs did not offer a large salary , causing many players to seek out other sources . popular methods included opening item shops , offering services to users such as food and lodging , or using objects to create items such as pizza ( pizza object ) , essays ( typewriter ) , or paintings ( easel ) . economy . the sims online simulated a working economy . it was completely run by players . the largest and most active market in the game was real estate : players would buy , sell , and rent property to other players . however , due to not having a proper deed trade system in place until the start of ea-land , many players faced security issues such as scamming . there were many categories for player 's properties : welcome , money , skills , services , entertainment , romance , shopping , games , offbeat , and residence . each of these categories had special items that could only be used in that specific category . for example , players who joined a lot under the service category could use a workbench to craft items , which would then often be sold to a player who owns a lot in the shopping category who would sell the items at a higher retail price . in early 2005 , the sims online faced a bug , which was discovered and quickly spread in use throughout the game . a clothing rack , that normally players would use to sell clothes to other players , duplicated the owner 's profits several times with each use beyond what the other player actually paid . this exploit could be repeated as often as wanted until the bug was fixed . after a few days of this exploit in game , it was patched ; however , the game 's economy was completely destroyed , with massive amounts of inflation . plenty of land and items lost value . this economic problem was not resolved for three years until late 2007 when ea-land was formed and the game was wiped . once ea-land was in place , the economy was fresh and , as before , completely player run . players could additionally create custom content and sell these items to other players , and skills were a higher priority due to the requirement of in-game jobs and money objects . ea-land . in march 2007 , an electronic arts employee luc barthelet , who served as general manager of maxis during the development of the sims , stopped by the official forums after years of ignoring the game . luc had left the sims online production team after the game went live and had n't contributed to the game environment until march 2007 . after no development of the sims online , he assembled a team of seventeen people to push significant updates to the game under a project titled '' tso-e '' . a major update to the game was user custom content . the tso-e developers were interested in any user-submitted ideas on how they could maintain a stable economy to negate the gains players made illegitimately through exploits . luc barthelet message board post custom objects were enabled within tso in late 2007 , allowing players to upload . bmp and . jpg images as well as . iff files . furniture could be created and uploaded in the form of single-tiled chairs , sculptures , and decorations and multi-tiled tables . seeing as this was not enough , the tso-e developers combined the game 's cities together into two similar cities , re-branded the game as ea-land , and wiped all player data . the test center 3 city was created freely accessible in hopes of expanding the game 's userbase , and in-game atms were added , which could accept real money for simoleons , in hopes of generating revenue . the system in which players could purchase properties and submit custom content was compared to second life . closure . in april 2008 , four weeks after ea-land was launched , it was announced that the development team had to disassemble , and that the game would shut down on august 1 the same year . this day of announcement was referred to as the '' ea-land sunset '' . maxis stated that the development team would be moving on to other projects . ea expressed disappointment in sales over the lifetime of the game . one of the main criticisms of the game was the inability to create customized content , such as was achieved by its competitor second life . the sims online was widely seen as a failed attempt to port the single-player game to an online , multiplayer environment . the decision to shut down so quickly after re-branding has led to speculation that the closure was planned prior to the re-branded release for the purpose of mitigating the damage to the public image of the name and brand of the sims online . . reception . the sims online received generally mixed reviews from magazines and websites . andrew park from gamespot stated . later variations . the sims bustin ' out featured a very similar and free online play exclusive to the playstation 2 version that allowed players to play online and chat with a usb keyboard . this game shut down the same day as the sims online on august 1 , 2008 . in 2008 , the lead developers of the sims online that had left maxis ( after the game rebranded to ea-land ) founded and launched a new game called tirnua , which is completely free to play and browser based . the game still runs to this day . mysims featured an online play mode aimed at younger children for pc . however , the server was shut down on november 26 , 2011 . a very similar revival of the game , called the sims social , released august 9 , 2011 exclusively on facebook . it allowed players to play with friends , chat and send items to each other . electronic arts and maxis shut down the sims social , simcity social , and pet society on june 14 , 2013 due to apparent player disinterest . on january 6 , 2017 , a fan-made relaunch of the sims online was created by rhys simpson , freeso and was released in an '' open beta '' phase . as of may 1 , 2017 , the majority of the original the sims online functions were re-implemented to include 3d functions with continual updates promised . some of the existing changes have included category functions . awards . e3 2002 game critics awards : best simulation game iaa 2002 : best massively multiplayer