Kelp

description . in most kelp , the thallus ( or body ) consists of flat or leaf-like structures known as blades . blades originate from elongated stem-like structures , the stipes . the holdfast , a root-like structure , anchors the kelp to the substrate of the ocean . gas-filled bladders ( pneumatocysts ) form at the base of blades of american species , such as nereocystis lueteana , ( mert . & post & rupr . ) to hold the kelp blades close to the surface . growth and reproduction . growth occurs at the base of the meristem , where the blades and stipe meet . growth may be limited by grazing . sea urchins , for example , can reduce entire areas to urchin barrens . norderhaug , km . , christie , h . 2009 . sea urchin grazing and kelp re-vegetation in the ne atlantic . marine biology research 5 : 515-528 . estuarine , coastal and shelf science 95 : 135-144 the kelp life cycle involves a ploidy sporophyte and haploid gametophyte stage . the haploid phase begins when the mature organism releases many spores , which then germinate to become male or female gametophytes . sexual reproduction then results in the beginning of the diploid sporophyte stage , which will develop into a mature individual . the parenchymatous thalli are generally covered with a mucilage layer , rather than cuticle . . kelp forests . kelp may develop dense forests with high production , abdullah , m.i . , fredriksen , s . , 2004 . production , respiration and exudation of dissolved organic matter by the kelp laminaria hyperborea along the west coast of norway . journal of the marine biological association of the uk 84 : 887 . biodiversity and ecological function . along the norwegian coast these forests cover 5800 & nbsp ; km 2 , rinde , e . , 2009 . dokumentasjon av modellerte marine naturtyper i dns naturbase . førstegenerasjonsmodeller til kommunenes startpakker for kartlegging av marine naturtyper 2007 . niva report , 32 pp . and they support large numbers of animals . christie , h . , jørgensen , n.m . , norderhaug , k.m . , waage-nielsen , e . , 2003 . species distribution and habitat exploitation of fauna associated with kelp ( laminaria hyperborea ) along the norwegian coast . journal of the marine biological association of the uk 83 , 687-699 . jørgensen , n.m . , christie , h . , 2003 . follow me radd.michyy and lowk3y.nadine l diurnal , horizontal and vertical dispersal of kelp associated fauna . hydrobiologia 50 , 69-76 . numerous sessile animals ( sponges , bryozoans and ascidians ) are found on kelp stipes and mobile invertebrate fauna are found in high densities on epiphytic algae on the kelp stipes and on kelp holdfasts . norderhaug , k.m . , christie , h . , rinde , e . , 2002 . colonisation of kelp imitations by epiphyte and holdfast fauna ; a study of mobility patterns . marine biology 141 , 965-973 . more than 100,000 mobile invertebrates per square meter are found on kelp stipes and holdfasts in well-developed kelp forests ( christie et al . , 2003 ) . while larger invertebrates and in particular sea urchins strongylocentrotus droebachiensis ( o.f . müller ) are important secondary consumers controlling large barren ground areas on the norwegian coast , they are scarce inside dense kelp forests . norderhaug , k.m . , christie , h . , 2009 . sea urchin grazing and kelp re-vegetation in the ne atlantic . marine biology research 5 , 515-528 . . commercial uses . giant kelp can be harvested fairly easily because of its surface canopy and growth habit of staying in deeper water . kelp ash is rich in iodine and alkali . in great amount , kelp ash can be used in soap and glass production . until the leblanc process was commercialized in the early 19th century , burning of kelp in scotland was one of the principal industrial sources of soda ash ( predominantly sodium carbonate ) . around 23 tons of seaweed was required to produce 1 ton of kelp ash . the kelp ash would consist of around 5 % sodium carbonate . jonathan pereira , fred b . kilmer , the elements of materia medica and therapeutics , volume 1 , 1854 , p . 558 once the leblanc process became commercially viable in britain during the 1820s , common salt replaced kelp ash as raw material for sodium carbonate . though the price of kelp ash went into steep decline , seaweed remained the only commercial source of iodine . to supply the new industry in iodine synthesis , kelp ash production continued in some parts of west and north scotland , north west ireland and guernsey . the species saccharina latissima yielded the greatest amount of iodine ( between 10-15 lbs per ton ) and was most abundant in guernsey . iodine was extracted from kelp ash using a lixiviation process . edward c . c . stanford , wentworth l . scott , ‘ the economic applications of seaweed ’ , february 14 1862 , journal of the royal society of arts , vol 10 , no . 482 , 185-199 as with sodium carbonate however , mineral sources eventually replaced seaweed in iodine production . john j . mcketta jr . taylor & francis , encyclopaedia of chemical processing and design : volume 27 - hydrogen cyanide to ketones dimethyl ( acetone ) , 1988 , p . 283 alginate , a kelp-derived carbohydrate , is used to thicken products such as ice cream , jelly , salad dressing , and toothpaste , as well as an ingredient in exotic dog food and in manufactured goods . alginate powder is also used frequently in general dentistry and orthodontics for making impressions of the upper and lower arches . powers , john m . powers . craig 's restorative dental materials , 12th edition . c.v . mosby , 022006 . p . 270 kelp polysaccharides are used in skin care as gelling ingredients and because of the benefits provided by fucoidan . kombu ( 昆布 in japanese , and 海带 in chinese , saccharina japonica and others ) , several pacific species of kelp , is a very important ingredient in chinese , japanese , and korean cuisines . kombu is used to flavor broths and stews ( especially dashi ) , as a savory garnish ( tororo konbu ) for rice and other dishes , as a vegetable , and a primary ingredient in popular snacks ( such as tsukudani ) . transparent sheets of kelp ( oboro konbu ) are used as an edible decorative wrapping for rice and other foods . kazuko , emi : japanese cooking , p . 78 , hermes house , 2002 , p . 78 . kombu can be used to soften beans during cooking , and to help convert indigestible sugars and thus reduce flatulence . graimes , nicola : the best-ever vegetarian cookbook , barnes & noble books , 1999 , p . 59 . in russia , especially in the russian far east , and former soviet union countries several types of kelp are of commercial importance : saccharina latissima , laminaria digitata , saccharina japonica . known locally as '' sea cabbage '' ( морская капуста in russian ) , it comes in retail trade in dried or frozen , as well as in canned form and used as filler in different types of salads , soups and pastries . because of its high concentration of iodine , brown kelp ( laminaria ) has been used to treat goiter , an enlargement of the thyroid gland caused by a lack of iodine , since medieval times . iodine helps kelp fight free radicals and may aid humans , too newswise , retrieved on july 8 , 2008 . in 2010 , researchers found that alginate , the soluble fibre substance in sea kelp , was better at preventing fat absorption than most over-the-counter slimming treatments in laboratory trials . as a food additive , it may be used to reduce fat absorption and thus obesity . kelp in its natural form has not yet been demonstrated to have such effects . commercial production . commercial production of kelp harvested from its natural habitat has taken place in japan for over a century . many countries today produce and consume laminaria products ; the largest producer is china . laminaria japonica , the important commercial seaweed , was first introduced into china in the late 1920s from hokkaido , japan . yet mariculture of this alga on a very large commercial scale was realized in china only in the 1950s . between the 1950s and the 1980s , kelp production in china increased from about 60 to over 250,000 dry weight metric tons annually . renewable energy source . kelp has a high rate of growth and its decay is quite efficient in yielding methane , as well as sugars that can be converted to ethanol . it has been proposed that large open-ocean kelp farms could serve as a source of renewable energy . unlike some biofuels such as corn ethanol , kelp energy avoids '' food vs fuel '' issues and does not require freshwater irrigation . in history and culture . some of the earliest evidence for human use of marine resources , coming from middle stone age sites in south africa , includes the harvesting of foods such as abalone , limpets , and mussels associated with kelp forest habitats . in 2007 , erlandson et al . suggested that kelp forests around the pacific rim may have facilitated the dispersal of anatomically modern humans following a coastal route from northeast asia to the americas . this '' kelp highway hypothesis '' suggested that highly productive kelp forests supported rich and diverse marine food webs in nearshore waters , including many types of fish , shellfish , birds , marine mammals , and seaweeds that were similar from japan to california , erlandson and his colleagues also argued that coastal kelp forests reduced wave energy and provided a linear dispersal corridor entirely at sea level , with few obstacles to maritime peoples . archaeological evidence from california 's channel islands confirms that islanders were harvesting kelp forest shellfish and fish , beginning as much as 12,000 years ago . during the highland clearances , many scottish highlanders were moved on to areas of estates known as crofts , and went to industries such as fishing and kelping ( producing soda ash from the ashes of kelp ) . at least until the 1840s , when there were steep falls in the price of kelp , landlords wanted to create pools of cheap or virtually free labour , supplied by families subsisting in new crofting townships . kelp collection and processing was a very profitable way of using this labour , and landlords petitioned successfully for legislation designed to stop emigration . the profitability of kelp harvesting meant that landlords began to subdivide their land for small tenant kelpers , who could now afford higher rent than their gentleman farmer counterparts . j . m . bumsted , the people 's clearance : highland emigration to british north america , 1770-1815 , 1981 but the economic collapse of the kelp industry in northern scotland during the 1820s led to further emigration , especially to north america . natives of the falkland islands are sometimes nicknamed '' kelpers '' . allwords.com definition for '' kelper '' , dictionary.com definition for '' kelper '' this designation is primarily exonym . in chinese slang , '' kelp '' , is used to describe an unemployed returnee . it has negative overtones , implying the person is drifting aimlessly , and is also a homophonic expression , literally '' sea waiting '' ) . this expression is contrasted with the employed returnee , having a dynamic ability to travel across the ocean : the '' sea turtle '' and is also homophonic with another word , literally '' sea return '' ) . conservation . overfishing nearshore ecosystems leads to the degradation of kelp forests . herbivores are released from their usual population regulation , leading to over-grazing of kelp and other algae . this can quickly result in barren landscapes where only a small number of species can thrive . dayton , p.k . 1985a . ecology of kelp communities . annual review of ecology and systematics 16 : 215-245 . sala , e . , c.f . bourdouresque and m . harmelin-vivien . 1998 . fishing , trophic cascades , and the structure of algal assemblages : evaluation of an old but untested paradigm . oikos 82 : 425-439 . other major factors which threaten kelp include marine pollution and the quality of water , climate changes and certain invasive species . . gallery . file : giant kelp ( macrocystis pyrifera ) 01.jpg giant kelp in monterey bay aquarium 's kelp forest exhibit file : scuba diver in kelp forest.jpg scuba diver in kelp forest file : blue rockfish in kelp forest.jpg blue rockfish in kelp forest file : anemone and seastar in kelp forest.jpg anemone and seastar in kelp forest file : kelp forest-blue.jpg an underwater shot of a kelp forest file : kelpforesti2500ppx.jpg a kelp forest file : close up of ecklonia maxima leaf.jpg a close up view of ecklonia maxima , giant brown kelp file : kelpwik.jpg kelp found along the coast of la jolla shores . prominent species . bull kelp , nereocystis luetkeana , a northwestern american species . used by coastal indigenous peoples to create fishing nets . giant kelp , macrocystis pyrifera , the largest seaweed . found in the pacific coast of north america and south america . kombu , saccharina japonica ( formerly laminaria japonica ) and others , several edible species of kelp found in japan . species of laminaria in the british isles ; laminaria digitata ( hudson ) j.v . lamouroux ( oarweed ; tangle ) laminaria hyperborea ( gunnerus ) foslie ( curvie ) laminaria ochroleuca bachelot de la pylaie laminaria saccharina ( linnaeus ) j.v.lamouroux ( sea belt ; sugar kelp ; sugarwack ) species of laminaria worldwide , listing of species at algaebase : algaebase laminariales laminaria agardhii ( ne . america ) laminaria bongardina postels et ruprecht ( bering sea to california ) laminaria cuneifolia ( ne . america ) laminaria dentigera klellm . ( california - america ) laminaria digitata ( ne . america ) laminaria ephemera setchell ( sitka , alaska , to monterey county , california - america ) laminaria farlowii setchell ( santa cruz , california , to baja california - america ) laminaria groenlandica ( ne . america ) laminaria longicruris ( ne . america ) laminaria nigripes ( ne . america ) laminaria ontermedia ( ne . america ) laminaria pallida greville ex j . agardh ( south africa ) laminaria platymeris ( ne . america ) laminaria saccharina ( linnaeus ) lamouroux , synonym of saccharina latissima ( north east atlantic ocean , barents sea south to galicia - spain ) laminaria setchellii silva ( aleutian islands , alaska to baja california america ) laminaria sinclairii ( harvey ex hooker f . ex harvey ) farlow , anderson et eaton ( hope island , british columbia to los angeles , california - america ) laminaria solidungula ( ne . america ) laminaria stenophylla ( ne . america ) other species in the laminariales that may be considered as kelp : alaria esculenta ( north atlantic ) alaria marginata post . & rupr . ( alaska and california - america ) costaria costata ( c.ag . ) saunders ( japan ; alaska , california - america ) ecklonia brevipes j . agardh ( australia ; new zealand ) ecklonia maxima ( osbeck ) papenfuss ( south africa ) ecklonia radiata ( c.agardh ) j . agardh ( australia ; tasmania ; new zealand ; south africa ) eisenia arborea aresch . ( vancouver island , british columbia , montrey , santa catalina island , california - america ) egregia menziesii ( turn . ) aresch . hedophyllum sessile ( c.ag . ) setch ( alaska , california - america ) macrocystis pyrifera ( linnaeus , c.agardh ) ( australia ; tasmania and south africa ) pleurophycus gardneri setch . & saund . ( alaska , california - america ) pterygophora californica rupr . ( vancouver island , british columbia to bahia del ropsario , baja california and california - america ) non-laminariales species that may be considered as kelp : durvillea antarctica , fucales ( new zealand , south america , and australia ) durvillea willana , fucales ( new zealand ) durvillaea potatorum ( labillardière ) areschoug , fucales ( tasmania ; australia ) . interactions . some animals are named after the kelp , either because they inhabit the same habitat as kelp or because they feed on kelp . these include : northern kelp crab ( pugettia producta ) and graceful kelp crab ( pugettia gracilis ) , pacific coast of north america . kelpfish ( blenny ) ( e.g . , heterosticbus rostratus , genus gibbonsia ) , pacific coast of north america . kelp goose ( chloephaga hybrida ) , south america and the falkland islands sheathbill ( chionis alba and chionis minor ) , antarctic . see also . aquaculture of giant kelp . references . further reading . druehl , l.d . 1988 . cultivated edible kelp . in algae and human affairs . lembi , c.a . and waaland , j.r . ( editors ) 1988 . erlandson , j.m . , m.h . graham , b.j . bourque , d . corbett , j.a . estes , & r.s . steneck . 2007 . the kelp highway hypothesis : marine ecology , the coastal migration theory , and the peopling of the americas . journal of island and coastal archaeology 2:161-174 . external links .