The Great White Hope

background . while the play is often described as being thematically about racism , this is not how sackler viewed his work . though not denying the racist issues confronted in the play , sackler once said in an interview , '' what interested me was not the topicality but the combination of circumstances , the destiny of a man pitted against society . it 's a metaphor of struggle between man and the outside world . some people spoke of the play as if it were a cliché of white liberalism , but i kept to the line straight through , of showing that it was n't a case of blacks being good and whites being bad . i was appalled at the first reaction . '' in a comment , reflecting on both the racist theme dealt with in the play and sackler 's notion that the play is about a man fighting society , muhammad ali , greatly impressed with james earl jones ' performance in the play , reportedly commented to the actor , '' hey ! this play is about me ! take out the interracial love stuff and jack johnson is the original me ! '' he added , '' you just change the time , date and the details and it 's about me ! '' ali was fighting being drafted into the army at the time on grounds of being a conscientious objector . . productions . the great white hope premiered at the arena stage in december , 1967 . '' arena stage history , see 1967-68 '' arenastage.org , accessed september 15 , 2015 '' great white hope ' will open on oct . 3 '' , the new york times , may 10 , 1968 , p.5 barnes , clive . '' theater : 'white hope ' tale of modern othello , opens in capital : howard sackler 's play given at arena stage jack johnson depicted as a tragic hero '' , the new york times , december 14 , 1967 , , p.57 the initial production at arena stage , paid for in part by two grants from the national endowment for the arts , was so well-received that the entire original cast , including james earl jones and jane alexander , moved to broadway . it was the first time the cast of a regional theater production was brought to broadway . the play opened on broadway on october 3 , 1968 , and closed on january 31 , 1970 , after 546 performances . '' 'the great white hope ' broadway '' playbillvault.com , accessed september 15 , 2015 using proceeds from his screenwriting contract , sackler substantially funded the broadway production by investing a reported us 225,000 . in addition to winning the pulitzer prize for drama , jones won the 1969 tony award for best actor in a play and alexander won the 1969 tony award for best featured actress in a play , as well as the drama desk award for each , for their respective portrayals of jack jefferson and eleanor bachman . a recording of the production was released by tetragrammaton records . yaphet kotto replaced jones '' yaphet kotto broadway '' playbillvault.com , accessed september 15 , 2015 and maria tucci replaced alexander on september 8 , 1969 . '' maria tucci broadway '' playbillvault.com , accessed september 15 , 2015 in 2000 , arena stage mounted a new production of the great white hope in honor of the theater 's 50th season . . film adaptation . the great white hope was adapted by sackler for a film released in 1970 , directed by martin ritt , starring james earl jones , jane alexander , chester morris , hal holbrook , beah richards and moses gunn . jones and alexander , who both had starred in the theatrical version , each received best actor academy award nominations for their performances . the oscars for their categories were ultimately presented to george c . scott for patton , and glenda jackson for women in love . in the movie , the role of '' the kid , '' or the '' great white hope , '' was played by professional heavyweight boxer james j . beattie ( 6 ' 9 '' , 240 pounds ) , the 10-ranked world heavyweight contender and an ali sparring partner . '' the great white hope '' . the term , '' the great white hope , '' reflects the racism and segregation of the era in which jack johnson fought . johnson , the first african american to hold the world heavyweight championship title , was one of the best fighters of his generation . yet , white reaction against johnson 's win and his very public relationships with white women was so strong that , in 1912 , the united states congress , concerned that film scenes of johnson pummeling white boxers would cause race riots , passed a law making it illegal to transport prizefight films across state lines . '' the great white hope '' is a reference to the white boxer who many hoped would finally defeat johnson . william warren barbour , who won the american and canada amateur heavyweight championship in 1910 and 1911 , respectively , was james j . corbett 's choice to be '' the great white hope , '' but barbour declined to take up the mantle . some 30 years later , it was barbour who , as u.s . senator ( r ) from new jersey in 1940 , worked successfully to repeal the 1912 law prohibiting interstate transportation of boxing film footage . about 30 years after that , william warren barbour 's nephew , thomas barbour , played four small parts , including sir william griswald , in the broadway production of the great white hope . the first '' great white hope '' boxer to accept the challenge was jim jeffries , who came out of retirement to fight johnson unsuccessfully in 1910 . johnson 's title was eventually lost to jess willard , a white boxer , in 1915 . there was some controversy surrounding willard 's win , with johnson claiming he threw the fight . in part because of white animosity toward johnson , it was 20 years before another african american boxer was allowed to contend for the world professional heavyweight title . in 1937 , joe louis defeated james j . braddock , '' the cinderella man , '' to become the second african-american boxer to hold the world heavyweight championship title . . awards and nominations . 1969 pulitzer prize for drama 1969 tony award for best play ( winner ) 1969 tony award for best actor in a play , james earl jones ( winner ) 1969 tony award for best featured actress in a play , jane alexander ( winner ) 1969 new york drama critics ' circle award for best play ( winner ) 1969 drama desk award for outstanding director , edwin sherin ( winner ) 1969 drama desk award outstanding performance , james earl jones ( winner ) 1969 drama desk award outstanding performance , jane alexander ( winner )