Jean Lesage

early years . lesage was born on june 10 , 1912 , in montreal , quebec , one of six children of xavéri lesage , a district manager of the insurance company les prévoyants du canada , and cécile côté . thompson , dale c . ( 1984 ) jean lesage and the quiet revolution . macmillan of canada . lesage began his education at the kindergarten saint-enfant-jésus montréal . in 1921 , the family relocated to quebec city , where xavéri lesage was appointed as assistant manager by his brother antoni in the headquarters office . thompson , dale c . ( 1984 ) jean lesage and the quiet revolution . macmillan of canada . . education . lesage enrolled as a day student in the private boarding school école saint-louis-de-gonzague and , in 1923 , he was admitted to the petit séminaire de québec for an eight-year program which eventually led to the baccalaureate . he was a talented and bright student who ranked highly in courses , especially in religion , french , latin , greek and philosophy . thompson , dale c . ( 1984 ) jean lesage and the quiet revolution . macmillan of canada . he enrolled in the faculté de droit de l'université laval , where his natural quick wit , his facility in expressing himself , and his argumentative nature assured him success in the field of law . during his years as a student , lesage was an active liberal , and he became interested in having a political career . he graduated with a law degree in 1934 . thompson , dale c . ( 1984 ) jean lesage and the quiet revolution . macmillan of canada . in 1965 , he received an honorary doctorate from sir george williams university , which later became concordia university . . legal career . he practised law in quebec city with paul lesage in 1934 , then with charles gavan power , valmore bienvenue , paul lesage , and jean turgeon . he married corinne lagarde , a singer and the daughter of alexandre lagarde and valéria matte . he was made a crown attorney for the wartime prices and trade board from 1939 to 1944 . federal political career . lesage was elected as a federal member of parliament for the riding of montmagny-l'islet as a liberal for the first time in the 1945 general election . after his re-election in 1949 , he was first named parliamentary assistant to the secretary of state for external affairs from 25 january 1951 to 31 december 1952 . he was then named parliamentary secretary for the minister of finance from 1 january 1953 to 13 june 1953 . following his re-election in 1953 , lesage was appointed as minister of resources and development from 17 september 1953 to 15 december 1953 , and then minister of northern affairs and national resources from 16 december 1953 to 21 june 1957 . government of canada . privy council office . '' seventeenth ministry '' he survived the progressive conservative ascendancy and was re-elected in both 1957 and 1958 . however , he resigned from his seat on 13 june 1958 following his election as leader of the liberal party of quebec on 31 may 1958 . lesage government . on june 22 , 1960 , lesage 's liberal party won the quebec general election with 51 of 95 seats and 51 per cent of the popular vote . he was elected to the national assembly of quebec with the slogans '' l ’ équipe de tonnerre '' – '' the terrific team '' – and '' c'est le temps que ça change '' - '' it ’ s time for a change '' . ( thompson , 1984:87 ) . his electoral success ended the union nationale and maurice duplessis 's conservative reign since 1944 . thompson , dale c . ( 1984 ) jean lesage and the quiet revolution . macmillan of canada . lesage became premier , president of the executive council , and minister of finance from 5 july 1960 to 16 june 1966 . he was also minister of federal-provincial affairs from 28 march 1961 to 16 june 1966 , and minister of revenue from 30 may 1963 to 8 august 1963 . his election ushered in the quiet revolution , which was the rapid and drastic change of values , attitudes , and behaviours in quebec society also characterized by a surge in quebec nationalism . thompson , dale c . ( 1984 ) jean lesage and the quiet revolution . macmillan of canada . in the previous decade , it had already ended its affiliation with the liberal party of canada . in 1962 , the liberal party of quebec won re-election with a campaign promising the nationalization of hydroelectricity , with the slogan maîtres chez nous ( masters in our own home ) . major accomplishments . the lesage government ’ s rule significantly contributed to social , economic and political changes in quebec society , and strengthened the québécois identity during the quiet revolution . the modernization of quebec was lesage ’ s main nationalism . thompson , david c . ( 1984 ) jean lesage and the quiet revolution . macmillan of canada . during his time as premier , lesage achieved many great changes in quebec . lesage believed that french canadians could very well develop as a modern people within canada without losing their identity . thompson , david c . ( 1984 ) jean lesage and the quiet revolution . macmillan of canada . one of the major and most successful changes made by the lesage government was the secularization of quebec from the catholic church . education reform was one of the most prominent examples of this secularization . lesage rejected the role of the catholic church , which had previously controlled the school system , and modernized it . he wanted the quebec provincial government to provide education for everyone and instill in them québécois values as well as produce a better skilled labour force . the mandatory schooling age was also increased from 14 to 16 . the ministry of education was created in 1964 with paul gérin-lajoie becoming quebec ’ s first minister of education . thompson , david c . ( 1984 ) . jean lesage and the quiet revolution . macmillan of canada . another major success was the establishment of hydro-québec and the nationalization of the province 's hydro-electricity . '' the nationalization of electricity was ' a logical extension ' of the government ’ s goal of growth . based primarily on the promotion of the french-canadian people . '' ( thompson , 1984:242 ) with much assistance from rené lévesque , the 11 remaining private power companies were bought out , and hydro-québec began supplying , distributing , and transmitting the entire province 's energy . the lesage government ’ s success of hydro-québec represents strength , determination , and initiative . other major economic accomplishments included the creation of the société générale de financement to encourage quebecers to invest in their future and provided capital for private and mainly francophone enterprises ; the creation of public companies like the société de montage automobile ( soma ) to assemble french automobiles in quebec , the société québécoise d ’ exploration minière ( soquem ) to ensure that mining resources would be developed in the interests of quebecers and sidérurgie québécoise ( sidbec ) which was established as an integrated steel plant . ( thompson , 1984:212 ) furthermore , during his time as premier , quebec also took over health care from the church and was the only province to opt out of the national pension plan to create its own version , the quebec pension plan . it also formed the caisse de dépôt et placement du québec to invest in the pension plan funds and the régie des rentes du québec to manage the plan , revamped the province ’ s labour force by giving public-sector workers the right to strike , and laid a foundation for the creation of post-secondary collège d'enseignement général et professionnel ( cegeps ) in the area of education . thompson , david c . ( 1984 ) . jean lesage and the quiet revolution . macmillan of canada . . defeat and retirement . despite winning 47 % of the vote in the 1966 quebec general election , compared to 40 % for the union nationale , lesage 's liberals won fewer seats because their vote was concentrated in urban ridings . lesage remained liberal leader for several years until he resigned in august 1969 . he remained leader of the opposition until january 1970 , when robert bourassa became the new liberal leader . lesage retired from politics and sat on several corporate boards until his death in 1980 . see also . politics of quebec quebec general elections quiet revolution history of quebec mackenzie king québec city jean lesage international airport . book references . rouillard , jacques ( 2003 ) , le syndicalisme québécois : deux siècles d'histoire , boréal editions , 335p . comeau , robert & bourque , gilles ( 1989 ) , jean lesage et l'éveil d'une nation sillery editions , 367p . thompson , dale c . ( 1984 ) jean lesage and the quiet revolution . macmillan of canada . thomson , dale carins ( 1984 ) , jean lesage et la révolution tranquille , du trecarre editions , 615p . fullerton , douglas h . ( 1978 ) , the dangerous delusion mcclelland and stuart editions , 240p . external links . jean lesage and the quiet revolution , 1960–1966 his order of canada citation . references .