Even Stevens

premise . the stevens family live in sacramento , california , where the two younger children in the family , ren and louis , who have opposing personalities , often clash . episodes . cast and characters . main . louis anthony stevens ( shia labeouf ) – louis , the youngest stevens sibling , is viewed as immature , rude , lazy , selfish , carefree , and extremely mischievous . he concocts elaborate schemes and inventions to make his life easier . his entire family is viewed as perfect next to him , which louis resents . he is always pulling pranks with best friend alan twitty . his parents seem to favor his sister ren and brother donnie because of the great successes both have achieved , but his parents do love him dearly and try to defend him when possible . louis tends to do '' gross '' things ( weird faces , poor hygiene , picking nose , etc . ) , especially if it annoys ren . tawny dean becomes his girlfriend at the end of the series . his birthday is on june 27 ( as shown in episode 33 ) . ren stevens ( christy carlson romano ) – an intelligent , well-behaved , perfectionist 8th-grader , ren is the middle sibling and only daughter . she is the classic overachiever , constantly running for hall monitor and class president while trying to keep louis 's schemes from becoming disasters and ruining her good-girl reputation . she is the head newscaster for '' the wombat report '' and spent a few weeks on her school 's cheerleading squad . ren is the editor of the school newspaper and the yearbook , a straight-a student , and principal wexler 's highly valued assistant . she destresses by singing karaoke . despite her top-student ranking , ren got sentenced to , and served , detention on at least one occasion . ren 's favorite color is purple . donnie stevens ( nick spano ) – ren and louis ' athletic big brother . donnie is highly concerned with his appearance . his popularity , good looks , and superb athletic skills made him a heartthrob and legend at their school , even after his graduation . although he excels in many sports , he 's an airhead and rarely knows what is going on . steve stevens ( tom virtue ) – a quirky lawyer and the patriarch of the stevens family . he played college football for michigan state university with the nickname '' stiffie '' stevens . he used to be a wrestler for his school . eileen stevens ( donna pescow ) – the matriarch of the stevens family ; a successful , no-nonsense , american jews state senator who launched a campaign for the u.s . house of representatives in 2002 and was narrowly defeated . alan twitty ( a.j . trauth ) – louis ' closest best friend . twitty is similar to louis but usually is n't as extreme and often has to get louis out of situations . referred to as '' twitty '' by his friends , he is on the basketball team and the baseball team , plays guitar , and also has success with girls . twitty 's catch phrases are '' dude '' and '' sweet '' . when going undercover with louis he goes by the name '' lars honeytoast . '' tawny dean ( margo harshman ) – louis ' female best friend , and eventually his girlfriend . tawny , at first , has no friends and is an outsider , until she meets louis . tawny usually dresses in goth clothing , unlike her classmates , and refuses to conform with others ' trivial pursuits . she is usually the voice of reason . ruby mendel ( lauren frost ) – ren 's best friend who loves to gossip about crushes and dating couples . she once had a crush on louis ( while under the spell of a lucky penny ) , in the same episode that she had a crush on the boy band bbmak . ruby speaks with a heavy brooklyn accent . recurring . thomas '' tom '' gribalski ( fred meyers ) – louis ' nerdy best friend . when louis cooks up a scheme , tom usually tries to talk louis out of it and usually does n't play along . also , tom speaks in a very scientific , philosophical , and intelligent manner . he is commonly the victim of many pranks by louis and twitty . he calls his mother by her name ( doris ) . in season 3 , doris is seen playing the piano when tom auditions for saccy , a performing arts school . monique taylor ( kenya williams ) – ren 's other best friend . monique is a perky cheerleader . monique takes many things to extreme limits . she has a strong southern accent . nelson minkler ( gary leroi gray ) – ren 's childhood best friend who seems to be allergic to everything and overprotects himself when he 's outside . he is usually with ren , and at times donnie , but has spoken to louis only once . he is fluent in french . nelson was also gray 's character 's name on the cosby show as a child . bernard '' beans '' aranguren ( steven anthony lawrence ) – the stevens ' extremely annoying neighbor , who comes into their home uninvited , makes himself at home , and refuses to leave . his love for bacon is a recurring theme , and in '' little mr . sacktown '' he visits a bacon shack . he eventually turns into a sidekick for louis and twitty 's schemes , usually double-crossing the two . lawrence anthony '' larry '' beale ( eric '' ty '' hodges ) – ren 's nasty , equally-popular , charismatic , know-it-all rival in school . larry hates ren and always tries to destroy her reputation , but his schemes usually backfire . his favorite victim is ren , but he occasionally tries to ruin louis as well . larry is secretly jealous of ren and considers louis a threat , but will never admit it . larry is an army brat . in the movie , he hinted he might even have romantic feelings for her , as he shows a bit of jealousy when it showed that ren was sharing a kiss with an actor . coach terry tugnut ( jim wise ) – the gym coach who is always tough on louis but crazy about donnie , larry , and food . he loves to eat . once he weighed over 300 & nbsp ; lbs . he is frequently the victim of louis ' pranks . coach tugnut often serves as wexler 's enforcer/sidekick . he is obsessed with dodgeball and with the three '' major points '' ( arm , head , stomach ) . a running gag throughout the series is coach tugnut shouting , '' stevens ! '' when louis causes trouble . conrad wexler ( george anthony bell ) – the principal of lawrence jr high . principal wexler favors ren over the other students . they have had arguments , but they 're good friends . ren is his student assistant , while louis drives him crazy . he usually makes ren do his dirty work . carla and marla ( lisa foiles and krysten leigh jones ) – two girls who look up to ren . carla and marla are both on the newspaper staff with ren and ruby . after the episode '' quest for coolness '' , carla and marla are never seen or mentioned again . bobby deaver ( brandon davis ) – ren 's middle-school boyfriend ; he appeared in seven episodes . ren broke up with bobby after louis told her that he was cheating on her by dating mandy sanchez , a rival of ren 's . ivan ( eric jungmann ) – larry beale 's yes-man sidekick in the first season , although he occasionally serves as a yes-man for other popular kids , such as blake thompson in the episode '' louis in the middle '' . production . the show was originally produced as a show called spivey 's kid brother . a pilot was filmed in july 1999 , and was later picked up by disney channel as even stevens . in the pilot episode , disney had to dub out the name '' spivey '' to '' stevens '' . in fact , in the gym class scene , a banner is visible in the background reading , '' home of spivey and the wild wombats . '' in the theme song of the show , clay animations of louis and ren turn their remote controls into lightsabers , alluding to star wars . prior to this , ren reads a tv guide with live-action photos of christy carlson romano and shia labeouf on the cover . lawrence junior high is apparently a standard three-grade junior high school . although the show lasted three seasons , the timeline of the show is only two school years , with louis and his friends remaining in the 7th grade until some point after the middle of the second season . in several third-season episodes there are subtle references to an advance in the timeline that puts ren and her friends in the 9th grade and louis in the 8th grade . ren finally graduates in the even stevens movie . shia labeouf and christy carlson romano are the only two actors to appear in all 65 episodes of the series . . broadcast . the series reran on disney channel from june 2 , 2003 to september 4 , 2006 . on july 7 , 2007 , disney channel aired eight episodes as part of their '' sometimes you win , sometimes you louis '' marathon , to coincide with the release of shia labeouf 's film transformers . in 2006 , superstation wgn ( now wgn america ) acquired the rights to even stevens and lizzie mcguire . it aired on the channel from september 18 , 2006 to september 12 , 2008 , during the week originally airing after each other on weekday afternoons before moving to the late night hours , when both shows ' target audiences were generally not awake , with even stevens airing tuesdays and thursdays and lizzie airing the rest of the week . in 2009 , after a three-year absence , even stevens returned to television on disney xd ; it was removed from the channel in january 2010 . from 2015–2016 , even stevens aired on freeform for two hours after midnight on wednesdays as part of the that 's so throwback block . in the uk , even stevens aired on citv ( having previously been shown on cbbc ) from 2009 to 2012 . the show currently is no longer airing , however , the even stevens movie continues to air on disney channel and on family channel occasionally . the series released on november 12 , 2019 with the launch of disney+ in the united states . it is currently not available in all territories where the platform has launched . home media . the first season of even stevens was made available on dvd on region 4 in australia and new zealand on july 25 , 2006 . to date , no further seasons have been released on region 4 . region 1 has not released any season of the series , however , the television film , the even stevens movie , was made available on june 28 , 2005 . awards and nominations . bafta awards :2002 – best international – matt dearborn , sean mcnamara & david brookwell ( won ) daytime emmy awards :2003 – outstanding performer in a children 's series – shia labeouf ( won ) :2003 – outstanding performer in a children 's series – donna pescow ( nominated ) :2003 – outstanding children 's series ( nominated ) :2002 – outstanding children 's series ( nominated ) :2002 – outstanding performer in a children 's series – donna pescow ( nominated ) :2001 – outstanding children 's series ( nominated ) :2001 – outstanding performer in a children 's series – donna pescow ( nominated ) directors guild of america :2003 – outstanding directorial achievement in children 's programs – gregory hobson for episode '' band on the roof '' ( nominated ) :2002 – outstanding directorial achievement in children 's programs – sean mcnamara for episode '' very scary story '' ( nominated ) :2001 – outstanding directorial achievement in children 's programs – paul hoen for episode '' take my sister . please '' ( nominated ) :2001 – outstanding directorial achievement in children 's programs – sean mcnamara for episode '' easy way '' ( nominated ) young artist awards :2004 – best performance in a tv series ( comedy or drama ) : supporting young actress – margo harshman ( nominated ) :2003 – best performance in a tv series ( comedy or drama ) : supporting young actor – steven anthony lawrence ( won ) :2003 – best performance in a tv series ( comedy or drama ) : supporting young actress – lauren frost ( nominated ) :2002 – best performance in a tv comedy series : leading young actress – christy carlson romano ( won ) :2002 – best performance in a tv series ( comedy or drama ) : supporting young actress – lauren frost ( won ) :2002 – best performance in a tv comedy series : leading young actor -shia labeouf ( nominated ) :2002 – best performance in a tv comedy series : leading young actor – a.j . trauth ( nominated ) :2002 – best performance in a tv comedy series : supporting young actor – steven anthony lawrence ( nominated ) :2001 – best performance in a tv comedy series : leading young actress – christy carlson romano ( won ) :2001 – best performance in a tv comedy series : leading young actor – shia labeouf ( nominated ) :2001 – best performance in a tv comedy series : guest starring young performer – ty hodges ( nominated ) young star awards :2000 – best young actor/performance in a comedy tv series – shia labeouf ( nominated ) . references . external links .