Battle of Vauchamps

context . on 13 february , having fought three successful actions in three days against the prussian and russian army at champaubert , montmirail and château-thierry , napoleon was pursuing the defeated enemy . after his consecutive defeats , field-marshal blücher decided to disengage from napoleon and move a significant force against the isolated french army corps of marshal marmont , at étoges . tulard 1999 , p . 920 . blücher knew that marmont 's corps was weak and his plan was to destroy it and thus fall upon the rear of napoleon 's main force . mir 2009 , p . 63 . still in pursuit of the debris of the enemy force , late on 13 february , napoleon received reports that marmont 's corps had been attacked and pushed out of his position at étoges . the emperor deduced that the enemy force before him would have to be a much reduced one and promptly decided to go to marmont 's aid . the emperor left château-thierry on 14 february , towards 3 o'clock in the morning , leaving a small portion of his forces with marshal édouard mortier , duc de trévise , with orders to continue the pursuit of the enemy . taking with him the cavalry of the guard and grouchy 's cavalry reserve , napoleon headed for the village of vauchamps . meanwhile , late on 13 february , having successfully regrouped what forces he could muster at bergères-lès-vertus , blücher had launched an attack against marmont 's single division , pushing him out of étoges and advancing as planned towards champaubert and fromentières , in the rear of napoleon 's force . however , having read blücher 's intentions , napoleon had given orders for a concentration of french forces in that very sector . . opposing forces . army of silesia . during the battle of vauchamps on 14 february , prussian field-marshal gebhard leberecht von blücher , commander of the combined prusso-russian army of silesia could count on 20,000 to 21,500 men , from three army corps : a prussian brigade comprised several regiments and was roughly equivalent in strength to a french or russian division . ii ( prussian ) corps , commanded by general friedrich graf kleist von nollendorf : 10th brigade under george dubislaw ludwig von pirch 11th brigade under hans ernst karl , graf von zieten 12th brigade under prince augustus of prussia cavalry brigade under von hacke cavalry brigade under von röder reserve artillery under braun ix ( russian ) corps : 9th division under udom ii x ( russian ) corps under general peter mikhailovich kaptzevich : 8th division under prince urusov ( or orosov ) 22nd division under turchaninov mir 2009 , p . 63-64 . mir 2009 , p . 79 . kleist 's ii corps numbered 13,500 men while kaptzevich 's x corps counted 6,500 . there were also 1,500 troops from ix corps who survived the battle of champaubert . these were grouped into three or four temporary battalions and an artillery battery . the rump of ix corps lost 600 men and all of its guns on the evening of 14 february . ii corps had eight 6-pound batteries and two 12-pound batteries . each battery had eight guns or a total of 80 cannons . there was also a howitzer battery of unknown strength , with x corps having three batteries attached . grande armée . napoleon had sent orders for a major concentration of forces , which resulted in a force of some 25,000 men being assembled in this sector . however , of these men , only 19,000 soldiers got to the battlefield in time , with no more than 10,000 men engaged in the actual fighting : vi corps , commanded by marshal of the empire auguste de marmont : 3rd division under joseph lagrange 8th division under étienne pierre sylvestre ricard reinforcements temporarily attached : 7th division under jean françois leval cavalry , commanded by general emmanuel de grouchy : division antoine louis decrest de saint-germain division jean-pierre doumerc division étienne tardif de pommeroux de bordesoulle guard cavalry , commanded by general etienne de nansouty : 2nd division under charles , comte lefebvre-desnouettes , 3rd division under louis marie levesque de laferrière . guard artillery under antoine drouot . guard infantry , under marshal , prince of the moskowa michel ney ( reinforcements not engaged ) : 1st ( old guard ) division under louis friant , 2nd ( young guard ) division under philibert jean-baptiste curial . thoumas , p . 49 . grouchy 's i cavalry corps and ii cavalry corps , each of two divisions , numbered a combined 3,600 horsemen . the two guard cavalry divisions together counted 3,300 troopers . the 1st old guard division had 4,000 men and the 2nd old guard division had 3,000 . the 1st young guard division was made up of 4,000 soldiers while the 2nd young guard division had 2,500 troops . marmont 's two divisions could muster only 3,000 men . jean françois leval 's 7th division comprised 4,500 soldiers . of these forces , only the cavalry , marmont 's infantry and one battalion of the old guard were actually engaged in the fighting . the others were marching along behind . battle . having begun to push back the feeble french forces from marmont 's vi 's corps the day before , blücher occupied champaubert early on 14 february , sending his vanguard forward , as far as the village of fromentières and then vauchamps . marmont , commanding only the lagrange division and 800 men from the ricard division , had cautiously pulled his men back towards montmirail , where he began to receive reinforcements . mir 2009 , p . 65 . towards 9 o'clock in the morning , blücher set zieten 's brigade and some cavalry in motion from vauchamps towards montmirail . to their surprise , marmont 's men did n't give ground this time and vigorously counterattacked , pushing zieten 's advance guard back into the village of vauchamps . the accompanying prussian cavalry was dispersed by a violent french cannonade . with now both brigades of ricard 's division available , marmont launched these men against the prussian position at vauchamps , with the 1st brigade on his right , advancing under the cover of the beaumont forest , south of the montmirail-vauchamps road and the 2nd brigade on his left , north of the road , advancing frontally towards the position . marmont also had with him his own escort cavalry squadron and four élite imperial guard duty squadrons from the emperor 's own escort , under general lion . marmont 's leftmost brigade entered vauchamps , but , with the village heavily invested with zieten 's prussian defenders , the frenchmen were soon repulsed , with the prussians in pursuit . marshal marmont then launched his five squadrons to the rescue and the cavalry promptly forced the prussians back to the village , with one of their battalions taken prisoner , after taking refuge in an isolated farm . zieten then decided to pull back his forces towards the village of fromentières . there , zieten was joined by generals kleist and kapsevitch , who , having heard the sound of the guns , had begun to move their respective army corps in that direction , coming from champaubert . the french also moved forward , with marmont 's two divisions ( lagrange and ricard ) in pursuit of zieten , along the road to fromentières . marmont was now supported on his left by general grouchy , who had just arrived on the field of battle with the divisions of saint-germain and doumerc , moving past the village of janvilliers , in order to cut off zieten 's retreat . further french reinforcements were now available , this time on marmont 's right : the division of leval , who had been steadily moving up the valley of the petit morin river , in a bid to outflank the prussians . with the french imperial guard artillery now also deployed and firing at them , zieten 's prussians drew back in good order , and formed in squares to fend off grouchy 's cavalry . towards 2 o'clock in the afternoon , after assessing the situation , blücher realised that he was facing napoleon himself and thus decided to immediately withdraw . he ordered all of his forces to retreat through champaubert and directed a part of his artillery to safety , towards étoges . mir 2009 , p . 63-65 . . pursuit . with the coalition forces now in full retreat , marmont received orders to aggressively pursue the enemy , knowing that he could count on his two infantry divisions , plus that of leval , as well as on the support of general drouot 's guard artillery , on nansouty 's guard cavalry on his right and on grouchy 's two cavalry divisions on his left . following marmont at a short distance were further reinforcements , two guard infantry divisions ( friant and curial ) under the command of marshal ney and with them was napoleon himself . napoleon was followed by an additional '' young guard '' division , under general meunier , which the emperor had taken with him when he left château-thierry early that morning . the french cavalry had been hindered in its movements by the broken terrain and thus far unable to really bother zieten 's infantry squares . consequently , blücher was able to lead an exemplary retreat up to fromentières and janvilliers . however , once past these villages , the terrain became flat and even , proper for cavalry action , and now , with the increasingly aggressive action of the enemy cavalry against his flank and rear , zieten and his brigade became increasingly isolated . grouchy , with the divisions of doumerc and saint-germain was now boldly menacing zieten 's right , while on his left , the prussian general saw nansouty 's guard cavalry ( laferrière-levesque 's division , plus the four service squadrons , under lefebvre-desnouettes ) . zieten 's brigade was finally cut off from the rest of the army and charged violently by grouchy 's cuirassiers , who broke the infantry squares and took no less than 2,000 prisoners , with the rest of the brigade routed . abandoning his position at fromentières , where marmont 's infantry had just begun to irrupt , blücher ordered the continuation of the retreat towards champaubert and étoges , with kleist 's corps on the left , south of the road and kaptzevitch 's corps on the right , north of the road . again taking advantage from the flat terrain , grouchy was able to advance rapidly and fall onto the rear of the coalition infantry squares , which were now slowly withdrawing in echelon and efficiently using the terrain to take shelter from the artillery bombardment . with night approaching and their retreat towards étoges now barred by enemy cavalry , the prussian squares began to lose cohesion . spotting this weakness , grouchy , who had been reinforced by bordesoulle 's division , energetically launched his three divisions against the coalition squares , dispersing a number of them , with these men fleeing in disorder to take refuge in the étoges forest . the old blücher , who had been bravely exposing himself to great danger in order to boost the morale his men , was almost taken prisoner , together with his chief of staff , gneisenau , generals kleist , kapsevitch and prince augustus of prussia . mir 2009 , p . 66 . only just escaping capture , blücher crossed the forest of vertus and took up positions at étoges with prince urusov 's division , which had been left there in reserve . russian general udom , with 1,800 men and 15 cannon , was instructed to cover the position , by occupying the park at étoges . udom 's men were exhausted after the long retreat and fighting and , seeing that night had fallen , thought themselves in safety . however , doumerc 's cuirassiers , formed unseen in the night , surprised these men and a single charge was enough to send the panicked men fleeing . prince urusov , 600 men and eight artillery pieces were captured during this action , with the french sailors ' regiment from lagrange 's division subsequently entering the village of étoges . blücher abandoned this position too and made a hasty retreat towards vertus and bergères . he then opted for a speedy night march and the next day he managed to bring his remaining men to châlons , where he was joined by yorck 's and sacken 's corps . . result . the battle was actually no more than a very long cavalry pursuit and was a very costly defeat for blücher 's '' army of silesia '' , which lost as much as 10,000 men , during this day . french author jean-pierre mir states that the prussian corps of kleist had 3,500 men out of action ( killed , wounded and missing ) , as well as 2,000 prisoners . according to this author , the russian corps had around 3,500 men , killed , wounded or missing and also lost 15 cannons and 10 flags . historian alain pigeard places overall losses of the army of silesia throughout this day between 9,000 and 10,000 men but the detail of these losses seems to suggest lighter casualties . pigeard speaks of only 1,250 men killed , wounded or missing and 2,000 prisoners for the prussians , and of 2,000 men lost for the russians . since pigeard asserts that these casualties occurred during the pursuit , it is possible that these figures do not take into account the casualties incurred during the initial actions of this battle ( one battalion of zieten 's brigade captured , plus the 2,000 prisoners taken during grouchy 's and nansouty 's joint action against zieten ) . according to pigeard , the french registered very light casualties of around 600 men . military historian jacques garnier , analysing the battle in jean tulard 's dictionnaire napoléon , notes that only the muddy , sodden ground , hampering an efficient deployment of the french artillery and infantry , prevented a much more emphatic victory . he also notes that after vauchamps , napoleon was able to safely turn south and fall upon the '' army of bohemia '' , commanded by prince of schwarzenberg . . references . sources . . further reading .