Critical Mass (cycling)

history . image : criticalmass-sf-broadway-tunnel.jpg thumb right broadway tunnel ( san francisco ) september 29 , 2006 critical mass-like bike tours with hundreds of participants took place in stockholm , sweden in the early 1970s . but the first ride within the present wave took place on friday , september 25 , 1992 , at 6 & nbsp ; pm in san francisco . at that time , the event was known as commute clot and was composed of a couple of dozen cyclists who had received flyers on market street . shortly after this , some participants in that ride went to a local bicycle shop for a screening of ted white 's documentary return of the scorcher , about bike culture in the netherlands and china in comparison with that of the united states . in that film , american human-powered vehicle and pedicab designer george bliss noted that , in china , both motorists and bicyclists had an '' understood '' method of negotiating intersections without signals . traffic would queue up at these intersections until the backlog reached a '' critical mass '' , at which point that mass would move through the intersection . this term from the footage of the movie , was applied to the name of the ride , and the name caught on , replacing '' commute clot '' by the time of the second event . . organization and tactics . structure . critical mass has a decentralized ( rather than hierarchical ) structure . critical mass is sometimes called an '' organized coincidence '' , with no leadership or membership . the routes of some rides are decided spontaneously by whomever is currently at the front of the ride , while others are decided prior to the ride by a popular vote of suggested routes often drawn up on photocopied fliers . the term xerocracy was coined to describe a process by which the route for a critical mass can be decided : anyone who has an opinion makes their own map and distributes it to the cyclists participating in the mass . still other rides decide the route by consensus . the disorganized nature of the event allows it to largely escape clampdown by authorities who may view the rides as forms of parades or organized protest . additionally , the movement is free from the structural costs associated with a centralized , hierarchical organization . in order for the event to function , the only requirement is a sufficient turn-out to create a '' critical mass '' of riders dense enough to occupy a piece of road to the exclusion of drivers of motorized vehicles . authorities in new york , california and oregon have expressed concern with the difficulty of coordinating with the riders , due to the lack of leadership . . scale . image:3a cm070922.jpg thumb left bike lift in budapest , september 22 , 2007 critical mass rides vary greatly in many respects , including frequency and number of participants . for example , many small cities have monthly critical mass rides with fewer than twenty riders which offer safety in numbers to cyclists in those locales , while on the opposite extreme , in what have been the largest events using the name critical mass , cyclists in budapest , hungary hold only two rides each year on april 22 ( earth day ) and september 22 ( car free days ) . the '' budapest style '' attracts tens of thousands of riders . the april 20 , 2008 , budapest ride participation was estimated at 80,000 riders . in vienna , close to budapest , a critical mass ride has been held every month since 2006 and attracts up to 1,000 or more riders . . corking . right because critical mass takes place without an official route or sanction , participants in some cities have sometimes practiced a tactic known as '' corking '' in order to maintain the cohesion of the group . this tactic consists of a few riders blocking traffic from side roads so that the mass can freely proceed through red lights without interruption . corking allows the mass to engage in a variety of activities , such as forming a cyclone , lifting their bikes in a tradition known as a '' bike lift '' ( in chicago this is referred to as a chicago hold-up ) , or to perform a '' die-in '' where riders lie on the ground with their bikes to symbolise cyclist deaths and injuries caused by automobiles , very popular in montreal . the '' corks '' sometimes take advantage of their time corking to distribute fliers . the practice of corking roads in order to pass through red lights as a group is in contravention of traffic laws in some jurisdictions and is sometimes criticized to be contrary to critical mass ' claim that '' we are traffic '' , since ordinary traffic does not have the right to go through intersections once the traffic signal has changed to red . joel pomerantz , the writer , rider and co-founder of critical mass who popularized corking in san francisco , explained in his 1992 instructional flyer that he sees the ride as a single vehicle for safety purposes , similar to a longer , articulated bus . he argued that it enhances both traffic flow overall and safety to keep the ride together as in a funeral procession , which he viewed critical as , metaphorically , for the death of car culture and crash victims . frustrated car drivers inhibited by the ride have sometimes reacted in hostile ways toward riders , even erupting into violence and arrests of motorists and cyclists alike during critical mass rides . pomerantz 's flyers have also proposed that drivers should only be as mad as they are at any traffic jam , most of which they accept as normal . other bicycling groups . similar organizations and movements . the critical mass rides have inspired a number of other bicycle movements , that range from political movements to the '' critical tits '' ride during the yearly burning man festival . in chicago , a movement has grown out of the critical mass community to promote winter cycling via the bikewinter campaign . the extensive news coverage of san francisco 's july 1997 ride spawned an international celebration of bicycling , called bike summer . kidical mass originated in oregon , and encourages bicycle riding for children and families . the movement gained momentum in north america and europe and set a record in september 2019 , when 1100 riders took part in dortmund , germany . critical sass was an all-female version of the ride in baton rouge , louisiana , that took place the second friday of every month . the tweed run ( along with various other vintage bike rides ) is a well dressed mass which takes place annually in a number of cities across the world . examples of critical mass rides for political movements includes the free tibet rides ( may 2008 ) : free tibet critical mass in columbia , missouri , '' tibetan freedom bike rally '' in san francisco ( aug 2008 ) , and in '' bike ride for tibet '' in london ( aug 2008 ) . san jose is the home to san jose bike party . bike party rides on the third friday of the month with a different starting point and route each time . rides are typically 15–25 miles in length and usually 1000-2000 riders in summer . the ride aims to build a community of cyclists and prove that bikes can co-exist with cars . it is different than critical mass in that it rides after rush hour and obeys all traffic laws and has a pre-determined route . san luis obispo , california , is the home of the '' bikes are happening . '' meetup . bikes are happening . starts at mission plaza at 9:30 & nbsp ; pm on the first thursday of the month . the ride consists of a continuous half mile loop through downtown san luis obispo . since there is no permit for the ride , riders are asked to follow three rules : have fun , respect the community , and obey all traffic laws . in portland , oregon a tactic called a “ bike swarm ” has been used by occupy wall street protesters to separate marching protesters from police . a huge bicycle demonstration is the '' fahrrad-sternfahrt '' in berlin , germany , since 1976 . each year in june and usually have 150.000–250.000 riders . together the 19 rides are more than 600 miles long including two sections of motorway . . critical manners . in san francisco , an event known as '' critical manners '' was created as a response to critical mass . critical manners rides through the city on the second friday of the month , with riders encouraged to obey all traffic laws such as stopping at red lights and signaling . tucson , arizona holds the tuesday night community bike ride as their alternative to critical mass . the weekly ride encourages bicycle commuting and motor vehicle awareness in a peaceful and friendly way . in 2007 there were conversations about starting critical manners in portland , oregon . according to the critical mass book , a similar project known as courteous mass is described as '' an alternative to critical mass . '' an alternative ride named ridecivil formed in seattle in late 2007 . rides are on the second friday of every month , and focus on encouraging civility between motorists , pedestrians and cyclists . the mobile social is a large no-drop , family and first-timer friendly alternative ride in atlanta sponsored by the atlanta bicycle coalition . rides start on 2nd thursday of every month , meeting at woodruff park in downtown atlanta and a focus on promoting local small business and cycling for commuting , social and civic engagement . on june 12 , 2009 , an indianapolis critical manners ride called '' courteous mass '' was launched but is no longer active as of 2016 . on august 14 , 2009 there was a critical manners ride in vancouver , british columbia . the ride consisted of between 70–100 cyclists riding through the downtown core , making all attempts to follow the rules of the road ( stopping at red lights / stop signs , using hand signals to turn , using the right-most lane or bike lane when applicable ) . the event generated some coverage in the local media and was generally deemed a success by the participants , although there were some criticisms . the ride only survived one outing . in kathmandu , nepal , it has been organised since april 2013 . in general cyclists gather at kathmandu durbar square , basantapur and ride round the city before grouping together again . sometimes there are people organizing awareness programmes in this gathering . people who really love cycling and feel awareness about own health , environment they doing critical mass gathering even after the heavy nepal earthquake 2015 with slogan '' quake or shake , sunny or rainy , we have to flow with time for next smile . '' . conflicts involving critical mass . critical mass rides have generated controversy and public opposition . the group has often protested in high-profile events , ranging from major political events to the olympics . some critics claim that critical mass is a deliberate attempt to obstruct traffic and disrupt normal city functions , asserting that individuals taking part refuse to obey traffic laws . some bicycling advocacy groups have expressed concern that the nature of critical mass and altercations with motorists could weaken public support for cyclists . though it does not condone incidents of violence and rudeness , the san francisco bicycle coalition credits critical mass with spotlighting bicycle issues and aiding their efforts in advocating for cyclists .