Roberto Sánchez Vilella

early years and education . sánchez vilella was born in mayagüez , puerto rico , roberto sanchez vilella . national governors association . retrieved 23 january 2012 . to luis sánchez frasqueri and angela vilella vélez and his family moved to ponce , puerto rico when he was five years old . the international who 's who 2004 by europa publications in ponce he attended elementary and secondary schools , including the ponce high school . ponce high school celebra por todo lo alto su centenario . alex david . primera hora . san juan , puerto rico . 3 march 2003 . retrieved 23 january 2012 . ponce high school celebra por todo lo alto su centenario . alex david . primera hora . 3 march 2003 . retrieved 29 december 2011 . after graduation , he attended ohio state university where he graduated with a degree in engineering in 1934 . as an engineer , in 1941 he was president of the ponce chapter of the colegio de ingenieros y agrimensores de puerto rico , the professional organization covering all engineers and land surveyors in puerto rico . 1941 ing . roberto sánchez vilella . colegio de ingenieros y agrimensores de puerto rico , capítulo de ponce . retrieved 29 december 2011 . he then was a professor for a short time at the university of puerto rico . governor . after a long and distinguished career as city manager of the city of san juan , secretary of public works and as the first secretary of state , sánchez vilella was handpicked by governor luis muñoz marín to run as the ppd 's candidate for governor in 1964 . sánchez won the election by a comfortable margin , becoming the second democratically elected governor of the island . during his tenure , sánchez vilella tried to change his party 's membership , urging a younger generation to rise in the friends party 's organization . it could be argued that sánchez vilella was influenced by the youth movement that the island was experiencing countrywide during the 1960s , a period where many social areas in puerto rico , including television , music and sports , were being introduced to fresh , younger personalities . sánchez vilella had public marital problems during his term . in march 1967 , his affair with his 35-year-old , twice-divorced former legislative aide , jeannette ramos , became public . sánchez vilella and his wife of 31 years , then first lady conchita dapena , separated shortly afterwards when governor sánchez vilella announced his intention to seek a divorce in order to marry ramos . in october 1967 , governor sánchez vilella and jeannette ramos married in a civil ceremony held in humacao , puerto rico , just two days after his divorce from dapena was finalized . this was the governor 's second marriage and ramos ' third marriage . his marital problems were brought to center stage during the 1968 gubernatorial campaign , given the still-conservative puerto rican moral values of the time , including the stigmatization of divorce . the affair effectively ended sánchez vilella 's political career and he announced at the time that he would not seek re-election . his goals of revitalization and change led to a public break with former governor , luis muñoz marín , who was still party leader . because of this , the ppd nominated luis negrón lópez for governor in the elections of 1968 . sánchez vilella left the ppd and founded his own party , the partido del pueblo ( the people 's party ) . while his new party lost in the 1968 elections , it caused a considerable percentage of ppd voters to vote for him , indirectly helping luis a . ferré and his new progressive party to win that year . it did not matter that ferré had made a similar split with his partido estadista republicano ( statehood republican party ) due to that party 's decision not to support the statehood status option in the 1967 puerto rican status plebiscite ( ferré created the new progressive party of puerto rico as a consequence ) . there is even speculation that united states navy officials , scorned by sánchez vilella as long-time meddlers in puerto rican affairs ( in a by-now famous episode , sánchez vilella had thrashed a hotline telephone that linked the governor 's office and the local navy command ) used navy intelligence resources to prepare a smear campaign against sánchez vilella and helped ferré with logistics and money for his own gubernatorial campaign . nevertheless , sánchez vilella was finally blamed for the first loss in the history of the ppd . his relationship with former governor muñoz marín was severely strained , but the two friends mended their differences in the late 1970s . in 1972 , sánchez vilella made his third and last run for elective office when he obtained 59,000 votes in his bid to become a representative-at-large , but lost when the supreme court of puerto rico certified the election of puerto rican independence party ( pip ) candidate luis ángel torres , who polled fewer than 150 votes , based on its interpretation of the puerto rico constitution 's rules regarding the election of at-large legislative candidates . . retirement and legacy . after leaving la fortaleza and his unsuccessful house bid in 1972 , sánchez vilella lived a relatively quiet life , serving as a professor at the university of puerto rico 's school of public administration and its law school , and as a radio commentator . the puerto rican sculptor tomás batista created a bust in his honor , and it is located in the city of ponce , at the parque del tricentenario . camina por ponce . government of the autonomous municipality of ponce . retrieved 29 december 2011 . he died on 24 march 1997 and was buried at the panteón nacional román baldorioty de castro in ponce , puerto rico ponce overview : panteón nacional román baldorioty de castro . ponce travel guide . retrieved 23 january 2012 . the rough guide to puerto rico . stephen keeling . page 288 . retrieved 29 december 2011 . which he had claimed as his adoptive city . ponce history museum . inter-american university of puerto rico . retrieved 29 december 2011 . the legacy of sánchez vilella , who was initially judged rather harshly by historians , has been perceived in a better light recently . his term was overshadowed by the legacy of muñoz , his predecessor , and the pdp 's loss in the 1968 elections is still blamed on him . however , he is perceived by many political commentators to have led the most efficient public administration of all puerto rican-born governors , and many long for sánchez vilella 's frankness and political integrity in light of the deteriorating political climate that has developed after he left office . as the perception of his legacy improves , he is now being honored more frequently . the government 's largest building complex at minillas in santurce , has now been named after him , and senate president kenneth mcclintock placed a bust of sánchez vilella in 2007 at the capitol building 's governors ' hall , righting a decades-long omission . sánchez vilella had two daughters , evelyn and vilma , from his marriage to first lady concepción '' conchita '' dapena . he had seven grandchildren born prior to his passing : marta monserrate-kohler ( née marta josefina monserrate sánchez ) , mari monserrate ( née maría de los ángeles monserrate sánchez ) , roberto márquez sánchez , iván monserrate sánchez , m.d . , jorge márquez sánchez , pe , us navy cmdr . luis enrique márquez sánchez , and marie marotte ( née vilmarí márquez sánchez ) . as of 2012 , sánchez vilella had 15 great grandchildren : natalie , mari elsa , esteban andres , cristina beatriz , isaac , jared , sydney , audrey , alexander , iván , david , daniel , jeremy and david joseph . he also had two children , olga elizabeth and roberto josé , from his marriage to jeannette ramos . honors . in 1997 , governor pedro rosselló signed into law a bill introduced by then senator kenneth mcclintock converting a major highway built by sánchez vilella between ponce and mayagüez into the '' roberto sánchez vilella expressway '' , honoring not only his service as governor but as secretary of public works . a new puerto rico highway , pr-66 , named in honor of roberto sánchez vilella was inaugurated on 31 march 2006 . the university of puerto rico 's school of public administration , where he served as a professor , bears his name . see also . list of puerto ricans governors . references . - -