Ski resort

locations . ski resorts are located on both northern and southern hemispheres on all continents except antarctica . they typically are located on mountains , as they require a large slope . they also need to receive at least 50 cm ( 20 in ) of snow ( unless the resort uses dry ski slopes ) . high concentrations of ski resorts are located in the alps , western and eastern north america , and japan . there are also ski resorts in the andes , scattered across central asia , and in australia and new zealand . extreme locations of non-indoor ( at least one ski lift outside ) ski resorts : the most northern ski resort is near tromsø , norway the most southern ski resort is near ushuaia , argentina the ski resort closest to equator from north is near lijiang , china . the ski resort closest to equator from south is near mahlasela , lesotho . types . the ski industry has identified advancing generations of ski resorts : heller , mark f . , editor ( 1979 ) the skier 's encyclopedia paddington press pg 15–18 , 140–145 , 157–159 r . knaffou ( 1978 ) les stations intégrées de sports d'hiver dans les alpes françaises , paris : masson ; first generation : developed around a well-established summer resort or village ( e.g . davos , st . moritz , kitzbühel , chamonix , megève , val gardena ) . ; second generation : created from a non-tourist village or pasture ( e.g . st . anton , lech , courchevel , alpe d'huez , aspen , breckenridge ) . ; third generation or integrated : designed from scratch on virgin territory to be a purpose-built ski resort , all the amenities and services nearby ( e.g . sestriere , flaine , la plagne , isola 2000 ) . ; fourth generation or village resorts : created from virgin territory or around an existing village , but more concerned with traditional uses ( e.g . resorts built since 1975 like shahdag mountain resort , azerbaijan ) . the term ski station is also used , particularly in europe , for a skiing facility which is not located in or near a town or village . a ski resort which is also open for summer activities is often referred to as a mountain resort . facilities and amenities . ski areas have marked paths for skiing known as runs , trails or pistes . ski areas typically have one or more chairlifts for moving skiers rapidly to the top of hills , and to interconnect the various trails . rope tows can also be used on short slopes ( usually beginner hills or bunny slopes ) . larger ski areas may use gondola lifts or aerial tramways for transportation across longer distances within the ski area . ski areas usually have at least a basic first aid facility , and some kind of ski patrol service to ensure that injured skiers are rescued . the ski patrol is usually responsible for rule enforcement , marking hazards , closing individual runs ( if a sufficient level of hazard exists ) , and removing ( dismissing ) dangerous participants from the area . some ski resorts offer lodging options on the slopes themselves , with ski-in and ski-out access allowing guests to ski right up to the door . ski resorts often have other activities , such as snowmobile , sledding , sled , dog sled , ice skating , indoor or outdoor swimming , and hot tub , game rooms , and local forms of entertainment , such as clubs , cinema , theaters and cabarets . après-ski is a term for entertainment , nightlife or social events that occur specifically at ski resorts . flower , raymond ( 1976 ) the history of skiing and other winter sports ; toronto , new york : methuen inc . pp 132-141 these add to the enjoyment of resort-goers and provide something to do besides skiing and snowboarding . the culture originated in the alps , where it is most popular and where skiers often stop at bars on their last run of the day while still wearing all their ski gear . though the word ‘ ski ’ is a derivation of the old norse ‘ skíð ’ via norwegian , the choice of french is likely attributed to the early popularity of such activities in the french alps , with which it was then linked . . environmental impacts . the process of resort development have progressed since the birth of the skiing industry . as the economic role of the skiing industry grew , the environmental impact of resort development has also caused environmental burdens on the natural ecosystem including mountain water levels of lakes , streams , and wildlife . amenities and infrastructure such as concrete buildings , ski-lifts , gondolas , access roads , parking lots , and railways have contributed to the urbanization of mountainous zones . primary ( direct ) impact of resort development . in recent years , the use of snow cannons has increased due to the fall in the volume of snow . in order to obtain good quality snow , dust or bacteria is mixed with the water in the process of snow making to form better snowflakes . not only that the manufacture of artificial snow is costly and uses large amounts of water , but sometimes the creation of artificial lakes is necessary for the snow-making process . snow cannons redistribute a large amount of water unnaturally over the land and freezes the ground vegetation late into spring , preventing growth and leaving pistes bare . with enough excess water , the likelihood of landslide and avalanche may be drastically higher . secondary ( indirect ) impact of resort development . the required space for hotels , flats and secondary residences has increased the amount of space occupied by roads and buildings . while a large number of people requires special water , sewage and electricity systems , a great deal of construction work is needed . access roads and the treatment of salt are responsible for high amounts of erosion at ski resorts . in some cases natural lakes must be tapped or reservoirs built to cater for the population demand . the urbanization of mountainous areas have increased the space of impervious surface , and prevents the natural flow of water into the ground , resulting in a disturbed water table and potential cause of erosion in undesired places . lastly , when building ski lift , its line of operation must be shaped and drained , and large concrete blocks must be set down for pylons . if the pylons are not carefully placed , it could cause damage to surface vegetation . gallery . ruka village ( 8361909910 ) . jpg ruka , finland vista de valle nevado.jpg valle nevado , chile male ciche.jpg małe ciche , poland perisher valley snow fields.jpg perisher ski resort , australia sierra nevada borreguiles 6.jpg sierra nevada ski station , spain shahdag01.jpg shahdag mountain resort , azerbaijan excurision - skiing in tsakhadzor - '11.jpg tsakhkadzor , armenia killington north ridge.jpg killington ski resort , vermont , united states winter park trail.jpg winter park resort , colorado , united states . see also . list of ski areas and resorts private ski area ( north america )