Daniel Drew

biography . drew was born in carmel , new york , in the family of gilbert drew and catherine muckleworth . he was poorly educated and saw hardship after his father , who owned a small cattle farm , died when daniel was fifteen years old . drew enlisted and drilled , though did not see face to face combat in the war of 1812 . after the war , he spent some time with a traveling zoo and then built a successful cattle-droving business . in 1820 , he moved to new york city , where he established himself at the bull 's head tavern in the bowery , a place frequented by drovers and butchers doing business in the city . while running the tavern , he formed a partnership with two other drovers , buying cattle from neighboring counties and bringing them to new york for sale . mccabe jr . , james d . , great fortunes and how they were made , trillarden in 1823 , he married roxanna mead . in 1834 , he entered the steamboat business , purchasing a share of a boat operating on the hudson river . competing with cornelius vanderbilt against the hudson river steamboat association , he ran numerous profitable lines outside of new york city . around this time , drew began to speculate in stocks . he founded the brokerage firm of drew , robinson & company in 1844 , which dissolved a decade later with the death of his partner . after the firm 's dissolution , he continued to work in the brokerage business as an independent operator . in 1857 , drew became a member of the board of directors of the erie railroad and used his position to manipulate the railroad stock price . he joined forces with vanderbilt to rescue the erie from bankruptcy , and also became a director of the new york and harlem railroad , where he collaborated again with vanderbilt to prop up that company 's finances . in 1864 , drew once again struggled with vanderbilt , speculating on the stock of the new york and harlem . drew was short selling , but vanderbilt and his associates bought every share he sold , ultimately causing the stock price to rise from 90 to 285 in five months . drew lost 500,000 . browder , clifford . the money game in old new york : daniel drew and his times . lexington : university of kentucky , 1986 . in 1866 to 1868 , drew engaged in the erie war , in which drew conspired along with fellow directors james fisk and jay gould to issue stock to keep vanderbilt from gaining control of the erie railroad . vanderbilt , unaware of the increase in outstanding shares , kept buying erie stock and sustained heavy losses , eventually conceding control of the railroad to the trio . in 1870 , fisk and gould betrayed drew , manipulating the stock price of the erie railroad and causing him to lose 1.5 million ( fisk was killed in january 1872 by a jealous rival over a mistress ; gould himself would later be swindled out of 1,000,000 worth of erie railroad stock and never controlled the erie railroad ) . the panic of 1873 cost him still more , and by 1876 , drew filed for bankruptcy , with debts exceeding a million dollars and no viable assets . he died in 1879 , dependent on his son for support . . legacy . daniel drew left behind a controversial legacy , but few written records . many details about his life come from bouck white 's 1910 book of daniel drew . white , a socialist activist , claimed to have '' found '' drew 's journal , publishing it as an autobiography . drew biographer clifford browder has called the book '' an enduring fake . '' clifford browder , the money game in old new york : daniel drew and his times , ( lexington : university press of kentucky , 1986 ; 2014 ) , p . 279 daniel drew 's son also contested the authenticity of the work when it was published . clifford browder , the money game in old new york : daniel drew and his times , ( lexington : university press of kentucky , 1986 ) , p . 2 in the introduction to white 's 1915 letters from prison : socialism a spiritual sunrise , the editor similarly notes that the book of daniel drew was '' a work from his white 's pen '' and '' a freely rendered biography of daniel drew . '' bouck white , letters from prison : socialism a spiritual sunrise ( boston : richard g . badger , 1915 ) , p . 6 despite having been established as a forgery , many details and inaccurate quotes from the book of daniel drew are still mistakenly regarded as factual . the longevity of the work 's influence is also in part due to the 1937 film adaptation of the book . the film , the toast of new york , starred edward arnold , cary grant , frances farmer , and jack oakie . details of drew 's life may be gleaned from other sources . at the zenith of his career as a financier , his personal fortune was estimated at 13 million and he was respectfully called '' uncle daniel '' on wall street . drew 's business tactics caused him to often be vilified , however , with white claiming that newspapers depicted drew as '' one of the curses of the market for years past . if he has now received such a blow as will result in his being driven from the street altogether , no one will be sorry for him , '' and '' he holds the honest people of the world to be a pack of fools . '' a devout methodist , drew built churches in port jervis , new york , carmel , and brewster , new york . he also contributed to the founding of drew theological seminary in madison , new jersey , which is now part of drew university , and drew seminary for young ladies in his home town of carmel ( which burnt down and closed in 1904 ) . drew street , in eastern baltimore , maryland , is reportedly named after him due to drew 's involvement as an investor in the baltimore canton company , which owned and developed much of the area through the early 1900s . drew is popularly credited with introducing what would be called '' watered stock '' to the wall street , to describe company shares that were issued by false means including counterfeit stock certificates and unauthorized stock release , resulting in a dilution of ownership . dodd , david l . stock watering : the judicial valuation of property for stock-issue purposes . new york : columbia university press , 1930 . the term came from his time in the livestock business , when he would have his cattle lick salt and drink water before selling them , to increase their weight . the watered stock tactic was used in the erie war of the 1860s , when drew along with james fisk and jay gould blocked arch rival cornelius vanderbilt from getting ownership of the erie railroad . john steele gordon . the scarlet woman of wall street : jay gould , jim fisk , cornelius vanderbilt , the erie railway wars , and the birth of wall street . new york : weidenfeld & nicolson , 1988 . drew biographer clifford browder warns that '' not all the uncle daniel stories should be believed , '' and many stories about his business tactics - especially those recounted by white - should be read with skepticism . clifford browder , the money game in old new york : daniel drew and his times , ( lexington : university press of kentucky , 1986 ; 2014 ) , p . 118 . quotations . daniel drew is famously credited with an expression that describes the nature of short selling : '' he who sells what is n't his ' n , must buy it back or go to pris ' n . '' . see also . list of railroad executives . references .