Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa

background . in 1195 , alfonso viii of castile was defeated by the almohads in the battle of alarcos . after this victory the almohads took several important cities : trujillo , plasencia , talavera , cuenca , and uclés . then , in 1211 , muhammad an-nasir crossed the strait of gibraltar with a powerful army , invaded christian territory , and captured salvatierra castle , the stronghold of the knights of the order of calatrava . the threat to the hispanic christian kingdoms was so great that pope innocent iii called christian knights to a crusade . battle . alfonso crossed the mountain range that defended the almohad camp , sneaking through the despeñaperros pass , led by martín alhaja , a local shepherd who knew the area . the christian coalition caught the moorish army at camp by surprise , and alhaja was granted the hereditary title cabeza de vaca for his assistance to alfonso viii . according to legend , the caliph had his tent surrounded with a bodyguard of slave-warriors . though it was once claimed that these men were chained together to prevent flight , it is considered more likely that this results from a mistranslation of the word '' serried '' , meaning a densely packed formation . the navarrese force led by their king sancho vii broke through this bodyguard . the caliph escaped , but the moors were routed , leaving heavy casualties on the battlefield . according to the king of castile , '' on their side 100,000 armed men fell in battle . '' see lynn hunt , r . po-chia hsia , thomas r . martin , barbara h . rosenwein , and bonnie smith , the making of the west : peoples and cultures : a concise history : volume i : to 1740 , second edition ( new york : bedford/st . martin 's 2007 ) , 391 . the victorious christians seized several prizes of war ; muhammad al-nasir 's tent and standard were delivered to pope innocent iii . riga and rome : henry of livonia and the papal curia , iben fonnesberg-schmidt , crusading and chronicle writing on the medieval baltic frontier , ed . marek tamm , linda kaljundi , carsten selch jensen , ( ashgate publishing , 2011 ) , 224 . christian losses were far fewer , only about 2,000 men ( though not as few as legend had it ) . gomez , miguel dolan , '' the battle of las navas de tolosa : the culture and practice of crusading in medieval iberia . '' phd diss . , university of tennessee , 2011 . the losses were particularly heavy among the orders . those killed included pedro gómez de acevedo ( bannerman of the order of calatrava ) , alvaro fernández de valladares ( comendator of the order of santiago ) , pedro arias ( master of the order of santiago , died of wounds on 3 august ) and gomes ramires ( portuguese master of the knights templar and simultaneously master of leon , castile and portugal ) . ruy díaz ( master of the order of calatrava ) was so grievously wounded that he had to resign his command . muhammad al-nasir died in marrakech shortly afterwards . aftermath . the crushing defeat of the almohads significantly hastened their decline both in the iberian peninsula and in the maghreb a decade later . that gave further impulse to the christian reconquest and sharply reduced the already declining power of the moors in iberia . shortly after the battle , the castilians took baeza and then úbeda , major fortified cities near the battlefield and gateways to invade andalusia . according to a letter from alfonso viii of castile to pope innocent iii , baeza was evacuated and its people moved to úbeda ; alfonso laid siege , killing 60,000 muslims and enslaving many more . according to the latin chronicle of kings of castile the number given is almost 100,000 saracens , including children and women , who were captured . thereafter , alfonso viii 's grandson ferdinand iii of castile took cordova in 1236 , jaén in 1246 , and seville in 1248 ; then he took arcos , medina-sidonia , jerez , and cádiz . in 1252 , ferdinand was preparing his fleet and army for invasion of the almohad lands in africa . but he died in seville on 30 may 1252 , during an outbreak of plague in southern hispania . only ferdinand 's death prevented the castilians from taking the war to the almohad on the mediterranean coast , james i of aragon conquered the balearic islands ( from 1228 over the following four years ) and valencia ( the city capitulated on 28 september 1238 ) . by 1252 the almohad empire was almost finished , at the mercy of another emerging african power . in 1269 a new association of african tribes , the marinids , took control of the maghreb , and most of the former almohad empire was under their rule . later , the marinids tried to recover the former almohad territories in iberia , but they were definitively defeated by alfonso xi of castile and afonso iv of portugal in the battle of río salado , the last major military encounter between large christian and muslim armies in hispania . moorish granada . in 1292 sancho iv took tarifa , key to the control of the strait of gibraltar . granada , almería , and málaga were the only major muslim cities remaining in the iberian peninsula . these three cities were the core of the emirate of granada , ruled by the nasrid dynasty . granada was a vassal state of castile , until finally taken by the catholic monarchs in 1492 . in fiction . harry harrison 's 1972 alternate history/science fiction novel tunnel through the deeps depicts a history where the moors won at las navas de tolosa and retained part of spain into the 20th century . notes . references . alvira cabrer , martín , las navas de tolosa , 1212 : idea , liturgia y memoria de la batalla , sílex ediciones , madrid 2012 ( spanish ) . garcía fitz , francisco , las navas de tolosa , ariel , barcelona 2005 ( spanish ) . garcía fitz , francisco , was las navas a decisive battle ? , in : journal of medieval iberian studies ( jmis ) , vol . 4 , no . 1 , 5–9 . nafziger , george f . and mark w . walton , islam at war : a history , greenwood publishing company , 2003 . o ’ callaghan , joseph f . , reconquest and crusade in medieval spain , university of pennsylvania press , philadelphia pa 2004 . setton , kenneth meyer , a history of the crusades , university of wisconsin press , 1975 . vara thorbeck , carlos , el lunes de las navas , universidad de jaén , 1999 . re-edited with another title : las navas de tolosa : 1212 , la batalla que decidió la reconquista , edhasa , barcelona 2012 ( spanish ) . gomez , miguel dolan , '' the battle of las navas de tolosa : the culture and practice of crusading in medieval iberia . '' phd diss . , university of tennessee , 2011 . . further reading . martín alvira-cabrer , las navas de tolosa , 1212 . idea , liturgia y memoria de la batalla , sílex , madrid , 2012 .