Beryllium copper

properties . beryllium copper is a ductile , weldable , and machinable alloy . like pure copper , it is resistant to oxidizing acid like hydrochloric acid and carbonic acid , to plastic decomposition products , to abrasive wear , and to galling . it can be heat-treated for increased strength , durability , and electrical conductivity . beryllium copper attains the greatest strength ( to of any copper-based alloy . it has good thermal conductivity ( 62 btu/ft-deg.f-h ) 3-5 times more than tool steel . it has a solid melting point of 1590 degrees fahrenheit and 1800 degrees fahrenheit liquid melting point . it has an excellent capacity for being hot formed . c17200 copper has the strength and hardness similar to that of steel and rockwell hardness properties in its peaked age condition are in the range of 200 ksi and rc45 . c17200 has excellent corrosion resistant properties when exposed to harsh conditions such as sea water , and down-hole environments . it will withstand sulfide or chloride stress corrosion cracking , and will resist the effects of carbon dioxide and hydrogen embrittlement . copper alloys in general have always been considered non-sparking . c17200 has the strength to withstand the use of a hand and mechanical tools . these non-sparking features are best applied in explosive environments such as in the oil & gas and gun powder industries . . toxicity . in solid form and as finished objects , beryllium copper presents no known health hazard . however , inhalation of dust , mist , or fume containing beryllium can cause the serious lung condition , berylliosis . that disease affects primarily the lungs , restricting the exchange of oxygen between the lungs and the bloodstream . the international agency for research on cancer ( iarc ) lists beryllium as a group 1 human carcinogen . the national toxicology program ( ntp ) also lists beryllium as a carcinogen . copper beryllium alloy containing less than 2.5 % beryllium ( in copper ) is not designated as a carcinogen . the current osha pels for pure beryllium are 2 micrograms/m3 as an 8-hour twa , 5 micrograms/m3 as a ceiling not to be exceeded for more than 30 minutes at a time , and 25 micrograms/m3 as a peak exposure never to be exceeded . the osha limits have been in place for nearly 30 years and have not been revised in that time . the american conference of governmental industrial hygienists ( acgih ) current threshold limit value ( tlv ) for beryllium is 0.05 micrograms/m3 averaged over an 8-hour work shift updated 02/23/2010 . uses . thumb beryllium copper is a non-ferrous alloy used in springs , spring wire , load cells , and other parts that must retain their shape under repeated stress and strain . it has high electrical conductivity , and is used in low-current contacts for batteries and electrical connectors . beryllium copper is non-sparking but physically tough and nonmagnetic , fulfilling the requirements of atex directive for zones 0 , 1 , and 2 . beryllium copper screwdrivers , pliers , wrench , cold chisels , knives , and hammers are available for environments with explosive hazards , such as oil rigs , coal mines , and grain elevators . an alternative metal sometimes used for non-sparking tools is aluminium bronze . compared to steel tools , beryllium copper tools are more expensive and not as strong , but the properties of beryllium copper in hazardous environments may outweigh the disadvantages . some other uses include : some percussion instruments for its consistent tone and resonance , especially tambourine and triangles . ultra-low temperature cryogenic equipment , such as dilution refrigerators , because of its mechanical strength and relatively high thermal conductivity in this temperature range . moulds for manufacturing plastic containers ( including virtually every plastic milk jug ) , with the blow molding process . armour piercing bullets , though such usage is unusual because bullets made from steel alloys are much less expensive and have similar properties . measurement-while-drilling ( mwd ) tools in the directional drilling industry . a non-magnetic alloy is required , as magnetometers are used for field-strength data received from the tool . also for its high strength combined with anti-galling properties . servicing magnetic resonance imaging ( mri ) machines , where high strength magnetic fields make the use of ferrous tools dangerous , and where magnetic materials in the field can disturb the image . gaskets used to create an rf-tight ( resistant to radio frequency leakage ) , electronic seal on doors used with emc testing and anechoic chambers . for a time , beryllium copper was used in the manufacture of golf clubs , particularly wedges and putters . though some golfers prefer the feel of becu club heads , regulatory issues and high costs have made becu clubs difficult to find in current production . kiefer plating ( defunct ) of elkhart , indiana built beryllium-copper trumpet for the schilke music co . of chicago . these light-weight bells produce a sound preferred by some musicians . beryllium copper wire is produced in many forms : round , square , flat and shaped , in coils , on spools and in straight lengths . beryllium copper valve seats and guides are used in high performance four-stroke engines with coated titanium valves . becu dissipates heat from the valve as much as seven times faster than powdered steel or iron seats & guides . the softer becu reduces valve wear and increases valve life . alloys . beryllium copper ( c17200 & c17300 ) is an age-hardening alloy which attains the highest strength of any copper base alloy . it may be age hardened after forming into springs , intricate forms or complex shapes . it is valued for spring properties , corrosion resistance , stability , conductivity , and low creep . tempered beryllium copper is c17200 & c17300 that has been age hardened and cold drawn . no further heat treatment is necessary beyond a possible light stress relief . it is sufficiently ductile to wind on its own diameter and can be formed into springs and most shapes . tempered wire is most useful where the properties of beryllium copper are desired , but age hardening of finished parts is not practical . c17510 and c17500 beryllium copper alloys are age-hardenable and provide good electrical conductivity , physical properties , and endurance . they are used in springs and wire where electrical conduction or retention of properties at elevated temperatures is important . high strength beryllium copper alloys contain as much as 2.7 % beryllium ( cast ) , or 1.6-2 % beryllium with about 0.3 % cobalt ( wrought ) . the strength is achieved by age hardening . the thermal conductivity of these alloys lies between steels and aluminium . the cast alloys are frequently formed with injection molds . the wrought alloys are designated by uns as c17200 to c17400 , the cast alloys are c82000 to c82800 . the hardening process requires rapid cooling of the annealed metal , resulting in a solid state solution of beryllium in copper , which is then kept at 200-460 °c for at least an hour , producing a precipitation of metastable beryllide crystals in the copper matrix . overaging beyond the equilibrium phase depletes the beryllide crystals and reduces the strength . the beryllides in cast alloys are similar to those in wrought alloys . high conductivity beryllium copper alloys contain as much as 0.7 % beryllium with some nickel and cobalt . the thermal conductivity of these alloys is greater than aluminium and slightly less than pure copper and are often used as electrical contacts .