Knuckleball

origins . the origins of the knuckleball are unclear . toad ramsey of the louisville colonels in the old american association—his pitch likely resembled the knuckle curve—and eddie cicotte of the chicago white sox , who in 1908 was nicknamed '' knuckles '' , are two possible creators of the pitch . other accounts attribute the pitch 's creation to charles h . druery , a pitcher in the blue ridge league . in 1917 , druery taught the pitch to eddie rommel who became successful with it for the philadelphia athletics . . grip and motion . image : eddiecicotte55.jpg right thumb 167px eddie cicotte , who is sometimes credited with inventing the knuckleball as used by cicotte , the knuckleball was originally thrown by holding the ball with the knuckles , hence the name of the pitch . ed summers , a pittsburgh teammate of cicotte who adopted the pitch and helped develop it , modified it by holding the ball with his fingertips and using the thumb for balance . this grip can also include digging the fingernails into the surface of the ball . the fingertip grip is more commonly used today by knuckleball pitchers , like retired boston red sox pitcher tim wakefield , who had a knuckleball with a lot of movement . there are other prominent knuckleball pitchers like hall of famer phil niekro , who had a very effective knuckler and knuckle curve , and cy young award winning pitcher r.a . dickey . however , young pitchers with smaller hands tend to throw the knuckleball with their knuckles . sometimes young players will throw the knuckleball with their knuckles flat against the ball , giving it less spin but also making it difficult to throw any significant distance . regardless of how the ball is gripped , the purpose of the knuckleball is to have the least possible amount of rotational spin . created by the act of throwing a ball , the ball 's trajectory is significantly affected by variations in airflow caused by differences between the smooth surface of the ball and the stitching of its seams . the asymmetric drag that results tends to deflect the trajectory toward the side with the stitches . over the distance from the pitcher 's mound to home plate , the effect of these forces is that the knuckleball can flutter , dance , jiggle , or curve in two different directions during its flight . a pitch thrown completely without spin is less desirable , however , than one with a very slight spin . the ball completes between one-quarter and one-half a rotation on its way from the pitcher to the batter ; the position of the stitches changes as the ball travels , affecting the drag that gives the ball its motion , thus making its flight erratic . even a ball thrown without rotation will '' flutter '' , due to the '' apparent wind '' it feels as its trajectory changes throughout its flight path . hitting a knuckleball is different enough from other aspects of baseball that players specifically prepare for the pitch during batting practice before games they expect it in . according to physicist robert adair , due to the physiological limitation of human reaction time , a breaking knuckleball may be impossible to hit except by luck . if a knuckleball does not change direction in mid-flight , however , then it is easy to hit due to its lack of speed . ( a common phrase for hitting a knuckleball is '' if it 's low , let it go ; if it 's high , let it fly '' ; meaning that a batter should attempt to hit a knuckleball only if it crosses the plate high in the strike zone due to lack of break . ) since it typically only travels , far slower than the average major league fastball , it can be hit very hard if there is no movement . one 2007 study offered evidence for this conclusion . to reduce the chances of having the knuckleball get hit for a home run , some pitchers will impart a slight topspin so that if no force causes the ball to dance , it will move downward in flight . another drawback is that runners on base can usually advance more easily than if a conventional pitcher is on the mound . this is due to both the knuckleball 's low average speed and its erratic movement , which force the catcher to keep focusing on the ball even after the runners start stealing their next bases . however , since a typical major league starting rotation exceeds the length of a series against any one opponent , one way a manager can mitigate this disadvantage is to adjust his team 's pitching rotation so as to eliminate ( or at least minimize ) games in which a knuckleballer would pitch against teams with a preponderance of fast baserunners . a paper presented at the 2012 conference of the international sports engineering association argues , based on pitchf/x data , that knuckleballs do not make large and abrupt changes in their trajectories on the way to home plate—or at least , no more abrupt than a normal pitch . it speculates that the appearance of abrupt shifting may be due to the unpredictability of the changes in direction . . naming and relationship to other pitches . image : wakefield throws a knuckleball.jpg thumb right 267px tim wakefield in his throwing motion , showing his grip of the knuckleball since it developed during a period when the spitball was legal and commonly used , and was similarly surprising in its motion , the knuckleball was sometimes called the '' dry spitter '' . cicotte was widely reported to throw both the knuckleball and a variant on the spitball known as a '' shine ball '' ( because he would '' shine '' one side of a dirty ball by rubbing it on his uniform ) . however , cicotte called the shine ball '' a pure freak of the imagination '' , claiming that he did this to disconcert hitters and that the pitch was still a knuckleball . other names for the knuckleball have generally alluded to its motion and slower speed . these include the flutterball , the floater , the dancer , the butterfly ball ( the name for the pitch used by french language game commentators employed by the montreal expos ) , the ghostball , and the bug . the knuckle curve has a somewhat similar name because of the grip used to throw it ( also with the knuckles or fingernails ) , but it is generally thrown harder and with spin . the resulting motion of the pitch more closely resembles a curveball , which explains the combination name . toad ramsey , a pitcher from 1885 to 1890 , is credited in some later sources with being the first knuckleballer , apparently based primarily on accounts of how he gripped the ball ; however , based on more contemporary descriptions of his pitch as an '' immense drop ball '' , it may be that his pitch was a form of knuckle curve . two later pitchers , jesse haines and freddie fitzsimmons , were sometimes characterized as knuckleball pitchers even by their contemporaries , but in their cases it again refers to a harder-thrown , curving pitch that would probably not be called a knuckleball today . historically , the term '' knuckle curve '' had a usage that was different from what it has in the game today . many current pitchers throw a curveball using a grip with the index finger touching the ball with the knuckle or fingertip ( also called a spike curve ) . this modern pitch is unrelated to the knuckleball . rarity . , only about 70 major league baseball pitchers have regularly used the knuckleball during their careers , and its use has become rarer over time . this can be attributed to a variety of factors . the first is selection bias in scouting . because the speed of any prospect 's pitch is one of the quickest and easiest metrics in judging the skill of the prospect , the knuckleball , which is thrown slower than any other pitch , gets overlooked . tim wakefield argues that '' the problem is that baseball is so radar gun-oriented . '' former knuckleballer and pitching coach charlie hough says that the increased rarity of the knuckleball is due to scouts increasingly looking only for the best arm . this effect is increasing over time as the modern game continues to emphasize power in pitching and average pitch speed increases . hoyt wilhelm , phil niekro , and jesse haines , three pitchers who primarily relied on the knuckleball , have been inducted into the baseball hall of fame . additionally , ted lyons , another member of the hall of fame , relied heavily on the knuckleball after injuring his arm in 1931 . niekro was given the nickname '' knucksie '' during his career . other prominent knuckleball pitchers have included josh turley , joe niekro ( phil 's brother ) , charlie hough , dave jolly , ben flowers , wilbur wood , barney schultz , tom candiotti , bob purkey , steve sparks , eddie rommel , tim wakefield , steven wright , and dickey . during the 1945 season , with talent depleted by call-ups to fight in world war ii , the washington senators had a pitching rotation which included four knuckleball pitchers ( dutch leonard , johnny niggeling , mickey haefner , and roger wolff ) who combined for 60 complete games and 60 wins , carrying the senators to second place . in november 2008 , it was announced that 16-year-old knuckleballer eri yoshida was drafted as the first woman ever to play in japanese professional baseball for the kobe 9 cruise of the kansai independent baseball league . on march 2 , 2010 , she trained with tim wakefield at the boston red sox minor-league training facility . and on april 8 , 2010 , she signed with the chico outlaws , debuting on may 29 , 2010 . another factor contributing to the rarity of the knuckleball is the difficulty of throwing the pitch . r.a . dickey estimates that it takes at least a year to grasp its fundamentals . the knuckleball is radically different from any other pitch in a pitcher 's arsenal , being less predictable and difficult to control . it is for this reason that the knuckleball is widely regarded as unreliable , and knuckleball pitchers are prone to extended slumps , such as when tim wakefield was released from the pirates in a mid-career slump during spring training in 1995 . another reason for the difficulty of the knuckleball is due to the network effect . because there are so few knuckleball pitchers , the resources for learning and improving the knuckleball are few compared to more common pitches . pitching coaches often struggle with knuckleball pitchers due to a lack of experience with the pitch . '' i think the hardest thing for me is just the alone-ness that you feel sometimes because nobody else really does it , '' said wakefield . coaches have also been seen as a barrier to succeeding with the knuckleball . jim bouton said , '' coaches do n't respect it . you can pitch seven good innings with a knuckleball , and as soon as you walk a guy they go , 'see , there 's that damn knuckleball . ' '' r.a . dickey argues that , '' for most managers , it takes a special manager to be able to really trust it – the bad and the good of it . coaches are quick to banish the pitch after one bad outing . this was common due to the amount of practice one must put into the pitch . and traditionally , if you look at tim wakefield , joe and phil niekro , tom candiotti , wilbur wood , hoyt wilhelm and all the guys that threw it , through their success they had guys who really believed in what it could do long-term and committed to giving them the ball every fifth day to do it . '' in 1991 , hall of fame catcher rick ferrell was quoted as saying , '' i think the knuckleball is fading out . '' ferrell knew knuckleballs : he had the task of being the washington senators catcher in 1944-45 , when the senators had four knuckleball pitchers in their starting rotation . furthermore , other factors , such as a dearth of knuckleball teachers and the dramatic increase in the running game -- -base stealing is often easier against knuckleball pitchers -- -may be contributing to its demise . perhaps as a result , knuckleball pitchers often view themselves as members of an exclusive club , with its own uniform number ( 49 , first worn by wilhelm ) and leader ( phil niekro , whom the new yorker in 2004 called '' the undisputed grand poobah '' of the group after wilhelm 's death ) . because they can not discuss pitching with non knuckleball-using teammates , they often share tips and insights even if on competing teams , and believe that they have a responsibility to help younger players develop the pitch . when , in 2012 , r . a . dickey became the first cy young award-winning knuckleball pitcher , he called the award '' a victory for … the knuckleball fraternity '' , and of the dozens of phone calls he received after the announcement , niekro 's was the only one he answered . when originally developed , the knuckleball was used by a number of pitchers as simply one pitch in their repertoire , usually as part of changing speeds from their fastball . it is almost never used in a mixed repertoire today , however , and some believe that to throw the knuckleball effectively with some semblance of control over the pitch , one must throw it more or less exclusively . at the same time , pitchers rarely focus on the knuckleball if they have reasonable skill with more standard pitches . unlike conventional pitches , which perform fast results without much exertion , a knuckleball pitcher must train his body and muscle memory to be able to execute a 65 & nbsp ; mph pitch with less than one rotation . , steven wright of the boston red sox was considered to be the last active knuckleballer in the mlb ; he has since been released from the team . minor leaguer mickey jannis of the binghamton rumble ponies also throws the knuckleball . on september 18 , 2020 , the first knuckleball thrown in 2020 was by the new york mets ' todd frazier , normally a third baseman , in a 15-2 blowout loss to atlanta braves . . use in pitching . the knuckleball does provide some advantages to its practitioners . it does not need to be thrown hard ( in fact , throwing too hard may diminish its effectiveness ) , and is therefore less taxing on the arm . knuckleball pitchers can throw more innings than other pitchers , and , requiring less time to recover after pitching , can pitch more frequently . the lower physical strain also fosters longer careers . some knuckleballers have continued to pitch professionally well into their forties : tim wakefield , hoyt wilhelm , r.a . dickey , charlie hough , tom candiotti , and the brothers phil niekro and joe niekro . pitchers like bouton have found success as knuckleballers after their ability to throw hard declined . indeed , bouton 's famous best-selling book ball four ( 1970 ) , while scandalous at the time for its unvarnished and often uncomplimentary portrayal of player behavior and coaching small-mindedness , is primarily a tale of the ups and downs of trying to hang on in the major leagues as a knuckleball pitcher . . catching . as with hitters , the unpredictable motion of the knuckleball makes it one of the most difficult pitches for catchers to handle , and they tend to be charged with a significantly higher number of passed balls . former catcher bob uecker , who caught for phil niekro , said , '' the way to catch a knuckleball is to wait until it stops rolling and pick it up . '' bouton said , '' catchers hate it . nobody likes to warm up with you . '' according to adair , the 150 & nbsp ; ms minimum human reaction time may be too slow to adjust to a knuckleball 's changing direction . a team will sometimes employ a catcher solely for games started by a knuckleballer . the '' knuckleball catcher '' is equipped with an oversized knuckleball catcher 's mitt , similar to a first baseman 's glove ; doug mirabelli , formerly of the red sox , used a softball catcher 's mitt . the boston red sox , in their 2004 world championship season , had mirabelli regularly catching in place of jason varitek when tim wakefield was pitching . this use of a '' specialist '' catcher continued into the 2008 season following the signing of kevin cash , and 2009 saw george kottaras fulfill this role . on august 26 , the first time victor martinez caught wakefield , he used a first baseman 's glove , instead of a regular catcher 's mitt . for a catcher , a key disadvantage to using a first baseman 's glove mitt is that they are not designed for easy extraction of the ball from the glove , making it harder to prevent baserunners from stealing . on occasion , teams have traded knuckleball pitchers and their catchers in the same transaction . in baseball terminology the pitcher and catcher together are known as a '' battery '' , and having a catcher experienced in catching a knuckleball pitcher is preferable , so the trade of pitcher and catcher together is sometimes referred to as a '' batteries included '' trade . for example , josh thole and mike nickeas went with dickey when the pitcher was traded to the toronto blue jays in late 2012 , and the team later signed henry blanco , who also caught for dickey . the record for passed balls in an inning ( 4 ) was first set by ray katt of the new york giants in 1954 , catching hoyt wilhelm . it was tied by geno petralli of the texas rangers in 1987 while trying to catch knuckleball pitcher charlie hough , and tied again in 2013 when ryan lavarnway of the boston red sox had four in the first inning , catching knuckleballer steven wright in wright 's first major league start . varitek holds the postseason record with three passed balls in the 13th inning of 2004 american league championship series game 5 while catching wakefield . the passed balls allowed yankee gary sheffield to reach first after a strikeout and then advance to second and third ; but did n't score , and the red sox won the game . in 2013 , j . p . arencibia set a toronto blue jays franchise record by allowing four passed balls in the season opener ( a 4–2 loss ) while catching for knuckleballer r.a . dickey . he never caught for dickey again . use in other sports . cricket . the knuckleball is also employed by cricket fast bowlers zaheer khan , bhuvneshwar kumar and andrew tye as their slower delivery . the physics of the operation are largely the same . however , the seam on a cricket ball is equatorial , and thus the extent of erratic movement is reduced due to the symmetry ( at least in the conventional release position where the planes of the ball 's trajectory and the seam are nearly co-planar ) . in addition , the lack of backspin does shorten the length of the delivery , and also tends to make the ball skid off the pitch—faster than it would come off a normal delivery . . volleyball . in volleyball , the float serve involves hitting the volleyball in such a way to minimize the rotation of the ball , causing unpredictability in the ball ’ s movement . when done correctly , the float serve is hard for opponents to predict where the ball will end up , thus rendering it hard to pass . association football . in association football or soccer , the method of striking the ball so that it produces almost no spinning motion during its flight has been colloquially described as '' knuckleballing '' by commentators , due to the ball 's motion that resembles a baseball thrown with a knuckleball pitch . this shooting technique is frequently used by players for long-range shots and free kicks . a successful knuckleball shot will move , dip , or wobble in the air unpredictably , making it difficult for the goalkeeper to save . this technique has also been described as the '' dry leaf '' or '' dead leaf '' ( '' folha seca '' in portuguese ) , the '' tomahawk '' , or even '' the accursed '' ( '' maledetta '' in italian ) . one of the main proponents of this shooting technique was brazilian playmaker juninho pernambucano , who popularised it in particular during his time with lyon in the mid 2000s ; however , it is commonly thought to have been invented by compatriot didi , '' kings of the free-kick '' . fifa.com . retrieved 20 may 2014 although italian forward giuseppe meazza before him is also credited with using the technique . this technique has also been used and even adapted by several other players , such as andrea pirlo , ronaldinho , cristiano ronaldo , didier drogba , and gareth bale . . see also . list of knuckleball pitchers knuckleball ! , 2012 documentary . references . notes bibliography . external links . knuckleball headquarters – comprehensive collection of information about the pitch and those who have thrown it the ( mostly ) complete list of knuckleball pitchers – a list of just about everyone who 's thrown the pitch in the major leagues , with links to each player 's career stats . npr.org on the red sox 's re-acquisition of doug mirabelli