William Lily (grammarian)

life . lily was born in c . 1468 at odiham , hampshire and he entered the university of oxford in 1486 . after graduating in arts he went on a pilgrimage to jerusalem . on his return journey he put in at rhodes , which was still occupied by the knights of st john , under whose protection many greeks had taken refuge after the capture of constantinople by the turks . he then went on to italy , where he attended the lectures of angelo sabino , m . audin , translated by edward g . kirwan browne , the life of henry the eighth and history of the schism of england ( london , 1852 ) , p . 422 online . sulpitius verulanus and pomponius laetus at rome , and of egnatius at venice . after his return he settled in london—where he became friends with thomas more—as a private teacher of grammar , and is believed to have been the first who taught greek in that city . in 1510 john colet , dean of st paul 's , who was then founding the school which afterwards became famous , appointed lily the first high master in 1512 . colet 's correspondence with erasmus shows he first offered the position to the dutchman , who refused it , before considering lily . ward and waller ranked lily '' with grocyn and linacre as one of the most erudite students of greek that england possessed '' . lily 's pupils included william paget , john leland , antony denny , thomas wriothesley and edward north , 1st baron north . carley , '' leland , john ( c.1503–1552 ) '' the school became a paragon of classical scholarship . he died of the plague in london on 25 february 1522 and was buried in the north churchyard of old st paul 's cathedral . his grave and monument were destroyed in the great fire of london in 1666 . a modern monument in the crypt lists his as one of the important graves lost . works . lily is famous not only as one of the pioneers of greek learning , but as one of the joint-authors of a book , familiar to many generations of students up to the 19th century , the old eton latin grammar or accidence . this brevissima institutio , a sketch by colet , corrected by erasmus and worked upon by lily , contains two portions the author of which is indisputably lily . these are the lines on the genders of nouns , beginning propria quae maribus , and those on the conjugation of verbs beginning as in praesenti . the carmen de moribus bears lily 's name in the early editions ; but thomas hearne asserts that it was written by leland , who was one of his scholars , and that lily only adapted it . however erasmus himself stated : at colet 's command , this book was written by william lily , a man of no ordinary skill , a wonderful craftsman in the instruction of boys . when he had completed his work , it was handed over to , nay rather thrust upon , me for emendation . easier for me to do ) . so that lily ( endowed as he is with too much modesty ) did not permit the book to appear with his name , and i ( with my sense of candour ) did not feel justified that the book should bear my name when it was the work of another . since both of us refused our names it was published anonymously , colet merely commending it in a preface . george a . plimpton , the education of shakespeare : illustrated from the schoolbooks in use in his time , oxford university press , london , 1933 , p . 85 . an edition published in 1534 was entitled rudimenta grammatices . various other parts were added and a stable form finally appeared in 1540 . in 1542 henry viii authorised it as the sole latin grammar textbook to be used in education and schools ; it has been suggested that henry commissioned the book but the interval between initial publication and authorisation argue against this . with corrections and revisions , wm . lilly ( 1513 ) a shorte introduction of grammar , oxford by the theater , link from google books it was used for more than three hundred years . it was so widely used by elizabethan scholars that shakespeare was able to refer to it in the second scene of act iv of titus andronicus , quote from it in the first scene of act ii of henry iv , part 1 ( '' homo is a common name to all men '' ) and allude to it in the first scene of act iv of the merry wives of windsor and scene 1 of act iv of much ado about nothing . part of the grammar is a poem , '' carmen de moribus '' , which lists school regulations in a series of pithy sentences , using a broad vocabulary , and examples of most of the rules of latin grammar that were part of an english grammar school curriculum . ( see latin mnemonics . ) the poem is an early reinforcement of part of the reading list in erasmus ' de ratione studii of the classical authors who should be included in the curriculum of a latin grammar school . specifically , the authors derived from erasmus are cicero , terence , and virgil . when john milton wrote his latin grammar accedence commenc't grammar ( 1669 ) , over 60 percent of his 530 illustrative quotations were taken from lily 's grammar . besides the brevissima institutio , lily wrote a variety of latin pieces and translations from greek , both in prose and verse . some of the latter are printed along with the latin verses of sir thomas more in progymnasmata thomae mori et gulielmi lylii sodalium ( 1518 ) . another volume of latin verse ( antibossicon ad gulielmum hormannum , 1521 ) is directed against a rival schoolmaster and grammarian , robert whittington , who had '' under the feigned name of bossus , much provoked lily with scoffs and biting verses . '' a sketch of lily 's life by his son george lily was written for paulus jovius , who was collecting for his history the lives of the learned men of great britain . notes . sources . anders , henry r . d . , shakespeare 's books : a dissertation on shakespeare 's reading and the immediate sources of his works ( new york : ams , 1965 ) hedwig gwosdek ed . : lily 's grammar of latin in english : an introduction of the eyght partes of speche , and the construction of the same , oxford : oxford univ . press , 2013 , joseph hirst lupton , formerly sur-master of st paul 's school , in the dictionary of national biography . ward , a . w . and waller , a.r . ( eds . ) the cambridge history of english and american literature . volume iii : renascence and reformation ( cambridge : university press , 1908 ) . external links . archival material at