Yawl

the sailing rig . origins . yawl rig appears to have originated in the early 19th century . working craft of this type include the later versions of the falmouth quay punt - and interest in this local type were taken by dixon kemp , an authority on yacht racing , in 1875 . yachts were rigged as yawls as early as 1814 . john macgregor had his 1867-built rob roy designed as a yawl . ( macgregor had a number of boats , all of the same name . ) british and european racing yachts were rigged as yawls from the second half of the 1870s , with a resurgence in popularity from 1896 , when a change to the handicap rating system gave advantages to yawls . they remained prominent in handicap classes through the 1920s - with yachts like rendezvous ( built 1913 ) measuring and setting of sail . . rig characteristics . ( single handed circumnavigator ) used a mizzen staysail on his yawl lively lady but did not set a mizzen - he felt it was of little value ( and it would interfere with the hasler self-steering gear ) . . current examples . yawls are currently popular in cruising dinghies . the drascombe lugger is a good example of this type . with the mizzen sheeted to an outrigger or boomkin and a jib set on a bowsprit , the rig extends a lot horizontally . this allows the sail area to have a lower centre of pressure than , for example , a bermudan sloop . this gives a lower heeling moment . the hull type . before '' yawl '' became the name of a rig , it was a hull type . generally , a yawl is a double-ended , clinker built open boat , which can be worked under sail or oar . they are considered to have viking or norse influence in their design . most were operated from a beach or a small harbour , with the boat being hauled out of the water when not in use . . scotland : yawl/yole/yoal . in the north of scotland , yawl is cognate with yole or yoal . there are examples in both shetland and orkney , with type and local variations in design . the shetland boats include foureens and sixareens - the names denote the number of oars they were designed to use . both also had sailing rigs - usually a single masted dipping lug . a sixareen was typically 24 to 25 long overall . the foureen was around overall . other smaller shetland types were the yoal and the fair isle yole . sixareens and foureens were used in the haaf fishery - catching white fish species such as cod and saithe with longline fishing . these undecked sixareens operated between 30 and 50 miles offshore -sometimes within sight of norway . the foureens ventured up to 20 miles offshore ( where they '' sank the land '' - i.e . when the land had just sunk below the horizon , it was 20 miles away ) . until the 19th century , most of these boats were built in norway and then transported to shetland disassembled , where they were put back together again . it appears that the norwegian boatbuilders built specific types of craft to meet the needs of the shetland market , as these boats differed somewhat from the ones used in norway . surviving examples and a replica of some of these shetland boats are in the shetland museum . the orkney yoles had more beam than their shetland counterparts . this allowed slightly more sail to be set , so these were 2 masted with standing lug rigs . norfolk and suffolk beach yawls . beach yawls could be found along a section of the east anglian coast - mainly from winterton in the north to aldeburgh in the south . ( they were called '' yols '' by the men who sailed in them . ) each boat was operated by a '' company '' that shared the profits of operations between their members , subject to strict rules . the members were entitled to serve as crew when the yawl was launched . these companies are known to have existed at the start of the 18th century and yawls operated right through the 19th century , until steam power , efficient tugs and lifeboats put the last of them out of business by the start of the 20th century . the yawls serviced the ships anchored in yarmouth roads , took pilots to and from ships , carried stores and performed salvage work . the royal navy often had warships anchored in yarmouth roads , so providing a lot of work additional to that from the many merchant ships that passed along the east anglian coast . the norfolk and suffolk beach yawls were probably the fastest open boats ever built . 14 knots could be achieved in the right conditions , and 16 knots has been measured for one of these boats . clinker-built and double-ended , the hulls were typically long with a beam of . reindeer , built in 1838 was at the top of the size range , at long ( with a beam ) . whilst the earlier boats had three lug-rigged masts , in common with other types of british lugger , from the middle of the 19th century the mainmast was usually dispensed with to give a dipping lug foresail and a standing lug mizzen . the foresail tack fastened to an iron bumkin protruding from the stemhead . the mizzen sheeted to an outrigger ( called an '' outligger '' by the crews of these boats ) . the fastest type of beach yawl was used for taking pilots and passengers out to ships . the slightly shorter and beamier '' bullock boats '' carried supplies out to ships moored in the roads and would land catches of herrings from luggers . beach yawls were kept ready for launching at a moment 's notice . a lookout tower was manned to spot any ship signalling for a pilot or in distress . there was competition between each company to get any potential work . the boats were run down the shingle beach on greased wooden skids laid at right angles to their route . men ran alongside to hold the boat upright as it started to move , crew members scrambled aboard and others passed bags of ballast on board . as the boat entered the water she was given a final shove with a spar . then each boat raced to get the work on offer . large crews were needed : 25 men would be common . they were fully occupied if going to windward . on tacking , the foresail would be dipped behind the mast to set on the other side , and the halyard ( which was made fast at the gunwale to help support the mast ) and burton ( a moveable stay ) would be shifted to windward and hauled taught again , whilst others would be heaving bags of shingle ballast to the new windward side of the bilge . some would be continuously baling to rid the boat of the spray that came aboard . the most important man aboard tended the foresheet , which was never cleated , but held in hand after taking a couple of turns around the main sampson post . if a gust was too strong , the sheet would instantly be eased to prevent a capsize . if worked under oar , a yawl would have 10 or more oars a side - though the beach companies usually operated a gig in light weather if delivering or collecting a pilot , as they were faster under oars . ship 's boat . the yawl as a type of royal navy ship 's boat appeared early in the second half of the 17th century . in early mentions , they were sometimes referred to as '' norway yawls '' , so showing a scandinavian influence . later yawls were built in deal . both were clinker built , but those built in deal had transom sterns . when navy dockyards started to copy the deal-built boats , they moved to carvel construction . the size of an individual yawl would vary depending on the size of the ship to which she belonged - though the yawl was usually the smallest of the various boats carried . in 1817 , royal navy yawls were issued in 8 different lengths between 26 ft and 16 ft . after this date , the yawl was less commonly used . the sailing rig was two-masted , typically setting identical sprit-sails . the number of oars depended on the size of the boat , 8 and 6 being common , with some rowed by just 4 oars , . see also . concordia yawls yoal