Élie Metchnikoff

life and work . mechnikov was born in the village ivanovka , kharkov governorate , russian empire , now located in the dvorichna raion in ukraine . he was the youngest of five children of ilya ivanovich mechnikov , an officer of the imperial guard . his mother , emilia lvovna ( nevakhovich ) , the daughter of the writer löb nevakhovich , largely influenced him on his education , especially in science . the family name mechnikov is a translation from romanian/moldavian , since his father was a descendant of the chancellor yuri stefanovich , the grandson of nicolae milescu . the word '' mech '' is a russian translation of the romanian/moldavian '' spadă '' ( sword ) , which originated with spătar ( sword-bearer ) . his elder brother lev became a prominent geographer and sociologist . he entered kharkov lycée in 1856 where he developed his interest in biology . convinced by his mother to study natural sciences instead of medicine , in 1862 he tried to study biology at the university of würzburg , but the german academic session would not start by the end of the year . so he enrolled at kharkov university for natural sciences , completing his four-year degree in two years . in 1864 he went to germany to study marine fauna on the small north sea island of heligoland . he was advised by the botanist ferdinand cohn to work with rudolf leuckart at the university of giessen . it was in leuckart 's laboratory that he made his first scientific discovery of alternation of generations ( sexual and asexual ) in nematodes and then at munich academy . in 1865 , while at giessen , he discovered intracellular digestion in flatworm , and this study influenced his later works . moving to naples the next year he worked on a doctoral thesis on the embryonic development of the cuttle-fish sepiola and the crustacean nebalia . a cholera epidemic in the autumn of 1865 made him move to the university of göttingen , where he worked briefly with w . m . keferstein and jakob henle . in 1867 he returned to russia to get his doctorate with alexander kovalevsky from the university of st . petersburg . together they won the karl ernst von baer prize for their theses on the development of germ layers in invertebrate embryos . mechnikov was appointed docent at the newly established odessa university ( now odessa university ) . only twenty-two years of age , he was younger than his students . after being involved in a conflict with a senior colleague over attending scientific meetings , he transferred to the university of st . petersburg in 1868 , where he experienced a worse professional environment . in 1870 he returned to odessa to take up the appointment of titular professor of zoology and comparative anatomy . in 1882 he resigned from odessa university due to political turmoils after the alexander ii of russia . he went to sicily to set up his private laboratory in messina . he returned to odessa as director of an institute set up to carry out louis pasteur 's vaccine against rabies ; due to some difficulties , he left in 1888 and went to paris to seek pasteur 's advice . pasteur gave him an appointment at the pasteur institute , where he remained for the rest of his life . . research . mechnikov became interested in the study of microbes , and especially the immune system . at messina he discovered phagocytosis after experimenting on the larvae of starfish . in 1882 he first demonstrated the process when he inserted small citrus thorns into starfish larvae , then found unusual cells surrounding the thorns . he realized that in animals which have blood , the white blood cells gather at the site of inflammation , and he hypothesised that this could be the process by which bacteria were attacked and killed by the white blood cells . he discussed his hypothesis with carl friedrich wilhelm claus , professor of zoology at the university of vienna , who suggested to him the term '' phagocyte '' for a cell which can surround and kill pathogens . he delivered his findings at odessa university in 1883 . his theory , that certain white blood cells could engulf and destroy harmful bodies such as bacteria , met with scepticism from leading specialists including louis pasteur , behring and others . at the time , most bacteriologists believed that white blood cells ingested pathogens and then spread them further through the body . his major supporter was rudolf virchow , who published his research in his archiv für pathologische anatomie und physiologie und für klinische medicin ( now called the virchows archiv ) . his discovery of these phagocytes ultimately won him the nobel prize in 1908 . he worked with émile roux on calomel ( mercurous chloride ) in ointment form in an attempt to prevent people from contracting the sexually transmitted disease syphilis . in 1887 , he observed that leukocytes isolated from the blood of various animals were attracted towards certain bacteria . the first studies of leukocyte killing in the presence of specific antiserum were performed by joseph denys and joseph leclef , followed by leon marchand and mennes between 1895 and 1898 . almoth e . wright was the first to quantify this phenomenon and strongly advocated its potential therapeutic importance . the so-called resolution of the humoralist and cellularist positions by showing their respective roles in the setting of enhanced killing in the presence of opsonins was popularized by wright after 1903 , although metchnikoff acknowledged the stimulatory capacity of immunosentisitized serum on phagotic function in the case of acquired immunity . this attraction was soon proposed to be due to soluble elements released by the bacteria ( see harris for a review of this area up to 1953 ) . some 85 years after this seminal observation , laboratory studies showed that these elements were low molecular weight ( between 150 and 1500 dalton ( unit ) s ) n-formylated oligopeptides , including the most prominent member of this group , n-formylmethionine-leucyl-phenylalanine , that are made by a variety of replicating gram positive bacteria and gram negative bacteria . j exp med . 1976 may 1 ; 143 ( 5 ) :1154–69 j immunol . 1974 jun ; 112 ( 6 ) :2055–62 mechnikov 's early observation , then , was the foundation for studies that defined a critical mechanism by which bacteria attract leukocytes to initiate and direct the innate immune response of acute inflammation to sites of host invasion by pathogens . mechnikov also developed a theory that aging is caused by toxic bacteria in the gut and that lactic acid could prolong life . based on this theory , he drank yogurt every day . he wrote the prolongation of life : optimistic studies , in which he espoused the potential life-lengthening properties of lactic acid bacteria ( lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp . bulgaricus ) . he attributed the longevity of bulgarian peasants to their yogurt consumption . . death . mechnikov died in 1916 in paris from heart failure . according to his will , his body was used for medical research and afterwards cremated in père lachaise cemetery crematorium . his cinerary urn has been placed in the pasteur institute library . . personal life and views . mechnikov was married to his first wife ludmila feodorovitch in 1869 . she died from tuberculosis on 20 april 1873 . her death , combined with other problems , caused mechnikov to unsuccessfully attempt suicide , taking a large dose of opium . in 1875 , he married his student olga belokopytova . in 1885 olga suffered from severe typhoid and this led to his second suicide attempt . he injected himself with the spirochete of relapsing fever . ( olga died in 1944 in paris from typhoid . ) despite being baptized in the russian orthodox church , mechnikov was an atheism . he was greatly influenced by darwinism . he first read fritz müller 's für darwin ( for darwin ) in giessen . from this he became a supporter of natural selection and ernst haeckel 's biogenetic law . his scientific works and theories were inspired by darwinism . . awards and recognitions . mechnikov with alexander kovalevsky won the karl ernst von baer prize in 1867 based on their doctoral research . he shared the nobel prize in physiology or medicine in 1908 with paul ehrlich . he was awarded honorary degree from the university of cambridge in cambridge , uk , and the copley medal of the royal society in 1906 . he was given honorary memberships in the academy of medicine in paris and the academy of sciences and medicine in st . petersburg . the leningrad medical institute of hygiene and sanitation , founded in 1911 was merged with saint petersburg state medical academy of postgraduate studies in 2011 to become the north-western state medical university named after i.i . mechnikov . the odessa i.i . mechnikov national university is in odessa , ukraine . . books . metchnikoff wrote notable books such as : leçons sur la pathologie comparée de l ’ inflammation ( 1892 ; lectures on the comparative pathology of inflammation ) l ’ immunité dans les maladies infectieuses ( 1901 ; immunity in infectious diseases ) études sur la nature humaine ( 1903 ; the nature of man ) immunity in infective diseases ( 1905 ) the new hygiene : three lectures on the prevention of infectious diseases ( 1906 ) the prolongation of life : optimistic studies ( 1907 ) этюды оптимизма / и . и . мечников . – 2-е изд . – москва : изд . « научного слова » , ( 1909 ) этюды о природе человека / и . и . мечников . — 4-е изд . — москва : изд . « научного слова » , ( 1913 ) основатели современной медицины . пастер — листер — кох . москва : изд . « научного слова » , ( 1915 ) . notes . references . further reading . ; . external links . the romantic rationalist : a study of elie metchnikoff works of elie metchnikoff , a pasteur institute bibliography books written by i.i.mechnikov ( in russian ) lactobacillus bulgaricus on the web tsalyk st . immunity defender immunity in infective diseases ( 1905 ) by élie metchnikoff , translated by francis b . binny , on the internet archive the prolongation of life : optimistic studies ( 1908 ) by élie metchnikoff , translation edited by p . chalmers mitchell , on the internet archive luba vikhanski 's page for metchnikoff 's documentary elie metchnikoff , nobel luminaries – jewish nobel prize winners , on the beit hatfutsot-the museum of the jewish people website .