Simon Says

other languages . this game has translated across multiple cultures from seemingly common routes and some international versions also use the name simon such as : afrikaans : '' kolonel bevel '' ( '' colonel commands '' ) arabic : for example : '' نبيلة قالت هاكا '' '' ( algeria ) nabila said like so or '' قال المعلّم '' ( '' the teacher says '' , lebanon ) and '' سلمان يقول '' ( '' salman says '' , iraq ) basque : '' buruak dio '' or '' buruzagiak dio '' ( the leader says ) , or '' unaik dio '' ( unai says ) bengali : '' নেতা বলেছেন '' ( '' the leader says '' ) cantonese chinese : '' 老師話 '' ( '' the teacher says '' ) czech : '' simon říká '' ( or with similar rules '' všechno lítá , co peří má '' ) danish : '' simon siger '' , '' kongen befaler '' dutch : '' commando '' ( the dutch noun for '' command '' ) , or '' jantje zegt '' ( '' johnny says '' ) in flemish parts of belgium finnish : '' kapteeni käskee '' ( '' the captain commands '' ) french : '' jacques a dit '' ( '' jack said '' ) in france , or '' jean dit '' ( '' john says '' ) in quebec filipino : '' sabi ni simon '' german : '' kommando pimperle '' ( or with similar rules '' alle vögel fliegen hoch '' ) greek : '' ο σιμών λέει '' ( ' o simón léi ' ) hebrew : '' הרצל אמר '' ( '' herzl said '' ) hungarian : '' simon mondja '' icelandic : '' símon segir '' irish : '' deir síomón '' japanese : '' 船長さんの命令 '' ( 'senchō-san no meirei ' , '' ship captain 's orders '' ) korean : '' 시몬 가라사대 '' ( '' simon says '' ) marathi : '' शिवाजी महाराज म्हणाले '' ( '' shivaji maharaj says '' ) mandarin chinese： '' 老师说 '' （lǎoshīshuō , '' the teacher says '' ） norwegian : '' kongen befaler '' ( '' the king commands '' ) polish : '' szymon mówi '' portuguese : '' o rei manda '' ( '' the king orders '' ) , or '' o mestre mandou '' ( '' the master ordered '' ) in brazilian portuguese spanish : '' mando , mando '' ( '' i command , i command '' ) , or '' simon dice '' ( '' simon says '' ) turkish : '' yakup der ki '' ( '' jacob says '' ) vietnam : '' tôi bảo '' ( '' i say '' ) russian : '' саймон говорит '' ( '' simon says '' ) a version also exists in india , pakistan , germany , slovakia , czechia and hungary where an analogy to what can fly and what can not is emphasized instead of simon saying or not , i.e . '' chidiya ud '' ( hindi ) which translates to bird fly or '' alle vögel fliegen hoch '' ( german ) which is '' all birds fly up '' . the term 'bird ' can then be replaced with a thing that can not fly . these games are usually played more with gestures than actual jumping . in a swedish version , gör si , gör så ( '' do this , do thus '' ) , the leader says either '' do this '' or '' do thus '' while performing an action . for failing to follow the correct command , '' do this '' , or following the wrong command , '' do thus '' , a child must sit down until a new leader is chosen . a similar swedish child 's game is '' följa john '' meaning '' following john '' , where physical actions are conducted by '' john '' ( usually involving movement in a line ) , and where remaining participants are replicating the activities shown by john . however , the commands are silent , and based on the remaining participants observation of john 's actions . in the late 1930s in new zealand , non commissioned officers were leading troops in a brain stimulation game as part of training classed as informal activities called , 'do this , do that . ' . gameplay . a command starting with '' simon says '' means that the players must obey that command . a command without the beginning '' simon says '' means do not do this action . anyone who breaks one of these two rules is eliminated from the remainder of the game . often , anyone who speaks is also eliminated . there can be very complex and difficult command chains , such as '' simon says : arms up . simon says : arms down . arms up . '' anyone ending with their arms up is eliminated , because a command that does n't begin with '' simon says '' can not be obeyed . a variation on the instruction phrases is used . '' simon says '' is said once at the start of a series of instructions , and an action along with the phrase '' do this '' must be obeyed while an action with the phrase '' do that '' must not be obeyed . obeying a '' do that '' command or not obeying a '' do this '' command will eliminate a player . it is considered cheating to give impossible commands ( '' simon says , lift both of your legs up and keep them there ! '' ) or phrase the commands in such a way that the other player has no option but to 'go out ' ( '' simon says , jump up . come down . '' ) . however , at least in some versions , it is allowed for simon to eliminate players by asking them to do something seemingly unrelated to the game ( example : '' anyone remaining join me up here . '' ) . cultural references . the phrase has been used multiple times as a plot device in films and television dramas including die hard with a vengeance , police academy , demolition man , the gift and the tv series underdog and supernatural , as well as being played in television game shows including 1970s show superstars and battle of the network reality stars . the phrase occurs twice in thelma and louise for comic effect : '' simon says everybody lay down on the floor . '' first the outlaw on the run character j.d . ( brad pitt ) tells how he usually sets off to do an armed robbery . later on we find out in the only flashback scene of the movie that thelma ( geena davis ) uses exactly the same phrase when robbing a store . in an episode of the cartoon network show courage the cowardly dog , the title character ( disguised as an eggplant ) gives commands to the other eggplants after saying '' the great eggplant says '' . the peanuts special it 's flashbeagle , charlie brown includes a song/dance number called '' lucy says '' where lucy plays the role of simon , but uses '' lucy says '' instead of '' simon says '' . in the animaniacs episode , '' king yakko '' , yakko , as king of anvilania gets his men to take their seats , but when they are about to do so , yakko stops them , saying , '' i did n't say 'simon says ' ! '' then he tells them , '' simon says take your seats ! '' which they follow . a stunt played on the game show fun house also played simon says , but was changed to '' tiny says '' to match the name of the show 's announcer giving the commands . the electronic game simon is named for simon says . jim henson 's pajanimals has the pajanimals play a similar game called '' cowbella says . '' similar to the peanuts example above , cowbella , one of the pajanimals , plays the role of simon and uses '' cowbella says '' instead of '' simon says '' . before they play , there is a short song that has the lyrics '' if cowbella says , 'cowbella says , ' you must do what cowbella says ; and if she does n't say 'cowbella says , ' you must not do what cowbella says ! '' mickey mouskersize , a short in disney junior has a game called mickey says . mickey plays the role of simon , once in the middle of the game , goofy and minnie did what mickey said when he did not say '' mickey says '' . in let 's go pocoyo , there is a game in some episodes called fred says . this is a simple game . fred plays the role of simon , however , the narrator always says '' fred says '' in each phrase . at the end , the narrator says '' fred says : that 's all . '' in phoenix wright : ace attorney – dual destinies , the game 's main prosecutor is simon blackquill , likely named after the game . he 's a master of psychological manipulation , and his acts of manipulating the minds of others is compared to as simon says by other characters . in an episode of transformers : rescue bots , cody uses the game to teach the bots about obeying commands . he uses basic instructions such as '' turn right '' and '' raise your left arm '' . when he issues a command without stating '' simon says '' , chase responds by stating '' simon did not authorize that last movement '' . a literal arcade-based smartphone adaptation of '' simon says '' was released exclusively on android on july 11 , 2016 , titled simon says mobile . in this version , bodily gestures are replaced with mobile gestures , namely touchscreen and tilting . it is free-to-play with microtransaction . in a barney & friends episode titled '' hop to it ! '' , barney and the kids play simon says . two of them , luci and min , are out after touching their chins but the other two , michael and tina , remain . another episode , '' all mixed up '' , also has barney and the kids play simon says in which the educational theme of this episode is about following directions . '' movin ' along '' is another episode to feature simon says . in the 2015 novel simon vs . the homo sapiens agenda ( and its 2018 film adaptation love , simon ) , protagonist simon spier 's online pseudonym jacques derived the french version of simon says , '' jacques a dit '' . a single by k-pop group nct 127 was released november 2018 titled '' simon says '' . an episode of sesame street 's elmo 's world has some kids playing simon says an episode of sesame street features telly participating in a simon says competition with the other characters in the sooty & co . episode '' speedy sweep '' , matthew challenges sooty and sweep to a game of simon says to see who has the faster reflexes . episode 2 '' boston '' of cabin pressure features the two pilots playing simon says . in a go , diego , go ! episode called '' penguin school , '' a male chinstrap penguin teacher plays simon says . the title of the raccoons episode is named after the game . the australian children ’ s music group , the wiggles have a song based on the game titled ‘ simon says ’ . the song is sung by one member of the group whose stage name is simon wiggle . the 1910 fruitgum company had a hit with their song '' simon says '' . in an episode of dragon tales , max , emmy , and their dragon friends play the game , which is hosted by a gnome wizard named simon . references . other references . arnold , arnold , the world book of children 's games , world publishing co . , 1972 , . bancroft , jessie h . , games for the playground , home , school and gymnasium , the macmillan co . , 1914 . forster , sally , simon says . let 's play , e . p . dutton , 1990 , . grunfeld , frederic v . , games of the world : how to make them , how to play them , how they came to be , henry holt and company , 1975 , .