Post-processual archaeology

approach to archaeology . subjectivism . the post-processualists ' approach to archaeology is diametrically opposed to that of the processualists . the processualists , as positivism , believed that the scientific method should and could apply to archaeological investigation , therefore allowing archaeologists to present objective statements about past societies based upon the evidence . post-processual archaeology , however , questioned this stance , and instead emphasized that archaeology was subjective rather than objective , and that what truth could be ascertained from the archaeological record was often relative to the viewpoint of the archaeologist responsible for unearthing and presenting the data . tri07 . pp . 451–452 . as the archaeologist matthew johnson noted , '' postprocessualists suggest that we can never confront theory and data ; instead , we see data through a cloud of theory . '' joh99 . p . 102 . . interpretation . due to the fact that they believe archaeology to be inherently subjective , post-processualists argue that '' all archaeologists . whether they overtly admit it or not '' , always impose their own views and biases into their interpretations of the archaeological data . joh99 . p . 103 . in many cases , they hold that this bias is political in nature . tri07 . p . 467 . post-processualist daniel miller believed that the positivist approach of the processualists , in holding that only that which could be sensed , tested and predicted was valid , only sought to produce technical knowledge that facilitated the oppression of ordinary people by elites . mil84 . p . 38 . in a similar criticism , miller and chris tilley believed that by putting forward the concept that human societies were irresistibly shaped by external influences and pressures , archaeologists were tacitly accepting social injustice . miltill84 . p . 2 . many post-processualists took this further and criticised the fact that archaeologists from wealthy , western countries were studying and writing the histories of poorer nations in the second and third worlds . ian hodder stated that archaeologists had no right to interpret the prehistories of other ethnic or cultural groups , and that instead they should simply provide individuals from these groups with the ability to construct their own views of the past . while hodder 's viewpoint was not universally accepted among post-processualists , there was enough support for opposing racism , colonialism and professional elitism within the discipline that in 1986 the world archaeological congress was established . tri07 . p . 452 . a number of post-processualists , such as michael shanks , christopher tilley and peter ucko , undermined '' archaeology 's claims to be an authoritative source of knowledge about the past '' , thereby '' encouraging people to question and resist all forms of authority… this position was hailed by its supporters as democratizing archaeology and purging it… of elitist pretensions '' . tri07 . pp . 467–468 . . understanding past societies . materialism and idealism . whereas the processualists had been firm materialists , and the culture-historical archaeology had , by contrast , been idealists , the post-processualists argued that past societies should be interpreted through both materialist and idealist ideas . as johnson noted , '' many postprocessualists claim that we should reject the whole opposition between material and ideal in the first place . '' joh99 . p . 102 . while recognizing that past societies would have interpreted the world around them in a partially materialistic way , the post-processualists argue that many historic societies have also placed a great emphasis on ideology ( which included religion ) in both interpreting their world and influencing their behaviour . examples of this can be seen in the work of bernard knapp , who examined how the social elite manipulated ideology to maintain their political and economic control , knapp , b . 1988 . and of mike parker pearson , who asserted that tools were just as much a product of ideology as were a crown or a law code . pearson , mike parker . 1984:61 . using an example to explain this belief in materialist-idealist unity , the archaeologist matthew johnson looked at the idea of landscape among past societies . he argued that : : on the one hand , a materialist view of landscape tends to stress how it may be seen in terms of a set of resources , for example for hunter-gatherers or early farming groups . this leads one to turn , for example , to optimal foraging theory and other economic models for an understanding of how people exploited the landscape 'rationally ' . postprocessualists like to argue that landscapes are always viewed in different ways by different peoples . they reject the 'rational ' view of 'landscape-as-a-set-of-resources ' as that of our own society and one that is ideologically loaded in its own way , loaded towards ideas of commodity and exploitation found in our own society . they suggest that ancient peoples would have had different views of what was 'real ' in that landscape . on the other hand , an exclusively idealist view of landscape does not work either . postprocessualists like to stress that such an understanding of landscape was not formed in the abstract—that the way people moved around and used that landscape affected their understanding of it . joh99 . p . 102 . . structuralism . many , although not all post-processualists have adhered to the theory of structuralism in understanding historical societies . structuralism itself was a theory developed by the french anthropologist claude lévi-strauss ( 1908–2009 ) , and held to the idea that '' cultural patterns need not be caused by anything outside themselves… and that underlying every culture was a deep structure , or essence , governed by its own laws , that people were unaware of but which ensured regularities in the cultural productions that emanate from it . '' at the centre of his structuralist theory , lévi-strauss held that '' all human thought was governed by conceptual dichotomies , or bilateral oppositions , such as culture/nature , male/female , day/night , and life/death . he believed that the principle of oppositions was a universal characteristic inherent in the human brain , but that each culture was based on a unique selection of oppositions '' . tri07 . p . 463 . this structuralist approach was first taken from anthropology and applied into forms of archaeology by the french archaeologist andré leroi-gourhan ( 1911–1986 ) , who used it to interpret prehistoric symbols in his 1964 work , les religions de la préhistoire . ler64 . within the post-processual movement , ian hodder became '' the leading exponent of a structuralist approach '' . tri07 . p . 464 . in a 1984 article , he looked at the similarities between the houses and the tombs of neolithic europe , and used a structuralist approach as a basis for his ideas on their symbolism . hod84 . he then went on , in his seminal book the domestication of europe ( 1990 ) , to use structuralist ideas to come up with his theory that within neolithic europe , there was a dichotomy between field ( agrios ) and house ( domus ) , with this duality being mediated by a boundary ( foris ) . hod90 . . human agency . post-processualists have also adopted beliefs regarding human agency , arguing that in other theoretical approaches to archaeology such as cultural-historical and processual , '' the individual is lost '' , and humans are therefore portrayed as '' passive dupes who blindly follow social rules . '' joh99 . p . 104 . post-processualists instead argue that humans are free agents who in many cases act in their own interests rather than simply following societal rules , and by accepting these ideas , post-processualists argue that society is conflict-driven . joh99 . p . 105 . influenced by the sociologist anthony giddens ( born 1938 ) and his structuration theory , many post-processualists accepted that most human beings , while knowing and understanding the rules of their society , choose to manipulate them rather than following them obediently . in turn , by bending the societal rules , these rules eventually change . joh99 . p . 104 . other post-processualists have instead taken the view of sociologist karl marx ( 1818–1883 ) that class conflict was the force for this social change . tri07 . p . 469 . in this manner they share similarities with marxist archaeology . a minority of post-processualists , such as julian thomas have however argued that human agency is not a useful aspect for looking at past societies , thereby accepting a cultural determinism position . tho00 . pp . 149–150 . . marginalised archaeologies . post-processualism places great emphasis on encouraging marginalised groups to interact with archaeology . gender archaeology . in the 1960s and 1970s , feminist archaeology emerged as adherents of the second wave feminism movement began to argue that women in the archaeological record had been ignored by archaeologists up until that time . according to archaeologist sam lucy , '' the agendas of feminist archaeology and post-processualism highlighted the importance of social and political factors on supposedly 'objective ' investigation '' . luc97 . p . 153 . . indigenous archaeology . . history . precedents . although it would not be actually termed '' post-processual archaeology '' until 1985 ( by one of its most prominent proponents , ian hodder ) , an archaeological alternative to processual archaeology had begun to develop during the 1970s . some had already anticipated the theory 's emergence , with the social anthropologist edmund leach informing the assembled archaeologists at a 1971 discussion on the topic of '' the explanation of culture change '' held at the university of sheffield that cultural structuralism , which was then popular among social anthropologists , would soon make its way into the archaeological community . lea73 p . 763 . bruce trigger , a canadian archaeologist who produced a seminal study of archaeological theory , identified there as being three main influences upon post-processualism . the first of these was '' the marxism-inspired social anthropology that had developed in france during the 1960s and already had influenced british social anthropology . '' this , trigger noted , '' had its roots not in orthodox marxism but in efforts to combine marxism and structuralism by anthropologists such as maurice godelier , emmanuel terray , and pierre-phillipe rey '' . tri07 . p . 444 . the second main influence was postmodernism , which '' emphasized the subjective nature of knowledge and embraced extreme relativism and idealism '' . having originated among the disciplines of comparative literature , literary criticism and cultural studies , postmodernist thinking had begun to develop within archaeology . tri07 . pp . 446–448 . the third influence identified by trigger was the new cultural anthropology movement within the cultural anthropological discipline , which had arisen after the collapse of boasian anthropology . the new cultural anthropologists '' denounced studies of cultural evolution as being ethnocentric and intellectually and morally untenable in a multicultural , postcolonial environment . '' tri07 . pp . 448–449 . . origins in britain . post-processual archaeology began in britain during the late 1970s , spearheaded by a number of british archaeologists who had become interested in aspects of french marxist anthropology . most prominent among these was ian hodder ( born 1948 ) , a former processualist who had made a name for himself for his economic analysis of spatial patterns and early development of simulation studies , particularly relating to trade , markets and urbanization in iron age and roman britain . having been influenced by the '' new geography '' and the work of the processualist david clarke , as his research progressed , he became increasingly sceptical that such models and simulations actually tested or proved anything , coming to the conclusion that a particular pattern in the archaeological record could be produced by a number of different simulated processes , and that there was no way to accurately test which of these alternatives was correct . in effect , he came to believe that even using the processual approach to understanding archaeological data , there were still many different ways that that data could be interpreted , and that therefore radically different conclusions could be put forward by different archaeologists , despite processualism 's claim that using the scientific method it could gain objective fact from the archaeological record . joh10 . pp . 102 & ndash ; 103 . tri07 . p . 450 . as a result of this , hodder grew increasingly critical of the processualist approach , developing an interest in how culture shaped human behaviour . he was supported in this new endeavour by many of his students , including matthew spriggs . tri07 . p . 450 . in 1980 these early post-processualists held a conference at cambridge university , from which a book was produced , entitled symbolic and structural archaeology ( 1982 ) , which was edited by hodder himself and published by cambridge university press . in his introduction to the book , hodder noted that : : during the early period of exploration and development of ideas , premature conference presentations and individual seminars were given by various members of the cambridge group in other archaeological departments in england and abroad . individual scholars who were invited to talk to us in cambridge in that period often felt , understandably , obliged to maintain a distinct opposition . while it is certainly the case that these presentations had occurred before our views had even begun to settle down , and that they were excessively aggressive , they played an important role in the process of enquiry and reformulation . in particular , the contrasts which were set up by us and by outside scholars allowed the views of the seminar group , and the differences of viewpoint within the group , to be clarified . the opposition highlighted our own opinion but also threw the spotlight on the blind alleys down which there was a danger of straying . our aggression resulted from the conviction that we were doing something new . this , too , was important . in the initial period there was a clear idea of what was wrong with existing approaches and there was a faith that something else could be done . hod82 . p . vii . bruce trigger considered this book to be '' a postprocessual showcase and counterpart to new perspectives in archaeology '' , the 1968 book written by american archaeologist lewis binford ( 1931–2011 ) that helped to launch the processual movement . tri07 . p . 450 . . development in the united states . post-processual archaeology developed largely independently among the archaeological community in the united states . as such its primary influence was critical theory , as opposed to the french marxist anthropology which had been the primary influence upon their british counterparts . many american archaeologists had begun to recognise issues of bias within the scientific community , and within the processual movement itself which attempted to be scientific . they also began to notice elements of ethnic prejudice within archaeology , particularly in regards to native american peoples , who had commonly not had a chance to participate in their own heritage management up until the 1990s . tri07 . pp . 456–458 . many american archaeologists also began to take note of a gender bias in the archaeological interpretation and in the discipline as a whole , as women had been largely marginalised . the 1980s saw archaeological studies finally being published that dealt with this issue , namely through joan gero 's paper on '' gender bias in archaeology : a cross-cultural perspective '' ( 1983 ) and margaret conkey and janet spector 's paper on '' archaeology and the study of gender '' ( 1984 ) . among the post-processualists , less emphasis was put on correcting class biases in the american archaeological record than had been put into studying gender and ethnic differences . instead , it was mostly among historical archaeology ( those who study the archaeology of the historic , or literate period of the past ) , that such investigation into marginalised classes such as workers and slaves took place . tri07 . p . 460 . . criticism . as the archaeologists colin renfrew and paul bahn noted , '' for its most severe critics , post-processualism , while making a number of valid criticisms , simply developed some of the ideas and theoretical problems introduced by processualism . to these critics it brought in a variety of approaches from other disciplines , so that the term '' postprocessual , '' while rather neatly echoing the epithet '' postmodern '' in literary studies , was a shade arrogant in presuming to supersede what it might quite properly claim to complement . '' ren04 . p . 44 . in their article '' processual archaeology and the radical critique '' ( 1987 ) , timothy k . earle and robert w . preucel examined the post-processual movement 's '' radical critique '' of processualism , and while accepting that it had some merit and highlighted some important points , they came to the conclusion that on the whole , the post-processual approach was flawed because it failed to produce an explicit methodology . ear87 .