1976 in literature

events . january – the first kolkata book fair opens in india . june 21 – the market theatre ( johannesburg ) is opened as a multiracial venue by barney simon . september 3 – novelist antonio di benedetto is released from prison after 18 months of imprisonment and torture under the national reorganization process ( military dictatorship ) in argentina . september 9 – the royal shakespeare company starts a noted production of shakespeare 's macbeth at the other place , stratford-upon-avon , england , with ian mckellen and judi dench in the leading roles , directed by trevor nunn . october 25 – the royal national theatre on london 's south bank opens in premises designed by sir denys lasdun , with a performance of goldoni 's 18th-century comedy il campiello . its lyttleton theatre first previews on 8 march , followed on 16 march by a performance of shakespeare 's hamlet by albert finney directed by peter hall . its olivier theatre opens on october 4 with marlowe 's elizabethan drama tamburlaine , also with finney in the title rôle , directed by peter hall . unknown dates théâtre nanterre-amandiers is established in new premises at nanterre . saul bellow wins both the nobel prize for literature and the pulitzer prize for fiction . new books . fiction . émile ajar ( romain gary ) – hocus bogus kingsley amis – the alteration ann beattie – chilly scenes of winter saul bellow – to jerusalem and back peter benchley – the deep caroline blackwood – the stepdaughter erma bombeck – the grass is always greener over the septic tank marjorie bowen – kecksies and other twilight tales john braine – waiting for sheila william f . buckley – saving the queen ( the first blackford oakes thriller ) anthony burgess – beard 's roman women ramsey campbell – the height of the scream leonora carrington – the hearing trumpet raymond carver – will you please be quiet , please ? agatha christie ( posthumous ) – sleeping murder ( the last miss marple story , written c . 1940 ) a . j . cronin – lady with carnations l . sprague de camp – the virgin & the wheels samuel r . delany – triton august derleth – dwellers in darkness philip k . dick and roger zelazny – deus irae g . b . edwards ( posthumous ) – the book of ebenezer le page buchi emecheta – the bride price marian engel – bear richard ford – a piece of my heart brian garfield – the last hard men judith guest – ordinary people alex haley – roots : the saga of an american family frank herbert – children of dune bohumil hrabal – too loud a solitude ( příliš hlučná samota ) ( samizdat publication ) derek lambert – blackstone underground etienne leroux – magersfontein , o magersfontein ! ira levin – the boys from brazil robert ludlum – the gemini contenders ryū murakami ( 村上 龍 ) – almost transparent blue ( 限りなく透明に近いブルー , kagirinaku tōmei ni chikai burū ) r . k . narayan – the painter of signs larry niven and jerry pournelle – inferno robert nye – falstaff breandán ó heithir – lig sinn i gcathú owain owain – y dydd olaf ( the last day ) marge piercy – woman on the edge of time anthony powell – infants of the spring terry pratchett – the dark side of the sun manuel puig – kiss of the spider woman ( el beso de la mujer araña ) jean raspail – le jeu du roi ishmael reed – flight to canada ruth rendell – a demon in my view anne rice – interview with the vampire hubert selby , jr . – the demon cynthia propper seton – a fine romance tom sharpe – wilt sidney sheldon – a stranger in the mirror alan sillitoe – the widower 's son sasha sokolov – a school for fools muriel spark – the takeover john steinbeck – the acts of king arthur and his noble knights jacqueline susann – dolores paul theroux – the family arsenal ngũgĩ wa thiong ' o – secret lives , and other stories jesús torbado – en el día de hoy leon uris – trinity melvin van peebles – just an old sweet song gore vidal – 1876 kurt vonnegut – slapstick ( novel ) alice walker – meridian roger zelazny doorways in the sand the hand of oberon my name is legion . children and young people . chester aaron – besser als lachen ( better than laughter ) natalie babbitt – tuck everlasting judy blume blubber tales of a fourth grade nothing nancy bond – a string in the harp eve bunting – one more flight adèle geras – tea at mrs manderby's michael de larrabeiti – the borribles penelope lively – a stitch in time ruth manning-sanders – a book of monsters dennis nolan big pig monster bubbles : a counting book ruth park – the muddle-headed wombat on clean-up day . drama . samuel beckett footfalls that time maeve binchy – end of term howard brenton – weapons of happiness ken campbell – illuminatus ! david edgar – destiny athol fugard – sizwe banzi is dead roger hall – glide time dorothy hewett – this old man came rolling home albert innaurato – gemini ntozake shange – for colored girls who have considered suicide / when the rainbow is enuf alexander vampilov – duck hunting ( « утиная охота » , utinaya okhota , published 1970 , first performed ) . non-fiction . maya angelou – singin ' and swingin ' and gettin ' merry like christmas john g . bennett ( died 1974 ) – journeys in islamic countries l . sprague de camp – literary swordsmen and sorcerers richard dawkins – the selfish gene norman f . dixon – on the psychology of military incompetence elisabeth elliot – let me be a woman michel foucault – the history of sexuality aileen fox – prehistoric maori fortifications henrietta quinnell , '' fox , aileen mary , lady fox ( 1907–2005 ) '' , oxford dictionary of national biography ( oxford , uk : oup , 2009 ) retrieved 21 november 2017 julien gracq – the narrow waters christopher isherwood – christopher and his kind ryszard kapuściński – another day of life john keegan – the face of battle maxine hong kingston – the woman warrior arthur koestler – the thirteenth tribe h . p . lovecraft selected letters iv ( 1932–1934 ) selected letters v ( 1934–1937 ) to quebec and the stars paul morand – the allure of chanel peter c . newman – the canadian establishment harold perkin – the age of the automobile jean-françois revel – the totalitarian temptation geoffrey smith mr smith 's flower garden mr smith 's vegetable garden arnold j . toynbee – mankind and mother earth andrew vachss – andrew vachss non-fiction simon wiesenthal – the sunflower bob woodward & carl bernstein – the final days . births . february 3 – isla fisher , australian actress and author august 29 – t . james belich ( colorado tolston ) , american playwright , novelist and actor october 31 – seth abramson , american professor and poet uncertain dates marion brunet , french young adult and crime fiction writer jon mcgregor , bermuda-born british fiction writer . deaths . january 12 – agatha christie , english crime writer ( born 1890 ) january 25 – victor ehrenberg , german historian ( born 1891 ) february 2 – barbara euphan todd , english children 's writer ( born 1890 ) february 12 – john lewis , welsh philosopher ( born 1889 ) march 7 – tove ditlevsen , danish poet and fiction writer , suicide ( born 1917 ) march 13 – sergiu dan , romanian novelist and journalist ( born 1903 ) march 24 – e . h . shepard , english illustrator and autobiographer ( born 1879 ) march 31 – edward streeter , american humorist ( born 1891 ) april 17 – allardyce nicoll , british literary scholar ( born 1894 ) april 22 – joe david brown , american novelist and journalist ( born 1915 ) april 28 – richard hughes , english novelist ( born 1900 ) may 7 – alison uttley , english writer of children 's books ( born 1884 ) june 18 – malcolm johnson , american journalist ( born 1904 ) july 3 – alexander lernet-holenia , austrian poet , dramatist and fiction writer ( born 1897 ) august 29 – kazi nazrul islam , bengali poet ( born 1899 ) september 10 – dalton trumbo , american novelist and screenwriter ( born 1905 ) october 30 – barbu solacolu , romanian poet , translator and economist ( born 1897 ) november 4 – robert speaight , english actor , biographer and essayist ( born 1904 ) november 6 – patrick dennis , american novelist ( pancreatic cancer , born 1921 ) december 21 – munro leaf , american children 's author ( born 1905 ) december 22 – martín luis guzmán , mexican novelist and journalist ( born 1887 ) december 26 – yashpal , hindi novelist ( born 1903 ) december 29 – g . b . edwards , guernsey-born writer ( born 1899 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : saul bellow . canada . see 1976 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : patrick grainville , les flamboyants prix médicis french : marc cholodenko , les états du désert prix médicis international : doris lessing , the gold coronet – united kingdom . spain . premio miguel de cervantes : jorge guillén . united kingdom . booker prize : david storey , saville carnegie medal for children 's literature : jan mark , thunder and lightnings cholmondeley award : peter porter , fleur adcock eric gregory award : stewart brown , valerie gillies , paul groves , paul hyland , nigel jenkins , andrew motion , tom paulin , william peskett james tait black memorial prize for fiction : john banville , doctor copernicus james tait black memorial prize for biography : ronald hingley , a new life of chekhov . united states . frost medal : a . m . sullivan nebula award : frederik pohl , man plus newbery medal for children 's literature : susan cooper , the grey king pulitzer prize for drama : michael bennett for concept , choreography , and direction ; james kirkwood , jr . for book , marvin hamlisch for lyrics , nicholas dante for music , a chorus line pulitzer prize for fiction : saul bellow , humboldt 's gift pulitzer prize for poetry : john ashbery , self-portrait in a convex mirror . elsewhere . miles franklin award : david ireland , the glass canoe premio nadal : raúl guerra garrido , lectura insólita de el capital viareggio prize : mario tobino , la bella degli specchi . references .