1985 in literature

events . february 25 – sue limb 's parodic pastiche of the lake poets , the wordsmiths at gorsemere , begins broadcasting on bbc radio 4 in the u.k . august 11 – a memorial to the poet hugh macdiarmid is unveiled near his home at langholm , scotland . unknown dates microsoft corporation releases the first version of its computer operating system : windows 1.0 . three notable novels in english by female authors are published during the year : margaret atwood 's the handmaid 's tale , jilly cooper 's riders , the first of the rutshire chronicles , and jeanette winterson 's oranges are not the only fruit . new books . fiction . isaac asimov – robots and empire margaret atwood – the handmaid 's tale jean m . auel – the mammoth hunters iain banks – walking on glass clive barker – the damnation game greg bear blood music eon m . c . beaton – death of a gossip thomas bernhard – old masters ( novel ) ( alte meister : komödie ) anthony burgess – the kingdom of the wicked orson scott card – ender 's game jilly cooper – rivals bernard cornwell – sharpe 's honour don delillo – white noise friedrich dürrenmatt – the execution of justice ( justiz ) bret easton ellis – less than zero steve erickson – days between stations john fowles – a maggot carlos fuentes – the old gringo ( gringo viejo ) william gaddis – carpenter 's gothic gabriel garcía márquez – love in the time of cholera ( el amor en los tiempos del cólera ) jane gardam – crusoe 's daughter alasdair gray – the fall of kelvin walker : a fable of the sixties graham greene – the tenth man béla hamvas ( died 1968 ) – karnevál ( carnival , written 1948–51 ) amy hempel – reasons to live frank herbert – chapterhouse : dune dương thu hương – hành trình ngày thơ ấu ( journey in childhood ) john irving – the cider house rules tahar ben jelloun – the sand child ( l'enfant de sable ) uwe johnson ( died 1984 ) – ingrid babendererde . reifeprüfung 1953 ( ingrid babendererde : final exam 1953 ) ernst jünger – a dangerous encounter ( eine gefährliche begegnung ) garrison keillor – lake wobegon days stephen king – skeleton crew lászló krasznahorkai – satantango derek lambert – the man who was saturday ursula k . le guin – always coming home doris lessing – the good terrorist h . p . lovecraft at the mountains of madness and other novels the dunwich horror and others ( corrected edition ) richard a . lupoff – lovecraft 's book cormac mccarthy – blood meridian larry mcmurtry – lonesome dove john d . macdonald – the lonely silver rain naguib mahfouz – akhenaten , dweller in truth ( العائش فى الحقيقة ) james a . michener – texas brian moore – black robe bharati mukherjee – darkness ( short stories ) iris murdoch – the good apprentice orhan pamuk – the white castle ( beyaz kale ) ellis peters – an excellent mystery caryl phillips – the final passage peter pohl – johnny , my friend ( janne , min vän ) guy rewenig – hannert dem atlantik ( first novel in the luxembourgish language ) carl sagan – contact nava semel – kova zekhukhit ( hat of glass , short stories ) sidney sheldon – if tomorrow comes patrick süskind – perfume ( novel ) antonio tabucchi – little misunderstandings of no importance ( piccoli equivoci senza importanza ) sue townsend – rebuilding coventry anne tyler – the accidental tourist andrew vachss – flood kurt vonnegut – galápagos jeanette winterson – oranges are not the only fruit roger zelazny – trumps of doom . children and young people . chester aaron – out of sight , out of mind pamela allen – a lion in the night chris van allsburg – the polar express frank asch – i can blink kirsten boie – paule ist ein glücksgriff robert cormier – beyond the chocolate war roald dahl – the giraffe and the pelly and me virginia hamilton ( with leo and diane dillon ) – the people could fly : american black folktales patricia maclachlan – sarah , plain and tall laura numeroff – if you give a mouse a cookie pat o'shea – the hounds of the morrigan bill peet – the kweeks of kookatumdee cynthia rylant – a blue-eyed daisy jacqueline wilson – how to survive summer camp ( novel ) elizabeth winthrop – the castle in the attic . drama . peter brook and jean-claude carrière ( adapted ) – mahabharata christopher hampton ( adapted ) – les liaisons dangereuses david hare and howard brenton – pravda larry kramer – the normal heart wallace shawn – aunt dan and lemon sam shepard – a lie of the mind neil simon – biloxi blues august wilson – fences . poetry . carol ann duffy – standing female nude . non-fiction . svetlana alexievich – u voyny — ne zhenskoye litso ( war 's unwomanly face ) bill bryson – the palace under the alps and over 200 other unusual , unspoiled and infrequently visited spots in 16 european countries roger caron – bingo ! the horrifying eyewitness account of a prison riot allen carr – the easy way to stop smoking timothy j . cooney - telling right from wrong michael denton – evolution : a theory in crisis elaine dundy – elvis and gladys julien gracq – the shape of a city g . l . harriss ( editor ) – henry v : the practice of kingship ernest hemingway – the dangerous summer pauline kael – state of the art david lowenthal – the past is a foreign country walter a . mcdougall – . the heavens and the earth : a political history of the space age tim o'brien – the nuclear age priscilla presley – elvis and me david robinson – chaplin : his life and art oliver sacks – the man who mistook his wife for a hat roger scruton – thinkers of the new left gary soto – living up the street crawford young and thomas turner - the rise and decline of the zairian state . births . april 24 – alexander zeldin , british playwright and director september 24 – eleanor catton , new zealand novelist september 30 – téa obreht , yugoslav-born american novelist writing in english . deaths . january 1 – sigerson clifford , irish poet , playwright , and civil servant ( born 1913 ) january 5 – alexis rannit , estonian-born american poet and critic ( born 1914 ) february 6 – james hadley chase , english thriller novelist ( born 1906 ) february 19 – carl joachim hambro , norwegian novelist , essayist and philologist ( born 1914 ) hambro , johan ( 1984 ) . c . j . hambro : liv og drøm ( in norwegian ) . oslo : aschehoug . p . 67 . march 15 – radha krishna choudhary , indian historian and philosopher ( born 1921 ) april 4 – kate roberts , welsh writer ( born 1891 ) april 7 – carl schmitt , german political theorist ( born 1888 ) april 17 – basil bunting , english poet ( born 1900 ) april 25 – uku masing , estonian religious philosopher , linguist and writer ( born 1909 ) may 12 – josephine miles , american poet and literary critic ( born 1911 ) may 18 – hedley bull , australian economist ( cancer , born 1932 ) may 25 – robert nathan , american novelist and poet ( born 1894 ) june 8 – hu feng ( 胡风 ) , chinese novelist ( born 1902 ) june 16 – ernst orvil , norwegian novelist , poet and playwright ( born 1898 ) july 16 – heinrich böll , german novelist , nobel laureate ( born 1917 ) july 29 – judah waten , australian novelist ( born 1911 ) august 14 – alfred hayes , english-born american novelist , poet and screenwriter ( born 1911 ) august 30 – ( janet ) taylor caldwell , english-born american novelist ( born 1900 ) september 17 – fran ross , african american satirist ( born 1935 ) september 22 – d . j . opperman , south african afrikaans poet ( born 1914 ) october 1 – e . b . white , american children 's writer and writer on style ( born 1899 ) october 11 – alex la guma , south african novelist and political activist ( born 1925 ) october 24 – lászló bíró , hungarian journalist and inventor ( born 1899 ) october 31 – nikos engonopoulos , greek poet ( born 1903 ) november 3 – j . m . wallace-hadrill , english historian ( born 1916 ) november 4 – hilda vaughan , welsh novelist and short story writer ( born 1892 ) november 11 – james hanley , english-born novelist and dramatist of irish extraction ( born 1897 ) november 16 – gulshan nanda , indian novelist and screenwriter ( born 1929 ) november 25 geoffrey grigson , english poet and critic ( born 1905 ) elsa morante , italian novelist ( born 1912 ) santo , aricò l . ( 1990 ) . contemporary women writers in italy : a modern renaissance . amherst : university of massachusetts press . november 27 – fernand braudel , french historian ( born 1902 ) december 2 – philip larkin , english poet ( born 1922 ) december 7 – robert graves , english novelist , poet and critic ( born 1895 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : claude simon . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : no award given out this year c . j . dennis prize for poetry : kevin hart , your shadow ; rosemary dobson , the three fates kenneth slessor prize for poetry , kevin hart , your shadow mary gilmore prize : doris brett , the truth about unicorns miles franklin award : christopher koch , the doubleman . canada . see 1985 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : yann queffélec , les noces barbares prix médicis french : michel braudeau , naissance d'une passion prix médicis international : joseph heller , god knows . spain . miguel de cervantes prize : gonzalo torrente ballester . united kingdom . booker prize : keri hulme , the bone people carnegie medal for children 's literature : kevin crossley-holland , storm cholmondeley award : dannie abse , peter redgrove , brian taylor eric gregory award : graham mort , adam thorpe , pippa little , james harpur , simon north , julian may james tait black memorial prize for fiction : robert edric , winter garden james tait black memorial prize for biography : david nokes , jonathan swift : a hypocrite reversed newdigate prize : robert twigger 1985 whitbread awards : douglas dunn , elegies . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : liz rosenberg , the fire music american academy of arts and letters gold medals poetry , robert penn warren frost medal : robert penn warren nebula award : orson scott card , ender 's game newbery medal for children 's literature : robin mckinley , the hero and the crown pulitzer prize for drama : james lapine for book ; stephen sondheim for music and lyrics , sunday in the park with george pulitzer prize for fiction : alison lurie – foreign affairs pulitzer prize for poetry : carolyn kizer : yin whiting awards ( inaugural year ) : : fiction : raymond abbott , stuart dybek , wright morris ( fiction/nonfiction ) , howard norman , james robison , austin wright ( fiction/nonfiction ) : poetry : douglas crase , jorie graham , linda gregg , james schuyler . elsewhere . premio nadal : pau faner coll – flor de sal . references .