East Lansing, Michigan

education . higher education . michigan state university , a member of the big ten conference , is the largest education institution in the state of michigan ( 9th largest in the united states ) , list of united states university campuses by enrollment reflecting east lansing 's history as a college town . msu has more than 200 programs of study including two in human medicine ( md and do ) and one veterinary medicine school ( dvm ) , a law school ( jd , l.l.m . , and m.j . ) , and numerous phd programs . there is also a master of arts in technology ( maet ) program . nearby lansing is home to several other colleges , including thomas m . cooley law school which is the largest law school in the united states ( by attendees ) , davenport university , and lansing community college . public primary and secondary schools . this city is covered by the east lansing public schools district , which has an enrollment of just over 3,400 students in grades k-12 . the district also includes small portions of neighboring lansing , lansing township , and meridian township . the district consists of six elementary schools , one middle school ( macdonald middle school ) , and east lansing high school . one fifth of the district 's students come from outside of east lansing through michigan 's schools of choice program . private schools . st . thomas aquinas parish school , 915 alton road stepping stones montessori school , 1370 beech street . transportation . local transportation . capital area transportation authority ( cata ) provides public bus transit throughout east lansing , lansing , and surrounding areas . the northern tier trail is a shared-use pedestrian and bicycle path system connecting some parts of the northern half of the city ; the lansing river trail begins on the campus of michigan state university and extends west into downtown lansing and then north towards the airport . intercity transportation . amtrak , indian trails , and greyhound all provide intercity rail and bus services at the east lansing amtrak depot , which is located at 1240 south harrison road , within walking distance of the michigan state university main campus , although public transportation also serves the depot . amtrak offers daily service to east lansing on its port huron to union station , chicago train , the blue water . two class one freight railroads serve the city including canadian national railway ( cn ) and csx transportation ( csxt ) . bus transportation is offered between east lansing and detroit metro airport twelve times daily by michigan flyer . the capital region international airport in nearby lansing offers a number of non-stop domestic and international flights as far as cancún ; connections between east lansing and the airport are offered by cata ( with a transfer in downtown lansing ) ; rental cars are also available at the airport . three major interstates and one u.s . highway serve the east lansing area including : interstate 96 ( i-96 ) , i-69 , i-496 , and u.s . highway 127 ( us 127 ) . major highways . runs from indianapolis , along the northern boundary of east lansing , and east to flint and port huron , connecting to canada . is a loop route running through lansing and east lansing . is a north-south highway passing between lansing and east lansing , continuing northerly toward clare and grayling and southerly toward jackson , michigan and into ohio . is a route between m-43 and the lansing city limit . culture . the city has several neighborhoods of detached , single-family houses within a mile of the michigan state university campus . under a 2004 city zoning ordinance , several of those neighborhoods have used a petition process to establish zones that prohibit or severely restrict renting . the net size of the area where renting is prohibited has increased since 2004 . east lansing has a very large student population ; in 2006 the city 's population was about 45,931 , us census bureau 2006–08 population estimate , available at : . while the university 's 2006–07 enrollment was 45,520 . granted , not all students enrolled live in east lansing or on campus . michigan state university board of trustees announcement , september 12 , 2007 , available at : . sports . from march 29 to april 2 , 2006 , east lansing hosted the usa hockey national tournament . the age group that competed contained players from the u-14 tier 2 division . states were represented with teams from massachusetts , michigan , alaska , nebraska , florida , california , connecticut , indiana , new york , and pennsylvania . in the end , the la hockey club representing california won . centennial . in 2007 , the city of east lansing celebrated its centennial . the celebration began in january 2007 with a kick-off press conference at the marriott hotel in downtown east lansing . events throughout the year included an old fashion concert , a birthday party , and a historic homes tour . a fireworks show took place in august , along with many more events throughout the year . with michigan state university 's sesquicentennial ice cream flavor such a huge success , the city of east lansing contracted melting moments ice cream shop to develop a centennial ice cream flavor . all downtown businesses were encouraged to take part in centennial festivities . the peoples church on west grand river avenue also celebrated its 100th birthday in 2007 . sites of interest . on campus . image : msu broad art museum exterior 4.jpg thumb right 200px broad art museum at michigan state university w . j . beal botanical garden which is the oldest botanical garden in the united states . michigan state university horticulture gardens beaumont tower red cedar river wharton center for performing arts ( great hall and pasant theatre ) , the fairchild theatre , and the msu auditorium ( main stage and arena theater ) . eli and edythe broad art museum abrams planetarium and the msu observatory spartan stadium breslin center msu forest akers golf courses msu pavilion msu federal credit union , the largest university-based credit union in the world . cata bus station sparty is the nickname of the spartan , a large statue representing the msu mascot , a spartan warrior . '' sparty '' is frequently used as a landmark when giving directions on campus . the rock is a large boulder , approximately five feet high , originally placed near beaumont tower by the class of 1873 , since relocated to a site northeast of the farm lane bridge . it serves as a venue for student groups and is routinely graffitied by those groups . national superconducting cyclotron laboratory . off campus . hannah community center ( originally built as east lansing high school , and later used as a middle school ) featuring the albert a . white performing arts theatre . east lansing public library . the '' habitrail '' , or hamster cage , or gerbil cage , is a large multicolored parking structure near campus that resembles a habitrail home for pet rodents . the controversial design resulted from the city 's instructions to the architect that the building be '' festive '' and have '' no brick '' . saper galleries , an award-winning art gallery serving clients internationally since 1978 is in a contemporary gallery building in downtown east lansing on albert avenue . scene metrospace , the city sponsored art gallery located in the ground floor of the multicolored parking structure . east lansing family aquatic center . trowbridge railroad junction ( located near trowbridge road ) and the nearby amtrak depot are popular spots with railfans for train watching . at trowbridge , the busy grand trunk western railroad line connecting chicago to toronto intersects the former pere marquette railroad ( now conrail line from detroit to grand rapids ) . outside east lansing . the city of lansing is adjacent to east lansing . lansing has , among other things , the state capitol , hall of justice ( supreme court ) , and michigan library and historical center . thomas m . cooley law school , the nation 's largest law school , is located in downtown lansing . lansing also is the home of the lansing lugnuts minor league baseball team . there is a city market in downtown lansing , next to the grand river . lake lansing is nearby and is approximately in size . the lake has an outstanding beach , and is a summer favorite of swimmers , sunbathers , boaters and fishermen . the lansing sailing club and michigan state university sailing club have facilities on lake lansing where sailing regattas are held throughout the summer months . meridian mall is located in the suburb of okemos , and eastwood towne center in lansing township . newspapers . the state news lansing state journal city pulse spartan edge . local events . the east lansing film festival east lansing film festival/ is the largest festival of its kind in michigan . east lansing art festival is a juried art show held each spring on the weekend before memorial day . in 2009 it received a national ranking in the art fair sourcebook top 200 for its fine art and craft sales . '' with its 117th fine art ranking and 153rd fine craft ranking , the festival was included among a list of the top 200 best-selling art fairs and festivals in the country . these rankings are based on the festival 's gross average sales for 2009 , which totaled 2,857 per artist exhibitor '' . great lakes folk festival originated after the national folk festival , which made east lansing its home for 3 years , moved to a new city for another 3 years . the festival is usually held during the second weekend of august . the michigan high school boys state basketball championship tournament is typically held at michigan state university 's breslin center each march . the 2007 odyssey of the find world finals occurred at michigan state university . the 2009 future problem solvers international conference was held in east lansing . '' pecatonica problem solvers are grand champions , '' wisconsin state journal , june 15 , 2009 . the children 's concerts held at east lansing hannah community center , is an annual series of live music geared for young audiences and their families . the crystal awards honors the extraordinary accomplishments of individuals , businesses and organizations that have impacted the quality of life in east lansing . the summer solstice jazz festival summer solstice jazz festival/ is a two-day festival that salutes jazz music with local and national jazz performers and celebrates the longest day of the year . the summer concert series features live local music each friday and saturday in downtown east lansing . the moonlight film festival moonlight film festival / offers free movies on an outdoor big screen in valley court park in downtown east lansing . one book one community is a unique program that brings the city-university community together to read the same book and come together to discuss it in a variety of settings . the winter glow winter soup & chili cookoff / features holiday activities , musical entertainment and merchant activities . the festival is usually takes place at the ann street plaza , parking lot 1 and the east lansing marriott . notable people . spencer abraham : former us senator and secretary of energy under president george w . bush . chuck bullough : former nfl player and current defensive coordinator for syracuse . jim cash : screenwriter of films such as top gun , legal eagles , dick tracy , and anaconda , was a long-time resident of east lansing and a professor at msu . born in boyne city , michigan harry a . demaso : michigan state legislator kevin deyoung : pastor , author richard lenski : evolutionary biologist at msu , winner of macarthur fellowship ( 1996 ) , guggenheim fellow ( 1991 ) . todd martin : tennis pro . 1988 graduate of elhs . julie mehretu : graduate of elhs , artist , and recipient of macarthur fellowship ( '' genius award '' ) ( 2005 ) . drew miller : wing player for the detroit red wings . brother of ryan miller . ryan miller : hobey baker winner at msu , nhl goalie for the anaheim ducks , an nhl all-star in 2007 , and goalie for the u.s . hockey team in the 2010 winter olympics . robert neller , commandant of the marine corps . larry page : ceo and co-founder of google inc . and the 13th richest person in america in 2012 according to forbes . wally pleasant : comedic folk singer . ben poquette : nba basketball player . susan may pratt : actress . nate silver : statistician-journalist ; named one of '' the world 's 100 most influential people '' by time magazine . gretchen whitmer : 49th and current governor of michigan . notes . further reading . balaskovitz , andy . '' despite hurdles , consolidating lansing , east lansing and lansing township makes sense . '' lansing city pulse . wednesday , november 28 , 2012 . news section . available on newsbank , record number : 33658e6f3e435749c466e59bf44dd1b692752 . external links . '' a brief history of east lansing , michigan '' a brief history of east lansing , michigan city of east lansing city of east lansing east lansing demographics and maps east lansing – demographics and maps