Indian independence movement

background . early british colonialism in india . european traders first reached indian shores with the arrival of the portuguese explorer vasco da gama in 1498 at the port of calicut , in search of the lucrative spice trade . just over a century later , the dutch and english established trading outposts on the indian subcontinent , with the first english trading post set up at surat in 1613 . over the course of the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries , the british defeated the portuguese and dutch militarily but remained in conflict with the french , who had by then sought to establish themselves in the subcontinent . the decline of the mughal empire in the first half of the eighteenth century provided the british with the opportunity to establish a firm foothold in indian politics . after the battle of plassey in 1757 , during which the east india company 's indian army under robert clive defeated siraj ud-daulah , the nawab of bengal , the company established itself as a major player in indian affairs , and soon afterward gained administrative rights over the regions of bengal , bihar and midnapur part of odisha , following the battle of buxar in 1764 . after the defeat of tipu sultan , most of south india came either under the company 's direct rule , or under its indirect political control as part a princely state in a subsidiary alliance . the company subsequently seized control of regions ruled by the maratha empire , after defeating them in a series of wars . the punjab was annexed in 1849 , after the defeat of the sikh armies in the first ( 1845–1846 ) and second ( 1848–49 ) anglo-sikh wars . especially during the battle of britain in 1940 , gandhi resisted calls for massive civil disobedience movements that came from within as well as outside his party , stating he did not seek india 's self-rule out of the ashes of a destroyed britain . in 1942 , the congress launched the quit india movement . there was some violence but the raj cracked down and arrested tens of thousands of congress leaders , including all the main national and provincial figures . they were not released until the end of the war was in sight in 1945 . the self-rule movement included the kakori conspiracy ( 9 august 1925 ) led by indian youth under the leadership of pandit ram prasad bismil and masterminded by rajendra lahiri ; and the azad hind movement , whose main protagonist netaji subhas chandra bose was a former leader of congress . from its earliest wartime inception , bose joined the axis powers to fight britain . azad hind fauj ( indian national army ) . india 's entry into the war was strongly opposed by subhas chandra bose , who had been elected president of the congress in 1938 and 1939 , but later resigned owing to differences of opinion with gandhi . after resignation he formed his own wing separated from the mainstream congress leadership known as forward bloc which was a loci focus for ex-congress leaders holding socialist views ; however he remained emotionally attached to congress for the remainder of his life . bose then founded the all india forward bloc . in 1940 the british authorities in calcutta placed bose under house arrest . however , he escaped and made his way through afghanistan to nazi germany to seek hitler and mussolini 's help for raising an army to fight the british . the free india legion comprising erwin rommel 's indian pows was formed . after a dramatic decline in germany 's military fortunes , a german land invasion of india became untenable . hitler advised bose to go to japan where a submarine was arranged to transport bose , who was ferried to japanese southeast asia , where he formed the azad hind government . the provisional free indian government in exile reorganised the indian national army composed of indian pows and volunteer indian expatriates in south-east asia , with the help of the japanese . its aim was to reach india as a fighting force that would build on public resentment to inspire revolt among indian soldiers of the raj . the ina was to see action against the allies , including the british indian army , in the forests of arakan , burma , and in assam , laying battle of imphal with the japanese 15th army . during the war , the andaman and nicobar islands were captured by the japanese and handed over by them to the ina . the ina failed owing to disrupted logistics , poor supplies from the japanese , and lack of training . the azad hind fauj surrendered unconditionally to the british in singapore in 1945 . in the consensus of scholarly opinion , subhas chandra bose 's death occurred from third-degree burns on 18 august 1945 after his overloaded japanese plane crashed in japanese-ruled formosa ( now taiwan ) . trials against members of the ina began in late 1945 , and included the infamous joint court-martial of key figures shah nawaz khan , prem sahgal , and gurbaksh singh dhillon . quit india movement . the quit india movement ( bharat chhodo andolan ) or the august movement was a civil disobedience movement in india which commenced on 8 august 1942 in response to gandhi 's call for immediate self-rule by indians and against sending indians to world war ii . he asked all teachers to leave their schools , and other indians to leave their respective jobs and take part in this movement . due to gandhi 's political influence , his request was followed by a significant proportion of the population . in addition , congress-led the quit india movement to demand the british to leave india and transfer the political power to a representative government . during the movement , gandhi and his followers continued to use non-violence against british rule . this movement was where gandhi gave his famous message , '' do or die ! '' , and this message spread towards the indian community . in addition , this movement was addressed directly to women as '' disciplined soldiers of indian freedom '' and they had to keep the war for independence to go on ( against british rule ) . at the outbreak of war , the congress party had during the wardha meeting of the working-committee in september 1939 , passed a resolution conditionally supporting the fight against fascism , but were rebuffed when they asked for self-rule in return . in march 1942 , faced with an increasingly dissatisfied sub-continent only reluctantly participating in the war , and deteriorations in the war situation in europe and south east asia , and with growing dissatisfactions among indian troops- especially in europe- and among the civilian population in the sub-continent , the british government sent a delegation to india under stafford cripps , in what came to be known as the cripps ' mission . the purpose of the mission was to negotiate with the indian national congress a deal to obtain total co-operation during the war , in return of progressive devolution and distribution of power from the crown and the viceroy to elected indian legislature . however , the talks failed , having failed to address the key demand of a timeframe towards self-government , and of the definition of the powers to be relinquished , essentially portraying an offer of limited dominion-status that was wholly unacceptable to the indian movement . culture and combat in the colonies . the indian army in the second world war . tarak barkawi . j contemp history . 41 ( 2 ) , 325–355.pp:332 to force the british raj to meet its demands and to obtain definitive word on total self-rule , the congress took the decision to launch the quit india movement . the aim of the movement was to force the british government to the negotiating table by holding the allied war effort hostage . the call for determined but passive resistance that signified the certitude that gandhi foresaw for the movement is best described by his call to do or die , issued on 8 august at the gowalia tank maidan in bombay , since renamed august kranti maidan ( august revolution ground ) . however , almost the entire congress leadership , and not merely at the national level , was put into confinement less than 24 hours after gandhi 's speech , and the greater number of the congress were to spend the rest of the war in jail . on 8 august 1942 , the quit india resolution was passed at the mumbai session of the all india congress committee ( aicc ) . the draft proposed that if the british did not accede to the demands , a massive civil disobedience would be launched . however , it was an extremely controversial decision . at gowalia tank , mumbai , gandhi urged indians to follow non-violent civil disobedience . gandhi told the masses to act as citizens of a sovereign nation and not to follow the orders of the british . the british , already alarmed by the advance of the japanese army to the india–burma border , responded the next day by imprisoning gandhi at the aga khan palace in pune . the congress party 's working committee , or national leadership was arrested all together and imprisoned at the ahmednagar fort . they also banned the party altogether . all the major leaders of the inc were arrested and detained . as the masses were leaderless the protest took a violent turn . large-scale protests and demonstrations were held all over the country . workers remained absent en masse and strikes were called . the movement also saw widespread acts of sabotage , indian under-ground organisation carried out bomb attacks on allied supply convoys , government buildings were set on fire , electricity lines were disconnected and transport and communication lines were severed . the disruptions were under control in a few weeks and had little impact on the war effort . the movement soon became a leaderless act of defiance , with a number of acts that deviated from gandhi 's principle of non-violence . in large parts of the country , the local underground organisations took over the movement . however , by 1943 , quit india had petered out . all the other major parties rejected the quit india plan , and most cooperated closely with the british , as did the princely states , the civil service , and the police . the muslim league supported the raj and grew rapidly in membership , and in influence with the british . there was opposition to the quit india movement from several political quarters who were fighting for indian self-rule . hindu nationalist parties like the hindu mahasabha openly opposed the call and boycotted the quit india movement . vinayak damodar savarkar , the president of the hindu mahasabha at that time , even went to the extent of writing a letter titled '' stick to your posts '' , in which he instructed hindu sabhaites who happened to be '' members of municipalities , local bodies , legislatures or those serving in the army.to stick to their posts '' across the country , and not to join the quit india movement at any cost . the other hindu nationalist organisation , and mahasabha affiliate rashtriya swayamsevak sangh ( rss ) had a tradition of keeping aloof from the anti-british indian self-rule movement since its founding by k.b . hedgewar in 1925 . in 1942 , the rss , under m.s . golwalkar completely abstained from joining in the quit india movement as well . the bombay government ( british ) appreciated the rss as such , by noting that , the sangh has scrupulously kept itself within the law , and in particular , has refrained from taking part in the disturbances that broke out in august 1942 . the british government stated that the rss was not at all supporting any civil disobedience against them , and as such their other political activities ( even if objectionable ) can be overlooked . further , the british government also asserted that at sangh meetings organised during the times of anti-british movements started and fought by the indian national congress , speakers urged the sangh members to keep aloof from the congress movement and these instructions were generally observed . as such , the british government did not crackdown on the rss and hindu mahasabha at all . the rss head ( sarsanghchalak ) during that time , m.s . golwalkar later openly admitted to the fact that the rss did not participate in the quit india movement . however , such an attitude during the indian independence movement also led to the sangh being viewed with distrust and anger , both by the general indian public , as well as certain members of the organisation itself . in golwalkar 's own words , in 1942 also , there was a strong sentiment in the hearts of many . at that time too , the routine work of the sangh continued . sangh decided not to do anything directly . ‘ sangh is the organisation of inactive people , their talks have no substance ’ was the opinion uttered not only by outsiders but also our own swayamsevaks . . christmas island mutiny . after two japanese attacks on christmas island in late february and early march 1942 , relations between the british officers and their indian troops broke down . on the night of 10 march , the indian troops assisted by sikh policemen mutinied , killing five british soldiers and imprisoning the remaining 21 europeans on the island . later on 31 march , a japanese fleet arrived at the island and the indians surrendered . . royal indian navy revolt . image : rin hmis hindustan.jpg thumb 250px hmis hindustan at bombay harbour after the war , was occupied by mutineers during the royal indian navy mutiny . the royal indian navy mutiny encompasses a total strike and subsequent mutiny by indian sailors of the royal indian revolt on board ship and shore establishments at bombay ( mumbai ) harbour on 18 february 1946 . from the initial flashpoint in bombay , the mutiny spread and found support throughout british india , from karachi to calcutta and ultimately came to involve 78 ships , 20 shore establishments and 20,000 sailors . notes on india by robert bohm.pp213 the agitations , mass strikes , demonstrations and consequently support for the mutineers , therefore continued several days even after the mutiny had been called off . along with this , the assessment may be made that it described in crystal clear terms to the government that the british indian armed forces could no longer be universally relied upon for support in crisis , and even more it was more likely itself to be the source of the sparks that would ignite trouble in a country fast slipping out of the scenario of political settlement . james l . raj ; making and unmaking of british india . abacus . 1997 . p571 , p598 and ; unpublished , public relations office , london . war office . 208/819a 25c . impact of world war ii . world war ii was one of the most significant factors in accelerating indian independence , and the independence of many british and non-british colonies . in the period 1945–1965 , decolonization led to more than three dozen countries getting freedom from their colonial powers . many factors contributed to the downfall of the british empire . when britain reached out to the us asking for help in the war , the us offered help contingent on britain decolonizing post-wwii , and that agreement was codified in the atlantic charter . the decolonization of britain ( post-war ) also meant that the us and other countries could possibly have access to markets to sell goods that were previously under the british empire - which were not accessible to them then william roger louis , imperialism at bay : the united states and the decolonization of the british empire , 1941–1945 ( 1978 ) . andrew n . buchanan , '' the war crisis and the decolonization of india , december 1941 – september 1942 : a political and military dilemma . '' global war studies 8 2 ( 2011 ) : 5–31 to bring about these changes , the establishment of the un following wwii codified sovereignty for nations , and encouraged free trade . the war also forced the british to come to an agreement with indian leaders to grant them independence if they helped with war efforts since india had one of the largest armies . also , following wwii , it was untenable for britain to raise capital on its own to keep its colonies . they needed to rely on america and did so via the marshall plan to rebuild their country . sovereignty and partition of india . on 3 june 1947 , viscount louis mountbatten , the last british governor-general of india , announced the partitioning of british india into india and pakistan . with the speedy passage of the indian independence act 1947 , at 11:57 on yom-e-istiqlal pakistan was declared a separate nation . then at 12:02 a.m . , on 15 august 1947 india became a sovereign and democratic nation . eventually , 15 august became independence day for india marking the end of british india . also on 15 august , both pakistan and india had the right to remain in or remove themselves from the british commonwealth . but in 1949 , india took the decision to remain in the commonwealth . violent clashes between hindus , sikhs , and muslims followed . prime minister nehru and deputy prime minister sardar vallabhbhai patel invited mountbatten to continue as governor general of india during the period of transition . he was replaced in june 1948 by chakravarti rajagopalachari . patel took on the responsibility for bringing 565 princely states into the union of india , steering efforts by his '' iron fist in a velvet glove '' policies , exemplified by the use of military force to integrate junagadh and hyderabad state into india ( operation polo ) . on the other hand , nehru kept the issue of kashmir in his hands . the constituent assembly , headed by the prominent lawyer , reformer and dalit leader , b.r . ambedkar was tasked with creating the constitution of free india . the constituent assembly completed the work of drafting the constitution on 26 november 1949 ; on 26 january 1950 , the republic of india was officially proclaimed . the constituent assembly elected rajendra prasad was the first president of india , taking over from governor general rajgopalachari . subsequently , the french ceded chandernagore in 1951 , and pondichéry and its remaining indian colonies by 1954 . indian troops invaded and annexed goa and portugal 's other indian enclaves in 1961 , and sikkim voted to join the indian union in 1975 after the indian victory over china in nathu la and cho la . following self-rule in 1947 , india remained in the commonwealth of nations , and india–united kingdom relations have since become friendly . there are many areas in which the two countries seek stronger ties for mutual benefit , and there are also strong cultural and social ties between the two nations . the uk has an ethnic indian population of over 1.6 million . in 2010 , prime minister david cameron described indian – british relations as a '' new special relationship '' . . see also . partition of india partition of bengal ( 1947 ) independence day ( india ) independence day ( pakistan ) revolutionary movement for indian independence . notes .