Monty (comic strip)

robotman . the comic strip began as robotman on february 18 , 1985 . it originally depicted the exploits of a small robot from outer space visiting earth , living with the ordinary milde family . in the 1990s , robotman instead began living with a geeky inventor named monty , introduced in the january 20 , 1993 strip . monty at don markstein 's toonopedia . archived from the original on march 8 , 2016 . robotman ( 1984 ) at don markstein toonopedia . archived from the original on january 24 , 2017 . robotman left the strip in 2001 to find love on the planet diskelion , and was replaced in the strip by space alien mr . pi . . robotman 's evolution . robotman originated as a character created by british musician peter shelley . shelley later worked with united feature syndicate in an attempt to push robotman via cross-marketing toys , records , videos , and other merchandise . in 1985 , dic enterprises produced a 90-minute television special called robotman & friends . the syndicate desired to have a comic strip featuring the character ; they had asked bill watterson to incorporate the character into calvin and hobbes as a condition of syndication , but watterson refused . the job was then passed on to jim meddick , who created the family setting and the other characters . as the strip progressed the design of robotman changed considerably as meddick 's style evolved . during contract negotiations , the syndicate approached meddick with a request to change the name of the strip to monty and to deemphasize and remove the robotman character from the strip . this was due to an ongoing difficulty in marketing the strip with the name robotman ( for a brief period , the strip was rechristened '' robotman & monty '' ) . robotman was gradually phased out of the strip through a farewell storyline , and the series continued as monty in april 2001 . robotman 's farewell included a return to outer space to live with his love interest , a female robot . storylines . as the website announces , the comic strip '' spoofs suburbia , trashes tacky tv shows and offers absurdism commentary on everything from hosing down spider monkeys to the latest conspiracy theory . '' monty montahue , the brainy , bumbling bachelor who 's unlucky in work and love , is the star of the strip . explains meddick , '' i 've tried to create the comic strip equivalent of monty python 's flying circus . the name 'monty ' is a nod to the influence that show had on my humor . in my cartoon just about anything can happen & mdash ; this way , the ideas and characters always stay fresh . '' monty at comics.com . characters . current cast . monty montahue is the protagonist and titular character . he is an odd , optimistic nerd who often comes up with strange inventions and works odd jobs . monty was introduced to the robotman strip in the early 1990s . in 1996 , it was revealed that monty was brainwashed of his past life as a government scientist when he invented robotman . monty is typically depicted as socially awkward , having poor dress skills and has a prominent nose but no chin . he takes on various ( often very nerdy ) hobbies and daily occupations , regularly failing because of a mix of goofiness and excessive self-confidence . fleshy is a skinny , hairless housecat resembling the pink panther cartoon character . fleshy is remarkable for his being the complete opposite of feline attitudes : he is goofy , fearful , unable to catch even the most innocuous of butterflies . fleshy is frequently shown to be entirely uninterested while in the presence of people , but once alone , he shows his intelligence to be on par with humans . he has a son , who was abducted ( and then returned ) by the same aliens that took robotman . moondog mchorney is the only true friend of monty . he 's a chronic beer drinker , and his house is one of the biggest centers of entropy in the world . pilsner is moondog 's cynical parrot , who often seems to be smarter than his owner , but still has n't managed to understand that the other parrot he sees in the mirror is himself . gretchen is a coffee waitress on whom monty has a crush . she , however , does not return the feelings . she 's a friend and is currently single . professor xemit is a time traveler from the year 2525 who came to visit the early 21st century and wound up living with monty for a while and still visits occasionally . eb3 is a cyborg and a friend of professor xemit 's . small in stature and painted white , he frets incessantly about the fact that he has a '' p-word '' ( in his case meaning pancreas , not what you might think it means ) . monty often tries to reassure about his pancreas anxiety ( '' i have one . doc has one . it 's nothing to be ashamed of ! '' ) . recently , he has shown romantic interest in a vacuum cleaner . sedgwick nuttingham iii is a privileged child who inhabits a mansion somewhere in monty 's neighborhood . his only companion is his faithful manservant jarvis , who does anything that sedgwick desires , from carrying ammunition as sedgwick hunts fleshy , to serving as a human target for snowballs , darts etc . sedgwick 's parents do not appear in the strip . the characters have occasional contact with sedgewick 's father , but he is usually away on business and rarely home . sedgewick 's aunt polly lives in the mansion and exercises some parental control , but is not seen in the strip . the only other characters that sedgwick interacts with besides fleshy are various doctors and psychologists . sedgwick is highly conservative politically , elitist , and convinced of his innate superiority to all others . jarvis is sedgwick 's aristocratic butler , with a politely sarcastic sense of humour . previous characters . robotman the original character for which the comic was originally named . he was visiting earth and lived with the milde family while here . the milde family was the original supporting cast for robotman during the 1980s . they portrayed an american middle-class family that lived in suburbia . it was made up of robotman 's best friend oscar who was an insecure boy about 10 years old , his cynical teenage brother gary , and their parents . when the strip shifted focus away from robotman , they stopped appearing . bruce ; robotman 's evil twin . he too was phased out after monty 's debut . olga ; was one of monty 's girlfriends in the mid-90s . she was a personal trainer , large-boned and muscular , in contrast to the out-of-shape monty . loco ohno was monty 's on-again/off-again girlfriend , a parody of yoko ono . she was cynical and artistic , very different from the optimistic and technology-minded monty . she was a devoted feminist , often finding men being the root of evil . chimpy was a talking chimpanzee . chimpy constantly attempted to demonstrate his superiority to ( or at least parity with ) human intelligence and culture , but in fact , he was not particularly bright . for example , he attempted to use a circular saw as a hammer . dave-7 , formerly known as mr . pi , was an alien from rigel and served as monty 's straight man . dave-7 lived with monty . he was very logical and deeply involved in studying sciences such as quantum mechanics . there were occasionally ominous references to his race 's plans to take over the earth . nothing has come of them yet . the closest they ever got was to the moon . then chimpy got his hands on dave-7 's fleet-command-device , thinking it was a video game , and annihilated the entire fleet . giggles the gumdrop-eating bear was introduced when robotman met him in a '' coping with cuteness '' support group . his relentlessly cheerful personality is embraced by readers and syndicate executives who love him and his tie-in merchandise , but the other characters find him creepy and off-putting . books . several strip collections have been published : robotman takes off : 1986 by topper books . robotman : the untold story 1988 by topper books . cyberpunktrek : with robotman and his evil twin bruce 1990 by topper books . primary crullers : a robotman book 1997 by andrews mcmeel publishing . the prehistoric robotman 2003 by plan 9 publishing . plot milestones . patrick stewart , the actor who portrayed jean-luc picard in star trek , once tried to kidnap fleshy . it appears stewart was his former owner . eventually monty manages to take fleshy back , thanks to his abilities in race walking . while attempting to emulate spider-man , monty was bitten by a radioactive ladybug and became ladybugman , whose superpowers include ladybug senses ( the ability to sense when and where rainbows will form , which caterpillars are aggressive , when a leprechaun is lying , and when somebody is crabby and needs a nap ) , a hard shell , the ability to sew , the ability to instill guilt in others , the ability to flutter through the air , and the ability to emit a malodorous fluid ( '' actually . he 's always had that ability '' - dave-7 ) . comics.com - monty - ladybugman . notable spoofs . a three-week spoof of lord of the rings : monty 's '' lord of the thing '' . comics.com - monty - '' lord of the thing '' spoof in march 2006 , a two-week spoof of the television series lost , where monty found himself shipwrecked on the island . in this spoof , monty discovers that the others are actually the castaways from gilligan 's island . comics.com - monty - '' lost '' spoof following a transporter accident , robotman and mr . spock exchanged ears . this had to be rectified by the vulcan ear meld . after assuring monty that he would be unaffected by the y2k bug , robotman became a theodore roosevelt-like character . references . external links . gocomics ' monty archive unofficial robotman & monty archive jim meddick 's website