Langley, Berkshire

etymology . the place-name langley derives from two middle english words : lang meaning long and leah , a wood or clearing . langley was formed of a number of clearings : george green , horsemoor green , middle green , sawyers green and shreding green . they became the sites for housing which merged into one village centred on the parish church in st mary 's road . the clearings are remembered in the names of streets or smaller green fields . marish or maries commemorates christiana de marecis who held the manor for a short time in the reign of edward i . langley village history . history . notable buildings . the church of st mary the virgin is in the church of england diocese of oxford . the church is a grade i listed building and houses the kedermister library , given by sir john kedermister ( or kederminster ) , who also endowed the surviving almshouses of 1617 in the village . other surviving almshouses include the seymour almshouses ( 1679–1688 ) , given by sir edward seymour who was a speaker of the house of commons , and those founded in 1839 by william wild in horsemoor green . sir john kedermister 's house , langley park ( bought by charles spencer , 3rd duke of marlborough ) was demolished and rebuilt to designs by stiff leadbetter , starting in 1756 and completed in the year of his death , 1758 . a domed temple in the park , , attributed to roger morris , no longer exists ; : s.v . '' leadbetter , stiff '' , '' morris , roger '' . wp : not sir john hubert the same one or a descendant ? was a royalist and it is recorded in a house of lords document that he paid a fine during the reformation to save it from being taken into state ownership . the wall surrounding the house is dated 1666 . -- > langley hall was built in the 17th century , but the façade was added in the 18th . in the early part of the 20th century it housed a preparatory school for boys and was known as langley place . the hall then served as the actors orphanage , and was used by raf bomber command during world war ii , then by the road research laboratory , langley college and east berkshire college . langley hall was purchased by the government in june 2011 to become one of the country 's first free schools . langley hall primary academy opened in september 2011 for children aged 4 to 11 . the langley academy secondary school opened in 2008 and was designed by architects foster + partners . langley airfield . the hawker aircraft bought parlaunt farm at langley in 1938 and built a major factory and airfield there . over 9,000 military aircraft were manufactured at the site especially the hurricane during world war ii and also the tempest and sea fury . the final hurricane built ( a mkiic serialled pz865 , which still flies today with the battle of britain memorial flight ) was completed here on 27 july 1944 and named 'last of the many ' in a special ceremony . retiring chief test pilot p w s 'george ' bulman made the first flight of this the aeroplane on this occasion – he having made the first flight of the prototype from brooklands almost nine years earlier . the hawker tornado ( 1940 ) , typhoon ( 1940 ) , tempest ( 1942 ) , fury ( 1944 ) , sea fury ( 1945 ) , and the general aircraft hamilcar x tank-carrying glider ( 1945 ) all made their first flights from langley . postwar , the aerodrome was also used by airwork services and british south american airways for aircraft maintenance work . the hawker factory closed in 1958 having also manufactured hawker hunter fighters and earlier jet prototypes . production and staff were transferred to the flight test airfield at dunsfold aerodrome and the parent hawker factory in kingston-on-thames ( now kingston upon thames ) , both in surrey . little of the factory or airfield remain today although the area 's aviation past is remembered in street-names such as spitfire close and hurricane way . a marker stone was unveiled by the airfields of britain conservation trust on 5 october 2019 . ford . the ford of britain opened a commercial vehicle component factory at langley airfield in 1949 , and then bought the entire site from hawker siddeley in 1959 . the former aircraft factory was re-used for commercial vehicle manufacture and the ford transit was built here until production was transferred to ford southampton plant at swaythling , southampton , and later the ford cargo . the langley factory became part of iveco in 1986 but finally closed in september 1997 . demolished a year later by gregory demolition , the site is now redeveloped with new housing , offices and warehousing ( including royal mail 's international mail centre , which services nearby heathrow airport ) . miscellaneous . langley carnival is held annually on the second saturday in july at the langley park memorial recreation ground . the cable corporation , based at langley , was the first cable company in the world to offer voice , video and data services to business and residential users . the first volume of writer charles tyrie 's autobiography is titled the langley boy ; tyrie grew up in langley in the 1940s and 1950s . / langley is reputed to be haunted by a ghost in a yellow coat . . transport . langley railway station , which includes an isambard kingdom brunel period building , is on the great western main line to london paddington . great western railway operate a half-hourly service in each direction . from 2019 , it will become part of the elizabeth line with services operated by tfl rail . due to the addition of the crossrail , the station is being upgraded to include three new lifts along with a new ticket hall , new ticket office and new ticket gates . in july 2012 , the department of transport announced plans to build the western rail approach between langley and iver stations . notable people . poet john milton ( 1608–74 ) is said to have lived for a time near kedermister library in langley questioned – see talk page . world war i war artist paul nash ( 1889–1946 ) is buried in the churchyard of st . mary 's church , langley writer john pudney ( 1909–77 ) – who wrote one of the best-known poems of the second world war , for johnny – was born in langley nathaniel vincent ( 1639 ? –97 ) , nonconformist minister and writer , lived in langley after the restoration ( he was ejected in 1662 ) footballer matty cash ( 1997- ) currently signed with premier league side , aston villa f.c . grew up in langley . nearest places . iver richings park colnbrook slough datchet . references . sources and further reading . . external links . langley village website