1940 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1940 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . events . february 10 – tom and jerry make their debut in the animated cartoon puss gets the boot . february 23 – walt disney 's second animated feature film pinocchio is released . although not a box office success upon its initial release , the film receives critical acclaim and wins two academy awards , including one for best original song for '' when you wish upon a star '' . over the years , pinocchio has gained a cult following and is now considered one of the greatest films of all time . march 21 – alfred hitchcock 's first american film rebecca is released , under the production of david o . selznick . it would go on to win the academy award for best picture the following year . may 17 – my favorite wife is released . may – a reproduction of '' america 's first movie studio '' , thomas edison 's black maria , is constructed . july 27 – bugs bunny makes his official debut in the animated cartoon a wild hare . october 15 – charlie chaplin 's the great dictator , a satirical comedy starring him , premieres in new york city . it is a critical and commercial success and goes on to become chaplin 's most financially successful film . november 13 – world premiere of walt disney 's animated film fantasia at the broadway theatre in new york city , the first film to be released in a multi-channel sound format ( see fantasound ) . the film also marks the first use of the click track while recording the soundtrack , overdubbing of orchestral parts , simultaneous multitrack recording and is cited as a key chapter in the conception and development of the multi-channel surround system . like pinocchio , the film is a box office failure for disney , though it recoups its cost years later and becomes one of the most highly regarded of disney 's films . december 5 – release of the thief of bagdad , pioneering the use of chroma key effects . in the united kingdom , the crown film unit supersedes the gpo film unit in the production of documentary films . academy awards . best picture : rebecca – david o . selznick , united artists best director : john ford – the grapes of wrath best actor : james stewart – the philadelphia story best actress : ginger rogers – kitty foyle best supporting actor : walter brennan – the westerner best supporting actress : jane darwell – the grapes of wrath . 1940 film releases . united states unless stated . january–march . january 1940 26 january the fighting 69th february 1940 23 february pinocchio march 1940 21 march rebecca . april–june . april 1940 20 april 'til we meet again . july–september . august 1940 30 august boom town . october–december . october 1940 15 october the great dictator ( limited ) . notable films released in 1940 . united states unless stated . a . abe lincoln in illinois , starring raymond massey all this and heaven too , starring bette davis and charles boyer andy hardy meets debutante , starring lewis stone , mickey rooney , cecilia parker , and fay holden angels over broadway , starring douglas fairbanks , jr . and rita hayworth anne of windy poplars , starring anne shirley the ape , starring boris karloff arise , my love , starring claudette colbert and ray milland arizona , starring jean arthur and william holden . b . band waggon , directed by marcel varnel , starring arthur askey – ( gb ) the bank dick , written by and starring w . c . fields before i hang , starring boris karloff the biscuit eater , directed by stuart heisler bismarck , starring paul hartmann – ( germany ) black friday , starring boris karloff and béla lugosi the blue bird , starring shirley temple boom town , starring clark gable , claudette colbert , spencer tracy , hedy lamarr the boys from syracuse , starring allan jones boys of the city , starring the east side kids brigham young , starring tyrone power and linda darnell british intelligence , starring boris karloff broadway melody of 1940 , starring fred astaire and eleanor powell – final film of series brother orchid , starring edward g . robinson , ann sothern , humphrey bogart . c . calling philo vance , starring james stephenson castle on the hudson , directed by anatole litvak , starring john garfield and ann sheridan the catacombs ( katakomby ) , directed by martin frič – ( czechoslovakia ) charlie chan at the wax museum , starring sidney toler charlie chan in panama , starring sidney toler christmas in july , directed by preston sturges a chump at oxford , starring stan laurel and oliver hardy , featuring a young peter cushing city for conquest , starring james cagney confucius – ( china ) contraband , directed by michael powell , starring conrad veidt and valerie hobson – ( gb ) convicted woman , starring rochelle hudson and june lang convoy – directed by pen tennyson , starring clive brook , john clements ( uk ) crimes at the dark house , directed by george king , starring tod slaughter – ( gb ) . d . dance , girl , dance , starring maureen o'hara , louis hayward , lucille ball dark command , starring john wayne dead man 's shoes , directed by thomas bentley , starring leslie banks – ( gb ) the devil bat , starring béla lugosi a dispatch from reuter 's , starring edward g . robinson dívka v modrém – ( czechoslovakia ) doomed to die , starring boris karloff down argentine way , starring don ameche , betty grable and carmen miranda dr . cyclops , directed by ernest b . schoedsack , starring albert dekker dr . ehrlich 's magic bullet , starring edward g . robinson , ruth gordon , otto kruger , donald crisp . e . east side kids , starring leon ames and the east side kids edison , the man , starring spencer tracy ergens in nederland ( somewhere in the netherlands ) – ( netherlands ) escape , starring norma shearer and robert taylor . f . fantasia , directed by samuel armstrong , james algar , bill roberts , paul satterfield , ben sharpsteen , david d . hand , hamilton luske , jim handley , ford beebe , t . hee , norman ferguson and wilfred jackson the fatal hour , starring boris karloff flowing gold , starring john garfield and frances farmer foreign correspondent , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring joel mccrea four sons , directed by archie mayo , starring don ameche the fox of glenarvon , directed by max w . kimmich – ( germany ) french without tears , starring ray milland – ( gb ) . g . gaslight , starring anton walbrook – ( gb ) the ghost breakers , starring bob hope and paulette goddard girl in the news , starring margaret lockwood – ( gb ) give us wings , starring the dead end kids go west , starring the marx brothers the grapes of wrath , directed by john ford , starring henry fonda the great dictator , directed by and starring charlie chaplin with paulette goddard and jack oakie the great mcginty , starring brian donlevy green hell , starring douglas fairbanks , jr . and joan bennett . h . here is the point ( ahí está el detalle ) , starring cantinflas – ( mexico ) his girl friday , directed by howard hawks , starring cary grant , rosalind russell , ralph bellamy hoots mon ! , directed by roy william neill , starring max miller and florence desmond ( britain ) the house across the bay , starring george raft the house of the seven gables , starring george sanders the howards of virginia , starring cary grant and martha scott hullabaloo , starring frank morgan . i-j . i love you again , starring william powell and myrna loy i take this woman , starring spencer tracy and hedy lamarr the invisible man returns , starring cedric hardwicke and vincent price the invisible woman , starring virginia bruce and john barrymore it all came true , starring ann sheridan , jeffrey lynn , humphrey bogart june nights ( juninatten ) , starring ingrid bergman – ( sweden ) . k-l . king of the white elephant ( prajao changpeuk ) – ( thailand ) kitty foyle , starring ginger rogers laddie , starring tim holt lady with red hair , starring miriam hopkins the letter , directed by william wyler , starring bette davis lillian russell , starring alice faye and henry fonda little men , starring george bancroft and kay francis the long voyage home , starring john wayne . m . maddalena , zero for conduct , directed by and starring vittorio de sica – ( italy ) the man from dakota , starring wallace beery the man who talked too much , starring george brent the marines fly high , starring lucille ball and richard dix the mark of zorro , starring tyrone power and linda darnell the middle watch , directed by thomas bentley , starring jack buchanan and greta gynt ( britain ) přítelkyně pana ministra ( přítelkyně pana ministra ) – ( czechoslovakia ) millionaires in prison , starring lee tracy the mortal storm , starring margaret sullavan and james stewart the mummy 's hand , starring dick foran my favorite wife , starring irene dunne and cary grant my little chickadee , starring mae west and w . c . fields . n . new moon , starring jeanette macdonald and nelson eddy night train to munich , directed by carol reed , starring margaret lockwood and rex harrison – ( gb ) north west mounted police , starring gary cooper , paulette goddard , madeleine carroll northwest passage , starring spencer tracy and robert young . o-p . one million b.c . ( aka the cave dwellers ) , starring carole landis one night in the tropics , film debut of abbott and costello our town , starring william holden and martha scott pastor hall , directed by roy boulting – ( gb ) the philadelphia story , directed by george cukor , starring katharine hepburn , cary grant , james stewart pinocchio , directed by ben sharpsteen and hamilton luske , starring dickie jones pride and prejudice , starring greer garson and laurence olivier primrose path , starring ginger rogers and joel mccrea the proud valley , starring paul robeson – ( gb ) . q-r . queen of the yukon , starring charles bickford rebecca , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring joan fontaine and laurence olivier – oscar for best picture remember the night , starring barbara stanwyck and fred macmurray rhythm on the river , starring bing crosby and mary martin road to singapore , starring bing crosby , dorothy lamour and bob hope – first in the series . s . saps at sea , starring laurel and hardy the sea hawk , starring errol flynn seven sinners , starring marlene dietrich and john wayne the shop around the corner , directed by ernst lubitsch , starring margaret sullavan and james stewart the siege of the alcazar ( l'assedio dell'alcazar ) – ( italy ) sky murder , starring walter pidgeon son of ingagi , directed by richard kahn the son of monte cristo , starring louis hayward and joan bennett spring parade , starring deanna durbin the stars look down , directed by carol reed , starring michael redgrave and margaret lockwood – ( gb ) der postmeister ( der postmeister ) – ( germany ) strange cargo , starring clark gable and joan crawford stranger on the third floor , starring peter lorre strike up the band , directed by busby berkeley , starring judy garland and mickey rooney south of suez , starring george brent swiss family robinson , starring thomas mitchell and edna best . t-v . they drive by night , starring george raft , humphrey bogart , ida lupino they knew what they wanted , directed by garson kanin , starring charles laughton and carole lombard the thief of bagdad , starring conrad veidt and sabu – ( gb ) 'til we meet again , starring merle oberon and george brent tom brown 's school days , starring cedric hardwicke too many girls , starring lucille ball too many husbands , starring jean arthur , fred macmurray , melvyn douglas tørres snørtevold – ( norway ) torrid zone , starring james cagney , ann sheridan , pat o'brien turnabout , starring john hubbard and carole landis vigil in the night , starring carole lombard virginia city , starring errol flynn and miriam hopkins . w-z . waterloo bridge , starring vivien leigh and robert taylor the well-digger 's daughter ( la fille du puisatier ) , directed by marcel pagnol , starring raimu and fernandel – ( france ) the westerner , starring gary cooper , walter brennan , dana andrews , forrest tucker where 's that fire ? , starring will hay – ( gb ) women in war , starring elsie janis and patric knowles young people , starring shirley temple young tom edison , starring mickey rooney you 're not so tough , starring the dead end kids . serials . adventures of red ryder , directed by william witney and john english deadwood dick , directed by james w . horne drums of fu manchu , starring henry brandon and robert kellard , directed by william witney and john english flash gordon conquers the universe , starring buster crabbe the green archer , starring victor jory , directed by james w . horne the green hornet , starring warren hull junior g-men , starring the dead end kids king of the royal mounted starring allan lane , directed by william witney and john english mysterious doctor satan , starring eduardo ciannelli , directed by william witney and john english the shadow , starring victor jory , directed by james w . horne terry and the pirates , starring william tracy , directed by james w . horne winners of the west , starring dick foran and anne nagel . short film series . buster keaton ( 1917–1941 ) laurel and hardy ( 1921–1943 ) our gang ( 1922–1944 ) charley chase ( 1924-1940 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) . animated short film series . krazy kat ( 1925-1940 ) mickey mouse ( 1928–1953 ) looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) scrappy ( 1931–1941 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) color rhapsodies ( 1934–1949 ) donald duck ( 1937–1956 ) pluto ( 1937–1951 ) walter lantz cartunes ( also known as new universal cartoons or cartune comedies ) ( 1938–1942 ) goofy ( 1939–1955 ) andy panda ( 1939–1949 ) knock knock ! ( first appearance of woody woodpecker ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) puss gets the boot . births . january 3 – thelma schoonmaker , american editor january 22 – john hurt , english actor ( died 2017 ) january 27 – james cromwell , american actor january 29 – katharine ross , american actress february 4 – george a . romero , american director , producer and screenwriter ( died 2017 ) february 12 – ralph bates , english actor ( died 1991 ) february 23 – peter fonda , american actor ( died 2019 ) february 27 – bill hunter , australian actor ( died 2011 ) march 9 – raúl juliá , puerto rican actor ( died 1994 ) march 10 – chuck norris , american actor and martial artist march 26 – james caan , american actor march 27 - austin pendleton , american actor , playwright , theatre director and instructor april 17 – billy fury , english singer and actor ( died 1983 ) april 25 – al pacino , american actor april 30 – burt young , american actor may 5 – lance henriksen , american actor may 15 – lainie kazan , american actress and singer may 17 – valie export , austrian director june 1 – rené auberjonois , american actor ( died 2019 ) june 20 – john mahoney , english-born american actor ( died 2018 ) june 22 – abbas kiarostami , iranian director ( died 2016 ) june 23 – adam faith , english actor and singer ( died 2003 ) july 4 – karolyn grimes , american actress july 7 – ringo starr , english drummer ( the beatles ) july 13 – patrick stewart , english actor july 18 – james brolin , american actor july 24 – dan hedaya , american actor july 28 - phil proctor , american actor , voice actor and member of the firesign theatre august 3 – martin sheen , american actor august 15 maria grazia buccella , italian actress ze'ev revach , israeli comedian , film actor , director august 19 – jill st . john , american actress august 27 – sonny sharrock , american jazz guitarist ( died 1994 ) august 31 larry hankin , american character actor , performer , director , comedian and producer . jack thompson , australian actor september 5 – raquel welch , american actress september 11 – brian de palma , american director , producer and screenwriter september 22 – anna karina , danish-born french actress , director and singer ( died 2019 ) october 9 – john lennon , english singer-songwriter and musician ( the beatles ) ( shot to death 1980 ) october 14 – cliff richard , english singer and actor october 16 - barry corbin , american actor october 19 – michael gambon , irish-born british actor november 2 – gigi proietti , italian actor ( died 2020 ) november 5 – elke sommer , german actress november 13 – rudolf schwarzkogler , austrian experimental filmmaker ( died 1969 ) november 15 – sam waterston , american actor november 20 – helma sanders-brahms , german director ( died 2014 ) november 22 - terry gilliam , american-born british screenwriter , director and animator ( monty python 's flying circus ) november 27 – bruce lee , chinese-american martial artist and actor ( died 1973 ) december 1 – richard pryor , american comedian and actor ( died 2005 ) december 13 – volli käro , estonian actor . deaths . january 4 – flora finch , 72 , american actress , a cure for pokeritis , the cat and the canary , quality street , her crowning glory february 20 – george periolat , 66 , american actor , the mark of zorro , one rainy afternoon , morning glory , what price hollywood ? march 5 – maxine elliott , 66 , american actress , fighting odds april 9 – mrs . patrick campbell , 75 , english actress , riptide , one more river april 11 – hemmo kallio , 77 , finnish actor , anna liisa may 25 – joe de grasse , 67 , canadian-born american film director , heart o ' the hills , the scarlet car , the girl of the night july 1 – ben turpin , 70 , american actor , saps at sea , mr . flip , a clever dummy july 15 – donald calthrop , 52 , english actor , scrooge , blackmail , murder ! , major barbara september 25 – marguerite clark , 57 , american actress , scrambled wives , easy to get , all of a sudden peggy , a girl named mary october 10 – berton churchill , 63 , canadian actor , stagecoach , i am a fugitive from a chain gang , in old chicago , heroes for sale october 12 – tom mix , 60 , american actor , the miracle rider , riders of the purple sage , sky high december 13 – wilfred lucas , 69 , canadian-born american actor , screenwriter , director , modern times , a chump at oxford , the girl and her trust . debuts . jack albertson – strike up the band dana andrews – lucky cisco kid anne baxter – 20 mule team hugh griffith – night train to munich van johnson – too many girls arthur kennedy – city for conquest karl malden – they knew what they wanted terry moore – maryland robert ryan – the ghost breakers gene tierney – the return of frank james david tomlinson – garrison follies forrest tucker – the westerner gig young – misbehaving husbands deborah kerr – contraband donna reed – convicted woman . references .