Romsey

the white horse hotel . the white horse hotel is a grade ii listed , 18th-century coaching inn whose timber frames date back to the 1450s . its medieval stone cellars indicate that the site may have hosted guests to romsey abbey as early as the 12th century . the existing assembly rooms are said to be where lord palmerston first engaged in political debate in the early 1800s . the building housed a hotel and brasserie , which until 2019 , was owned and operated by silks hotels . sadler 's mill . the existence of sadler 's mill , the only mill to be developed on the main course of the river test , is first recorded in the 16th century , when it functioned as a corn and grist mill . it was at one time owned by lord palmerston and later the broadlands estate before passing to various private owners . milling ceased in 1932 and the building was left derelict for many years until its restoration in 2005 . carbon dating during this restoration placed the earlier structure in the mid-17th century . it is a grade ii listed building . . the plaza . the plaza , in winchester road , is a fully equipped 230-seat art deco style theatre , originally built as a cinema in the 1930s . it became a bingo hall until the 1980s . it was converted in 1984 and is now home to local amateur dramatics group , romsey amateur operatic and dramatic society ( raods ) , who stage between ten and fourteen productions each year and hire the venue out for other local productions , concerts , and functions . . memorial park . the town 's memorial park , which plays host to the annual mayor 's picnic , contains a japanese type 96 15 cm howitzer , one of two captured by the british and brought back to romsey by louis mountbatten . one was donated to the town and the other retained on the grounds of his country estate , broadlands . romsey signal box . built in 1865 , the signal box controlled the freight and passenger trains running on the railway lines passing through romsey until 1982 . rescued from demolition by romsey and district buildings preservation trust , it is now a working museum . . other places of interest . sir harold hillier gardens – gardens and arboretum mottisfont abbey – national trust property with nationally renowned rose collection paultons park – children 's theme park . events . the mayor 's picnic takes place in early-mid summer and is held in romsey 's memorial park . there is music performed by local schools , a variety of stalls , and the popular duck race , in which numbered plastic ducks 'race ' each other along the river test , to be scrupulously retrieved before awarding a prize to whoever chose the winning duck . the beggars fair is held in the streets and pubs of romsey on the second saturday in july . it is a free festival featuring all types of music , together with dance and other street entertainment . romsey carnival takes place during a week in july with the highlight being the procession through the streets of romsey on the final sunday afternoon . the romsey agricultural & horse show is a large agricultural show that takes place on the second saturday of september every year at broadlands . the show is one of the oldest in england , held annually since 1842 . in addition , broadlands has twice hosted the cla game fair , the largest countryside show in the world , most recently in july 2006 . the winter carnival takes places each year when romsey 's christmas lights are switched on . the romsey arts festival occurs every 3 years , showcasing talent from in and around the local area . romsey beer festival is organised by the local round table , and takes place in october or november each year , at crosfield hall . romsey has two rotary clubs which are active , working with local business partners and schools to raise charitable funds for the community . the rotary clubs organise the annual walk the test way which has become popular with several hundred walkers raising money for charities . notable people . w.v . awdry – clergyman , railway enthusiast and author of the railway series from which the character thomas the tank engine originated . edward lyon berthon – inventor and clergyman . charles butler – author of children 's books . martin butler – composer . laura carmichael – actress in downton abbey . andy cook – footballer . harry dennis – footballer . charlie dimmock – tv gardening expert and presenter . david gower – retired cricketer and television personality . anthony hayward – journalist and author . giles jacob – legal writer and lexicographer . john latham – ornithologist and author . ollie locke – featured in made in chelsea and celebrity big brother 13 . ben mansfield – actor . louis mountbatten , 1st earl mountbatten of burma lived at broadlands . florence nightingale – founder of modern nursing . lord palmerston – statesman and prime minister . william petty – economist , philosopher and co-founder of the royal society . john russell reynolds – neurologist and physician to queen victoria . richard sharp – banker and member of parliament . samuel sharp — geologist and antiquary . tim sills – footballer . nigel spackman – footballer . kerrie taylor – actress . education . state . primary : braishfield school cupernham infant school cupernham junior school halterworth primary school romsey primary school romsey abbey c of e primary school secondary : the mountbatten school the romsey school . independent . primary : stroud school embley secondary : embley . transport . romsey is within 10 miles ( 16 & nbsp ; km ) of both the m27 and m3 motorways , providing fast links along the south coast and to london , and to the midlands and the north via the a34 . the a36 runs a few miles west of the town , providing a direct but not particularly quick route to the west of england and south wales . there are cycle links to southampton and salisbury via route 24 of the national cycle network . romsey has a railway station with frequent services ( operated by great western railway ) running on the route between portsmouth and cardiff , via southampton , salisbury and bristol . in 2004 , an hourly south west trains local service was introduced , running to chandler 's ford and eastleigh and then down to southampton and totton . the noise from these new services attracted complaints from local residents , who demanded their withdrawal , and there were also suggestions that some of the journeys regularly carried no passengers . however , its future is assured under the new south west trains , which saw the service altered from december 2007 to run from romsey to southampton via eastleigh as currently , then back to romsey via millbrook and redbridge and on to salisbury . the result is more train services for romsey than at any other time in its history , with particular improvements for passengers travelling to southampton or salisbury . a dedicated shuttle bus linking romsey with fast london trains at winchester was discontinued in 2009 despite a campaign to save the service . campaign to save bus defeated romsey advertiser , 9 november 2007 other bus services are provided by wilts & dorset within the town and to salisbury , bluestar to southampton and eastleigh and stagecoach within the town and to winchester . sport and leisure . one of the cricket clubs is old tauntonians and romsey cricket club the wessex league football club romsey town fc play at the bypass ground , south front . romsey rugby football club is based at romsey sports centre . it fields teams of all ages each weekend of the playing season . the town has a swimming pool , the romsey rapids . . media . published every friday , the romsey advertiser is the town 's newspaper printed at redbridge , southampton . media appearances . in thomas hardy 's wessex , the town of deansleigh is based on romsey ; and deansleigh park , the residence of lady mottisfont in a group of noble dames , is thought to be based on broadlands . in the 1980 and 1990s , romsey was used as the location of fictional sussex town kingsmarkham in the television series the ruth rendell mysteries . romsey locations appear throughout the series concerning inspector wexford played by george baker . the location used for the fictional police station was the former romsey magistrates ' court in church street . a fictional '' underground car park in romsey '' is referred to in an episode of the tv series absolutely fabulous . . references . external links . romsey local history society local history in romsey and its surrounding area transition town romsey romsey is now an official transition towns hampshire county council page on the town romseyschools.net information on all schools in romsey a video of romsey today ( 2014 )