Wheat beer

varieties . weißbier ( german – '' white beer '' ) uses at least 50 % wheat to barley malt to make a light coloured top-fermenting beer . witbier ( dutch – '' white beer '' ) uses flavorings such as coriander and orange peel . belgian white beers are often made with raw unmalted wheat . german weißbier and belgian witbier are termed '' white beers '' because '' wheat '' has the same etymology root as '' white '' in most west germanic languages ( including english ) . other wheat beer styles , such as berliner weiße , gose , and lambic , are made with a significant proportion of wheat . weizenbier . weizenbier or hefeweizen , in the southern parts of bavaria usually called weißbier ( literally '' white beer '' , but the name probably derives from weizenbier , '' wheat beer '' ) , is a beer , traditionally from bavaria , in which a significant proportion of malted barley is replaced with malted wheat . by german law , weißbiers brewed in germany must be fermented using a '' top-fermenting '' yeast , which is technically an '' ale yeast '' . eric warner , german wheat beer . boulder , co : brewers publications , 1992 . specialized strains of yeast are used which produce overtones of banana and clove as by-products of fermentation . weißbier is so called because it was , at the time of its inception , paler in color than munich 's traditional brown beer . it is well known throughout germany , though better known as weizen ( '' wheat '' ) outside bavaria . the terms hefeweizen ( '' yeast wheat '' ) or hefeweißbier refer to wheat beer in its traditional , unfiltered form . the term kristallweizen ( crystal wheat ) , or kristallweißbier ( crystal white beer ) , refers to a wheat beer that is filtered to remove the yeast and wheat proteins which contribute to its cloudy appearance . the hefeweizen style is particularly noted for its low hop bitterness ( about 15 ibus ) and relatively high carbonation ( approaching four volumes ) , considered important to balance the beer 's relatively malty sweetness . another balancing flavor note unique to hefeweizen beer is its phenolic character ; its signature phenol is 4-vinyl guaiacol , a metabolite of ferulic acid , the result of fermentation by top-fermenting yeast appropriate for the style . hefeweizens phenolic character has been described as '' clove '' and '' medicinal '' ( '' band-aid '' ) but also smoky . other more typical but less assertive flavour notes produced by weißbier yeast include '' banana '' ( amyl acetate ) , '' bubble gum '' , and sometimes '' vanilla '' ( vanillin ) . weißbier is available in a number of other forms , including dunkelweizen ( dark wheat ) and weizenstarkbier ( strong wheat beer ) , commonly referred to as weizenbock . the dark wheat varieties are made with darker , more highly kilned malts ( both wheat and barley ) . the weizenbocks typically have a much higher alcohol content than their lighter cousins . the four largest brands in germany are erdinger , paulaner , franziskaner , and maisel . other renowned brands are augustiner , weihenstephaner , schneider ( a bronze-coloured specialty ) , and andechser . regional brands in bavaria are hopf , unertl , ayinger , schweiger and plank . aventinus is an example of weizen doppelbock , stronger and darker version of weizenbock , made by the g . schneider & sohn brewery in kelheim . british brewers producing cask-conditioned varieties include oakleaf eichenblatt bitte , hoskins white dolphin , fyfe weiss squad and oakham white dwarf . witbier . witbier , white beer , bière blanche , or simply witte is a barley/wheat , top-fermented beer brewed mainly in belgium and the netherlands . it gets its name due to suspended yeast and wheat proteins , which cause the beer to look hazy , or white , when cold . it is a descendant from medieval beers that were flavored and preserved with a blend of spices and other plants , such as coriander , orange , and bitter orange referred to as '' gruit '' instead of using hops . the style was revived by pierre celis at the hoegaarden brewery in belgium and the celis brewery in the united states . and is traditionally made with up to 50 % raw wheat rather than wheat malt . the beers have a somewhat sour taste due to the presence of lactic acid or acetic acid , much more pronounced in the past than today . also , the suspended yeast in the beer causes some continuing fermentation in the bottle . other varieties . a minor variety of wheat beer is represented by berliner weiße ( berlin white ) , which is low in alcohol ( 2.5 % to 3 % abv ) and intentionally tart . sweetened syrups of lemon , raspberry , or woodruff herb are often added before drinking . leipziger gose is similar to berliner weiße , but slightly stronger at around 4 % abv . its ingredients include coriander and salt , which are unusual for german beers . belgian lambic is also made with wheat and barley , but differs from nearly all beers in the use of wild yeast for spontaneous fermentation . a variation on the barley wine style involves adding a large quantity of wheat to the mash bill , resulting in what is referred to as wheat wine . this style originated in the united states in the 1980s . . names and types . wheat beers vary in name according to where they are brewed and small variations in the recipe . among those used are : weißbier , short weiße : weiß is german for '' white '' . these terms are used almost exclusively in the southern german state of bavaria and in austria . weizenbier , short weizen : weizen is german for '' wheat '' . these terms are used in the western ( baden-württemberg ) and northern german regions for weißbier . hefeweißbier or hefeweizen : hefe is the german word for yeast , is added to indicate that the beer is bottle-conditioned ( unfiltered ) , thus might have sediment . kristallweißbier or kristallweizen : kristall , being german for crystal , is added if weißbier is filtered clear of sediment . dunkles weißbier or dunkelweizen : a dark version of a wheat beer ( dunkel is the german word for '' dark '' ) weizenbock is a wheat beer made in the bock style originating in germany . witbier ( literally , '' white beer '' ) or simply wit : dutch-language name for the belgian style of wheat beer bière blanche ( literally , '' white beer '' ) : the french language name for wheat beer . serving . bavarian-style wheat beer is usually served in , vase-shaped glasses . in belgium , witbier is usually served in a 250-ml glass ; each brewery ( hoegaarden , dentergems , etc . ) has its own shape of glass . berliner weiße is often served in a schooner . kristallweizen ( especially in austria ) and american styles of wheat beer are sometimes served with a slice of lemon or orange in the glass . this is not traditional in bavaria , and is generally frowned upon there . the modern american custom appears to have originated in portland , oregon , in the mid-1980s , where the dublin pub served widmer brothers brewery 's weizenbier with a slice of lemon , to accentuate the citrus flavor of the cascade hops . in northern bavaria , a grain of rice commonly is added to kristallweizen , which causes a gentle bubbling effect and results in a longer-lasting foam . weizenbier or wheat beer a common item on pub menus in bavaria is shandy , which is a mix of cola and weizenbier . another mixture popular during the summer is a radler variant with a 50–50 mix of weißbier with lemonade called '' russ '' , which is the german term for russian . . sensory profile . weißbiers feature fermentation by-products such as esters ( which lend fruity flavors and aromas ) , especially isoamyl acetate , reminiscent of bananas , and the natural phenol guaiacol , a metabolite of ferulic acid , which smells and tastes like cloves . other phenolics sometimes found in weißbiers evoke medicinal or smoky sensations . the bittering level of most weißbiers is close to 15 international bitterness units , a very low level . hop flavor and aroma are typically low . the ester and phenolic aspects are produced by the special type of yeast , rather than the high fraction of wheat in the grain bill . the carbonation level can range from 5.5 & nbsp ; g/l ( about 2.7 volumes ; slightly higher than that of most other german beers ) to 7 & nbsp ; g/l , or more . this produces a generous stand of foam , especially with the high protein content of wheat malt . . see also . beer glassware beer in belgium beer in germany rye beer . references . bibliography . german wheat beer , eric warner , brewers publications ( 1992 ) , . external links . beer judge certification program ( bjcp ) wheat beer style guidelines