Bonnot Gang

members . the bonnot gang originally consisted of a group of french anarchists centered around the individualist anarchism magazine l'anarchie . the group was founded by octave garnier , raymond callemin , and rené valet . it was garnier 's idea to use automobiles in the service of a daring criminal act . jules bonnot joined them in december 1911 . file : jules-bonnot.png jules bonnot file : octave-garnier.png octave garnier file : callemin attitude trois-quarts casquette.jpg raymond callemin , executed file : etienne monier bande à bonnot.jpg étienne monier , executed file : soudy.jpg andré soudy , executed principal gang members included : jules bonnot octave garnier raymond callemin anna dondon marie vuillemin andré soudy édouard carouy jeanne belardi jean de boe étienne monier eugène dieudonné minor players included david belonie , marius medge , antoine gauzy , pierre jourdan ( anarchist ) , charles reinart , victor serge , godorowski , henriette maîtrejean , and berbe leclech . the gang 's political and social perspective was heavily influenced by mikhail bakunin and pierre-joseph proudhon as well as max stirner , ludwig büchner , and friedrich nietzsche . bonnot 's ideas were more part with late anarchist ravachol . crime spree . the first robbery by bonnot 's gang was on december 21 , 1911 at the ab branch of société générale bank , located at 148 rue ordener in the 18th arrondissement of paris . they shot a collection clerk in the neck and lung ( yet he survived ) , snatched his cash bags , then escaped in an automobile ( a delaunay-belleville ) they had stolen a week before . robbersbonnot , octave garnier , eugène dieudonné and raymond callemingot earnings equal to 5,126 francs , but the rest of it was composed of securities . on december 28 , 1911 , the gang broke into a gun shop in the paris center . a few days later , on the night of january 2 , 1912 , they entered the home of the wealthy m . moreau and murdered both him and his maid . the take was equal to 30,000 francs . the national police did its best to catch the gang . they were able to arrest one man based on their registry of anarchist organisations . the gang fled temporarily to belgium , where they sold the stolen automobile and tried to carjack another . in the process they shot a belgian policeman . the gang continued their automobile thefts and robberies , shooting two more policemen in the process . automobiles were not yet common so the gang usually stole still expensive cars from garages , not from the street . by march 1912 , police had arrested many of the gang 's supporters and knew many of the members ' faces and names . in march 1912 , gang member and would-be leader octave garnier sent a mocking letter to the sûretéwith his fingerprints . in those days , the french police still did not yet use fingerprinting . on march 25 , 1912 , the gang stole a de dion-bouton automobile in the forest of sénart south of paris by shooting the driver through the heart . richard parry : the bonnot gang . rebel press , 1987 , , p . 115 . they drove into chantilly north of paris where they robbed the local branch of société générale bank fatally shooting two bank cashiers and severely wounding a bookkeeper . they escaped in their stolen automobile as two policemen tried to catch them , one on horseback and the other on a bicycle . sûreté chief xavier guichard took the matter personally . even politicians became concerned , increasing police funding by 800,000 francs . banks began to prepare for forthcoming robberies and many cashiers armed themselves . the société générale promised a reward of 100,000 francs for information that would lead to arrests . . pursuit and capture . on march 30 , police arrested andré soudy at the english channel coast , where he announced that he did not care whether he died of tuberculosis or by guillotine . édouard carouy was arrested april 3 . raymond callemin was arrested april 7 , and police had to prevent an angry mob from lynching him on the spot . étienne monnier was arrested in paris on april 24 . by the end of that month , police had arrested 28 gang members and supporters . still , bonnot , octave garnier and rené valet remained at large . on april 24 , three police officers surprised bonnot in the apartment of a suspected fence . he shot at the officers , killing one and wounding another , and then fled over the rooftops . part of the 100,000 francs reward was later given to the widow of the police officer killed ( louis jouin , the vice-chief of the french national police ) . on april 28 , police had tracked bonnot to a converted garage in the paris suburb of choisy-le-roi . the building had only one entrance so it was easy for bonnot to keep the police at bay . they besieged the place with 500 armed police officers , soldiers ( with one brand new hotchkiss machine gun ) , firefighters , military engineers and private gun-owners . by noon , after a sporadic firing from both sides , paris police chief louis lépine sent three police officers to put a dynamite charge under the house . the explosion demolished the front of the building . bonnot was hiding in the middle of a rolled mattress and tried to shoot back until lépine shot him non-fatally in the head . afterwards police again had to prevent the spectators from lynching bonnot . they simply told the crowd that bonnot was already dead and had been buried in a secret grave . in fact , he was fatally injured but was taken to the hôtel-dieu de paris and survived for around another hour . on the evening of 14 may , octave garnier and rene valet were besieged in the paris suburb of nogent-sur-marne by a large force including 300 police officers and gendarmes and 800 soldiers . sûreté chief xavier guichard himself led the siege . the firing from both sides was intense , and at 2 & nbsp ; am , guichard decided to blow the place up . garnier died in the explosion , but valet tried to keep firing despite his wounds . trial . the trial of the gang 's survivors began on february 3 , 1913 . victor serge was sentenced to five years for robbery . all the others were initially sentenced to death . the sentence of eugène dieudonné was commuted to life imprisonment . sentences of édouard carouy and marius metge were commuted to life imprisonment at hard labor . carouy later committed suicide . metge was sent to a penal colony . raymond caillemin , étienne monier and andré soudy refused to plead for clemency and they were executed by guillotine . aftermath . in the aftermath of the collapse of the bonnot gang , french authorities used the threat of anarchist violence as the pretext for a substantial expansion in law enforcement power . hundreds of raids were carried out against known anarchists and sympathizers ( similar in scale to the palmer raids in the united states ) . although the actions of the gang were not widely supported , even within the anarchist milieu , the mainstream press called for a general crackdown on left-wing revolutionary activity . french anarchist communism attempted to distance themselves from illegalism and individualist anarchism as a whole . in august 1913 , the fédération communiste-anarchistes ( fca ) condemned individualism as bourgeois and more in keeping with capitalism than communism . nevertheless , the bonnot gang found some sympathy from the french working-class . as many as one hundred thousand people visited nogent-sur-marne ( the site of the shoot-out that ended the lives of garnier and valet ) and merchants in paris sold souvenirs depicting the bandits . the bonnot gang remains one of france 's best known anarchist groups . see more . la bande à bonnot , 1968 film les brigades du tigre