Fynbos

overview and history . the word fynbos is often confusingly said to mean '' fine bush '' in afrikaans , as '' bos '' means '' bush '' . typical fynbos foliage is ericoid rather than fine . the term , in its pre-afrikaans , dutch form , fynbosch , was recorded by noble as being in casual use in the late 19th century . in the early 20th century , john bews referred to : '' south-western or cape region of macchia or fynbosch '' . he said : '' in this well-known region where the rain occurs in winter and the summers are more or less dry , the dominant vegetation is of a sclerophyllous type and there is little or no natural grassland , though there are many kinds of grass . '' he also refers to a high degree of endemism in the grasses in that region . elsewhere he speaks of the term as '' . applied by the inhabitants of the cape to any sort of small woodland growth that does not include timber trees '' ; in the current vernacular , this still is the effective sense of the word . however , in the technical , ecological sense , the constraints are more demanding . in the latter half of the 20th century , '' fynbos '' gained currency as the term for the '' distinctive vegetation of the southwestern cape '' . . cape floral kingdom . fynbos – which grows in a 100-to-200-km-wide coastal belt stretching from clanwilliam on the west coast to port elizabeth on the southeast coast – forms part of the cape floral kingdom , where it accounts for half of the surface area and 80 % of the plant species . the fynbos in the western regions is richer and more varied than in the eastern regions of south africa . of the world 's six floral kingdoms , this is the smallest and richest per unit of area . the holarctic kingdom , in contrast , incorporates the whole of the northern hemisphere north of the tropics . the diversity of fynbos plants is extremely high , with over 9,000 species of plants occurring in the area , around 6,200 of which are endemic , i.e . growing nowhere else in the world . south africa 's western cape has the vast majority of species with one estimate finding 8,550 species in 89,000 & nbsp ; km 2 , which is higher than that estimated for the malayan forests , 7,900 species in 132,000 & nbsp ; km 2 . it has been claimed that it exceeds even the richest tropical rainforest in south america , including the amazon . of the ericas , over 600 occur in the fynbos kingdom , while only two or three dozen have been described in the rest of the world . this is in an area of 46,000 & nbsp ; km 2 – by comparison , the netherlands , with an area of 33,000 & nbsp ; km 2 , has 1,400 species , none of them endemic . table mountain in cape town supports 2,200 species , more than the entire united kingdom . thus , although the fynbos covers only 6 % of the area of southern africa , it has half the species on the subcontinent – and in fact has almost 1 in 5 of all african plant species so far described . five main river systems traverse the cape floral kingdom : the olifants river ( western cape ) ; the berg river which drains the west coast forelands plain stretching from the cape flats to the olifants ; the breede , which is the largest river on the cape ; the olifants river ( southern cape ) ; gourits and the groot rivers which drain the little karoo basin and the south coast forelands ; and the baviaanskloof and gamtoos rivers to the east . flora . the most conspicuous components of the flora are evergreen sclerophyllous plants , many with ericoid leaves and gracile habit , as opposed to timber forest . several plant families are conspicuous in fynbos ; the proteaceae are prominent , with genera such as protea , leucospermum ( the '' pincushions '' ) , and leucadendron ( the silver tree and '' cone bushes '' ) . proteas are represented by many species and are prominent in the landscape , generally with large striking flowers , many of which are pollinated by birds , and others by small mammals . most of these do not have anything like ericoid leaves , and nor do most rhamnaceae , fabaceae , or geraniaceae . fynbos ericaceae include more species of erica than all other regions combined . they are popularly called heaths and are generally smaller plants bearing many small , tubular or globular flowers and ericoid leaves . restionaceae also occur in greater variety in fynbos than anywhere else ; their species are superficially grass-like . many of them grow in wet areas such as seasonal marshes and spongy basins in the sources of mountain streams , but others grow in decidedly arid conditions . depending on the locality and the aspects under discussion , several other families have equal claim to being characteristic , including asteraceae , rutaceae , and iridaceae . more than 1400 bulb species occur among the fynbos , of which 96 are gladiolus and 54 lachenalia . areas that are dominated by '' renosterbos '' , elytropappus rhinocerotis , ( asteraceae ) are known as renosterveld ( afrikaans for '' rhinoceros veld '' ) . . vegetation types . fynbos vegetation types , code ff : agulhas limestone fynbos ( ffl 1 ) agulhas sand fynbos ( ffd 7 ) albertinia sand fynbos ( ffd 9 ) algoa sandstone fynbos ( ffs 29 ) atlantis sand fynbos ( ffd 4 ) bokkeveld sandstone fynbos ( ffs 1 ) boland granite fynbos ( ffg 2 ) breede alluvium fynbos ( ffa 2 ) breede quartzite fynbos ( ffq 4 ) breede sand fynbos ( ffd 8 ) breede shale fynbos ( ffh 4 ) canca limestone fynbos ( ffl 3 ) cape flats sand fynbos ( ffd 5 ) cape winelands shale fynbos ( ffh 5 ) cederberg sandstone fynbos ( ffs 4 ) central coastal shale band vegetation ( ffb 4 ) central inland shale band vegetation ( ffb 3 ) de hoop limestone fynbos ( ffl 2 ) eastern coastal shale band vegetation ( ffb 6 ) eastern inland shale band vegetation ( ffb 5 ) elgin shale fynbos ( ffh 6 ) elim ferricrete fynbos ( fff 1 ) garden route granite fynbos ( ffg 5 ) garden route shale fynbos ( ffh 9 ) graafwater sandstone fynbos ( ffs 2 ) greyton shale fynbos ( ffh 7 ) grootrivier quartzite fynbos ( ffq 5 ) hangklip sand fynbos ( ffd 6 ) hawequas sandstone fynbos ( ffs 10 ) hopefield sand fynbos ( ffd 3 ) kamiesberg granite fynbos ( ffg 1 ) kango conglomerate fynbos ( fft 1 ) knysna sand fynbos ( ffd 10 ) kogelberg sandstone fynbos ( ffs 11 ) kouebokkeveld alluvium fynbos ( ffa 1 ) kouebokkeveld shale fynbos ( ffh 1 ) kouga grassy sandstone fynbos ( ffs 28 ) kouga sandstone fynbos ( ffs 27 ) leipoldtville sand fynbos ( ffd 2 ) loerie conglomerate fynbos ( fft 2 ) lourensford alluvium fynbos ( ffa 4 ) matjiesfontein quartzite fynbos ( ffq 3 ) matjiesfontein shale fynbos ( ffh 2 ) montagu shale fynbos ( ffh 8 ) namaqualand sand fynbos ( ffd 1 ) north hex sandstone fynbos ( ffs 7 ) north kammanassie sandstone fynbos ( ffs 25 ) north langeberg sandstone fynbos ( ffs 15 ) north outeniqua sandstone fynbos ( ffs 18 ) north rooiberg sandstone fynbos ( ffs 21 ) north sonderend sandstone fynbos ( ffs 13 ) ? north swartberg sandstone fynbos ( ffs 23 ) northern inland shale band vegetation ( ffb 1 ) olifants sandstone fynbos ( ffs 3 ) overberg sandstone fynbos ( ffs 12 ) peninsula granite fynbos ( ffg 3 ) peninsula sandstone fynbos ( ffs 9 ) piketberg sandstone fynbos ( ffs 6 ) potberg ferricrete fynbos ( fff 2 ) potberg sandstone fynbos ( ffs 17 ) robertson granite fynbos ( ffg 4 ) south hex sandstone fynbos ( ffs 8 ) south kammanassie sandstone fynbos ( ffs 26 ) south langeberg sandstone fynbos ( ffs 16 ) south outeniqua sandstone fynbos ( ffs 19 ) south rooiberg sandstone fynbos ( ffs 22 ) south sonderend sandstone fynbos ( ffs 14 ) south swartberg sandstone fynbos ( ffs 24 ) southern cape dune fynbos ( ffd 11 ) stinkfonteinberge quartzite fynbos ( ffq 1 ) suurberg quartzite fynbos ( ffq 6 ) suurberg shale fynbos ( ffh 10 ) swartberg altimontane sandstone fynbos ( ffs 31 ) swartberg shale fynbos ( ffh 3 ) swartland alluvium fynbos ( ffa 3 ) swartruggens quartzite fynbos ( ffq 2 ) swellendam silcrete fynbos ( ffc 1 ) tsitsikamma sandstone fynbos ( ffs 20 ) western altimontane sandstone fynbos ( ffs 30 ) western coastal shale band vegetation ( ffb 2 ) winterhoek sandstone fynbos ( ffs 5 ) . fauna . the fynbos is home to many unique and endemic animals , with 7 species of endemic bird and an unknown number of endemic reptiles , amphibians , and arthropods . the 7 avian endemics include the cape rockjumper , cape sugarbird , victorin 's warbler , orange-breasted sunbird , protea canary , cape siskin , and fynbos buttonquail . ecoregions . the fynbos area has been divided into two very similar ecoregions : the lowland fynbos ( below 300 m above sea level ) on the sandy soil of the west coast , and the montane fynbos of the cape fold belt . the lowland fynbos and renosterveld experiences regular winter rainfall , especially to the west of cape agulhas . the ecoregion has been subdivided into 9 areas : the west coast forelands from the cape flats to the olifants river ( western cape ) ; the warm bokkeveld basin around the town of ceres ; the elgin valley around the town of elgin ; the sandy agulhas plain on the coast ; the breede river valley around the town of worcester ; the south coast forelands from caledon west to mossel bay ; the south-eastern end of the little karoo ; langkloof valley ; and the southeastern coast forelands west from tsitsikamma to port elizabeth . the flora of the lowlands contains a high number of endemic species , and tends to favour larger plants than those growing on the hillier areas . they include the larger restionaceae such as species of elegia , thamnochortus , and willdenowia and proteas such as king protea ( protea cynaroides ) and blushing bride ( serruria florida ) . particular types of lowland fynbos include the shrubs and herbs of the coastal sand dunes , the mixture of ericoids and restoids with thickets of shrubs such as maytenus , and other celastraceae , sideroxylons and other sapotaceae , and rhus and other anacardiaceae on the coastal sands ; the classic fynbos of the sandplains of the west coast forelands , and the agulhas plain ; the grassy fynbos of the hillier and wetter areas of the south and south-eastern coast forelands ; areas where fynbos and renosterveld are mixed ; coastal renosterveld on the west and south coast forelands ; and the inland renosterveld of the drier inland little karoo and warm bokkeveld . the area is also home to a large number of endemic creatures that have adapted to life in this area , such as the monkey beetles which pollinate ixia viridiflora . endemic species of fish in the five river systems occur in the area , too . endemic reptiles and amphibians include a number of tortoises and the chameleon-like arum frog ( hyperolius horstockii ) . the montane fynbos and renosterveld is the area above 300 & nbsp ; m , a total of 45,000 & nbsp ; km 2 of the cape fold mountains . the same level of floral variety , including all three characteristic fynbos families , is found there , but ericas predominate . because the higher and wetter areas are more protected and contain important water sources , the original flora is more intact than in the lowlands ; but agriculture and global warming are still threats . the region includes the mountains in the west from the cape peninsula to the kouebokkeveld mountains , the south coast hinterland from elgin to port elizabeth , the mountains north of the little karoo from laingsburg to willowmore , and the inselberg hills within the little karoo . about half of these areas are originally fynbos , and about half are renosterveld . many different microclimates occur , so the flora changes from west to east , and also varies with altitude up the hillsides away from the coast and according to compass direction . lower elevations are covered with protea fynbos , with ericas taking over further up . plant species include pincushions ( leucospermum ) . the wildlife includes a number of endemic bees , beetles , horseflies , and ants , and birds such as cape sugarbirds and the orange-breasted sunbird . many of these birds and insects are important and specific pollinators for the fynbos , such as the mountain pride butterfly ( aeropetes tulbaghia ) which only visits red flowers such as disa uniflora and pollinates 15 different species . larger animals include antelopes , particularly cape grysbok ( raphicerus melanotis ) , common duiker ( sylvicapra grimmia ) , and klipspringer ( oreotragus oreotragus ) . the extinct bluebuck and quagga were also fynbos natives . economic uses . rooibos ( aspalathus linearis ) and honeybush ( cyclopia intermedia ) are of economic importance , grown and harvested in large quantities in the cederberg area , and providing important exports . restios continue to be used for thatching , as they have for hundreds or even thousands of years . proteas and other floral species are grown in many areas and their flowers harvested for export . in many areas with mediterranean climates , fynbos species have become popular garden plants , in particular aloes and geraniums , and in cooler regions are used as window plants . a very large number of fynbos plant species are used in traditional medicine , and while only a tiny proportion have as yet been subjected to formal testing , many have already been identified as having medicinal properties . . threats and conservation . the fynbos is the region of south africa most affected by invasive species which collectively cover around 10 % of the entire country . the most common invasive plants are wattles and hakeas , native to australia , and pines native to europe and the californian coast of the united states . pines had been introduced to south africa by the 19th century and the wattles were imported into the mid-1870s to stabilize sand dunes . in 1997 it was estimated that invasion caused the fynbos region to decline in value by us 750 million per year . the working for water ( wfw ) program was started in 1995 by the department of water affairs and forestry to control these invasive species which were shown to sequester 9.95 % of usable surface water runoff . since then , over 100,000 hectares of land have been cleared of invasive species while providing jobs to around 20,000 people per year , most of which are women and unskilled workers . systematic monitoring of wfw 's progress is lacking but there is anecdotal evidence that endemic silver peas have returned to table mountain after being thought extinct . file : kogelberg biosphere reserve - city of cape town.jpg researchers in a relatively remote stretch of kogelberg sandstone fynbos file : harmony flats nature reserve - city of cape town.jpg community conservation group for the critically endangered remnant of lourensford alluvium fynbos at harmony flats , cape town . . see also . . references . external links . fynbos paradise of south africa images of fynbos western cape school network on fynbos '' protea atlas project '' with excellent information and images . fauna & flora international 's work on fynbos fynbos photography ( organized taxonomically ) conservation and land restoration project at terrapi , sa data on invasive species in south africa wfw program official page