Orbital mechanics

history . until the rise of spaceflight in the twentieth century , there was little distinction between orbital and celestial mechanics . at the time of sputnik , the field was termed 'space dynamics' . the fundamental techniques , such as those used to solve the keplerian problem ( determining position as a function of time ) , are therefore the same in both fields . furthermore , the history of the fields are almost entirely shared . johannes kepler was the first to successfully model planetary orbits to a high degree of accuracy , publishing his laws in 1605 . isaac newton published more general laws of celestial motion in the first edition of philosophiæ naturalis principia mathematica ( 1687 ) , which gave a method for finding the orbit of a body following a parabola path from three observations . this was used by edmund halley to establish the orbits of various comets , including that which bears his name . newton 's method of successive approximation was formalised into an analytic method by euler in 1744 , whose work was in turn generalised to elliptical and hyperbolic orbits by lambert in 1761–1777 . another milestone in orbit determination was carl friedrich gauss 's assistance in the '' recovery '' of the dwarf planet ceres in 1801 . gauss 's method was able to use just three observations ( in the form of pairs of right ascension and declination ) , to find the six orbital elements that completely describe an orbit . the theory of orbit determination has subsequently been developed to the point where today it is applied in gps receivers as well as the tracking and cataloguing of newly observed minor planets . modern orbit determination and prediction are used for operating all types of satellites and space probes , as it is necessary to know their future positions to a high degree of accuracy . astrodynamics was developed by astronomer samuel herrick beginning in the 1930s . he consulted the rocket scientist robert goddard and was encouraged to continue his work on space navigation techniques as goddard believed they would be needed in the future . astrodynamics numerical techniques were coupled with new powerful computers in the 1960s , and man was ready to travel to the moon and return . practical techniques . rules of thumb . the following rules of thumb are useful for situations approximated by classical mechanics under the standard assumptions of astrodynamics outlined below the rules . the specific example discussed is of a satellite orbiting a planet , but the rules of thumb could also apply to other situations , such as orbits of small bodies around a star such as the sun . kepler 's laws of planetary motion : orbits are ellipse , with the heavier body at one focus of the ellipse . a special case of this is a circular orbit ( a circle is a special case of ellipse ) with the planet at the center . a line drawn from the planet to the satellite sweeps out equal areas in equal times no matter which portion of the orbit is measured . the square of a satellite 's orbital period is proportional to the cube of its average distance from the planet . without applying force ( such as firing a rocket engine ) , the period and shape of the satellite 's orbit wo n't change . a satellite in a low orbit ( or low part of an elliptical orbit ) moves more quickly with respect to the surface of the planet than a satellite in a higher orbit ( or a high part of an elliptical orbit ) , due to the stronger gravitational attraction closer to the planet . if thrust is applied at only one point in the satellite 's orbit , it will return to that same point on each subsequent orbit , though the rest of its path will change . thus one can not move from one circular orbit to another with only one brief application of thrust . from a circular orbit , thrust applied in a direction opposite to the satellite 's motion changes orbit to elliptical ; the satellite will descend and reach the lowest orbital point ( the periapse ) at 180 degrees away from the firing point ; then it will ascend back . thrust applied in the direction of the satellite 's motion creates an elliptical orbit with its highest point ( apoapse ) 180 degrees away from the firing point . the consequences of the rules of orbital mechanics are sometimes counter-intuitive . for example , if two spacecraft are in the same circular orbit and wish to dock , unless they are very close , the trailing craft can not simply fire its engines to go faster . this will change the shape of its orbit , causing it to gain altitude and actually slow down relative to the leading craft , missing the target . the space rendezvous before docking normally takes multiple precisely calculated engine firings in multiple orbital periods requiring hours or even days to complete . to the degree that the standard assumptions of astrodynamics do not hold , actual trajectories will vary from those calculated . for example , simple atmospheric drag is another complicating factor for objects in low earth orbit . these rules of thumb are decidedly inaccurate when describing two or more bodies of similar mass , such as a binary star system ( see n-body problem ) . celestial mechanics uses more general rules applicable to a wider variety of situations . kepler 's laws of planetary motion , which can be mathematically derived from newton 's laws , hold strictly only in describing the motion of two gravitating bodies in the absence of non-gravitational forces ; they also describe parabolic and hyperbolic trajectories . in the close proximity of large objects like stars the differences between classical mechanics and general relativity also become important . laws of astrodynamics . the fundamental laws of astrodynamics are newton 's law of universal gravitation and newton 's laws of motion , while the fundamental mathematical tool is differential calculus . every orbit and trajectory outside atmospheres is in principle reversible , i.e . , in the space-time function the t-symmetry . the velocities are reversed and the accelerations are the same , including those due to rocket bursts . thus if a rocket burst is in the direction of the velocity , in the reversed case it is opposite to the velocity . of course in the case of rocket bursts there is no full reversal of events , both ways the same delta-v is used and the same mass ratio applies . standard assumptions in astrodynamics include non-interference from outside bodies , negligible mass for one of the bodies , and negligible other forces ( such as from the solar wind , atmospheric drag , etc . ) . more accurate calculations can be made without these simplifying assumptions , but they are more complicated . the increased accuracy often does not make enough of a difference in the calculation to be worthwhile . kepler 's laws of planetary motion may be derived from newton 's laws , when it is assumed that the orbiting body is subject only to the gravitational force of the central attractor . when an engine thrust or propulsive force is present , newton 's laws still apply , but kepler 's laws are invalidated . when the thrust stops , the resulting orbit will be different but will once again be described by kepler 's laws . the three laws are : the orbit of every planet is an ellipse with the sun at one of the foci . a line joining a planet and the sun sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time . the squares of the orbital periods of planets are directly proportional to the cubes of the semi-major axis of the orbits . escape velocity . the formula for an escape velocity is derived as follows . the specific energy ( energy per unit mass ) of any space vehicle is composed of two components , the specific potential energy and the specific kinetic energy . the specific potential energy associated with a planet of mass m is given by : \epsilon_p - \frac . -- > . the universal variable formulation . to address computational shortcomings of traditional approaches for solving the 2-body problem , the universal variable formulation was developed . it works equally well for the circular , elliptical , parabolic , and hyperbolic cases , the differential equations converging well when integrated for any orbit . it also generalizes well to problems incorporating perturbation theory . perturbations . the universal variable formulation works well with the variation of parameters technique , except now , instead of the six keplerian orbital elements , we use a different set of orbital elements : namely , the satellite 's initial position and velocity vectors x_0 and v_0 at a given epoch t 0 . in a two-body simulation , these elements are sufficient to compute the satellite 's position and velocity at any time in the future , using the universal variable formulation . conversely , at any moment in the satellite 's orbit , we can measure its position and velocity , and then use the universal variable approach to determine what its initial position and velocity would have been at the epoch . in perfect two-body motion , these orbital elements would be invariant ( just like the keplerian elements would be ) . however , perturbations cause the orbital elements to change over time . hence , we write the position element as x_0 ( t ) and the velocity element as v_0 ( t ) , indicating that they vary with time . the technique to compute the effect of perturbations becomes one of finding expressions , either exact or approximate , for the functions x_0 ( t ) and v_0 ( t ) . the following are some effects which make real orbits differ from the simple models based on a spherical earth . most of them can be handled on short timescales ( perhaps less than a few thousand orbits ) by perturbation theory because they are small relative to the corresponding two-body effects . equatorial bulges cause precession of the node and the perigee tesseral harmonics of the gravity field introduce additional perturbations lunar and solar gravity perturbations alter the orbits atmospheric drag reduces the semi-major axis unless make-up thrust is used over very long timescales ( perhaps millions of orbits ) , even small perturbations can dominate , and the behaviour can become chaotic . on the other hand , the various perturbations can be orchestrated by clever astrodynamicists to assist with orbit maintenance tasks , such as station-keeping , ground track maintenance or adjustment , or phasing of perigee to cover selected targets at low altitude . orbital maneuver . in spaceflight , an orbital maneuver is the use of propulsion systems to change the orbit of a spacecraft . for spacecraft far from earth—for example those in orbits around the sun—an orbital maneuver is called a deep-space maneuver ( dsm ) . orbital transfer . transfer orbits are usually elliptical orbits that allow spacecraft to move from one ( usually substantially circular ) orbit to another . usually they require a burn at the start , a burn at the end , and sometimes one or more burns in the middle . the hohmann transfer orbit requires a minimal delta-v . a bi-elliptic transfer can require less energy than the hohmann transfer , if the ratio of orbits is 11.94 or greater , but comes at the cost of increased trip time over the hohmann transfer . faster transfers may use any orbit that intersects both the original and destination orbits , at the cost of higher delta-v . using low thrust engines ( such as electrical propulsion ) , if the initial orbit is supersynchronous to the final desired circular orbit then the optimal transfer orbit is achieved by thrusting continuously in the direction of the velocity at apogee . this method however takes much longer due to the low thrust . for the case of orbital transfer between non-coplanar orbits , the change-of-plane thrust must be made at the point where the orbital planes intersect ( the '' node '' ) . as the objective is to change the direction of the velocity vector by an angle equal to the angle between the planes , almost all of this thrust should be made when the spacecraft is at the node near the apoapse , when the magnitude of the velocity vector is at its lowest . however , a small fraction of the orbital inclination change can be made at the node near the periapse , by slightly angling the transfer orbit injection thrust in the direction of the desired inclination change . this works because the cosine of a small angle is very nearly one , resulting in the small plane change being effectively '' free '' despite the high velocity of the spacecraft near periapse , as the oberth effect due to the increased , slightly angled thrust exceeds the cost of the thrust in the orbit-normal axis . gravity assist and the oberth effect . in a gravity assist , a spacecraft swings by a planet and leaves in a different direction , at a different speed . this is useful to speed or slow a spacecraft instead of carrying more fuel . this maneuver can be approximated by an elastic collision at large distances , though the flyby does not involve any physical contact . due to newton 's third law ( equal and opposite reaction ) , any momentum gained by a spacecraft must be lost by the planet , or vice versa . however , because the planet is much , much more massive than the spacecraft , the effect on the planet 's orbit is negligible . the oberth effect can be employed , particularly during a gravity assist operation . this effect is that use of a propulsion system works better at high speeds , and hence course changes are best done when close to a gravitating body ; this can multiply the effective delta-v . interplanetary transport network and fuzzy orbits . it is now possible to use computers to search for routes using the nonlinearities in the gravity of the planets and moons of the solar system . for example , it is possible to plot an orbit from high earth orbit to mars , passing close to one of the earth 's trojan points . collectively referred to as the interplanetary transport network , these highly perturbative , even chaotic , orbital trajectories in principle need no fuel beyond that needed to reach the lagrange point ( in practice keeping to the trajectory requires some course corrections ) . the biggest problem with them is they can be exceedingly slow , taking many years . in addition launch windows can be very far apart . they have , however , been employed on projects such as genesis . this spacecraft visited the earth-sun point and returned using very little propellant . see also . aerodynamics aerospace engineering astrophysics canonical units celestial mechanics chaos theory kepler orbit lagrangian point mechanical engineering n-body problem orbit orders of magnitude ( speed ) roche limit spacecraft propulsion tsiolkovsky rocket equation universal variable formulation . references . . further reading . many of the options , procedures , and supporting theory are covered in standard works such as : . external links . orbital mechanics ( rocket and space technology ) java astrodynamics toolkit astrodynamics-based space traffic and event knowledge graph