Suite (music)

history . estienne du tertre published suyttes de branle in 1557 , giving the first general use of the term '' suite '' 'suyttes ' in music , although the usual form of the time was as pairs of dances . the first recognizable suite is peuerl 's newe padouan , intrada , dantz , and galliarda of 1611 , in which the four dances of the title appear repeatedly in ten suites . the banchetto musicale by johann schein ( 1617 ) contains 20 sequences of five different dances . the first four-movement suite credited to a named composer , sandley 's suite , was published in 1663 . the '' classical '' suite consisted of allemande , courante , sarabande , and gigue , in that order , and developed during the 17th century in france , the gigue appearing later than the others . johann jakob froberger is usually credited with establishing the classical suite through his compositions in this form , which were widely published and copied , although this was largely due to his publishers standardizing the order ; froberger 's original manuscripts have many different orderings of the movements , e.g . the gigue preceding the sarabande . the publisher 's standardized order was , however , highly influential especially on the works of bach . many later suites included other movements placed between sarabande and gigue . these optional movements were known as galanteries : common examples are the minuet , gavotte , passepied , and bourrée . often there would be two contrasting galanteries with the same name , e.g . minuet i and ii , to be played alternativement , meaning that the first dance is played again after the second ( but without the internal repeats ) , thus i , ii , i . the later addition of an overture to make up an '' overture-suite '' was extremely popular with german composers ; telemann claimed to have written over 200 overture-suites , christoph graupner wrote 86 orchestral overture-suites and 57 partitas for harpsichord , j . s . bach had his four orchestral suites along with other suites , and handel put his water music and music for the royal fireworks in this form . handel wrote 22 keyboard suites ; bach produced multiple suites for lute , cello , violin , flute , and other instruments , as well as english suites , french suites and partitas for keyboard . françois couperin 's later suites ( which he called '' ordres '' ) often dispensed entirely with the standard dances and consisted entirely of character pieces with fanciful names . by the 1750s , the suite had come to be seen as old-fashioned , superseded by the symphony and concerto , and few composers were still writing suites during that time . but since the 19th century , composers have frequently arranged ballets , operas and other works into suites for concert performance . arrangement into a suite can make the music more accessible and available to a wider audience , and has greatly helped popularize the music itself , such as in tchaikovsky 's suite from the nutcracker , or aaron copland 's suite from appalachian spring . suites for orchestra or concert band usually consist of one or more movements . an example is grieg 's peer gynt orchestral suites i and ii , each consisting of four movements . such suites may consist of : an instrumental selection from a larger work such as an opera , ballet , film score , or musical ; : a sequence of smaller pieces tied together by a common theme , such as the nationalistically inflected suites of grieg , sibelius , or tchaikovsky and the planets by holst ; : a work deliberately referential of baroque themes , as in the mischievous suite for piano by schoenberg . carl nielsen made a suite for string orchestra his opus 1 in 1888 at the age of 23 . in the late 19th century , sibelius 's karelia suite was written for the students of the helsinki university . brought on by impressionism , the piano suite was reintroduced by early 20th-century french composers such as ravel and debussy . debussy 's pour le piano is a suite in three movements , published in 1901 , and his suite bergamasque , revised in 1905 , is probably one of the most famous suites , especially the third movement , clair de lune . ravel is particularly well known for his miroirs suite for piano and lesser known for le tombeau de couperin , both requiring tremendous skill and dexterity from the pianist . arnold schoenberg 's first use of the twelve-tone technique throughout an entire work was in his suite for piano , op . 25 . modeled on the baroque keyboard suite , the piece consists of six movements entitled präludium ( prelude ) , gavotte , musette , intermezzo , menuett ( minuet , with trio ) , and gigue . other famous examples of early 20th-century suites are the planets by gustav holst , a 'suite for orchestra ' in which each piece represents the astrology significance of one of the seven uninhabited planets then known , as well as his first suite in e-flat and second suite in f for military band . there are as well several examples of suites being used in the jazz genre . perhaps the most notable composer is duke ellington/billy strayhorn , who produced many suites , amongst them : black , brown and beige , such sweet thunder , the far east suite , new orleans suite , latin american suite and many more . but is as well used in free jazz ( max roach : freedom now suite , don cherry , john coltrane 's a love supreme , etc . ) . dance suite . the dance suite was a collection of dance music popular in the baroque era . sections . a dance suite contains some of the following movements : prelude entrée ( ballet ) : sometimes an entrée is composed as part of a suite ; but there it is purely instrumental music and no dance is performed . it is an introduction , a march-like piece played during the entrance of a dancing group , or played before a ballet . usually in time . it is related to the italian 'intrada ' . allemande : literally translates from french as the word 'german ' . it is a stately german dance with a meter of . chaconne ( chacona ) : a slow spanish dance in triple meter , much used as a vehicle for variation on a repeated short harmonic progression with a short , repetitive , bass-line . courante or corrente : a courante is a slow french dance in time , while the corrente is an italian dance in quick . sarabande ( zarabanda ) : a slow , stately spanish dance in time . the original spanish dance was very lively and quick , and deemed so inappropriate that miguel de cervantes said that '' hell was its birth and breeding place '' . the dance was subsequently slowed down in france to a solemn triple metre . intermezzi : this section consists of two to four dances at the discretion of the composer that may include a minuet , bourrée , polonaise , and/or a gavotte . gigue ( giga ) : the gigue or 'jig ' originates in britain and ireland , and is a fast dance , normally with a meter of . the italian giga is rarer than the gigue , and is faster with running passages over a harmonic basis . minuet ( menuetto ) : a dance in a stately manner . it is often short and simple often with only clear theme and little variation . in many suites there are two minuets , in such cases the first minuet is played with repeats , then follows the second minuet with repeats , then the first minuet is repeated ( da capo ) usually without repeats . there may also be a third minuet , in which case it is played with repeats after the first da capo , afterwards the first minuet is played again ( usually without repeats ) as a second da capo . passacaglia ( pasacalles ) : a lively , often serious spanish dance in or meter . commonly based on a ostinato . pavane : a slow dance in or time of spanish and/or italian origin . polonaise : a dance in which comes in cycles of two bars . a heavy stress is placed on the first beat of the first bar and a lighter stress is placed on the second beat of the second bar giving a slight feeling of disorientation . siciliana ( sicilienne ) : a dance in or in which most of the dance is fixed to one of three typical rhythms involving syncopation and inversion of the rhythm structure . it is often in a minor key and somewhat sombre . bourrée : a light dance in time . a bourée begins with the last beat of a bar and continues with two or three bars until the 4th beat of one bar takes a light stress giving a sense of return to the beginning of the rhythm structure . gavotte : the gavotte is a dance in or related time signature . it begins on the third beat of an incomplete bar . it continues for a few bars where the third beat takes a light stress giving a sense of returning to the beginning of the rhythm structure . passepied : a french dance movement in or . the rhythm is almost always in quaver form . it begins on the last beat of an incomplete bar though the upbeat does not resolve until the end of each section ( unlike the bourée or gavotte where there can be a resolution of the upbeat ( s ) every three or four bars . it is a light dance with a strong feeling of movement . badinerie : a brief and quick dance in time that merged with the scherzo to give rise to a movement of fast tempo in duple meter common in the romanticism as a substitute to the minuet . see also . list of musical medleys . references .