Desmostylia

description . desmostylians were large , fully aquatic quadrupeds with massive limbs and short tails . the smallest is ashoroa laticosta , a relatively large animal at a body length of 168 & nbsp ; cm , while the largest species reached sizes comparable to steller 's sea cow . nicholas d . pyenson , geerat j . vermeij , the rise of ocean giants : maximum body size in cenozoic marine mammals as an indicator for productivity in the pacific and atlantic oceans , published 5 july 2016.doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2016.0186 a desmostylian skull has an elongated and broadened rostrum , with the nasal opening located slightly dorsally . the zygomatic arches are prominent ( behind the eyes ) , the paroccipital processes elongated ( downward-pointing processes behind the jaw-joints ) , and the epitympanic sinuses open into the temporal fossae ( cavities above the ear holes ) . the mandible and maxilla typically have forward-pointing incisors and canine tusks , followed by a long postcanine diastema , partly because of the reduced number of premolars . the cusps of the premolars and molars are composed of densely packed cylinders of thick enamel , giving the order its name ( '' bundle of columns '' ) . the primitive dental formula is 3.1.4.3 , with a trilobate fourth deciduous premolar . the cheek teeth are brachydont and bunodont in primitive genera , but hypsodont in later genera such as desmostylus , which has many supernumerary cusps . in the postcrania , the clavicle is absent and the sternum consists of a series of heavy , paired , plate-like sternebrae . in adults , the joints between the radius and ulna prevent any movements . the metacarpals are longer than metatarsals , and each foot has four digits ( digit i is vestigial ) . . behaviour . their dental and skeletal forms suggest that desmostylians were aquatic herbivores dependent on littoral habitats . their name refers to their highly distinctive molars , in which each cusp was modified into hollow columns , so a typical molar would have resembled a cluster of pipes , or in the case of worn molars , volcanoes . ( this may reflect the close relationship between the paenungulata , to which this group has been assigned , and the tubulidentata . ) desmostylus did not chew or eat like any other known animal . it clenched its teeth , rooted up plants with the help of tusks and powerful neck , and then sucked them in using strong throat muscles and the shape of the roof of the mouth . desmostylians are believed to be aquatic because of a combination of characteristics . their legs seemed to be adapted for terrestrial locomotion , while a number of other parameters confirms their aquatic nature : fossils have been found in marine strata . the nares are retracted and the orbits are raised like in other aquatic mammals . levels of stable isotopes in their tooth enamel suggest an aquatic diet and environment ( carbon and oxygen ) and fresh or brackish water ( strontium ) . their spongy bone structure is similar to that of cetaceans . based on a comparison of trunk and limb proportions , concluded that desmostylians were more terrestrial than aquatic and clearly fore limb-dominated swimmers , hence they were more similar to '' sea bears '' than '' sea sloths '' ( as proposed by other researchers . ) however , a more recent and detailed analysis of desmostylian bone structure has revealed them to be fully aquatic , like sirenians and cetaceans , with their limbs being incapable of supporting their own weight on land . more recent studies vindicate this assessment , as desmostylians had a thoracic morphology more similar to sirenians and modern cetaceans than to that of semiaquatic mammals . its less dense bone structure suggests that desmostylus had a lifestyle of active swimming and possibly feeding at the surface , while other desmostylians were primarily slow swimmers and/or bottom walkers and sea grass feeders . . habitat . a 2017 study on desmostylus and paleoparadoxia shows that the former preferred areas shallower than 30 m , while the latter occurred in deep , offshore waters . . distribution . desmostylian fossils are known from the northern pacific rim , from southern japan through russia , the aleutian islands , and the pacific coast of north america to the southern tip of baja california . they range from the early oligocene to the late miocene . extinction . desmostylians , being fully marine herbivores , are thought to have been outcompeted ecologically by dugongid sirenians . in particular , later species like neoparadoxia are more specialised than previous forms , suggesting increased divergence to compete with sirenians , and sirenian diversity appears to increase with desmostylian decline . barnes , l . ( 2013 , september 11 ) . a new genus and species of late miocene paleoparadoxiid ( mammalia , desmostylia ) from california . natural history museum of los angeles county contributions in science , ( 521 ) , 51–114 both desmostylians and north pacific dugongids were apparently kelp specialists , as opposed to marine herbivorous mammals from other regions , with diets primarily composed of seagrass . . classification . the type species desmostylus hesperus was originally classified from a few teeth and vertebrae as a sirenian by , but doubts arose a decade later when more complete fossils were discovered in japan . also proposed that they belonged to the sirenia . . retrieved march 2013 . one of the most comprehensive collections of desmostylian teeth was amassed by paleontologist john c . merriam , who concluded on the basis of the molar structure and repeated occurrence in marine beds that the animals had been aquatic , and were probably sirenian . in 1926 , the austrian palaeontologist othenio abel suggested origins with monotremes , like the platypus , and in 1933 , he even created the order '' desmostyloidea '' , which he placed within the multituberculata . abel died shortly after world war ii , and his classification won few supporters and has been ignored since . because desmostylians were originally known only from skull fragments , teeth , and bits of other bones , general agreement was that they had had flippers and a fin-like tail . the discovery of a complete skeleton from sakhalin island in 1941 , however , showed that they possessed four legs , with bones as stout as a hippopotamus ' , and justified the creation of a new order for the desmostylians , described by . a major find was announced in october 2015 after scientists examined an extensive group of giant , tusked , quadruped , marine mammal fossils . this northernmost to date species discovery had been unearthed during excavation for the construction of a school in unalaska , in the aleutian islands . giant extinct mammal identified from unalaska fossils , alaska dispatch news , mike dunham , october 7 , 2015 . retrieved 8 october 2015 . a rendition of a group was drawn by alaskan artist ray troll . photos : new species of extinct marine mammal identified from unalaska fossils , alaska dispatch news , mike dunham , october 7 , 2015 . retrieved 8 october 2015 . despite their similarities to manatees and elephants , desmostylians were entirely unlike any living creatures . douglas emlong 's 1971 discovery of the new genus behemotops from oregon showed that early desmostylians had more proboscidean-like teeth and jaws than later ones . despite this discovery , their relationships to manatees and proboscids remain unresolved . the analysis of cooper et al . ( 2014 ) indicates the similarities with manatees and elephants may be a result of convergence and that they may instead be basal perissodactyls . proposed a new classification of paleoparadoxiidae : order desmostylia reinhart , 1953 family paleoparadoxiidae reinhart , 1959 subfamily behemotopsinae ( inuzuka , 1987 ) behemotops domning , ray , and mckenna , 1986 behemotops proteus domning , ray , and mckenna , 1986 ( including behemotops emlongi domning , ray , and mckenna , 1986 ) behemotops katsuiei inuzuka , 2000b subfamily paleoparadoxiinae ( reinhart , 1959 ) archaeoparadoxia archaeoparadoxia weltoni ( clark , 1991 ) paleoparadoxia reinhart , 1959 paleoparadoxia tabatai ( tokunaga , 1939 ) , ( paleoparadoxia media inuzuka , 2005 ) neoparadoxia barnes 2013 neoparadoxia repenningi ( domning and barnes , 2007 ) neoparadoxia cecilialina barnes 2013 . references . further reading . . external links .