Niagara Escarpment

formation . study of rock exposures and drillholes demonstrates that no displacement of the rock layers occurs at the escarpment , which is not a fault line but the result of unequal erosion . the escarpment 's caprock is dolomitic limestone , also known as dolostone , which is more resistant and overlies weaker , more easily eroded shale as a weathering-resistant '' cap '' . the escarpment formed over millions of years through a process of differential erosion of these rocks of different hardnesses . through time the soft rocks weather away or erode by the action of streams . the gradual removal of the soft rocks undercuts the resistant caprock , leaving a cliff or escarpment . the erosional process is most readily seen at niagara falls , where the river has quickened the process . it can also be seen at the three genesee river at rochester ( additional resistant rock layers make more than one escarpment in some places ) . also , in some places thick glacial deposits , such as the oak ridges moraine , conceal the niagara escarpment , such as north of georgetown , ontario , where it actually continues under glacial till and reappears farther north . the dolomite cap was laid down as sediment on the floor of a marine environment . in michigan , behind ( southwest of ) the escarpment , the cuesta capstone slopes gently to form a wide basin , the floor of an ordovician-silurian-age tropical sea . ( the escarpment is essentially the remnant shoreline of that sea . ) there the constant deposition of minute shells and fragments of biologically-generated calcium carbonate , mixed with sediment washed in by erosion of the virtually lifeless landmasses , eventually formed a limestone layer . during the silurian period , some magnesium substituted for some of the calcium in the carbonates , slowly forming harder dolomite layers in the same fashion . worldwide sea levels were at their all-time maximum in the ordovician ; as the sea retreated , erosion inevitably began . this dolomite basin contains lakes michigan , huron , and erie . ( the geological formations under lakes superior and ontario were formed from volcanic rifts . soft basalt lines their canyon walls , bottoming at 1300 feet below sea level . ) . human geography . the welland canal allows ships to traverse the escarpment between lake erie and lake ontario on the niagara peninsula of ontario . the escarpment was a major obstacle in the construction of the erie canal in new york and was traversed by a series of locks ; the community which grew up at the site thus became known as lockport , new york . in southern ontario , the bruce trail runs the length of the escarpment from queenston on the niagara river to tobermory on the bruce peninsula . highway 401 , canada 's busiest , also crosses the niagara escarpment , beginning its long descent through rolling hills , farmland , and towns west of milton . rock exposed on the face of the escarpment can be seen along highway 26 from owen sound eastwards towards meaford , ontario . hamilton , ontario is on the escarpment in such a way that the north end of the city is below and the south part above . affectionately referred to as '' the mountain '' by its residents , many roads or '' mountain accesses '' join the urban core below with the suburban expansion above . from 1892 to 1936 , the hamilton incline railway transported people up and down '' the mountain '' . high cliff state park in wisconsin shows how modern and prehistoric humans used the escarpment for not only cultural reasons , but economic gains , as well . a number of different animal and geometric effigy mounds and the remains of an early 20th-century limestone quarry and kiln are within the park . the relief and exposed edge are used by several wind farms stretching from pipe , to brownsville in wisconsin . wind speeds average 18 & nbsp ; mph ( about 29 & nbsp ; km/h ) along this stretch . the niagara escarpment is a prominent feature just east of fond du lac , wisconsin , and it is known there as '' the ledge '' . joanne kluessendorf , '' a look at the ledge '' , wisconsin natural resources magazine , october 2010 . some local organizations take their name from it , including the ledgers , the sports teams at st . mary 's springs academy , which is perched on the side of the escarpment . many resorts and ski areas in ontario , michigan , wisconsin , and new york are along the escarpment . vineyard land . niagara county , new york , near the eastern end of the escarpment , is the site of the niagara escarpment ava ( american viticultural area ) . [ federal register / vol . 70 , no . 173 / thursday , september 8 , 2005 / rules and regulations , page 53300 – alcohol and tobacco tax and trade bureau 27 cfr part 9 t.d . ttb–33 ; re : notice no . 33 rin 1513–aa97 . establishment of the niagara escarpment viticultural area ( 2004r–589p ) wines produced in this region include traditional grape varieties such as merlot , cabernet franc , cabernet sauvignon , chardonnay , and riesling , and fruit wines . ontario 's niagara peninsula is the site of the largest canadian wine appellation ( region ) in canada . cool-climate varieties such as riesling , chardonnay , gamay noir , pinot noir , and cabernet franc are among the more than 30 varietals produced across . three subappellations lie along the benchlands of the niagara escarpment : short hills bench , twenty mile bench , and beamsville bench . northeastern wisconsin , at the western end of the escarpment , is the site of the wisconsin ledge ava . most of the region 's vineyards lie upon the escarpment 's eastern-facing slope that rises gently upward from the shores of lake michigan to the top of the ledge , before dropping sharply off into green bay , and benefit greatly from constant air movement from lake michigan , which stores warmth during the summer . the presence of the lake produces a vacuum of sorts during the growing season : warm air over the lake rises , sucking colder air off the land and creating offshore breezes . cold air can not settle over the vineyards and a constant flow of warmer air makes the growing season here longer than in other parts of the state . the escarpment 's glacial soils are made up of gravel , sand , and clay over limestone bedrock . an aquifer provides mineral-rich ground water to the vines , encouraging deep root growth . . world biosphere reserve . in february 1990 , the niagara escarpment was a designated world biosphere reserve by unesco , making it one of 12 in canada . development and land use on and adjacent to the escarpment is regulated by the niagara escarpment commission , an agency of the ontario government . cliffs along the niagara escarpment have the oldest forest ecosystem in eastern north america . the oldest tree in ontario is an eastern white cedar from 688 a.d . the oldest known tree in wisconsin , a 1,300 year-old eastern white cedar , was found in brown county . the oldest known tree in wisconsin is a 1,300-year-old cedar growing from a cliff