Eanflæd

birth , baptism , exile . eanflæd 's mother had been raised as a christian , but her father was raised as an anglo-saxon pagan and he remained uncommitted to the new religion when she was born on the evening before easter in 626 at a royal residence by the river derwent . bede recounts that earlier on the day that eanflæd was born , an assassin sent by cwichelm of wessex made an attempt on edwin 's life . afterward , edwin , prompted by æthelburg 's bishop , paulinus , agreed to eanflæd 's baptism and promised to become a christian if he was granted a victory over cwichhelm . eanflæd was baptised , bede says , on the feast of pentecost ( 8 june 626 ) with eleven others of the royal household . thacker ; bede , ecclesiastical history , book ii , chapter 9 . thacker notes that according to a wales tradition recorded in the historia brittonum , chapter 64 : eanfeld , his daughter , received baptism , on the twelfth day after pentecost , with all her followers , both men and women . if any one wishes to know who baptized them , it was rhun son of urien . higham , northumbria , p . 81 , suggests sancton as the location of the royal residence in question . edwin campaigned successfully against cwichelm and adopted the new faith in 627 . bede , ecclesiastical history , book ii , chapter 13 . his reign ended in 633 with his defeat and death at the battle of hatfield chase . fleeing the unsettled times which followed edwin 's death , æthelburg , together with bishop paulinus , returned to kent , where eanflæd grew up under the protection of her uncle , king eadbald of kent . bede , ecclesiastical history , book ii , chapter 20 . bede states that æthelburg did not trust her brother , or edwin 's sainted successor oswald , with the lives of edwin 's male descendants whom she sent to the court of king dagobert i in francia . . return , marriage . in 642 oswiu , king of bernicia , head of the rival northumbrian royal family , sent a priest named utta to kent , which then was ruled by eanflæd 's cousin , eorcenberht , to ask for her hand in marriage . bede , ecclesiastical history , book iii , chapter 15 . oswiu already had been married , to a british princess , named rieinmellt , but recently had become king on the death of his brother , oswald , at the battle of maserfield . king penda of mercia , the victor of maserfield , dominated central britain and oswiu was in need of support . marriage with eanflæd would provide kentish , and perhaps frankish , support , and any children oswiu and eanflæd might have would have strong claims to all of northumbria . higham , convert kings , p . 225 ; holdsworth '' oswiu '' ; thacker . the date of the marriage is not recorded . thacker states '' in or shortly after 642 '' ; holdsworth , '' oswiu '' , prefers 643 . if oswiu 's goal in marrying eanflæd was the peaceful acceptance of his rule in deira , the plan was unsuccessful . by 644 oswine , eanflæd 's paternal second cousin , was ruling in deira . kirby , pp . 91–92 ; yorke , 'kings , pp . 78–79 . in 651 oswine was killed by one of oswiu 's generals . to expiate the killing of his wife 's kinsman , oswiu founded gilling abbey at gilling where prayers were said for both kings . bede , ecclesiastical history , book iii , chapter 14 ; holdsworth , '' oswiu '' ; thacker ; higham , convert kings , pp . 226–230 . . children , patron of wilfred , supporter of rome . with varying degrees of certainty , eanflæd 's children with oswiu are identified as ecgfrith , ælfwine , osthryth , and ælfflæd . oswiu 's complicated series of marriages and liaisons makes identifying the mother of each of his children difficult . kirby states that aldfrith , ealhfrith , and ealhflæd were not born to eanflæd . higham , northumbria , p . 80 ; kirby , pp . 90 & 143 ; thacker . eanflæd was the early patroness of wilfrid , who played a large part in northumbrian politics during the reigns of ecgfrith , aldfrith , and osred , and elsewhere in seventh century britain . when wilfrid wished to travel on pilgrimage to rome , the queen recommended him to her cousin , the kentish king eorcenberht . eddius , life of wilfred , cc . 2–3 . . widow , abbess , saint . perhaps several years after oswiu 's death , eanflæd retired to the monastery at whitby . this monastery was closely associated with her royal family and many members were buried there . divisions within the northumbrian church led to the synod of whitby held at this monastery in 664 , during which oswiu had agreed to settle a calendar controversy about easter by adopting the roman dating method . whitby abbey was a double monastery , housing the nuns and monks in separate quarters although they shared the church and religious rites . following the death of her kinswoman and the founding abbess of the monastery , hild , in 680 eanflæd became abbess jointly with her daughter ælfflæd . she died in the reign of her stepson , aldfrith ( 685–704 ) . during this time , the remains of king edwin were reburied at whitby . holdsworth , '' edwin '' ; lapidge , '' eanflæd '' ; thacker . thacker gives her death date as '' after 685 '' , lapidge , circa 704 . some late sources give the feast day of eanflæd as 24 november . along with edwin , oswiu , hilda , and later , ælfflæd , she was buried at whitby . william of malmesbury believed that her remains later had been removed to glastonbury abbey where a monument to her was said to exist in the twelfth century . thacker , eanflæd . notes . references . bede , ecclesiastical history of the english people . translated by leo sherley-price , revised r . e . latham , ed . d . h . farmer . london : penguin , 1990 . eddius , '' life of wilfrid '' in d . h . farmer ( ed . ) & j . h . webb ( trans . ) , the age of bede . london : penguin , 1998 . ibn 0-140-44727-x higham , n . j . , the convert kings : power and religious affiliation in early anglo-saxon england . manchester : manchester university press , 1997 . higham , n . j . , the kingdom of northumbria ad 350–1100 . stroud : sutton , 1993 . holdsworth , philip , '' edwin , king of northumbria '' in m . lapidge , et al . , ( eds ) , the blackwell encyclopedia of anglo-saxon england . oxford : blackwell , 1999 . holdsworth , philip , '' oswiu '' in m . lapidge , et al . , ( eds ) , the blackwell encyclopedia of anglo-saxon england . oxford : blackwell , 1999 . kirby , d . p . , the earliest anglo-saxon kings , routledge , 1991 lapidge , michael , '' eanflæd '' in michael lapidge et al . , the blackwell encyclopedia of anglo-saxon england . blackwell , 1999 . lapidge , michael , '' paulinus '' in michael lapidge et al . , the blackwell encyclopedia of anglo-saxon england . blackwell , 1999 . . external links . britannia.com profile