Cantharidin

chemistry . structure and nomenclature . cantharidin , from the greek kantharis , for beetle , is an odorless , colorless natural product with solubility in various organic solvents , but only slight solubility in water . its skeleton is tricyclic , formally , a tricyclo-5.2.1.0 2,6 decane skeleton . its functionalities include a organic acid anhydride ( −co−o−co− ) substructure in one of its rings , as well as a bridging ether in its bicyclic ring system . the complete mechanism of the biosynthesis of cantharidin is unknown . its framework formally consists of two isoprene units . however , feeding studies indicate that the biosynthetic process is more complicated and not a simple product of geranyl pyrophosphate or related ten-carbon parent structure as the seeming monoterpene nature would suggest . instead , there is a farnesol ( 15-carbon ) precursor from which certain carbon segments are later excised . . distribution and availability . the level of cantharidin in blister beetles can be quite variable . among blister beetles of the genus epicauta in colorado , e . pennsylvanica contains about 0.2 & nbsp ; mg , e . maculata contains 0.7 & nbsp ; mg , and e . immaculata contains 4.8 & nbsp ; mg per beetle ; males also contain higher levels than females . males of berberomeloe majalis have higher level of cantharidin per beetle : 64.22 ± 51.28 & nbsp ; mg/g ( dry weight ) and 9.10 ± 12.64 & nbsp ; mg/g ( d . w . ) . cantharidin content in haemolymph is also higher in males ( 80.9 ± 106.5 & nbsp ; µg/g ) than in females ( 20.0 ± 41.5 & nbsp ; µg/g ) . . history . aphrodisiac preparations . preparations made from spanish fly have been used since ancient times as an aphrodisiac , possibly because their physical effects were perceived to mimic those of sexual arousal , john l . capinera , encyclopedia of entomology , volume 4 , springer science & business media , 2008 . p.2010 and because they can cause prolonged erection or priapism in men . peter v . taberner , aphrodisiacs : the science and the myth , springer science & business media , 2012 , pp.100ff these preparations were known as cantharides , from the greek word for '' beetle '' . examples of such use found in historical sources include : the ancient roman historian tacitus relates that a cantharid preparation was used by the empress livia , wife of augustus caesar to entice members of the imperial family or dinner guests to commit sexual indiscretions ( thus providing her information to hold over them ) . the german emperor henry iv ( 1050–1106 ) is said to have consumed cantharides . the french surgeon ambroise paré ( 1510–1590 ) described a case in 1572 of a man suffering from '' the most frightful satyriasis '' after taking a potion composed of nettles and a cantharid extract . this is perhaps the same man of whom paré relates that a courtesan sprinkled a cantharid powder on food she served to him , after which the man experienced '' violent priapism '' and anal bleeding , of which he later died . the same paré also cites the case of a priest who died of hematuria after swallowing a dose of cantharides which he intended to fortify his sex drive . augustin cabanès , remèdes d'autrefois , paris : a . maloine , 1910 , p . 498ff . cantharides were in widespread use among the upper classes in france in the 1600s , despite being a banned substance . police searches in connection with a rash of poisonings around 1680 turned up many stashes of '' bluish flies '' which were known to be used in the preparation of aphrodisiac potions . the french sorceress la voisin ( known as '' la voisin '' , c . 1640–1680 ) is recorded in the 1670s as having prepared a love charm made from spanish fly mixed with dried mole 's blood and bat 's blood . richard cavendish , the black arts ( london : pan books , 1969 ) , p . 333 . aphrodisiac sweets which probably contained cantharides were circulated in libertine circles in the 1700s in france . they were multicolored tablets nicknamed '' pastilles de richelieu '' after the maréchal de richelieu , a notorious libertine ( not to be confused with his great-uncle the cardinal richelieu ) who procured sexual encounters for king louis xv . jacques levron , le maréchal de richelieu , un libertin fastueux ( paris , perrin , 1971 ) . the french writer donatien alphonse françois ⁠— ⁠notoriously known as the marquis de sade ( 1740–1814 ) ⁠— ⁠is said to have given aniseed-flavored pastilles laced with spanish fly to two prostitutes at an orgy in 1772 , poisoning and nearly killing them . he was sentenced to death for that ( and for the crime of sodomy ) , but was later reprieved on appeal . schaeffer , neil ( 2000 ) . the marquis de sade : a life , cambridge , ma , usa : harvard university press , p . 58 . . non-aphrodisiac uses . the spanish clergyman juan de horozco y covarrubias ( es ) ( c . 1540–1610 ) reported the use of blister beetles as a poison as well as an aphrodisiac . preparations of dried blister beetles were at one time used as a treatment for smallpox . cantharides referred to throughout the book . as late as 1892 andrew taylor still , the founder of osteopathy , recommended inhaling a tincture of cantharidin as an effective preventative and treatment for smallpox , decrying vaccination . andrew taylor still , the philosophy and mechanical principles of osteopathy , 1892 , chapter 12 : '' smallpox '' . the 1902 edition is available here . . pharmaco-chemical isolation . cantharidin was first isolated as a chemically pure substance in 1810 by pierre robiquet , a french chemist then living in paris . robiquet isolated cantharidin as the active ingredient in pharmacological preparations of lytta vesicatoria , a.k.a . '' spanish fly '' , a species of blister beetle . this was one of the first historical instances of the identification and extraction of a simple active principle from a complex medicine . robiquet found cantharidin to be an odorless and colorless solid at room temperature . he demonstrated that it was the active principle responsible for the aggressively blister agent of the coating of the eggs of the blister beetle , and established as well that cantharidin had toxic properties comparable in degree to those of the most virulent poisons known in the 19th century , such as strychnine . . other uses of the pharmacological isolate . diluted solutions of cantharidin can be used as a topical medication to remove warts and tattoos and to treat the small papules of molluscum contagiosum . in santería rituals , cantharides are used in incense . . veterinary issues . poisoning from cantharidin is a significant veterinary concern , especially in horses by epicauta species ; species infesting feedstocks depend on region—e.g . , epicauta pennsylvanica ( black blisterbeetle ) in the u.s . midwest and e . occidentalis , temexia , and vittata species ( striped blister beetles ) in the u.s . southwest—where the concentrations of the agent in each can vary substantially . beetles feed on weeds and occasionally move into crop fields used to produce livestock feeds ( e.g . , alfalfa ) , where they are found to cluster and find their way into hay bale , e.g . , a single flake ( 4-5 in . section ) may have several hundred insects , or none at all . horses are very sensitive to the cantharidin produced by beetle infestations : the for horses is roughly 1 & nbsp ; mg/kg of the horse 's body weight . horses may be accidentally poisoned when fed bales of fodder with blister beetles in them . great bustards , a strongly polygynous bird species , are not immune to the toxicity of cantharidin ; they become intoxicated after ingesting blister beetles ; however , cantharidin has activity also against parasites that infect them . great bustards may eat toxic blister beetles of the genus meloe to increase the sexual arousal of males . . human medical issues . general risks . as a blister agent , cantharidin has the potential to cause adverse effects when used medically ; for this reason , it has been included in a list of '' problem drugs '' used by dermatologists and emergency personnel . despite being widely used , cantharidin has never been and is not currently fda approved . it is currently in phase 3 clinical trials for the treatment of molluscum . however , when compounded properly and applied in the clinic topically by a medical provider familiar with its effects and uses , cantharidin can be safely and effectively used to treat some benign skin lesions like warts and molluscum . when ingested by humans , the is around 0.5 & nbsp ; mg/kg , with a dose of as little as 10 & nbsp ; mg being potentially fatal . ingesting cantharidin can initially cause severe damage to the lining of the gastrointestinal and urinary tracts , and may also cause permanent renal damage . symptoms of cantharidin poisoning include hematuria , abdominal pain , and rarely priapism . . risks of aphrodisiac use . the extreme toxicity of cantharidin makes any use as an aphrodisiac highly dangerous . as a result , it is illegal to sell ( or use ) cantharidin or preparations containing it without a prescription in many countries . . research . mechanism of action . cantharidin is absorbed by the lipid membranes of epidermal cells , causing the release of serine proteases , enzymes that break the peptide bonds in proteins . this causes the disintegration of desmosome , cellular structures involved in cell-to-cell adhesion , leading to detachment of the tonofibril that hold cells together . the process leads to the loss of cellular connections ( acantholysis ) and ultimately blistering of the skin . lesions heal without scarring . . bioactivities . cantharidin appears to have some effect in the topical treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis in animal models . in addition to topical medical applications , cantharidin and its analogues may have activity against cancer cells . laboratory studies with cultured tumor cells suggest that this activity may be the result of pp2a inhibition .