Shopping hours

shopping days and impact of holidays . some countries , particularly those with predominantly christian populations or histories , do not allow sunday shopping . in islamic countries some shops are closed on fridays for noontime prayers . in israel many shops are closed on friday evenings and saturdays during the daytime for shabbat ( the jewish sabbath ) . each state in australia sets its own standard trading hours , but in most of the country the shops are open seven days a week for at least part of the day . for some shops and other businesses in culturally christian countries , christmas day is the only day in the year that they are closed . in the united states and canada , nearly all retail stores are open every day of the year except for thanksgiving , christmas day , and easter sunday . some suburban and smaller communities often close on sundays . for example , bergen county , new jersey , next to new york city , completely bans sunday shopping . nearly all stores in the united states have restricted hours on sundays ( most often 11 am or noon to 5 - 7 pm ) , and stores close early on important holidays , such as christmas eve , new year 's eve , new year 's day , and independence day . banks , post offices and other government offices either are closed on weekends , or close early on saturdays . many other non-retail establishments remain closed on weekends . in islamic countries shops may have special opening hours during ramadan . in israel , many shops are closed on religious holidays other than shabbat , especially on yom kippur when nearly all businesses are closed . by country . australia . shop trading hours in australia are regulated by individual states and territories . the australian capital territory , the northern territory and the states of new south wales , victoria and tasmania , totally or almost totally deregulate shopping hours . all retail businesses in the two territories , regardless of size or product offer , are allowed to decide their trading hours to suit their individual customer demand . non-essential shops in the three states are required to remain closed on christmas day and good friday , anzac day ( until 1pm ) , and in tasmania and nsw on easter sunday , and in nsw on boxing day ( outside the sydney special trading precinct ) . shops in the northern territory and the australian capital territory can remain open on any public holiday . the two main supermarket operators , woolworths and coles , generally trade between 6 am and midnight every day , although some inner-city shops in sydney and melbourne operate twenty-four hours . in canberra , woolworths , kmart and a few more shops open 24/7 . melbourne generally has the most relaxed rules . almost all shopping centres in melbourne now trade until 9pm on thursdays and fridays as well as being open longer hours on sundays . interstate late night trading only occurs on either thursday or friday rather than both . melbourne is also famous for beginning the trend of 36-hour overnight trades in the lead-up to christmas . some of the larger shopping centres will open from 8 am december 23 until 6 pm on christmas eve . centres often open to 10pm or midnight on most other nights in the fortnight before christmas , and the first few days of the annual boxing day sales . trading hours in the australian capital territory have been deregulated since the repeal of the trading hours act 1996 act on 29 may 1997 . shopping hours in south australia are still regulated , but there have been numerous changes to relax the laws . nonetheless , trading laws are still face complicated and confusing : legal trading hours vary depending on size and product offer . supermarkets that trade with fewer than seven workers and with a trading floor less than 500 & nbsp ; m 2 are exempt from the laws . larger supermarkets are required by law to close at 9 pm on mondays to fridays , and 5 pm on saturdays ; they are permitted to trade on sundays and public holidays only from 11am to 5pm , except anzac day , which is 12 noon to 5pm ; they must remain closed on good friday , easter sunday and christmas day . in all areas of queensland , trading hours of major supermarkets are monday to saturday from 7am to 9pm and sundays and public holidays from 9am to 6pm . most major shopping centres close at 5pm every day , except for '' late night shopping '' on one night a week . supermarkets in major shopping centres must still cease trading at 9pm , with special access for just the supermarket . in rural areas of western australia below the 27th latitude , local governments nominate shop closing hours to the state government , which , if accepted , are implemented by ministerial order . shopping hours in the state 's capital , perth , are regulated by laws similar to south australia 's . trading hours are stipulated in law , and are based on size and product offer . as in south australia , smaller , independently operated supermarket retailers are exempted . chain supermarkets are required to close monday to friday at 9pm , saturdays at 5pm , and are permitted to trade on sundays and public holidays only from 11am to 5pm . austria . the situation in austria is very similar to that in germany , with most public holidays being based on catholic holidays as the country is predominantly roman catholic . until the 1990s , all shops closed around noon on saturday and did not reopen until monday morning . entrepreneurs such as richard lugner lobbied for an expansion of shopping hours , and laws are gradually being changed , with more and more exceptions granted . meanwhile , as in germany , gas stations and train stations in big cities have taken on the role of nahversorger ( '' local providers '' , supplying the local population with groceries ) outside regular shopping hours . until very recently , shopping hours remained very restrictive . in 2008 austria modified its 2003 öffnungszeitengesetz ( '' opening times law '' ) . the new regulations allow stores to open from 6:00 & nbsp ; a.m . until 9:00 & nbsp ; p.m . on weekdays , and on saturday until 6:00 & nbsp ; p.m . but they are restricted to a total of 72 open hours per week . bakeries can open 30 minutes earlier at 5:30 & nbsp ; a.m . shops are closed on sunday , but there are exceptions for tourist locations , train stations , airports , and the christmas season . . canada . store hours in canada are regulated by each province or territory and , in some provinces , individual municipalities as well . as a general rule , there is little regulation of shopping hours across the country . in the provinces of british columbia , alberta , and saskatchewan , as well as all three territories ( yukon , northwest territories and nunavut ) , there are no restrictions at all and stores can open 24/7 every day . nova scotia permits any store to open every day of the year except remembrance day ( november 11 ) . the remaining provinces ( manitoba , ontario , quebec , new brunswick , prince edward island and newfoundland and labrador ) require stores to close on most major holidays . furthermore , three provinces have further restrictions on sunday openings . in manitoba , stores may open on sundays only with municipal approval and only between 9am - 6 pm ( although exceptions for essential services apply ) . new brunswick allows sunday opening all year only with both municipal and provincial approval ; otherwise it is permitted only from august until the new year . some communities in new brunswick ( such as woodstock , miramichi , sussex ) restrict sunday hours of operation to 12pm - 5pm . the province of quebec is the only province in canada that regulates shopping hours outside of sundays and holidays . as a general rule , stores are permitted to open only between 8am and 9pm weekdays and 8am - 5pm weekends , excluding holidays . there are several exceptions , however , notably several supermarkets in montreal , which are open later hours or 24 hours a day . in practice , few stores in canada ( except a few grocery stores ) remain open 24 hours . most shopping centres open from 10am-9pm monday to friday , 9:30am - 6pm ( or in some cases 9pm ) on saturday and 12pm - 5pm or 6pm on sunday . many larger stores , such as walmart canada , and most major grocery stores remain open 8am - 10pm monday to saturday and 10am - 6pm ( in some provinces 8 am - 10 pm ) on sunday , except in provinces where further restrictions apply . the sobeys chain stays open from 7am - 11pm on weekdays and saturdays , though some locations are open twenty-four hours . many loblaws brand stores such as zehrs markets and real canadian superstore are open from 7am - 11pm , 7 days a week . china . trading hours in china , including hong kong and macau special administrative regions , are commercial decisions and are not regulated . most shops are open on public holidays . some convenience stores are open twenty-four hours and every day of the year , but only a few large supermarkets are open twenty-four hours a day . during the chinese new year , many shops in china close for a few days , from chinese new year 's eve to the first day of the chinese new year . or more often , to the third day of the chinese new year . some shops in hong kong and macau operate on chinese new year holidays , especially supermarket chains . croatia . shopping hours in croatia are currently unregulated after the constitutional court struck down a ban on sunday shopping , which had been in effect from mid-2008 until mid-2009 . most large out-of-town supermarkets are open between 07:30/08:00-21:00/22:00 , monday to sunday . shopping malls usually open at 09:00 and also close at 22:00 , every day . smaller supermarkets close earlier on sundays , typically at 13:00 . other shops in urban areas are generally closed on sundays . bakeries and newspaper kiosks often open very early in the morning , at 05:30 or 06:00 , and open every day but not twenty-four hours . gas stations and convenience stores along major roads as well as some pharmacies ( at least one in each major city , five in zagreb ) operate twenty-four hours . denmark . standard operating hours for most businesses are generally 8:00/8:30 - 17:30 . since 1 october 2012 , danish shops have been allowed to be open every day around the clock , except on public holidays and after 3 pm on christmas eve 's day and new year eve 's day . shops with a turnover of less than dkk 32.2 million ( 2012 figure , indexed ) are allowed to be open every day of the year . still in many small towns shops are usually closed on saturday after 2 pm and on sunday . some small shops are closed on monday . . finland . sunday shopping was first introduced in 1994 . in 1989 shops were allowed to be open on sundays in sparsely populated areas . in the autumn of 1994 the law was extended to apply to the conurbanations i.e . densely populated areas , but only in december and on six specifically designated sundays . in 1997 it was legislated that the grocery shops could be open on sundays during the whole summer . at the same time the closing hour was set at later ; 21:00 . in 2000 small markets — less than 400 m 2 in sales area — were encouraged to be open on sundays all year around , with the exception of four days . also the legislation concerning ( super ) markets bigger than 400 m 2 in sales area was clarified by discarding the law of six designated sundays and replacing it with sunday opening hours from may to august and from november to december . on 15 december 2015 , the finnish parliament voted to remove all opening hour restrictions for all retailers . the law came into effect on 1 january 2016 . many stores are open every day . larger supermarkets and hypermarkets are open from 7:00 or 8:00 to 21:00 or 22:00 , and smaller shops from 10:00 to 18:00 or 19:00 . the only stores with regulated hours are the nationally owned alko alcohol shops , which are open from 9:00 to 21:00 on weekdays and from 9:00 to 18:00 on saturdays . on sundays all alko stores are closed . germany . in germany , shopping days and opening hours were previously regulated by a federal law called the '' shop closing law '' ( ladenschlussgesetz ) , first enacted in 1956 and last revised on 13 march 2003 . on 7 july 2006 , however , the federal government handed over the authority to regulate shopping hours to the sixteen states ( länder ) . since then , states have been allowed to pass their own laws regulating opening hours . the federal ladenschlussgesetz still applies in bavaria and saarland , which have not passed their own laws . under this law , shops may not open prior to 6 am and may not stay open later than 8 p.m . from monday to saturday . shops must also stay closed on sundays and public holidays ( both federal and state ) , and special rules apply concerning christmas eve ( december 24 ) should that day fall on a weekday . there are several exceptions , including petrol stations and shops located in railway stations and airports , which may stay open past the normal hours . most petrol stations in larger cities , and all situated on autobahns , are open twenty-four hours . shops in so-called '' tourist zones '' may also open outside the normal hours , but they are restricted to selling souvenirs , handcrafted articles and similar tourist items . in connection with fairs and public market days , communities are allowed four days per year ( normally sundays ) on which shops may open outside the normal restrictions ; such shop openings may not take place during primary church services and they must close by 6 pm . bakeries may open for business at 5.30 am and may also open for a limited time on sundays . restaurants , bars , theatres , and cultural establishments are generally unaffected by the shop opening time restrictions . as most public holidays in germany are religiously based , and since the religious holidays ( protestant and catholic ) are not uniform across germany , shops may be closed due to a public holiday in one state , and open in a neighbouring state . bavaria even differentiates between cities with protestant or catholic majorities . the ladenschlussgesetz has been the subject of controversy , as larger stores ( and many of their customers ) would prefer to have fewer restrictions on shopping hours , while trade unions , small shop owners and the church are opposed to a further loosening of the rules . on june 9 , 2004 , the german supreme court ( bundesverfassungsgericht ) rejected a claim by the german department store chain kaufhof that the shop-closing law was unconstitutional . among other things , the court cited article 140 of the german constitution ( grundgesetz ) ( which in turn invokes article 139 of the 1919 weimar constitution ) protecting sundays and public holidays as days of rest and recuperation . nonetheless , the court in effect invited the federal parliament ( bundestag ) to reconsider whether the states should regulate hours instead of the federal government . so far , no state has passed a regulation that allows general store opening on sundays . states with no restrictions from monday to saturday and varying regulations for sunday : baden-württemberg berlin brandenburg bremen hamburg hesse lower saxony schleswig-holstein states with no restrictions from monday to friday and varying regulations for saturday and sunday : mecklenburg-western pomerania north rhine-westphalia saxony-anhalt thuringia states where shops can open between 6 a.m . and 10 p.m . from monday to saturday ; regulations for sunday vary : rhineland-palatinate saxony states with no liberalisation of opening hours exceeding the federal ladenschlussgesetz : bavaria saarland . ireland . shops in ireland may , with few exceptions ( such as those involved in the sale of alcohol ) , open whenever they want , including sundays and public holidays . here are typical hours : monday - wednesday , saturday : 8:00/9:00/10:00 - 17:00/18:00/19:00 thursday - friday : 8:00/9:00/10:00 - 20:00/21:00/22:00 sunday : 9:00/10:00/11:00 - 17:00/18:00/19:00 many supermarkets are open twenty-four hours or have longer opening hours ( like 8:00 - 22:00 ) everyday . large shopping centres are typically open longer hours everyday ( e.g . 09:00 - 21:00/22:00 weekdays , 09:00 - 19:00 saturdays , 10:00 - 19:00 sundays ) . in the two weeks running up to christmas , it is common for many shops to have extended opening hours ; some may operate twenty-four hours however the 24 hr openings are extremely uncommon and would be mainly in the large cities . on christmas eve most shops have shut their doors by 6pm , some close by 3pm . most shops ( other than petrol stations or convenience stores ) in smaller towns and villages do n't open at all on sundays . almost all shops ( except certain petrol stations , convenience stores ) are closed on christmas day , though most are open on all other holidays . convenience stores and some chemists ( drugstores ) normally open at 09:00 and close between 18:00 and 21:00 . new year 's day is also sunday hours . in rural areas or in traditional trades , businesses used to take a half day on wednesdays , however this no lingers happens . alcohol is allowed to be sold only between 10:30 and 22:00 from monday to saturday and 12:30 to 22:00 on sundays , but this does not affect opening hours ( supermarkets will often block access to alcoholic products outside of these times ) . alcohol can now be sold on good friday as-well as having the pubs open . japan . in japan , most shops open at 10:00 , and close at 20:00 ( 8 pm ) . banks are open from 09:00-15:00 on weekdays , and closed on weekends ; post offices are open from 09:00-17:00 on weekdays , and closed on weekends . convenience stores are open round the clock . mexico . in mexico city , in large shopping centers , stores are generally open from 11 a.m . to 8 p.m . , and on sundays from 11 a.m . to 8 p.m . restaurant and cinema hours are different , as are those of independent shops and markets . centro santa fe official site tiendeo.com tiendeo mexico ( shopping meta-site ) . netherlands . regular opening hours are monday 11:00 - 18:00 ; tuesday-friday : 09:30 - 18:00 ; saturday : 09:30 - 17:00 ; sunday ( amsterdam , rotterdam , the hague , utrecht , almere , leiden and smaller tourist towns ) : 12:00 - 18:00 . in many other towns shops are open every first sunday of the month ( koopzondag ) . shops are allowed to stay open until 22:00 from monday to saturday . except in busy tourist areas , in or near railway stations , or for big box retailers such as media markt , most close at 18:00 on weekdays , and 17:00 on saturdays , unlike germany where retailers have taken fuller advantage of liberalization laws and most stay open till at least 19:30 . many supermarkets ( including outlets of the market leader albert heijn , several diy stores and ikea ) stay open until 20:00 , 21:00 or 22:00 . most towns have their weekly shopping evening ( koopavond ) , when shops stay open until 21:00 , on thursday or friday . in touristic towns ( like amsterdam 's city centre ) supermarkets are allowed to open on sundays between 07:00 and 22:00 . many towns have one or more supermarkets ( avondwinkels ) that are open until later in the evening , occasionally all night . convenience stores also have longer shopping hours ; they are at many larger railway stations ( '' albert heijn to go '' ) and in some busy streets . a regular size supermarket that is open until midnight seven days a week is the albert heijn at schiphol airport near amsterdam ( in the landside area of the airport , not just for air travelers ) . on public holidays , shops that close on sundays are usually also closed , and other shops tend to have sunday opening hours . on christmas day and new year 's eve almost all shops are closed . for specific opening hours ( openingstijden ) in the netherlands there are several websites . . serbia . shopping hours in serbia are unregulated . large supermarkets are usually open from 07:00/07:30/08:00 to 22:00 from monday to sunday . shopping malls open at 09:00 or 10:00 and also stay open until 22:00 . smaller supermarkets close earlier on sundays , at 15:00 or 16:00 . unlike neighbouring croatia , many fast food outlets , bakeries , kiosks and convenience stores in urban areas operate twenty-four hours . even some hypermarkets , like tempo and metro , are open twenty-four hours . singapore . shopping hours for shopping malls are usually from 10:00 to 22:00 from monday to sunday . automotive shops like tire outlets are usually from 09.30 to 19:00 . some supermarkets are open twenty-four hours . most stores do not open on the first day of chinese new year because of low demand patronage . sweden . in sweden there is no longer any law regarding shopping hours except for the nationally owned systembolaget alcohol shops , which close at 20:00 at the latest on weekdays and 15:00 on saturdays . on sundays no alcohol is sold at all , although it is served in restaurants . shopping centres and food shops are generally open every day ; grocery stores often until 22:00 all days of the week and shopping centers usually until 20:00 on weekdays and 18:00 on weekends . usually shopping centers are closed on new year 's day , midsummer 's day and christmas day , but grocery stores are open even those days albeit fewer hours than usual . although there are n't any law that regulate business hours in general , labour laws do not allow work between midnight and 5 am in many professions including grocery stores and most shops . switzerland . shopping hours are governed by cantonal law and vary accordingly , the only confederally mandated store holiday being august 1 ( the national holiday ) , as per article 110 iii of the swiss constitution . most often , stores will be open from 8 or 9 am to 7 or 8 pm , 9 pm one day a week ( usually a thursday or a friday ) depending on the region . on saturday and the day before public holidays , most stores close at around 4 or 5 pm . stores are also generally closed on sundays ; see sunday shopping switzerland . united kingdom . in great britain , many retail stores are open every day . some large supermarkets are open for twenty-four hours , ( except on sundays in england and wales ) . most stores do not open on easter sunday , new year 's day or christmas day and have reduced hours on other public and bank holidays . typical store shopping hours : mondays - saturdays : 9:00 am to 5:30 pm , or 10:00 am to 8:00 pm/10:00 pm . sundays : 10:00 am to 4:00 pm , or 11:00 am to 5:00 pm , or 12 noon to 6:00 pm . sunday shopping has become more popular , and most but not all shops in towns and cities are open for business . shops 280 & nbsp ; m 2 and larger in england and wales are allowed to trade for only six hours on sundays ; shops in northern ireland may open from 1:00 & nbsp ; pm to 6:00 & nbsp ; pm . in scotland , in theory , sunday is considered the same as any other day , and there are no restrictions . in practice , however , some shops do not open on sunday or open for only four hours in smaller towns . in some free church dominated areas , for example stornoway on the isle of lewis , sunday is considered a day of rest and consequently very few if any shops open at all . united states . in the u.s . , the various levels of government generally do not regulate the hours of the vast majority of retailers ( though there are exceptions , such as the blue law ) , and with the main exception being shops licensed to sell spirits and other alcoholic beverages ( for shopping hours , see alcohol sale hours by state ) and car dealerships . shopping hours vary widely based on management considerations and customer needs . key variables are the size of the metropolitan area , the type of store , and the size of the store . las vegas , nevada is the notable exception to all the traditions just described . las vegas is world-famous for its 24-hour local culture since it is an area with large gaming and tourism industries that operate 24/7 . since many of the employees in the city 's primary industries work overnight shifts & mdash ; and because nevada has few laws in regard to operating hours for any type of commercial activity & mdash ; many businesses cater to such workers . thus , las vegas is home to many 24-hour car dealerships , dental clinics , auto mechanics , computer shops , and even some smaller clothing stores . typical store shopping hours : monday - saturday 9 - 10 a.m . to 8 - 10 p.m . ( 9:00 - 10:00 to 20:00 - 22:00 ) sunday 11 - 12 noon to 5 - 7 p.m . ( 11:00 - 12:00 to 17:00 - 19:00 ) supermarkets usually open at earlier hours , between 6 or 7 a.m . to 10 p.m . ( 7:00 - 22:00 ) every day . boutiques and smaller shops often close early at 5 or 6 p.m . ( 17:00 or 18:00 ) , and usually close once or twice a week , most often on sunday . nearly all stores are closed on easter , thanksgiving day and christmas day . in recent years , however , several department stores and discount stores have started opening during the evening on thanksgiving day ; see black friday for more details . early closing ( half days ) occur on christmas eve and new year 's eve . some stores might have reduced hours on other major holidays . all malls and department stores , as well as most other stores remain open longer hours between thanksgiving weekend and christmas eve for christmas and holiday shopping . many are open until 11 p.m . ( 23:00 ) , and a few even longer . few stores remain open twenty-four hours ; the main exceptions to this rule are most walmarts throughout the country ( especially supercenters , which combine a discount store and full supermarket ) ; many convenience stores , especially those that also sell motor fuel ; and some drug stores like cvs , especially in larger cities like new york city and las vegas . some stores , especially in suburban and rural areas , might remain closed on sundays for any reason ( such as most retail in bergen county , new jersey due to the blue law , which is next to new york city , and home to four major malls and has the largest retail in the nation ) . see also . blue law sunday shopping ladenschlußgesetz . references .