Cave bear

taxonomy . cave bear skeletons were first described in 1774 by johann friedrich esper in his book newly discovered zoolites of unknown four footed animals . while scientists at the time considered that the skeletons could belong to apes , canids , felids , or even dragons or unicorns , esper postulated that they actually belonged to polar bears . twenty years later , johann christian rosenmüller , an anatomist at the leipzig university , gave the species its binomial name . the bones were so numerous that most researchers had little regard for them . during world war i , with the scarcity of phosphate dung , earth from the caves where cave bear bones occurred were used as a source of phosphates . when the '' dragon caves '' in austria 's styria region were exploited for this purpose , only the skulls and leg bones were kept . many caves in central europe have skeletons of cave bears inside , for example the heinrichshöhle in hemer , the dechenhöhle in iserlohn , germany . a complete skeleton , five complete skulls , and 18 & nbsp ; other bones were found inside jaskinia niedźwiedzia ( bear cave ) in 1966 in poland . with summary in romania , in a cave called bears ' cave , 140 & nbsp ; cave bear skeletons were discovered in 1983 . cave bears . jan kowalski . psu.edu in august of 2020 a 'completely preserved ' ice age cave bear carcass was found by reindeer herders in russia . the preserved carcass was estimated to be between 22,000 and 39,500 years old with radiocarbon dating proposed to ascertain a more accurate age . it is the only find of its kind with full soft tissue preservation such that even the nose was still intact . the preserved bear was found on bolshoy lyakhovsky island , part of the lyakhovsky islands archipelago . in a separate discovery , a well preserved cave bear cub was also found . . evolution . both the cave bear and the brown bear are thought to be descended from the plio-pleistocene etruscan bear ( ursus etruscus ) that lived about 5.3 & nbsp ; mya to 100,000 & nbsp ; years ago . the last common ancestor of cave bears and brown bears lived between 1.2 & ndash ; 1.4 & nbsp ; mya . the immediate precursor of the cave bear was probably ursus deningeri ( deninger 's bear ) , a species restricted to pleistocene europe about 1.8 & nbsp ; mya to 100,000 & nbsp ; years ago . the transition between deninger 's bear and the cave bear is given as the last interglacial , although the boundary between these forms is arbitrary , and intermediate or transitional taxa have been proposed , e.g . ursus spelaeus deningeroides , while other authorities consider both taxa to be chronological variants of the same species . cave bears found in different regions vary in age , thus facilitating investigations into evolutionary trends . the three anterior premolars were gradually reduced , then disappeared , possibly in response to a largely vegetarian diet . in a fourth of the skulls found in the conturines , the third premolar is still present , while more derived specimens elsewhere lack it . the last remaining premolar became conjugated with the true molars , enlarging the crown and granting it more cusps and cutting borders . this phenomenon , called molarization , improved the mastication capacities of the molars , facilitating the processing of tough vegetation . this allowed the cave bear to gain more energy for hibernation , while eating less than its ancestors . in 2005 , scientists recovered and sequenced the nuclear dna of a cave bear that lived between 42,000 and 44,000 years ago . the procedure used genomic dna extracted from one of the animal 's teeth . sequencing the dna directly ( rather than first replicating it with the polymerase chain reaction ) , the scientists recovered 21 cave bear genes from remains that did not yield significant amounts of dna with traditional techniques . this study confirmed and built on results from a previous study using mitochondrial dna extracted from cave bear remains ranging from 20,000 to 130,000 years old . both show that the cave bear was more closely related to the brown bear and polar bear than it was to the american black bear , but had split from the brown bear lineage before the distinct eastern and western brown bear lineages diversified and before the split of brown bears and polar bears . the divergence date estimate of cave bears and brown bears is about 1.2–1.4 & nbsp ; mya . however , a recent study showed that both species had some hybridization between them . . description . standing close to 3.5 meters ( 11.50 ft ) tall while rearing up , the cave bear had a very broad , domed skull with a steep forehead . its stout body had long thighs , massive shins and in-turning feet , making it similar in skeletal structure to the brown bear . cave bears were comparable in size to the largest modern-day bears . the average weight for males was , per christiansen ( 1999 ) : what size were arctodus simus and ursus spelaeus ( carnivora : ursidae ) ? , finnish zoological and botanical publishing board , helsinki 1999 though some specimens weighed as much as 1,000 & nbsp ; kg ( 2,200 & nbsp ; lb ) , while females weighed . of cave bear skeletons in museums , 90 % are male due to a misconception that the female skeletons were merely '' dwarfs '' . cave bears grew larger during glaciations and smaller during interglacials , probably to adjust heat loss rate . cave bears of the last ice age lacked the usual two or three premolars present in other bears ; to compensate , the last molar is very elongated , with supplementary cusps . gli orsi spelèi delle conturines/ ursus spelaeus . altabadia.it . retrieved on 2011-09-26 . the humerus of the cave bear was similar in size to that of the polar bear , as were the femora of females . the femora of male cave bears , however , bore more similarities in size to those of kodiak bears . . behaviour . dietary habits . cave bear teeth were very large and show greater wear than most modern bear species , suggesting a diet of tough materials . however , tubers and other gritty food , which cause distinctive tooth wear in modern brown bears , do not appear to have constituted a major part of cave bears ' diets on the basis of dental microwear analysis . pinto llona , a . c . , andrews , p . & etxeberrı´a , p . 2005 : taphonomy and palaeoecology of cave bears from the quaternary of cantabrian spain . fondacio´n de asturias/du pont ibe´rica/the natural history museum , grafinsa , oviedo . the morphological features of the cave bear chewing apparatus , including loss of premolars , have long been suggested to indicate their diets displayed a higher degree of herbivory than the eurasian brown bear . indeed , a solely vegetarian diet has been inferred on the basis of tooth morphology . results obtained on the stable isotopes of cave bear bones also point to a largely vegetarian diet in having low levels of nitrogen-15 and carbon-13 , which are accumulated at a faster rate by carnivores as opposed to herbivores . however , some evidence points toward the occasional inclusion of animal protein in cave bear diets . for example , toothmarks on cave bear remains in areas where cave bears are the only recorded potential carnivores suggests occasional cannibalistic scavenging , possibly on individuals that died during hibernation , and dental microwear analysis indicates the cave bear may have fed on a greater quantity of bone than its contemporary , the smaller eurasian brown bear . additionally , cave bear remains from peștera cu oase in the southwestern tip of the romanian part of the carpathian mountains had elevated levels of nitrogen-15 in their bones , indicative of omnivore diets , although the values are within the range of those found for the strictly herbivorous mammoth . bocherens , h . 2003 : isotopic biogeochemistry and the paleoecology of the mammoth steppe fauna . in reumer , f . , braber , f . , mol , d . & de vos , j . ( eds . ) : advances in mammoth research , 57–76 . deinsea 9 . although the current prevailing opinion concludes that cave bears were largely herbivorous , and more so than any modern species of the genus ursus , increasing evidence points to omnivorous diets , based both on regional variability of isotopic composition of bone remains indicative of dietary plasticity , and on a recent re-evaluation of craniodental morphology that places the cave bear squarely among omnivorous modern bear species with respect to its skull and tooth shapes . . mortality . death during hibernation was a common end for cave bears , mainly befalling specimens that failed ecologically during the summer season through inexperience , sickness or old age . some cave bear bones show signs of numerous ailments , including spinal fusion , bone tumours , cavities , root resorption , necrosis ( particularly in younger specimens ) , osteomyelitis , periostitis , rickets and kidney stones . male cave bear skeletons have been found with broken bacula , probably due to fighting during the breeding season . cave bear longevity is unknown , though it has been estimated that they seldom exceeded twenty years of age . paleontologists doubt adult cave bears had any natural predators , save for pack-hunting wolves and cave hyenas , which would probably have attacked sick or infirm individuals . cave hyenas are thought to be responsible for the disarticulation and destruction of some cave bear skeletons . such large carcasses were an optimal food resource for the hyenas , especially at the end of the winter , when food was scarce . the presence of fully articulated adult cave lion skeletons , deep in cave bear dens , indicates the lions may have occasionally entered dens to prey on hibernating cave bears , with some dying in the attempt . 15th international cave bear symposium – spišská nová ves , slovakia . 17–20 september 2009 . ( pdf ) . retrieved on 2011-09-26 . . range and habitat . the cave bear 's range stretched across europe ; from spain and great britain in the west , italy , parts of germany , poland , the balkans , romania and parts of russia , including the caucasus ; and northern iran . no traces of cave bears have been found in scotland , scandinavia or the baltic countries , which were all covered in extensive glaciers at the time . the largest numbers of cave bear remains have been found in austria , switzerland , northern italy , northern spain , southern france , and romania , roughly corresponding with the pyrenees , alps , and carpathians . the huge number of bones found in southern , central and eastern europe has led some scientists to think europe may have once had herds of cave bears . others , however , point out that , though some caves have thousands of bones , they were accumulated over a period of 100,000 years or more , thus requiring only two deaths in a cave per year to account for the large numbers . the cave bear inhabited low mountainous areas , especially in regions rich in limestone caves . they seem to have avoided open plains , preferring forested or forest-edged terrains . . relationship with humans . between the years 1917 and 1923 , the drachenloch cave in switzerland was excavated by emil bächler . the excavation uncovered more than 30,000 cave bear skeletons . it also uncovered a stone chest or cist , consisting of a low wall built from limestone slabs near a cave wall with a number of bear skulls inside it . also , a cave bear skull was found with a femur bone from another bear stuck inside it . scholars speculated that it was proof of prehistoric human religious rites involving the cave bear , or that the drachenloch cave bears were hunted as part of a hunting ritual , or that the skulls were kept as trophies . in archaeology , religion , ritual ( 2004 ) , archaeologist timothy insoll strongly questions whether the drachenloch finds in the stone cist were the result of human interaction . insoll states that the evidence for religious practices involving cave bears in this time period is '' far from convincing '' . he also states that comparisons with the religious practices involving bears that are known from historic times are invalid . insoll , timothy , archaeology , religion , ritual ( 2004 ) , routledge ( london ) , a similar phenomenon was encountered in regourdou , southern france . a rectangular pit contained the remains of at least twenty bears , covered by a massive stone slab . the remains of a neanderthal lay nearby in another stone pit , with various objects , including a bear humerus , a scraper , a core , and some flakes , which were interpreted as grave offerings . an unusual discovery in a deep chamber of basura cave in savona , italy , is thought to be related to cave bear worship , because there is a vaguely zoomorphic stalagmite surrounded by clay pellets . it was apparently used by neanderthals for a ceremony ; bear bones scattered on the floor further suggests it was likely to have had some sort of ritual purpose . . extinction . recent reassessment of fossils indicate that the cave bear probably died out 24,000 years ago . a complex set of factors , rather than a single factor , are suggested to have led to the extinction . however , there have been archeological finds of cave bear teeth used in a necklace that dates back only 12,000 years ago , suggesting that the extinction may have happened much later . compared with other megafaunal species that also became extinct during the last glacial maximum , the cave bear was believed to have had a more specialized diet of high-quality plants and a relatively restricted geographical range . this was suggested as an explanation as to why it died out so much earlier than the rest . some experts have disputed this claim , as the cave bear had survived multiple climate changes prior to extinction . additionally , mitochondrial dna research indicated that the genetic decline of the cave bear began long before it became extinct , demonstrating habitat loss due to climate change was not responsible . finally , high nitrogen-15 levels were found in cave bear bones from romania , indicating wider dietary possibilities than previously believed . overhunting by humans has been largely dismissed because human populations at the time were too small to pose a serious threat to the cave bear 's survival , though the two species may have competed for living space in caves . unlike brown bears , cave bears are seldom represented in cave paintings , leading some experts to believe the cave bear may have been avoided by human hunters the walking larder : patterns of domestication , pastoralism , and predation by juliet clutton-brock , published by routledge , 1990 , or their habitat preferences may not have overlapped . the late paleontologist björn kurtén hypothesis cave bear populations were fragmented and under stress even before the advent of the glaciers . populations living south of the alps possibly survived significantly longer . some evidence indicates that the cave bear used only caves for hibernation and was not inclined to use other locations , such as thickets , for this purpose , in contrast to the more versatile brown bear . this specialized hibernation behavior would have caused a high winter mortality rate for cave bears that failed to find available caves . therefore , as human populations slowly increased , the cave bear faced a shrinking pool of suitable caves , and slowly faded away to extinction , as both neanderthals and anatomically modern humans sought out caves as living quarters , depriving the cave bear of vital habitat . this hypothesis is being researched at this time . according to the research study , published in the journal molecular biology and evolution , radiocarbon dating of the fossil remains shows that the cave bear ceased to be abundant in central europe around 35,000 years ago . in 2019 the results of a large scale study of 81 bone specimens ( resulting in 59 new sequences ) , and 64 previously published complete mitochondrial genomes of cave bear mitochondrial dna remains found in switzerland , poland , france , spain , germany , italy and serbia , indicated that the cave bear population drastically declined starting around 40,000 years ago at the onset of the aurignacian , coinciding with the arrival of anatomically modern humans . it was concluded that human hunting and/or competition played a major role in their decline and ultimate disappearance , and that climate change was not likely to have been the dominant factor . in a study of spanish cave bear mtdna , each cave used by cave bears was found to contain almost exclusively a unique lineage of closely related haplotypes , indicating a homing behaviour for birthing and hibernation . the conclusion of this study is cave bears could not easily colonize new sites when in competition with humans for these resources . in 2020 a well preserved ice age cave bear was found on the bolshoy lyakhovsky island . ice age cave bear found exquisitely preserved in siberian permafrost nearby , on the siberian mainland of yakutia , a tiny , beautifully preserved cave bear cub recently emerged from another patch of melting permafrost . beautifully preserved cave bears emerge from siberian permafrost . see also . azykh cave bear cave darband cave dechen cave peștera cu oase divje babe flute . references . external links . show caves of romania cave bear fossils