Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales

early life . edward was born at the palace of westminster , london , the only son of king henry vi of england and his wife , margaret of anjou . at the time , there was strife between henry 's supporters and those of richard plantagenet , 3rd duke of york , who had a claim to the throne and challenged the authority of henry 's officers of state . henry was suffering from mental illness , and there were widespread rumours that the prince was the result of an affair between his mother and one of her loyal supporters . edmund beaufort , 2nd duke of somerset and james butler , 5th earl of ormonde , were both suspected of fathering prince edward ; paul murray kendall , richard the third ; page 32 however , there is no firm evidence to support the rumours , and henry himself never doubted the boy 's legitimacy and publicly acknowledged paternity . edward was invested as prince of wales at windsor castle in 1454 . war over the english throne . in 1460 , king henry was captured by the supporters of the duke of york at the battle of northampton and taken to london . the duke of york was dissuaded from claiming the throne immediately , but he induced parliament to pass the act of accord , by which henry was allowed to reign but edward was disinherited , as york or his heirs would become king on henry 's death . queen margaret and edward had meanwhile fled through cheshire . by margaret 's later account , she induced outlaws and pillagers to aid her by pledging them to recognise the seven-year-old edward as rightful heir to the crown . they subsequently reached safety in wales and journeyed to scotland , where margaret raised support , while the duke of york 's enemies gathered in the north of england . after york was killed at the battle of wakefield , the large army which margaret had gathered advanced south . they defeated the army of richard neville , 16th earl of warwick , one of york 's most prominent supporters , at the second battle of st albans . warwick had brought the captive king henry in the train of his army , and he was found abandoned on the battlefield . two of warwick 's knights , william bonville , 1st baron bonville , and sir thomas kyriell , who had agreed to remain with henry and see that he came to no harm , were captured . the day after the battle , margaret asked edward what death the two knights should suffer . edward readily replied that their heads should be cut off . . exile in france . margaret hesitated to advance on london with her unruly army , and subsequently retreated . they were routed at the battle of towton a few weeks later . margaret and edward fled once again , to scotland . for the next three years , margaret inspired several revolts in the northernmost counties of england , but was eventually forced to sail to france , where she and edward maintained a court in exile . ( henry had once again been captured and was a prisoner in the tower of london . ) in 1467 the ambassador of the duchy of milan to the court of france wrote that edward '' already talks of nothing but cutting off heads or making war , as if he had everything in his hands or was the god of battle or the peaceful occupant of that throne . '' r . a . griffiths , 'edward , prince of wales ( 1453–1471 ) ' , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 after several years in exile , margaret took the best opportunity that presented itself and allied herself with the renegade earl of warwick . king louis xi of france wanted to start a war with burgundy , allies of the yorkist king edward iv . he believed if he allied himself to restoring lancastrian rule they would help him conquer burgundy . as a compliment to his new allies louis made young edward godfather to his son charles . prince edward was married to anne neville , warwick 's younger daughter , in december 1470 , though there is some doubt as to whether the marriage was ever consummated . battles of barnet and tewkesbury . warwick returned to england and deposed edward iv , with the help of edward iv 's younger brother , the duke of clarence . edward iv fled into exile to burgundy with his youngest brother the duke of gloucester , while warwick restored henry vi to the throne . prince edward and margaret lingered behind in france until april 1471 . however , edward iv had already raised an army , returned to england , and reconciled with clarence . on the same day margaret and edward landed in england ( 14 april ) , edward iv defeated and killed warwick at the battle of barnet . with little real hope of success , the inexperienced prince and his mother led the remnant of their forces to meet edward iv in the battle of tewkesbury . they were defeated and edward of westminster was killed . john marius wilson , imperial gazetteer of england and wales ( 1870–72 ) , entry for tewkesbury according to some accounts , shortly after the rout of the lancastrians at tewkesbury , a small contingent of men under the duke of clarence found the grieving prince near a grove , and immediately beheaded him on a makeshift block , despite his pleas . paul murray kendall , a biographer of richard iii , accepts this version of events . paul murray kendall . richard the third ( 1956 ) ; pp . 118 , 528–529 note another account of edward 's death is given by three tudor sources : the grand chronicle of london , polydore vergil , and edward hall . it was later dramatised by william shakespeare in henry vi , part 3 , act v , scene v . their story is that edward was captured and brought before the victorious edward iv and his brothers and followers . the king received the prince graciously , and asked him why he had taken up arms against him . the prince replied defiantly , '' i came to recover my father 's heritage . '' the king then struck the prince across his face with his gauntlet hand , and his brothers killed the prince with their swords . however , none of these accounts appear in any of the contemporaneous sources , which all report that edward died in battle . edward 's body is buried at tewkesbury abbey . his widow , anne neville , married the duke of gloucester , who eventually succeeded as king richard iii in 1483 . epitaph . the latin memorial brass to edward in tewkesbury abbey is set in the floor between the choir stalls , under the tower . it reads as follows : + hic jacet edwardus princeps wallie , crude liter interfectus dum adhuc juvenis anno dñi 1471 mense maie die quarto eheu hominum furore matris tu sola lux es ⁊ gregis ultima spes this can be translated into english as follows : '' www.tewkesburyabbey.org.uk '' monumental inscriptions on gravestones and monuments in the abbey '' here lies edward , prince of wales , cruelly slain whilst but a youth . anno domini 1471 , may fourth . alas , the savagery of men . thou art the sole light of thy mother , and the last hope of thy race . '' . ancestry . notes . references . r . a . griffiths , the reign of king henry vi ( 1981 ) , especially the epilogue . alison weir , lancaster and york : the wars of the roses , london ( 1995 ) . external links . richard iii society the death of edward of lancaster at tewkesbury - -