Troy weight

etymology . troy weight probably takes its name from the french market town of troyes where english merchants traded at least as early as the early 9th century . the name '' troy '' is first attested in 1390 , describing the weight of a platter , in an account of the travels in europe of the earl of derby . charles moore watson ( 1844–1916 ) proposes an alternative etymology : the assize of weights and measures ( also known as tractatus de ponderibus et mensuris ) , one of the statutes of uncertain date from the reign of either henry iii or edward i , thus before 1307 , specifies '' troni ponderacionem '' —which the public record commissioners translate as '' troy weight '' . the word '' troni '' refers to markets . watson finds the dialect word '' troi '' , meaning a balance in wright 's the english dialect dictionary . troy weight referred to the tower system ; the earliest reference to the modern troy weights is in 1414 . . history . many aspects of the troy weight system were indirectly derived from the roman currency . the romans used bronze bars of varying weights as currency . an ( '' heavy bronze '' ) weighed one pound . one twelfth of an was called an , or in english , an '' ounce '' . before the adoption of the metric system , many systems of troy weights were in use in various parts of europe , among them holland troy , paris troy , etc . their values varied from one another by up to several percentage points . troy weights were first used in england in the 15th century , and were made official for gold and silver in 1527 . the british imperial system of weights and measures ( also known as imperial units ) was established in 1824 , prior to which the troy weight system was a subset of pre-imperial english units . the troy ounce in use today is essentially the same as the british imperial troy ounce ( 1824–1971 ) , adopted as an official weight standard for united states coinage by act of congress on may 19 , 1828 . the british imperial troy ounce ( known more commonly simply as the imperial troy ounce ) was based on , and virtually identical with , the pre-1824 british troy ounce and the pre-1707 english troy ounce . ( 1824 was the year the british imperial system of weights and measures was adopted , 1707 was the year of the act of union which created the kingdom of great britain . ) troy ounces have been used in england since about 1400 and the english troy ounce was officially adopted for coinage in 1527 . before that time , various sorts of troy ounces were in use on the continent . the troy ounce and grain were also part of the apothecaries ' system . this was long used in medicine , but has now been largely replaced by the metric system ( milligrams ) . the only troy weight in widespread use today is the british imperial troy ounce and its american counterpart . both are currently based on a grain of 0.06479891 & nbsp ; gram ( exact , by definition ) , with 480 grains to a troy ounce ( compared with grains for an ounce avoirdupois ) . the british empire abolished the 12-ounce troy pound in the 19th century , though it has been retained ( although rarely used ) in the american system . origin . the origin of the troy weight system is unknown . although the name probably comes from the champagne fairs at troyes , in northeastern france , the units themselves may be of more northern origin . english troy weights were nearly identical to the troy weight system of bremen . ( the bremen troy ounce had a mass of 480.8 british imperial grains . ) an alternative suggestion is that the weights come from the muslim domains by way of the gold dirham ( 47.966 british imperial grains ) , in the manner that king offa 's weights were derived from the silver dirhem ( about 45.0 british grains ) . according to watson , troy relates to a dialect word troi ( balance ) . then troy weight is a style of weighing , like auncel or bismar weights , or other kindred methods . the troy weight then refers to weighing of small precious or potent goods , such as bullion and medicines . . use in other countries . troy ounces are still often used in precious metal markets in countries that otherwise use international system of units ( si ) , except in east asia . the people 's bank of china , in particular , which has never historically used troy measurements , has begun issuing gold pandas minted according to si weights . units of measurement . troy pound . the troy pound is 5760 & nbsp ; grains ( ≈ 373.24 & nbsp ; g , 12 & nbsp ; oz & nbsp ; t ) , while an avoirdupois pound is approximately 21.53 % heavier at 7000 & nbsp ; grains ( ≈ 453.59 & nbsp ; g ) . troy ounce ( oz t ) . because of the international yard and pound agreement , one troy ounce ( oz t ) equals exactly grams . it also equals avoirdupois ounces , or exactly , about 10 % larger . the international yard and pound agreement did not define any troy weights . rather , it defined the avoirdupois pound in metric terms , from which we can derive an exact value for the troy ounce . specifically , it defined one pound as . we can derive an exact value for the troy ounce as follows : :1 lb an avoirdupois pound also equals 7,000 grains ( the international yard and pound agreement did not change the grain values of non-metric units ) . :1 lb 7000 grains :7000 grains :1 grain the troy system was used in the apothecaries ' system , but with different further subdivisions . relationship to british coinage . king offa 's currency reform replaced the sceat with the silver penny . this coin was derived from half of a silver dirhem . the masses were then derived by a count of coins , by a mix of charlemagne and roman systems . a shilling was set to twelve pence , an ounce to twenty pence , and a pound to twelve ounces or twenty shillings . the penny was quite a lot of money , so mass by coins was not a general practice . later kings debased the coin , both in weight and fineness . the original pound divided was the tower pound of 5,400 grains , but a later pound of 5,760 grains displaced it . where once 240 pence made a tower pound ( and 256 make a troy pound ) , by the time of the weights and measures acts ( uk ) of 1824 , a troy pound gives 792 silver pence , still minted as such as maundy money . sterling originally referred to the norman silver penny of the late 11th century . the coin was minted to a fineness of 11 oz , 2 dwt ( in the pound ) , or 925 millesimal fineness . see also . carat ( unit ) conversion of units english units fluid ounce grain ( unit ) imperial units mark ( weight ) tola ( unit ) united states customary units . references .