Tiwanaku

antiquity . the age of the site has been significantly refined over the last century . from 1910 to 1945 , arthur posnansky maintained that the site was 11,000–17,000 years old based on comparisons to geological eras and archaeoastronomy . beginning in the 1970s , carlos ponce sanginés proposed the site was first occupied around 1580 bc , the site 's oldest radiocarbon date . this date is still seen in some publications and museums in bolivia . since the 1980s , researchers have recognized this date as unreliable , leading to the consensus that the site is no older than 200 or 300 bc . most recently , a statistical assessment of reliable radiocarbon dates estimates that the site was founded around ad 110 ( 50–170 , 68 % probability ) , a date supported by the lack of ceramic styles from earlier periods . . structures . the structures that have been excavated by researchers at tiwanaku include the akapana , akapana east , and pumapunku stepped platforms , the kalasasaya , the kheri kala , and putin enclosures , and the semi-subterranean temple . these may be visited by the public . the akapana is an approximately cross-shaped pyramidal structure that is 257 m wide , 197 m broad at its maximum , and 16.5 m tall . at its center appears to have been a sunken court . this was nearly destroyed by a deep looting excavation that extends from the center of this structure to its eastern side . material from the looter 's excavation was dumped off the eastern side of the akapana . a staircase with sculptures is present on its western side . possible residential complexes might have occupied both the northeast and southeast corners of this structure . originally , the akapana was thought to have been developed from a modified hill . twenty-first-century studies have shown that it is an entirely manmade earthen mound , faced with a mixture of large and small stone blocks . the dirt comprising akapana appears to have been excavated from the '' moat '' that surrounds the site . the largest stone block within the akapana , made of andesite , is estimated to weigh 65.7 tonnes . the structure was possibly for the shaman-puma relationship or transformation through shape shifting . tenon puma and human heads stud the upper terraces . the akapana east was built on the eastern side of early tiwanaku . later it was considered a boundary between the ceremonial center and the urban area . it was made of a thick , prepared floor of sand and clay , which supported a group of buildings . yellow and red clay was used in different areas for what seems like aesthetic purposes . it was swept clean of all domestic refuse , signaling its great importance to the culture . isbell , w . h . , 2004 , palaces and politics in the andean middle horizon . in s . t . evans and j . pillsbury , eds . , pp . 191-246 . palaces of the ancient new world , dumbarton oaks research library and collection washington , d.c . the pumapunku is a man-made platform built on an east-west axis like the akapana . it is a rectangular , terraced earthen mound faced with megalithic blocks . it is 167.36 m wide along its north-south axis and 116.7 m broad along its east-west axis and is 5 m tall . identical 20-meter-wide projections extend 27.6 meters north and south from the northeast and southeast corners of the pumapunku . walled and unwalled courts and an esplanade are associated with this structure . a prominent feature of the pumapunku is a large stone terrace ; it is 6.75 by 38.72 meters in dimension and paved with large stone blocks . it is called the '' plataforma lítica '' and contains the largest stone block found in the tiwanaku site . ponce sanginés , c . and g . m . terrazas , 1970 , acerca de la procedencia del material lítico de los monumentos de tiwanaku . publication no . 21 . academia nacional de ciencias de bolivia . vranich , a . , 1999 , interpreting the meaning of ritual spaces : the temple complex of pumapunku , tiwanaku , bolivia , doctoral dissertation , university of pennsylvania . according to ponce sangines , the block is estimated to weigh 131 metric tonnes . the second-largest stone block found within the pumapunku is estimated to be 85 metric tonnes . the kalasasaya is a large courtyard more than 300 feet long , outlined by a high gateway . it is located to the north of the akapana and west of the semi-subterranean temple . within the courtyard is where explorers found the gateway of the sun . since the late 20th century , researchers have theorized that this was not the gateway 's original location . near the courtyard is the semi-subterranean temple ; a square sunken courtyard that is unique for its north-south rather than east-west axis . the walls are covered with tenon heads of many different styles , suggesting that the structure was reused for different purposes over time . it was built with walls of sandstone pillars and smaller blocks of ashlar masonry . browman , d . l . , 1981 , '' new light on andean tiwanaku , '' new scientist vol . 69 , no . 4 , pp . 408-419 . coe , michael , dean snow , and elizabeth benson , 1986 , atlas of ancient america p . 190 the largest stone block in the kalasasaya is estimated to weigh 26.95 metric tons . within many of the site 's structures are impressive gateways ; the ones of monumental scale are placed on artificial mounds , platforms , or sunken courts . many gateways show iconography of the staff god . this iconography also is used on some oversized vessels , indicating an importance to the culture . this iconography is most present on the gateway of the sun . silverman , helaine andean archaeology volume 2 . malden , massachusetts : blackwell publishing , 2004 the gateway of the sun and others located at pumapunku are not complete . they are missing part of a typical recessed frame known as a chambranle , which typically have sockets for clamps to support later additions . these architectural examples , as well as the recently discovered akapana gate , have unique detail and demonstrate high skill in stone-cutting . this reveals a knowledge of descriptive geometry . the regularity of elements suggests they are part of a system of proportions . many theories for the skill of tiwanaku 's architectural construction have been proposed . one is that they used a luk ’ a , which is a standard measurement of about sixty centimeters . another argument is for the pythagorean ratio . this idea calls for right triangles at a ratio of five to four to three used in the gateways to measure all parts . lastly , protzen and nair argue that tiwanaku had a system set for individual elements dependent on context and composition . this is shown in the construction of similar gateways ranging from diminutive to monumental size , proving that scaling factors did not affect proportion . with each added element , the individual pieces were shifted to fit together . protzen , j.-p . , and s . e . nair , 2000 , '' on reconstructing tiwanaku architecture '' : the journal of the society of architectural historians , vol . 59 , no . , 3 , pp . 358-371 . as the population grew , occupational niches developed , and people began to specialize in certain skills . there was an increase in artisans , who worked in pottery , jewelry , and textiles . like the later inca , the tiwanaku had few commercial or market institutions . instead , the culture relied on elite redistribution . , smith , michael e . ( 2004 ) , '' the archaeology of ancient economies , '' annu . rev . anthrop . 33 : 73-102 . that is , the elites of the empire controlled essentially all economic output but were expected to provide each commoner with all the resources needed to perform his or her function . selected occupations include agriculturists , herders , pastoralists , etc . such separation of occupations was accompanied by hierarchical stratification within the empire . bahn , paul g . lost cities . new york : welcome rain , 1999 . the elites of tiwanaku lived inside four walls that were surrounded by a moat . this moat , some believe , was to create the image of a sacred island . inside the walls were many images devoted to human origin , which only the elites would see . commoners may have entered this structure only for ceremonial purposes since it was home to the holiest of shrines . . archaeology . as the site has suffered from looting and amateur excavations since shortly after tiwanaku 's fall , archeologists must attempt to interpret it with the understanding that materials have been jumbled and destroyed . this destruction continued during the spanish conquest and colonial period , and during 19th century and the early 20th century . other damage was committed by people quarrying stone for building and railroad construction , and target practice by military personnel . no standing buildings have survived at the modern site . only public , non-domestic foundations remain , with poorly reconstructed walls . the ashlar blocks used in many of these structures were mass-produced in similar styles so that they could possibly be used for multiple purposes . throughout the period of the site , certain buildings changed purposes , causing a mix of artifacts found today . detailed study of tiwanaku began on a small scale in the mid-nineteenth century . in the 1860s , ephraim george squier visited the ruins and later published maps and sketches completed during his visit . german geologist alphons stübel spent nine days in tiwanaku in 1876 , creating a map of the site based on careful measurements . he also made sketches and created paper impressions of carvings and other architectural features . a book containing major photographic documentation was published in 1892 by engineer georg von grumbkow , with commentary by archaeologist max uhle , this was the first in-depth scientific account of the ruins . von grumbkow had first visited tiwanaku between the end of 1876 and the beginning of 1877 , when he accompanied as a photographer the expedition of french adventurer théodore ber , financed by american businessman henry meiggs , against ber ’ s promise of donating the artifacts he will find , on behalf of meiggs , to washington 's smithsonian institution and the american museum of natural history in new york . ber ’ s expedition was cut short by the violent hostility of the local population , instigated by the catholic parish priest , but von grumbkow ’ s early pictures survive . ; pictures of archaeological excavations in 1903 file : escalinata monolítica 1903-1904.jpg stairs of kalasasaya ( 1903 ) file : edificio de la segunda epoca - vista de la izquierda 1903-1904.jpg temple of kalasasaya ( 1903 ) file : puerta monolitica ( puerta del sol . ) 1903-1904.jpg gate of the sun ( 1903 ) file : puerta monolítica , vista de atras 1903-1904.jpg gate of the sun , rear view ( 1903 ) . contemporary excavation and restoration . in the 1960s , the bolivian government initiated an effort to restore the site and reconstruct part of it . the walls of the kalasasaya are almost all reconstructed . the original stones making up the kalasasaya would have resembled a more '' stonehenge '' -like style , spaced evenly apart and standing straight up . the reconstruction was not sufficiently based on research ; for instance , a new wall was built around kalasasaya . the reconstruction does not have as high quality of stonework as was present in tiwanaku . as noted , the gateway of the sun , now in the kalasasaya , is believed to have been moved from its original location . modern , academically sound archaeological excavations were performed from 1978 through the 1990s by university of chicago anthropologist alan kolata and his bolivian counterpart , oswaldo rivera . among their contributions are the rediscovery of the suka kollus , accurate dating of the civilization 's growth and influence , and evidence for a drought-based collapse of the tiwanaku civilization . archaeologists such as paul goldstein have argued that the tiwanaku empire ranged outside of the altiplano area and into the moquegua valley in peru . excavations at omo settlements show signs of similar architecture characteristic of tiwanaku , such as a temple and terraced mound . evidence of similar types of cranial vault modification in burials between the omo site and the main site of tiwanaku is also being used for this argument . left today tiwanaku has been designated as a unesco world heritage site , administered by the bolivian government . recently , the department of archaeology of bolivia ( dinar , directed by javier escalante ) has been conducting excavations on the akapana pyramid . the proyecto arqueologico pumapunku-akapana ( pumapunku-akapana archaeological project , papa ) run by the university of pennsylvania , has been excavating in the area surrounding the pyramid for the past few years , and also conducting ground penetrating radar surveys of the area . in former years , an archaeological field school offered through harvard 's summer school program , conducted in the residential area outside the monumental core , has provoked controversy amongst local archaeologists . . the program was directed by dr . gary urton , . of harvard , who was an expert on quipus , and dr . alexei vranich of the university of pennsylvania . the controversy was over allowing a team of untrained students to work on the site , even under professional supervision . it was so important that only certified professional archaeologists with documented funding were allowed access . the controversy was charged with nationalistic and political undertones . . the harvard field school lasted for three years , beginning in 2004 and ending in 2007 . the project was not renewed in subsequent years , nor was permission sought to do so . in 2009 state-sponsored restoration work on the akapana pyramid was halted due to a complaint from unesco . the restoration had consisted of facing the pyramid with adobe , although researchers had not established this as appropriate . in 2013 , maritime archaeology exploring lake titicaca 's khoa reef discovered an ancient ceremonial site and lifted artifacts such as a lapis lazuli and ceramic figurines , incense burners and a ceremonial medallion from the lake floor . the artifacts are representative of the lavishness of the ceremonies and the tiwanaku culture . when a topographical map of the site was created in 2016 by the use of a drone , a '' set of hitherto unknown structures '' was revealed . these structures spanned over 411 hectares , and included a stone temple and about one hundred circular or rectangular structures of vast dimensions , which were possibly domestic units .