Sumner Redstone

early life and education . redstone was born to a jewish family in boston , massachusetts , to belle ( née ostrovsky ) and michael redstone . in 1940 , his father changed the family surname from '' rothstein '' to '' redstone '' ( '' red stone '' is the literal translation of the yiddish name , '' rothstein '' ) . michael rothstein owned northeast theater corporation in dedham , massachusetts ( the forerunner of national amusements ) weddings/celebrations : paula fortunato , sumner m . redstone , the new york times , april 6 , 2003 and the boston branch of the latin quarter nightclub . redstone attended the boston latin school , from which he graduated first in his class . in 1944 , he graduated from harvard college , where he completed the studies for his baccalaureate in three years . later , redstone served as a 1st lieutenant in the united states army during world war ii with a team at the signals intelligence service that decoded japanese messages . cf . '' the highwaymen '' by ken auletta . auletta also wrote that redstone finished his harvard undergraduate degree in two and a half years . after his military service , he worked in washington , d.c . , and attended georgetown university law center . he transferred to harvard law school and received his law degree in 1947 . after completing law school , redstone served as special assistant to u.s . attorney general tom c . clark ( who later served as associate justice of the supreme court of the united states from 1949 to 1967 ) and then worked for the united states department of justice tax division in washington , d.c . and san francisco , and thereafter entered private practice . in 1954 , he joined his father 's theater chain , national amusements and in 1967 , he became ceo of the company . as the company grew , redstone came to believe that content would become more important than distribution mechanisms : channels of distribution ( in varied forms ) would always exist , but content would always be essential ( redstone coined the phrase , '' content is king ! '' ) he invested in columbia pictures , 20th century fox , orion pictures , and paramount pictures ( redstone 's viacom would buy paramount in the 1990s ) , all of which turned over huge profits when he chose to sell their stock in the early 1980s . on march 29 , 1979 , he suffered severe burns in a fire at the copley plaza hotel , in boston , but survived after 30 hours of extensive surgery at massachusetts general hospital . though he was warned that he might never be able to live a normal life again , eight years later he was fit enough to insist on playing tennis nearly every day and to launch a hostile takeover of viacom . redstone discussed the story of surviving the fire as a reflection of his strong determination and will to live . . career . viacom . looking for a new business venture , redstone set his sights on viacom ( 2005–2019 ) , a company which he had already been buying stock in as an investment and was a spin-off of cbs in 1971 after the fcc ruled at the time that television networks could not syndicate programs following their network run ( a ruling that has since been repealed ) . viacom syndicated most of cbs 's in-house productions ( such as hawaii five-o and gunsmoke , as well as the pre-1960 desilu productions library which cbs acquired in 1960 , i love lucy being among the acquired programs ) , but also found syndicating other programs highly lucrative , including most of carsey-werner productions ' shows ( the cosby show , roseanne , and a different world ) , as well as syndicating shows for other companies ( columbia pictures television 's all in the family was one example , as was mtm enterprises ' the mary tyler moore show ) , and cable channels ( nickelodeon 's double dare and finders keepers , co-syndicated with 20th television , were two examples ) . viacom also owned mtv networks ( formerly known as warner-amex satellite entertainment ) , which owned mtv and nickelodeon . in addition , other properties included showtime networks ( a pay-television network similar to hbo and cinemax ) and the movie channel . viacom acquired mtv networks in 1985 for 550 million from steve ross ' warner communications . ( wci bought american express ' share and then sold the entire entity to viacom , as they felt that , in addition to losing money from the short-lived qube service , they could not make a lot of money from the venture and the bias of a studio owning cable channels would be a conflict of interest . the studio 's stance changed in 1996 , when as time warner it bought turner broadcasting . ) after a four-month hostile takeover in 1987 , redstone won voting control of viacom . . paramount pictures . redstone 's next acquisition was the purchase of paramount communications ( previously gulf+western ) , parent of paramount pictures in 1994 . he engaged in a bidding war with barry diller ( former ceo of iac/interactivecorp ) and john malone ( president of tci/liberty media ) , and had to raise his bid three times . some say that redstone overpaid , but after he shed certain assets — the madison square garden properties ( which included the nba 's new york knicks and the nhl 's new york rangers ) to charles dolan 's cablevision and simon & schuster 's educational publishing units to pearson plc — for almost 4 billion , redstone turned viacom 's expenditure into a substantial profit . under redstone 's leadership , paramount produced such films as saving private ryan , titanic ( one of the highest-grossing films of all time and best picture academy award winner ) , braveheart ( best picture academy award ) , and forrest gump ( also a best picture winner ) and the creation of the hugely successful mission : impossible series of pictures . redstone replaced the team of jonathan dolgen and sherry lansing in 2004 . after arriving at paramount in 2005 , chairman and chief executive officer brad grey led a return to fortune at the box office . he oversaw the creation or revitalization of several major franchises , including transformers , star trek and paranormal activity . paramount also forged productive relationships with top-tier filmmakers and talent including j.j . abrams , michael bay and martin scorsese . the 2010 paramount slate achieved much success with shutter island and a true grit remake , reaching the biggest box office totals in the storied careers of martin scorsese and the coen brothers , respectively . in addition , during grey 's tenure , paramount launched its own worldwide releasing arm , paramount pictures international , and has released acclaimed films such as an inconvenient truth , up in the air , and there will be blood . the paramount acquisition was only the tip of the iceberg . he purchased blockbuster entertainment , which included aaron spelling 's production company and a huge library of films , much of which has been merged into paramount pictures . blockbuster has now been spun off into its own independent entity . redstone acquired cbs corporation in 2000 and then spun it off as a separate company in 2005 , taking with it all of paramount 's television shows and catalog . in december 2005 , redstone announced that paramount had agreed to buy dreamworks skg for an estimated 1.6 & nbsp ; billion . the acquisition was completed on february 1 , 2006 . subsequent financing brought viacom 's investment down to 700 & nbsp ; million . the animation studio , dreamworks animation , was not included in the deal as it has been its own company since late 2004 . however , paramount had the rights to distribute films by dreamworks animation until 2013 . on june 1 , 2012 , paramount pictures renamed the administration building on the studio lot the sumner redstone building in a dedication ceremony attended by employees of paramount pictures and viacom . . cbs . one of redstone 's largest acquisitions came in the form of viacom 's former parent , cbs . former viacom president and coo mel karmazin ( who was then the president of cbs ) proposed a merger to redstone on favorable terms and after the merger completed in 2000 , viacom had some of the most diversified businesses imaginable . viacom had assets in the form of broadcast networks ( cbs and upn ) , cable television networks ( mtv , vh1 , nickelodeon , mtv2 , comedy central , bet , nick at nite , noggin/the n , tv land , cmt , and spike tv ) , pay television ( showtime and the movie channel ) , radio ( infinity broadcasting , which produced the howard stern talk radios ) , outdoor advertising , motion pictures ( paramount pictures ) , television production ( spelling entertainment , paramount television , big ticket entertainment , cbs productions , and viacom productions ) , and king world productions ( a syndication unit , which notably syndicates the runaway daytime hit , the oprah winfrey show , as well as dr . phil , wheel of fortune , and jeopardy ! ) , among others . after cbs and viacom split in 2006 , redstone remained chairman of both companies but two separate ceos were appointed for each company . . succession . redstone 's trusts made it clear that his daughter , shari redstone ( vice-chairwoman of the board of viacom and cbs as well as president of national amusements ) , was set to assume his role upon his death . however , a november 22 , 2006 , new york times article indicated that redstone was reconsidering his daughter 's role . in 2007 , they feuded publicly over issues of corporate governance and the future of the cinema chain . documents were made public which verify that , as part of a settlement from sumner 's first divorce , all of sumner 's stock is in trust law that will be left for his grandchildren . on march 1 , 2010 , sumner publicly confirmed that all of his stock would be left for his five grandchildren ( brandon korff , kimberlee korff , tyler korff , keryn redstone , and lauren redstone ) . redstone made arrangements to step down as ceo of viacom in 2006 . after mel karmazin resigned in 2004 , two heirs apparent were named : co-president and co-coo les moonves ( who was number 2 to karmazin at cbs ; he was the former head of warner bros . television and before that , lorimar television ) and co-president and co-coo tom freston ( who had been president and ceo of mtv networks since 1987 and had been with the company since the formation of mtv networks ' precursor company , warner-amex satellite entertainment ) . after the viacom split was approved by the board on june 14 , 2005 , les headed cbs corporation , and tom headed the second incarnation of viacom , inc . on september 5 , 2006 , redstone removed freston as president and ceo of viacom and replaced him with director and former viacom counsel philippe dauman . redstone also brought back former cfo tom dooley . this was surprising to many , as freston had been seen by many as redstone 's heir apparent , and redstone had touted that freston would run the company after he retired . redstone publicly stated that he let freston go because of viacom 's lack of aggressiveness in the digital/online arena , lack of contact with investors , and a lackluster upfront ( coupled with falling viewership ) at mtv networks . in february 2016 , at age 92 , after a court-ordered examination by a geriatric psychiatry whose findings were not publicly disclosed , redstone relinquished the chairmanship of cbs to moonves and the chairmanship of viacom to dauman . in may 2016 , los angeles superior court judge david cowan dismissed a lawsuit alleging that redstone was mentally incompetent , although the judge stated it was '' not in dispute that redstone suffers from either mild or moderate dementia '' ; in addition to this , his speech was severely impaired due to a bout with aspiration pneumonia in 2014 . two weeks later , another such lawsuit was filed in massachusetts . . holdings . at the time of his death , redstone owned over seventy percent of the voting interest of viacomcbs . viacomcbs was controlled by redstone through national amusements . redstone sold his holdings of midway games , of over 89 percent , in december 2008 . . books . redstone 's autobiography , a passion to win ( co-written with author peter knobler ) , was published in 2001 by viacom 's simon & schuster . this book details redstone 's life from a young boy in boston to the difficult takeover of viacom and the problems he overcame in purchasing and managing both blockbuster video and paramount pictures . the book also recounts the cbs merger ( viacom was a spin-off company of cbs to syndicate its programs , and the subsidiary bought the parent almost 30 years later ) . viacom 's broadcasting properties at the time of a passion to wins release included several radio stations and two tv stations : wbz-tv , which had just become a cbs o & o through a merger with westinghouse four years before viacom and cbs merged , and wsbk-tv in redstone 's hometown , boston . . political views . a longtime democratic supporter , with a history of donating to many democratic campaigns , including regular donations to ted kennedy , john kerry , and former senate majority leader tom daschle , redstone endorsed republican george w . bush over kerry in the 2004 presidential election , allegedly because he argued that bush would be better for his company and the economy . despite this public endorsement , he donated money to kerry during the primaries and was involved in the rathergate scandal meant to hurt bush 's reelection . '' guess who 's a republican booster ? '' ( september 24 , 2004 ) . wsj.com . the wall street journal . retrieved 2016-06-05 . . philanthropy . redstone contributed over 150 & nbsp ; million to various philanthropic causes . in april 2007 , redstone announced a commitment of 105 million in charitable grants to fund research and patient care advancements in cancer and burn recovery at three major non-profit healthcare organizations . the cash contributions of 35 million were each paid out over five years to fastercures/the center for accelerating medical solutions , based in washington , d.c . ; the cedars-sinai prostate cancer center in los angeles , california ; and the massachusetts general hospital in boston , massachusetts . up to at least 2012 , redstone contributed 1.5 million to the global poverty project . he gave millions of dollars to the cambodian children 's fund , a nonprofit program that provides a wide range of critical health and educational services to impoverished and abused children in the capital city of phnom penh . redstone 's contribution will be used to create the sumner m . redstone child rescue center , a stand-alone facility originally scheduled to open during the fall of 2007 for children 5 to 16 . in subsequent years redstone continued to support this organization . in early 2010 , redstone pledged a 1 & nbsp ; million gift to autism speaks in support of scientific research into the causes of autism and effective treatments . redstone had given financial support to autism speaks previously . carl diorio , redstone donates 1 mil to autism speaks , associated press ( february 24 , 2010 ) . in 2011 , redstone gave an additional 500,000 to the group in support of its translational research initiative , bringing his cumulative lifetime contribution to autism speaks to 1.7 million . sumner m . redstone donates 500,000 to autism speaks , autism speaks ( press release ) ( march 14 , 2011 ) . in july 2010 , redstone donated 24 million to the keck school of medicine of the university of southern california to support cancer research . in september 2012 , redstone donated 18 million to the boston university school of law . the gift funded , in part , the construction of the five-story sumner m . redstone building , a classroom building which opened in 2014 . since october 2012 , redstone donated a total of 350,000 to the go campaign , which funds projects in 21 countries with a focus on helping orphans and other needy children . in may 2013 , the sumner m . redstone charitable foundation donated 1 million to literacy inc . , a new york city-based nonprofit literacy organization . in january 2014 , it was announced that the sumner m . redstone charitable foundation had donated 10 million to harvard law school for public-interest fellowships , the largest charitable contribution ever made to the law school in support of public service . the money supports students who work in public-interest positions after graduation . sumner redstone donates 10 million to harvard law school to support public service , harvard law school ( press release ) ( january 9 , 2014 ) . . personal life . in 1947 , he married phyllis gloria raphael . they had two children : brent redstone and shari redstone . in 1999 , they divorced when sumner was slapped with a 3 billion dollar divorce lawsuit which accused the mogul of adultery and cruelty . sumner was seen with hollywood producer , imdbname:0287080 in paris and was quoted as saying at the time that he '' wanted to spend the rest of his life with christine '' as a result of the divorce , sumner moved to los angeles where he continued to romantically pursue peters . peters went on to produce the hit romantic comedy '' how to lose a guy in 10 days '' in canada . as sumner 's patience ran out , he married paula fortunato , a former primary school teacher 39 years his junior . sumner redstone filed for divorce from her on october 17 , 2008 . their divorce was finalized on january 22 , 2009 . redstone owned a house in the beverly park area of los angeles , which he purchased in 2002 for 14.5 million . in july 2010 , redstone was caught on tape trying to find the source of an apparently embarrassing leak within mtv . redstone offered money and protection to a journalist if he would give up his source . redstone had been pushing mtv management to give more airtime to the band the electric barbarellas . on the message , redstone tells the reporter that '' we 're not going to kill '' the source , adding '' we just want to talk to him '' . the 87-year-old redstone also told the reporter he would be '' well rewarded and well protected '' if he would reveal the source . peter lauria told nbc 's today show he would not do it . viacom inc . spokesman , carl folta confirmed to today that it was redstone 's voice on the message and said he had made a mistake . a viacom source told the new york post , '' sumner wants to be consequential . sumner is really proud of what he did . this guy is loving it… he likes people to know he 's still alive '' . in august 2015 , redstone split with his live-in girlfriend , sydney holland , after five years together . in january 2019 , redstone and his family settled with his former live-in companion manuela herzer . according to marketwatch , '' herzer agreed to pay back 3.25 million of the tens of millions of gifts that redstone gave her '' , and '' the wide-ranging agreement ends all litigation between the two sides , who have been battling in the courts since the fall of 2015 when redstone kicked herzer out of his beverly hills mansion , replaced her as his health-care agent and wrote her out of his estate planning . '' on august 11 , 2020 , redstone died at his home in los angeles at the age of 97 .