Alexis Herman

secretary of labor . in 1996 , president clinton announced his intention to nominate herman as secretary of labor to replace outgoing secretary robert reich . trade unions publicly supported the nomination , although they had mostly supported other potential nominees such as harris wofford , esteban edward torres , and alan wheat . herman 's senate confirmation was delayed twice . the first resulted from questions regarding her role in organizing white house coffees clinton used as fundraisers . the second was because senate republicans refused to allow a vote on her nomination , as part of their opposition to a proposed executive order related to federal construction projects , which clinton eventually abandoned . with the delays over , the senate labor committee held its hearing on her nomination on march 18 , 1997 . then on april 30 , 1997 , the senate voted to confirm by a vote of 85–13 . herman was sworn in on may 9 , 1997 . she became the first african-american , and the fifth woman , to serve in the position . as secretary of labor , herman oversaw the department of labor , which at the time employed 17,000 people and operated on a 39 billion annual budget . the department of labor is tasked with enforcing a variety of workplace laws and regulations , including safety issues and anti-discrimination . during herman 's tenure , american unemployment was at its lowest level in decades . left she earned praise from her peers for her handling of the united parcel service strike of 1997 , the largest strike in the united states in two decades . after the strike began in august , herman met privately with the teamsters ' president and the ups chairman to frame the issues . she was an instrumental mediator in the talks , and the strike was settled after 15 days . herman 's role in resolving the strike raised her public profile as she began to pursue her agenda as secretary . as secretary , herman supported the 1996 and 1997 raises to the minimum wage , increasing it by 0.90 to 5.15 per hour by september 1997 . herman argued the wage hike increased the buying power of workers . she later opposed a 1999 republican supported plan to raise the minimum wage over three years , instead supporting a two-year time-table for an increase . herman also opposed the legislation as it included tax cuts without offsets . among herman 's responsibilities as secretary was the enforcement of child labour law . during her tenure , the department of labor fined toy store chain toys '' r '' us 200,000 for violating laws restricting the type of work that may be done , and the number of hours that may be worked by underage employees . it found more than 300 teenage employees were working more and later hours than permitted , and toys '' r '' us agreed to stop the practices . herman supported the united states ' participation in the international labour organization child labor convention , a treaty designed to protect children under 18 years old from slavery , trafficking , bondage , and other abuses . she also defended the united states ' support of a provision to allow for voluntary military service of those under 18 years old , a practice allowed in the united states , great britain , germany , and the netherlands . opponents , including other nations , trade unions , and amnesty international urged tougher provisions ; however , herman contended the focus of the treaty should be on forced labor , not voluntary military service . attorney general janet reno appointed independent council ralph i . lancaster jr . , in may 1998 , to investigate herman after businessman laurent j . yene alleged she accepted kickbacks while working at the white house . reno was skeptical of yene 's allegations following a preliminary fbi investigation , but she believed the independent council law obligated her to appoint independent council where she could not affirm the claims were without merit . following a twenty-three month investigation , independent council lancaster concluded that herman had broken no laws and cleared her of all wrongdoing . she was the fifth clinton cabinet officer to be investigated by independent counsel , and the fourth cleared of all wrongdoing . the independent council investigations of the cabinet members cost 95 million and did not uncover any felonies , leading congress to allow the independent counsel act to expire in june 1999 without re-authorization . herman was active in al gore 2000 campaign for president . during the florida election recount , herman was part of the team planning a transition to a gore administration . abc news and the new york times considered her a likely candidate to remain in gore 's white house if he won . elaine chao replaced her as secretary of labor in the george w . bush administration . . post-government . herman served as co-chair of democratic presidential nominee john kerry transition team during the 2004 presidential election . in 2005 , howard dean , serving as democratic national committee chairman , appointed herman and lawyer james roosevelt , jr . co-chairs of its rules and bylaws committee . mydd : vote counting the dnc rules & bylaws committee the position put herman and roosevelt at the center of a dispute between the campaigns of democratic primary candidates barack obama and hillary clinton over whether to seat delegates from michigan and florida at the 2008 democratic national convention . herman endorsed hillary clinton in the 2016 democratic party presidential primaries and served as deputy parliamentarian at the 2016 democratic national convention . from 2001 to 2006 , herman was chairwoman of the coca-cola company 's human resources task force . the following year , coca-cola made her a director . herman served on toyota 's diversity advisory board . in 2006 , the company appointed her to head a special task force to ensure the company 's compliance with anti-discrimination standards following the resignation of toyota north america 's ceo , after being named the defendant in a sexual harassment lawsuit . herman served on the boards of other major companies , including cummins , mgm resorts international , entergy , sodexo , and is the chairman and ceo of new ventures , inc . in 2010 , herman was appointed to the board of the clinton bush haiti fund , a charitable organization founded by bill clinton and george w . bush to aid haiti following a 2010 haiti earthquake in january of that year . herman has also been involved with civic groups including the national urban league and the national epilepsy foundation . she has been awarded more than 20 honorary doctorate degrees from academic institutions . . personal life . herman was carnival queen for the mobile area mardi gras association in 1974 . her father had served as king of carnival in his youth . herman married physician charles franklin jr . in february 2000 at the washington national cathedral . franklin had three children from previous marriages . he died in 2014 following an extended illness . . see also . list of african-american firsts list of african-american united states cabinet secretaries list of female united states cabinet secretaries . references . external links . u.s . department of labor biography private attorney chosen to investigate alexis herman , cnn , allpolitics , may 26 , 1998 clinton questioned in alexis herman investigation , cnn , september 8 , 1999 congressional record—senate s3409 , april 22 , 1997 jonathan karl on the possible 'sleeper case ' in the election dispute , cnn , december 3 , 2000 -