Wax museum

history before 1800 . the making of life-size wax figures wearing real clothes grew out of the funeral practices of european royalty . in the middle ages it was the habit to carry the corpse , fully dressed , on top of the coffin at royal funerals , but this sometimes had unfortunate consequences in hot weather , and the custom of making an effigy in wax for this role grew , again wearing actual clothes so that only the head and hands needed wax models . after the funeral these were often displayed by the tomb or elsewhere in the church , and became a popular attraction for visitors , which it was often necessary to pay to view . the museum of westminster abbey in london has a collection of british royal wax effigies going back to that of edward iii of england ( died 1377 ) , as well as those of figures such as the naval hero horatio nelson , and frances stewart , duchess of richmond , who also had her parrot stuffed and displayed . from the funeral of charles ii in 1680 they were no longer placed on the coffin but were still made for later display . the effigy of charles ii , open-eyed and standing , was displayed over his tomb until the early 19th century , when all the westminster effigies were removed from the abbey itself . nelson 's effigy was a pure tourist attraction , commissioned the year after his death in 1805 , and his burial not in the abbey but in st paul 's cathedral after a government decision that major public figures should in future be buried there . concerned for their revenue from visitors , the abbey decided it needed a rival attraction for admirers of nelson . westminster abbey , '' horatio , viscount nelson '' . in european courts including that of france the making of posed wax figures became popular . antoine benoist ( 1632–1717 ) was a french court painter and sculptor in wax to king louis xiv . he exhibited forty-three wax figures of the french royal circle at his residence in paris . thereafter , the king authorized the figurines to be shown throughout france . his work became so highly regarded that james ii of england invited him to visit england in 1684 . there he executed works of the english king and members of his court . a seated figure of peter the great of russia survives , made by an italian artist , after the tsar was impressed by the figures he saw at the chateau of versailles . the danish court painter johann salomon wahl executed figures of the danish king and queen in about 1740 . taylor , 37 the 'moving wax works of the royal court of england ' , a museum or exhibition of 140 life-size figures , some apparently with clockwork moving parts , opened by mrs mary in fleet street in london was doing excellent business in 1711 . philippe curtius , waxwork modeller to the french court , opened his cabinet de cire as a tourist attraction in paris in 1770 , which remained open until 1802 . in 1783 this added a caverne des grands voleurs ( '' cave of the great thieves '' ) , an early '' chamber of horrors '' . he bequeathed his collection to his protégée marie tussaud , who during the french revolution made death masks of the executed royals . taylor , 37-38 . notable wax museums . madame tussauds , historically associated with london , is the most famous name associated with wax museums , although it was not the earliest wax museum , as is sometimes thought . in 1835 madame tussaud established her first permanent exhibition in london 's baker street . by the late 19th century most large cities had some kind of commercial wax museum , like the musée grévin in paris or the panoptikum hamburg , and for a century these remained highly popular . in the late 20th century it became harder for them to compete with other attractions . today there are also madame tussauds in dam square , amsterdam ; berlin ; madame tussauds hong kong ; shanghai ; and five locations in the united states : the venetian hotel in las vegas valley , times square in new york city , washington , d.c . , fisherman 's wharf in san francisco and hollywood . louis tussaud 's wax museum in san antonio , texas , is across the street from the historic alamo . others are located on the canadian side of niagara falls , and grand prairie , texas . one of the most popular wax museums in the united states for decades was the movieland wax museum in buena park , california , near knott 's berry farm . the museum opened in 1962 and through the years added many wax figures of famous show business figures . several stars attended the unveilings of the wax incarnations . the museum closed its doors on october 31 , 2005 , after years of dwindling attendance . however , the most enduring museum in the united states is the hollywood wax museum located in hollywood , california which features almost exclusively figures of movie actors displayed in settings associated with their roles in popular movies . this group of museums includes hollywood wax museum branson in branson , missouri along with hollywood wax museum pigeon forge in pigeon forge , tennessee and hollywood wax museum myrtle beach in myrtle beach , south carolina . with the original location having been developed in the mid-1960s , the most recent reports suggest that this group of museums is experiencing brisk business with the branson location having undergone a substantial expansion and remodeling in 2008 and 2009 including an animated ride and a mirror maze . another popular wax museum is the musée conti wax museum in new orleans , louisiana , which features wax figures portraying the city 's history as well as a '' haunted dungeon '' section of wax figures of famous characters from horror films and literature . this museum is currently closed as the conti building is being converted into condos . the museum should reopen at jazzland theme park some time in the future . another popular wax museum in the u.s . is the wax museum at fisherman 's wharf in san francisco , california . biblewalk is a christian wax museum in mansfield , ohio . it has received attention for its use of celebrity wax figures in its religious scenes , originally a cost-saving measure when new wax figures were deemed too expensive . the royal london wax museum was open in downtown victoria , british columbia , canada , from 1970 to 2010 in the steamship terminal building , it featured '' royalty to rogues and the renowned . '' it was forced to close when the building required seismic upgrades . the national wax museum in dublin , ireland is a wax museum which hosts well over a hundred figures . for many years it has had only one sculptor , pj heraty , who continued producing figures even while the museum was closed . meanwhile , it could be re-opened at a new location . during the last few years some other new wax museums are starting around the world . in 2009 dreamland wax museum opened in gramado , in the south of brazil . the national presidential wax museum in keystone , south dakota is the only wax museum in the world to feature every u.s . president . their exhibits also include other notable figures from history such as general george custer , alexander graham bell , thomas edison , and sitting bull . originally created by the famed sculptor katherine stubergh , the museum includes death and life masks of notable hollywood celebrities including mae west and sid grauman . their most revered exhibit is a depiction of george w . bush standing on the rubble of the world trade center with nyfd fireman bob beckwith following the attacks on september 11 , 2001 . in india . india 's first wax museum opened in december 2005 in kanyakumari . now located to lonavala it contains 100 wax statues of celebrities at lonavala square mall . the biggest in india wax museum named mother 's wax museum was opened in november 2014 in rajarhat . another branch opened in july 2008 at the historical site of old goa with a collection of religious statues . madame tussauds opened its first museum in india at new delhi in 2017 . gallery of wax museum . file : the beatles wax dummies.jpg the beatles at madame tussauds london . file : sissi im panoptikum hamburg.jpg elisabeth of bavaria ( sissi ) at panoptikum hamburg . file : cats wachsfigur.jpg wax figure of cats ( musical ) at panoptikum hamburg . file : céline dion , musée grévin montréal.jpg celine dion at musée grévin montreal . file : hollywood wax museum - hollywood ca.jpg hollywood wax museum in hollywood , ca file : hollywood wax museum - pigeon forge , tn.jpg hollywood wax museum pigeon forge in pigeon forge , tn file : hollywood wax museum - myrtle beach sc.jpg hollywood wax museum myrtle beach in myrtle beach , sc file : hollywood wax museum - branson mo.jpg hollywood wax museum branson in branson , mo file : museu de cera.jpg wax museum of fátima in fátima , portugal . . see also . wax sculpture . notes . references . taylor , lou , the study of dress history , 2002 , manchester university press , , 9780719040658 , google books