The Last Continent

plot summary . the story opens weeks after the events of interesting times , in which rincewind is magically transported to the continent of xxxx due to a miscalculation made by the unseen university wizards . he meets the skippy the bush kangaroo , who was sent by the creator of fourecks . scrappy explains to rincewind that he is fated to bring back '' the wet '' , meaning the rain , and that he is the reason for the eons-long drought . scrappy says that the continent is unfinished , and time and space will be an eternal anomaly there until it is finished , i.e . , the rain is brought back . rincewind is shown cave paintings of wizards . meanwhile , the senior wizards ( archchancellor mustrum ridcully , the dean , the bursar , the chair of indefinite studies , the lecturer in recent runes , the senior wrangler , and ponder stibbons ) are trying to find a cure for the librarian 's magical malady , which causes him to transform into a native object , such as a book when near a library , whenever he sneezes . the wizards soon find out that the books in the library become hostile and attack when not in the librarian 's care . the wizards can not cure the librarian without knowing his name . the librarian , being also the archivist , destroyed any evidence of his true name since he believed the wizards would attempt to turn him human again , as he rather enjoyed his orang-utan body ( brought on by a magical accident years before ) . the lecturer in recent runes suggests they interrogate rincewind , as he once worked closely with the librarian and seemed to know more about him than anyone else . to find rincewind , they have to find the continent of xxxx . they seek out the egregious professor of cruel and unusual geography , and find his office but no sign of the professor himself . they then find a magical window in space leading from the professor 's bathroom to a tropical island thousands of years in the past . back in the present , rincewind attempts to run away from his destiny , but in fact runs towards it . with the secret assistance of scrappy , ( a parody of skippy the bush kangaroo , a television show from 1969 to 1970 , with re-runs into the early 1980s ) he eventually ends up wrongfully arrested for sheep theft and taken to bugarup , where he is hoping to find a ship to escape on . along the way he subsequently ends up inventing several things that are considered australian icons in the real world , as well as becoming the subject of a ballad that is hinted at being a parody of the song '' waltzing matilda '' . a gigantic circular storm surrounding fourecks prevents any ships from leaving , however . the people of bugarup regard sheep thieves as folk heroes and encourage rincewind to escape , while not actually allowing him to . he finds a hidden message on the ceiling of his holding cell , left by a previous escapee named tinhead ned , a reference to the bushranger ned kelly , telling him : '' g'day mait , check the hinges . '' he discovers that he is able to lift the door off its hinges and escape . the university wizards become trapped when mrs whitlow , the head maid , closes the window that leads back into the professor 's study . the wizards soon encounter plants that rapidly evolve to suit their needs but , apart from ponder , do not question the turn of events until a large dinosaur evolves into a chicken in front of their eyes . after finding a plant-based boat , the wizards start to question their surroundings even more and the god of evolution , who has been causing the events , then turns up and helps explain things . the god does n't understand the purpose of the seeds and is , it turns out , unaware of the concept of sexual reproduction . after mrs whitlow explains it to him , the excited god decides to redesign the creatures on the island in order to incorporate the idea . ( the god is also shown to have created a large number of beetle species , in reference to the quotation by j . b . s . haldane . ) the wizards then reach fourecks , inventing surfing along the way , and meet the creator of fourecks ( not of the disc ) in the process of creating it by way of indigenous australian art . the wizards bicker over the creator 's technique and inadvertently create the duck-billed platypus . the librarian meanwhile steals the creator 's bullroarer and spins it , causing the drought rincewind is in the process of stopping . the wizards are then frozen in time for thousands of years by the stray magic left over from creating the continent . rincewind , having escaped from gaol , meets up with a group of female impersonators , darleen and letitia , and a female , neilette . the '' ladies '' have found his luggage , which rescues him from the watch . in the escape , rincewind and neilette break into the old brewery ( which was never used because all the beer kept going flat ) . an earthquake ( induced by the voice of the creator ) causes the brewery to collapse , trapping them inside the luggage . when they emerge , rincewind can see the ethereal outlines of the wizards ( who were trapped , frozen in time , for 30,000 years in the brewery ) . eventually he arrives at the university of fourecks ( which has a tower that is taller on the inside than it is on the outside ) . rincewind figures out how to free the wizards . the wizards attempt to find a way to bring back the rain , but are unsuccessful . as they are sitting around , rincewind idly twirls the bullroarer , which soon begins to fly faster and farther than it should . rincewind lets go and the bullroarer flies off ; immediately , it begins to rain . having saved fourecks , rincewind and the wizards return to ankh-morpork by ship , and the story ends with the old man with the sack ( the creator of the last continent ) catching the bullroarer in front of a young boy . reception . the sf site described it as '' ( l ) oads of sarcasm , an outrageous plot and tons of sheer fun '' . the last continent , reviewed by todd richmond , at the sf site ; published 1999 infinity plus was less positive , recommending that discworld newcomers start elsewhere , and stating that it '' falls below ( pratchett 's ) normal very high standard on several counts '' , because although it is '' great fun '' and '' worth buying '' , it '' does n't hang together as a plot , as an unfolding story '' . the last continent by terry pratchett ( doubleday , £16.99 , 261 pages , hardback . published 1998 . ) , reviewed by john owen , at infinity plus ; june 20 , 1998 ; retrieved october 15 , 2017 . see also . '' no worries '' , an australian phrase used extensively in the book