Tick (comics)

history . in 1986 , eighteen-year-old cartoonist ben edlund created the tick as a mascot for a newsletter of the brockton , massachusetts store new england comics , where he was a frequent customer . edlund expanded this into stories , beginning with the three-page tale '' the tick '' in new england comics newsletter 14–15 ( july/august – september/october 1986 ) , in which the hero escapes from a mental institution . the character became popular and the store financed a black-and-white comic book series , with the first issue released in june , 1988 , and subsequently reprinted at least nine times through the next decade , including later editions with additional content . the tick 's sidekick , arthur , was introduced in the tick 4 ( april 1989 ) . spin-offs followed featuring characters such as paul the samurai , man-eating cow , and chainsaw vigilante . edlund continued to write and illustrate these projects initially through his years as an undergraduate film student at the massachusetts college of art . the chainsaw vigilante spin-off , which was never completed , was written and illustrated by zander cannon . other series , such as the second paul the samurai series and the man-eating cow series , were written by writer clay griffith . in 1994 , the fox network introduced the tick as a saturday-morning cartoon series , which edlund wrote and co-produced . lasting three seasons , the animated series provided the tick 's greatest mainstream fame . townsend coleman voiced the title character and micky dolenz played his sidekick arthur , in season 1 . rob paulsen took over the arthur role during seasons 2 and 3 . the series also featured hapless heroes die fledermaus , sewer urchin and american maid . reruns on comedy central helped make the series a cult hit with adults . the 1997 book the tick : mighty blue justice ! by greg hyland ( creator of lethargic lad ) was published as a tie-in with the animated series . in 2001 , fox introduced a live-action tv series ( produced by columbia tristar television ) , written and executive produced by edlund . the series starred patrick warburton as the tick , david burke as arthur , nestor carbonell as batmanuel and liz vassey as captain liberty . the series was short-lived , however , and it only lasted nine episodes . a dvd release of the complete series ( including several unaired episodes ) was released on september 30 , 2003 . in june 2005 , the toon disney network began airing the tick animated series . the series also occasionally aired on abc family as part of the jetix cartoon block . the following year , buena vista home entertainment released the first season of the tick animated series on dvd . the second season was released on august 7 , 2007 ; however , both collections were missing an episode for different reasons . in july 2016 , amazon announced that a new live-action series , starring peter serafinowicz and directed by wally pfister , would air on amazon video . the pilot was picked up as a series , and the first season 's 12 episodes were released in two parts—the first 6 episodes on august 25 , 2017 , and the second half on february 23 , 2018 . a 10-episode second season was released on april 5 , 2019 . character biography . the tick seems to have no memory of his life before being the tick , and indeed not much memory of anything ; more than likely , this is due to frequent head injuries . each media adaptation has a different origin of the tick : in the original comic series , the tick is apparently legally insane , having escaped from a mental institution located not too far from the city . in the 1994 animated series , he has passed his official superhero initiation test and was assigned to the city . in the 2001 live-action series , the tick was tricked into moving to ( and protecting ) the city after irritating the employees of a remote bus station he had sworn to protect . he has no memory of his life before that , although batmanuel suggests that the tick may be from space . in the 2016 live-action series , the tick has no memory of where he comes from , and his past has not yet been explained or uncovered . a square-jawed , muscular , bright blue-costumed figure with antennae sticking up from his head , the tick is a surrealistic parody of superheroes , in the vein of dave sim 's character the cockroach . he is well-intended , friendly , childlike , good-natured , high-spirited , bombastic , frequently obtuse , and prone to quipping odd , dim remarks and '' inspirational '' speeches filled with bizarre metaphors . the tick is known for his nonsensical battle cry , '' spoooooon ! '' , which he decided upon one day while eating a bowl of drama flakes cereal . actor patrick warburton described his perception of the tick character , as warburton played him : originally , the tick 's costume was meant to be brown , but it was decided that blue looked better in print . in the tick vs . the tick , wherein the tick is confronted by barry , an unstable pseudo-hero who also calls himself '' the tick '' , barry wears a brown costume similar to the tick 's . the tick is named after an arachnid , much like spider-man . the logo of the series also resembles that of the 1994 spider-man series . according to the live-action series , the tick is 6 feet 6 & nbsp ; inches tall , weighs 230 pounds ( 6 & nbsp ; inches and 170 pounds less than his dimensions in the comic ) , and has blue hair and eyes . in the comic series , the tick gets a job at the weekly world planet newspaper . he works in the same office as clark oppenheimer , who is also a superhero called the caped wonder . oppenheimer has all the typical superman powers , including x-ray vision ( '' see-through vision '' ) , super strength , invulnerability , flight , heat-vision ( '' very hot vision '' ) , and super hearing . consequently , he looks down on the tick as a lower form of superhero with limited powers . like many superheroes , the tick has a sidekick , a rather plump former accountant named arthur . arthur wears a white moth suit that allows him to fly ; however , he is often mistaken for a bunny due to the long ear-like antennae of his costume and the fact that his wings are often folded up . the tick is impulsive and arthur serves as a sort of conscience . he also figures out the schemes of villains and formulates plans to stop them . arthur 's '' battle cry '' is '' not in the face ! not in the face ! '' in the amazon prime video series , the tick is fixated on arthur , and even mentions at one point that his thinking is fuzzy when away from arthur . despite arthur 's repeated attempts to push the tick away , the hero wo n't leave arthur 's side for long . the tick also frequently talks about destiny as if she is a literal person , guiding arthur 's path ( '' destiny gave him the suit . i just acted in more of a 'delivery man ' role '' ) , alluding to the parcae in roman mythology . at one point , arthur starts to believe that the tick is merely a hallucination , but that thought is quickly dispelled when arthur 's sister , dot , interacts with '' the blue guy '' . in all of his incarnations , the tick is surrounded by a cast of equally absurd heroes and villains , many of them parodies of popular comic book characters and character types . few of the '' superheroes '' in the tick mythos have powers that measure up to those of dc comics or marvel comics characters , but their foes are often equally silly and/or weak . the tick lives in a city simply called '' the city '' . in the animated series , the tick was assigned to the city after his '' cabinet of terror '' ( described by the tick as the '' deadliest engine of destruction 1974 had to offer '' ) exploded , leaving him unharmed , during his city assignment selection trials at the national super institute convention in reno , nevada . according to the series ' companion book , the tick : mighty blue justice ! , at least one of the judges was amazed by this , awarding the tick a score of 10 out of 10 . powers and abilities . the tick possesses superhuman strength and mass , which makes him capable of inflicting great damage on his surroundings if he is not careful . his full strength is never actually quantified , although he is capable of lifting whole cars with a single hand , and comfortably bending steel girders . in the pilot of the 2016 series , the tick claims to have the strength of '' ten , perhaps twenty men—a crowded bus stop of men '' . the tick is also '' nigh-invulnerable '' , which means it is almost impossible to injure him in any serious way ( although he is vulnerable to feelings of pain and his antennae are particularly sensitive ) . because of this he can survive moments of extreme stress , and has demonstrated this ability on numerous occasions . in one noteworthy instance , in the animated episode '' evil sits down for a moment '' , he fell 4,000 feet out of the sky , crashing through the concrete road below into a subway tunnel , yet before he reached a stop he was subsequently hit by an oncoming train—and he survived it all without any lasting physical injury ( only a brief , albeit severe , concussion ) . several powerful supervillains have been able to knock the tick unconscious in several fights , but he never comes to any lasting harm . he also does not possess a super-powered immune system , as he has been seen sick with the common cold just like a normal person . one of the tick 's few limitations is that harming or removing his antennae will destroy his sense of balance . finally , the tick possesses something referred to as '' drama power '' , or basically a tendency for the tick 's powers to increase as the situation becomes more dramatic . he can also survive in space without a suit , and under water without oxygen for '' at least '' a long time . in the 2017 amazon adaption , he is shown to be able to leap and bound great heights with ease and speed , and he is utterly impervious to bullets . however , he is almost choked to death in the second season , the only indication that the tick can be physically harmed . reception . the tick has been well received as a comic book character . empire magazine ranked him as the 28th-greatest comic book character of all time , stating that the tick is a lovable lunk , given to overly dramatic declarations on behalf of justice . ign ranked him as the 57th-greatest comic book hero of all time , saying that if you like your heroes on the bizarre side , you wo n't find anyone more surreal than the tick . ign also stated that whatever his mental state , the tick 's adventures are thoroughly enjoyable on both the printed page and television . wizard magazine rated him as the 187th-greatest comic book character of all time . . in other media . television . the tick ( 1994 tv series ) , a 1994–1997 animated television series , with townsend coleman voicing '' the tick '' the tick ( 2001 tv series ) , a 2001–2002 live-action television series , with patrick warburton as '' the tick '' the tick ( 2016 tv series ) , a 2016–2019 live-action television series , with peter serafinowicz as '' the tick '' . merchandising . while the tick comic book series included some extras , such as trading cards , the merchandising of the tick increased dramatically with the launch of the animated series . action figures , stickers , pogs , t-shirts , hats , party favors , costumes , and a board game were created . in addition , many fast food restaurant chains , such as carl 's jr . and taco bell offered tick-related giveaways . in 1994 , fox interactive also released a beat 'em up the tick ( video game ) . the game , however , was not well received . see also . one-punch man , a japanese superhero franchise that has similarity . references . bibliography . . external links . the tick ( 1994–1997 ) – official site comic vine michael legg : leggman 's the tick super fanpage ! the tick - compendium of comics