Armed merchantman

pre-20th century . east indiamen of various european countries were heavily armed for their long journeys to the far east . in particularly dangerous times , such as when the home countries were at war , a convoy system would be used whereby the ships were escorted by a warship . however , many east indiamen also travelled on their own , and therefore were heavily armed in order to defend themselves against pirates and privateers . they also defended themselves against warships , scoring signal victories at the battle of pulo aura and the action of 4 august 1800 . the british royal navy purchased several that it converted to ship of the line . development of auxiliary cruisers . in 1856 , privateering ( or seizure of a belligerent country 's merchant ships as a private enterprise ) lost international sanction under the declaration of paris . from 1861 to 1865 european countries built high-speed ships to run the union blockade during the american civil war . some of these were armed and served as confederate states navy raiders . russia purchased three ships in 1878 of armed with guns for use as auxiliary cruisers for a dobroflot . germany and the united kingdom responded to the precedent by asking their shipping companies to design fast steamers with provision for mounting guns in time of war . in 1890 german and british shipyards built new civilian ships designed for wartime conversion , and france , italy , japan , austria-hungary , and the united states made similar agreements with their shipyards . in 1892 russia likewise built two more auxiliary cruisers . in 1895 the imperial german navy mobilized the provisional auxiliary cruiser normannia for a 15-day trial armed with eight 6-inch guns , two guns , six guns , and two torpedo boats . . 20th century . in both world wars , both germany and the united kingdom used auxiliary cruisers . while the british used armed passenger liners defensively for protecting their shipping , the german approach was to use them offensively to attack enemy shipping . . the armed merchant cruisers ( amc ) of the british royal navy were employed for convoy protection against enemy warships . they ultimately proved to have limited value and many , particularly ocean liners , were later converted into troopships , a role for which they were more suited . documentary evidence quoted by the bbc researched from the early stages of the first world war suggests that the express liners had greater speed than most warships ( few warships of the period could exceed 21 knots ) , which made them suitable as amcs . the downside proved to be their high fuel consumption ; using them in a purely amc role would have burned through the admiralty reserve supplies of coal ranks in less than three months . the ships were vulnerable to enemy fire because they lacked warship armour , and they used local control of guns rather than director fire-control systems , which reduced their effective fire power . a famous amc of world war i was the british which , after a battle that caused heavy damage on both sides , sank the german auxiliary cruiser near the brazilian island of trinidade in 1914 . carmania i by coincidence , cap trafalgar was disguised as carmania . in world war ii , , the sole escort for convoy hx 84 in november 1940 , stood off the pocket battleship , when the german ship attacked the convoy . though she was sunk alongside five vessels , this enabled the rest of the convoy to escape . her master , acting captain edward fegen was awarded the victoria cross posthumously for his actions . another famous action involving an armed merchant cruiser was the november 1939 battle between and the german battlecruisers and . outgunned , the rawalpindi was quickly sunk . . both the spanish and united states navy used auxiliary cruisers during the spanish–american war of 1898 . in world war i , too , american auxiliary cruisers fought several engagements with german u-boats . the german practice was to arm merchantmen with hidden weapons and use them as commerce raiding . an auxiliary cruiser , hilfskreuzer or handels-stör-kreuzer ( hsk ) , usually approached her target under a false flag with guns concealed , and sometimes with her appearance altered with fake funnels and masts and often a fake paint scheme . the victim was thus engaged at point-blank range and had no chance to escape . in world war i , the imperial german navy initially used fast passenger ships , such as past holders of the blue riband for fastest north atlantic crossings , but they made obvious and easy targets because of their very familiar silhouettes . the germans , therefore , soon moved on to using captured and refitted allied vessels , but principally modified transport ships . these were slower , but less recognizable . in both world wars , these ships were vulnerable to attack , and were withdrawn before the war ended . many were sunk after being caught by regular warships & nbsp ; – an unequal battle , since auxiliary cruisers had poor fire control and no armor . there were , however , a few success stories . was a former passenger liner that sank two freighters in 1914 before being caught by . her sister ship , , had a legendary journey , sinking or capturing a total of 15 ships in 1914 and 1915 , before finally running out of supplies and having to put into port in virginia , where the americans interned her and eventually converted her into the united states navy troop transport uss von steuben . the most famous german commerce raider of world war i probably was , a sailing ship under the command of the legendary count felix von luckner . however , both and were each much more successful than seeadler . in world war ii , nazi germany 's kriegsmarine operated ten very successful auxiliary cruisers , ranging in tonnage from 3,860 to 9,400 ; typically these vessels were equipped with : floatplanes 6 & nbsp ; in ( 15 & nbsp ; cm ) guns smaller armaments ( typically hidden away behind specially designed and hinged bulwarks , or beneath fake deckhouses and/or skylights ) torpedoes mines to preserve their cover , these ships flew the flags of neutral or occasionally allied nations . they were refueled and provisioned from special supply ships , from japanese island bases , or simply from prizes they had taken . to counter the effectiveness of these disguises , the allies introduced the check-mate system in 1942 to identify individual ships on a one-by-one basis with the admiralty in london . in one incident , the german ( ex-merchantman steiermark ) managed to surprise and sink the australian light cruiser , which approached too close , though kormoran was also sunk in the engagement . this was the only occasion in history when an armed merchantman managed to sink a modern warship ; in most cases , auxiliary cruiser raiders tried to avoid confrontation with warships . kormorans attack upon sydney was motivated by desperation . however , she was not the most successful german raider of world war ii ( both and scored higher kill tonnages ) . another , , was also sunk in a mutually destructive engagement with the american liberty ship . the only encounters between allied and axis auxiliary cruisers in world war ii were all with the raider . this small vessel , which captured or sank 22 merchantmen , encountered three british amcs in her career , defeating hms alcantara and and later sinking hms voltaire . during world war ii , german auxiliary cruisers are believed to have either sunk or captured some of allied shipping . compare to the q-ship , which was a disguised merchantman for anti-submarine operations . others . the cam ship ( from catapult armed merchantman ) was a british merchantman fitted with a catapult that could launch , but not recover , a single fighter aircraft . the merchant aircraft carrier or '' mac '' was a british or dutch cargo ship with a flight deck that could carry a small number of aircraft . cam and mac ships remained as civilian ships operated by civilian crews , with fleet air arm or royal netherlands navy '' air parties '' . 21st century . despite a rise in modern piracy , it was up until the early 2010s very unusual for modern merchant ships to be armed , save for maybe a number of small arms and the use of the ship 's fire hoses to repel boarders . one notable exception to this were the ships of pacific nuclear transport limited , pntl fleet which are used to transport spent nuclear fuel and reprocessed uranium on behalf of british nuclear fuels ltd . transporting enough fissile material between them to produce 50–60 nuclear weapons , these ships , beginning with the pacific pintail and pacific teal , became armed in 1999 to avoid the cost of a royal navy escort . travelling together in convoy during these ships ' intermittent voyages , they have an onboard escort of armed police from the ukaeac and its successors and are equipped with two or three autocannons . another exception were various ships of the soviet union 's merchant marine ( morflot ) during the cold war ( morflot often operated as an adjunct to soviet foreign and military policy , both overtly and otherwise ) . in 2007 , facing a chronic shortage of naval vessels the cuban navy placed into service the rio damuji-class frigate , which are large fishing trawlers converted into warships . in april 2010 , it was reported that a russian company was offering a version of the 3m-54 klub missile that could be disguised and launched from a shipping container , in theory enabling any cargo ship to be armed with an anti-ship missile . this type of missile was allegedly capable of disabling or even sinking an aircraft carrier , but '' it 's not known how many of them would have to hit a carrier to knock it out of action , much less sink it . '' during the 2011 libyan civil war , forces loyal to gaddafi armed several merchant vessels and attempted to use them to blockade the port of misrata . in october 2011 , british prime minister david cameron announced that british merchant shipping passing through areas known for piracy were permitted to carry firearms . . ship list . since the late 19th century various navies have used armed merchant ships in the role of auxiliary cruisers , also called armed merchant cruisers . significant use of this type of ship was made by britain and germany in both world wars . some of the ships used in this role include : – spanish–american war ( united states ) – russo-japanese war ( japan ) – russo-japanese war ( russia ) – world war i ( australia ) – world war i ( germany ) – world war i ( great britain ) – spanish civil war ( nationalist spain ) – world war ii ( germany ) – world war ii ( germany ) – world war ii ( great britain ) – world war ii ( great britain ) ramb i – world war ii ( italy ) – world war ii ( japan ) – world war ii ( canada ) . see also . armed merchant ship defensively equipped merchant ships false flag hired armed vessels list of auxiliary and merchant cruisers list of cruisers of the second world war merchant raider q-ship