Decapolis

cities . image : jerash bw 12.jpg thumb 300px the oval forum and cardo of gerasa ( jerash ) the names of the traditional ten cities of the decapolis come from natural history ( pliny ) . natural history , 5.16.74 they are : jerash ( jerash ) in jordan dium later capitolias also dion , aydoun in arabic , in jordan scythopolis ( beit she'an ) in israel , the only city west of the jordan river hippos ( also hippus or sussita ; al-husn in arabic ) on the golan heights gadara ( umm qais ) in jordan pella ( west of irbid ) in jordan amman , modern day amman , the capital of jordan canatha ( qanawat ) in syria raphana , usually identified with abila in jordan damascus , the capital of modern syria encyclopædia britannica online edition '' decapolis - ancient greek league , palestine '' damascus was further north than the others and so is sometimes thought to have been an '' honorary '' member . josephus stated that scythopolis was the largest of the ten towns . wars of the jews , book 3 , chapter 9 , section 7 , accessed 6 december 2016 biblical commentator edward plumptre therefore suggested that damascus was not included in josephus ' list . plumptre , e . h . , in ellicott 's commentary for english readers on matthew 4 , accessed 6 december 2016 according to other sources , there may have been as many as eighteen or nineteen greco-roman cities counted as part of the decapolis . history . hellenistic era . except for damascus , the decapolis cities were by and large founded during the hellenistic period , between the death of alexander the great in 323 bc and the roman conquest of coele-syria , including judea in 63 bc . some were established under the ptolemaic dynasty which ruled judea until 198 bc . others were founded later , when the seleucid dynasty ruled the region . some of the cities included '' antiochia '' or '' seleucia '' in their official names ( antiochia hippos , for example ) , which attest to seleucid origins . the cities were greek from their founding , modeling themselves on the greek polis . the decapolis was a region where two cultures interacted : the culture of the greek colonists and the indigenous semitic culture . there was some conflict . the greek inhabitants were shocked by the semitic practice of circumcision , while various elements of semitic dissent towards the dominant and assimilative nature of hellenic civilization arose gradually in the face of assimilation . at the same time , cultural blending and borrowing also occurred in the decapolis region . the cities acted as centers for the diffusion of greek culture . some local deities began to be called by the name zeus , from the chief greek god . meanwhile , in some cities greeks began worshipping these local '' zeus '' deities alongside their own zeus olympios . there is evidence that the colonists adopted the worship of other semitic gods , including phoenician deities and the chief nabatean god , dushara ( worshipped under his hellenized name , dusares ) . the worship of these semitic gods is attested to in coins and inscriptions from the cities . the roman general pompey conquered the eastern mediterranean in 63 bc . the people of the hellenized cities welcomed pompey as a liberator from the jewish hasmonean kingdom that had ruled much of the area . when pompey reorganized the region , he awarded a group of these cities with autonomy under roman protection . this was the origin of the decapolis . for centuries the cities based their calendar era on this conquest : 63 bc was the epochal year of the pompeian era , used to count the years throughout the roman and byzantine periods . autonomy under rome . thumb under roman rule , the cities of the decapolis were not included in the territory of the herodian kingdom , its successor states of the herodian tetrarchy , or the judea ( roman province ) . instead , the cities were allowed considerable political autonomy under roman protection . each city functioned as a polis or city-state , with jurisdiction over an area of the surrounding countryside . each minted its own coins . many coins from decapolis cities identify their city as '' autonomous , '' '' free , '' '' sovereign , '' or '' sacred , '' terms that imply some sort of self-governing status . the romans left their cultural stamp on all of the cities . each one was eventually rebuilt with a roman-style grid of streets based around a central cardo and/or decumanus . the romans sponsored and built numerous temples and other public buildings . the imperial cult , the worship of the roman emperor , was a very common practice throughout the decapolis and was one of the features that linked the different cities . a small open-air temple or façade , called a kalybe , was unique to the region . the cities may also have enjoyed strong commercial ties , fostered by a network of new roman roads . this has led to their common identification today as a '' federation '' or '' league '' . the decapolis was probably never an official political or economic union ; most likely it signified the collection of city-states which enjoyed special autonomy during early roman rule . '' decapolis '' in the oxford encyclopedia of archaeology in the near east . ed . eric m . meyers , s . thomas parker . oxford biblical studies online . nov 14 , 2016 . the new testament gospels of matthew , mark , and luke mention that the decapolis region was a location of the ministry of jesus . according to the decapolis was one of the areas from which jesus drew his multitude of disciples , attracted by his '' healing all kinds of sickness '' . the decapolis was one of the few regions where jesus travelled in which gentiles were in the majority : most of jesus ' ministry focused on teaching to jews . mark 5:1-10 emphasizes the decapolis ' gentile character when jesus encounters a herd of pigs , an animal forbidden by kashrut , the jewish dietary laws . a demon-possessed man healed by jesus in this passage asked to be included among the disciples who traveled with jesus ; but jesus did not permit him , as he wanted him to tell his friends what the lord had done and instructed him to remain in the decapolis region . . direct roman rule . the decapolis came under direct roman rule in ad 106 , when arabia petraea was annexed during the reign of the emperor trajan . the cities were divided between the new province and the provinces of syria and judea . in the later roman empire , they were divided between arabia and palaestina secunda , of which scythopolis served as the provincial capital ; while damascus became part of phoenice libanensis . the cities continued to be distinct from their neighbors within their provinces , distinguished for example by their use of the pompeian era and their continuing hellenistic identities . however , the decapolis was no longer a unit of administration . the roman and byzantine decapolis region was influenced and gradually taken over by christianity . some cities were more receptive than others to the new religion . pella was a base for some of the earliest church leaders ( eusebius reports that the apostles fled there to escape the first jewish–roman war ) . in other cities , paganism persisted long into the byzantine era . eventually , however , the region became almost entirely christian , and most of the cities served as seats of bishops . most of the cities continued into the late roman and byzantine periods . some were abandoned in the years following palestine 's conquest by the umayyad caliphate in 641 , but other cities continued to be inhabited long into the islamic period . evolution and excavation . jerash ( gerasa ) and bet she'an ( scythopolis ) survive as towns today , after periods of abandonement or serious decline . damascus has never lost its prominent role throughout later history . philadelphia was long abandoned , but was revived in the 19th century and has become the capital city of jordan under the name amman . twentieth-century archaeology has identified most of the other cities on pliny 's list , and most have undergone or are undergoing considerable excavation . segal , arthur . '' the 'kalybe ' structures . '' zinman institute of archaeology , haifa university . . see also . heptapolis ( meaning seven cities ) doric hexapolis ( six ) pentapolis ( five ) tetrapolis ( four ) tripolis ( three )