Croissant

variants . uncooked croissant dough can also be wrapped around any praline , almond paste , or chocolate before it is baked ( in the last case , it becomes like pain au chocolat , which has a different , non-crescent , shape ) , or sliced to include sweet or savoury fillings . it may be flavoured with dried fruit such as sultanas or raisins , or other fruits such as apples . in france and spain , croissants are generally sold without filling and eaten without added butter , but sometimes with almond filling . in the united states , sweet fillings or toppings are sometimes used , and warm croissants may be filled with ham and cheese , or feta cheese and spinach . in the levant , croissants are sold plain or filled with chocolate , cheese , almonds , or zaatar . in germany , croissants are sometimes filled with nutella or persipan ; in southern germany , there is also a popular variety of a croissant glazed with lye ( laugencroissant ) . in the german-speaking part of switzerland , the croissant is typically called a gipfeli ; this usually has a crisper crust and is less buttery than the french-style croissant . argentina and uruguay . croissants are commonly served alongside coffee for breakfast , aperitivo ( a light mid-morning meal ) , or merienda ( a mid-afternoon meal ) . they are referred to as medialunas ( '' half moons '' ) because of their shape and are typically coated with a sweet glaze ( medialunas de manteca , '' half moons of butter '' ) . another variant is a medialuna de grasa ( '' half moon of lard '' ) , which is not always sweet . italy . a cousin of the croissant is the italian cornetto ( in the center and south ) or brioche ( in the north ) . these variants are often considered to be the same , but that is not completely true : the french version tends to be crispy and contains a lot of butter , whereas an italian cornetto or brioche is usually softer . furthermore , the cornetto vuoto ( italian : '' empty cornetto '' ) is commonly accompanied by variants with filling , which include crema pasticciera ( custard ) , apricot jam or chocolate cream . they often come covered with powdered sugar or other toppings . cornetto with cappuccino at the bar is considered to be the one of the most common breakfasts in italy . poland . on 11 november , st . martin 's day is celebrated in the polish region of greater poland , mainly in its capital city poznań . on this day , the people of poznań purchase and eat considerable amounts of sweet , crescent-shaped pastries called rogale świętomarcińskie ( '' st . martin 's croissants '' ) . they are made specially for this occasion from puff pastry with a filling made of ground white poppy seeds , almonds , raisins , and nuts . portugal . the first type of portuguese croissant is similar to the french , and can be plain or filled with custard , chocolate , fruit jam , or a typical portuguese cream made of egg yolk and sugar , '' doce de ovo '' . it is customary for these to also have powdered sugar on top . the second version has a similar consistency to brioche and is commonly eaten with ham and cheese . sometimes this type is also served like toast , with a spread of butter . while the first type of croissant is considered a sweet and is eaten during breakfast or tea , the second type is a more filling meal and is usually considered a sandwich and often prepared for picnics or as travel food . both types share the same name ( french/portuguese : '' croissant '' ) but are typically found in different bakeries : the sweet croissant is more commonly found in portuguese pâtisseries and the brioche croissant is usually found in coffeehouses . spain . besides of the regular croissant , a variation called '' cuerno '' ( meaning '' horn '' ) is sold . it is half of a croissant stuffed usually with cream . turkey . a remote similarity of the croissant shape is the turkish ay çöreği . it is filled with cinnamon , walnut , hazelnut , cacao and raisin . its rectangular shape variant is known as pastiç or i̇zmir çöreği . it is generally eaten during breakfast or with tea . overview of manufacturing . the first step of manufacturing croissants is the '' predough '' formation . to prepare predough , flour , water , in-dough fat , yeast , salt , and sugar are mixed together in a single step . typically , croissant predough is mixed in a relatively cool environment , for a longer time than other pastry . the ideal temperature of the dough should be around 19 & nbsp ; °c , to best hydrate the ingredients . in comparison to the mixing of bread dough ingredients , pastry predough is considered underdeveloped in that mixing is stopped as soon as the dough appears homogeneous , to allow for further dough development in the next step . the second step is the lamination process . lamination is necessary to produce multilayered dough with alternating layers of predough and fat . generally , there are two methods for folding fat into the dough : the english method and the french method . in the english method , one fold results in two fat layers and three dough layers . after spreading out predough , roll-in fat is flattened to a similar thickness as the predough and spread over two-thirds of the surface of the laminated predough . the exposed third of predough is then folded over half of the roll-in fat , while the other end ( one predough and one fat layer ) is folded on top . in the french method , one fold results in one fat layer and two dough layers . after spreading out the predough and putting a layer of roll-in fat over the center surface of the dough , the corners of the predough are folded toward the middle of the fat . croissant dough is typically laminated until 16–50 fat layers are obtained . the optimal number of layers can be determined by balancing certain crumb properties with specific volume . on one hand , a low number of layers yields large specific heights as well as irregular crumb structure with large voids . on the other hand , a large number of relatively thin layers leads to interconnections between different dough layers as well as less dough lift . after lamination , the dough is formed into its famous crescent shape . first , the laminated dough is cut into triangles of the desired size . the triangles are then rolled with three-and-a-half to four full turns , and finally , the ends of the roll are curved inwards to form a crescent . the third step is the fermentation process . croissants are different from other puff pastries in that they include yeast which , during proofing , increase the dough volume . ideally , the optimum croissant quality is achieved at a yeast level of 7.5 % , with a proof time of 60 minutes at 31 & nbsp ; °c . the croissants are finished proofing when the dough has expanded two-and-a-half times its original volume . the fourth step is the baking process . also known as '' pastry lift '' or '' dough lift , '' the dough expands as water is converted to steam , thus increasing the pressure between each dough layer . as a result , the croissant dough rises up to yield its characteristic flaky texture . depending on the type of oven used and specific size of the croissant , the baking time can range from 10 to 20 minutes and the oven temperature can be set anywhere from 165 & nbsp ; °c to 205 & nbsp ; °c . the final steps are the cooling and storage of the croissant . croissants are generally not stored for very long and are typically consumed soon after baking . ingredient functionality during processing . predough . gluten proteins affect the water absorption and viscoelastic properties of the predough . the role of proteins can be divided into two stages of dough formation : hydration and deformation . in the hydration stage , gluten proteins absorb water up to two times their own weight . in the deformation or kneading stage , the action of mixing causes the gluten to undergo a series of polymerization and depolymerization reactions , forming a viscoelastic network . hydrated glutenin proteins in particular help form a polymeric protein network that makes the dough more cohesive . on the other hand , hydrated gliadin proteins do not directly form the network , but do act as plasticizers of the glutenin network , thus imparting fluidity to the dough ’ s viscosity . starch also affects the viscosity of predough . at room temperature and in a sufficient amount of water , intact starch granules can absorb water up to 50 % of their own dry weight , causing them to swell to a limited extent . the slightly swollen granules are found in the spaces between the gluten network , thus contributing to the consistency of the dough . the granules may not be intact , as the process of milling wheat into flour damages some of the starch granules . given that damaged starch granules have the capacity to absorb around three times as much water as undamaged starch , the use of flour with higher levels of damaged starch requires the addition of more water to achieve optimal dough development and consistency . water content affects the mechanical behavior of predough . as previously discussed , water is absorbed by gluten and starch granules to increase the viscosity of the dough . the temperature of the water is also important as it determines the temperature of the predough . in order to facilitate processing , cold water should be used for two main reasons . first , chilled water provides a desirable environment for gluten development , as the temperature at which mixing occurs impacts the dough ’ s hydration time , consistency , and required amount of mixing energy . secondly , cold water is comparable to the temperature of the roll-in fat to be added later , which better facilitates the latter ’ s incorporation . in-dough fat affects the texture and lift of predough . although higher levels of dough fat may lower dough lift during baking , it also correlates with a softer end product . as such , the main function of in-dough fat is to produce a desirable softness in the final croissant . lamination . in laminated croissant dough , the gluten network is not continuous . instead , the gluten proteins are separated as thin gluten films between dough layers . the formation of thin , well-defined layers affects the height of dough lift . generally , laminated croissant dough contains fewer layers than other puff pastry doughs that do not contain yeast , due to the presence of small bubbles in the gluten sheets . upon proofing , these bubbles expand and destroy the integrity of the dough layers . the resulting interconnections between different dough layers would over-increase dough strength and allow water vapor to escape through micropores during baking , consequently decreasing dough lift . the role of fat also influences the separation of layers , as will be discussed next . roll-in fat affects the flakiness and flavor of the croissant . in laminated dough , fat layers alternate with dough layers . as such , the most important function of roll-in fat is to form and maintain a barrier between the different dough layers during sheeting and folding . as previously stated , the ability for fat to maintain separation between folded dough layers ensures proper dough lift . the type of roll-in fat used is typically butter or margarine . butter and margarine are both water-in-oil emulsions , composed of stabilized water droplets dispersed in oil . while butter is appealing due to its high consumer acceptance , its low melting point , 32 & nbsp ; °c , actually makes it undesirable for production purposes . the use of butter as roll-in fat during the lamination step will cause problems of oiling out during sheeting and fermentation if the temperature is not tightly controlled , thus disrupting the integrity of the layers . on the other hand , kinds of margarine are commonly used as roll-in fat because they facilitate dough handling . generally , roll-in margarine should have a melting point between 40 & nbsp ; °c and 44 & nbsp ; °c , at least 3 & nbsp ; °c higher than the fermentation temperature to prevent oiling out prior to baking . it is also important to consider the plasticity and firmness of the roll-in fat , which is largely determined by its solid fat content . generally , a greater proportion of solid fat coincides with larger croissant lift . at the same time , the roll-in fat should have plasticity comparable to that of the dough , such that the fat layers do not break during sheeting and folding . if the fat is firmer than the dough , then the dough can rupture . if the fat is softer than the dough , then it will succumb to the mechanical stress of sheeting and potentially migrate into the dough . fermentation . croissants contain yeast , saccharomyces cerevisiae , which is incorporated during predough formation . when oxygen is abundant , the yeast breaks down sugar into carbon dioxide and water through the process of respiration . this process releases energy that is used by the yeast for growth . after consuming all of the oxygen , the yeast switches to anaerobic fermentation . at this point , the yeast partially breaks down sugar into ethanol and carbon dioxide . once co2 saturates the dough ’ s aqueous phase , the gas begins to leaven the dough by diffusing to preexisting gas cells that were incorporated into the predough during mixing . yeast action does not produce new gas cells , as the immense pressure required for a single co2 molecule to create a new gas bubble is not physically attainable in order to ensure the flaky texture of the croissant , it is important to balance the yeast activity with steam production . if the yeast overproduces co2 , then the well-defined layers may collapse . during the baking process , this would cause steam to escape too early from the bread , reducing dough lift and flakiness of the final product . thus , to offset the negative effects of yeast on layer integrity and dough lift , croissants usually contain fewer layers than other puff pastries . baking . during baking , the transient gluten network turns into a permanent network . at higher temperatures , intermolecular disulfide form between glutenin molecules , as well as between gliadin and glutenin . with more bonds being made , the gluten network becomes more rigid , strengthening the croissant ’ s crumb texture . additionally , the baking process significantly stretches the dough layers due to the large macroscopic deformation that occurred during fermentation ’ s dough lift . starch undergoes gelatinization as a result of baking . prior to baking , starch granules absorb a small amount of water at room temperature as it is mixed with water to form predough . as long as the dough ’ s temperature stays under the gelatinization temperature , this granule swelling is limited and reversible . however , once the baking process begins and the dough is exposed to temperatures above the gelatinization temperature , amylopectin crystallites become more disordered inside the starch granules and cause an irreversible destruction of molecular order . at the same time , starch gelatinization actively draws water from the gluten network , further decreasing the flexibility of the gluten . currently , the extent of amylose leaching and granular structure distortion during the baking of croissants is still unknown . roll-in fat gradually melts as the temperature in the oven increases . some of the melting fat can migrate into the dough , which could then interfere with gluten protein crosslinking . the fat phase also contributes to dough lift through gas inflation , which will be described next . water is converted to steam during the baking process , which is the main factor behind the leavening of the dough . the water for steam production comes from both the dough layers and the roll-in fat . as the fat melts , the continuous oil phase is no longer able to stabilize the water droplets , which are then released and converted to steam . although the exact mechanism of steam entrapment is still unclear , it is likely a result of both steam expanding inside each dough layer and steam migrating to oil layers , where it inflates gas bubbles . the steam migration to oil phase is likely due to the smaller pressure differential required to inflate a bubble of steam in liquid fat than in solid dough . as the concentration of steam increases between dough layers , the increased pressure causes the dough to lift . it is important to note that during the entire baking process , only half of the water vapor contributes to dough lift , as the other half is lost through micropores and capillaries of interconnected dough layers . storage . the effect of gluten proteins during cooling and storage is still unclear . it is possible that gluten proteins influence croissant firming through the loss of plasticizing water , which increases the stiffness of the gluten network . starch plays a major role in the degradation of croissants during storage . amylopectin retrogradation occurs over several days to weeks , as amorphous amylopectin chains are realigned into a more crystalline structure . the transformation of the starch causes undesirable firmness in the croissant . additionally , the formation of the crystal structure of amylopectin requires the incorporation of water . starch retrogradation actively draws water from the amorphous gluten network and some of the amorphous starch fraction , which reduces the plasticity of both . water migration influences the quality of stored croissants through two mechanisms . first , as previously stated , water redistributes from gluten to starch as a result of starch retrogradation . secondly , during the baking process , a moisture gradient was introduced as a result of heat transfer from the oven to the croissant . in fresh croissants , there is high moisture content on the inside and low moisture content on the outside . during storage , this moisture gradient induces water migration from the inside to the outer crust . on a molecular level , water is lost from the amorphous starch fraction and gluten network . at the same time , water diffuses from the outer crust to the environment , which has less moisture . the result of this redistribution of water is a firming up of the croissant , caused by a decrease in starch plasticity and an increase in gluten network rigidity . due to the presence of large pores in croissants , moisture is lost to the environment at a faster rate than bread products . as such , croissants generally become harder in texture at a faster rate than breads . fat also affects the quality of croissants in storage . on one hand , an increased amount of in-dough fat has been found to correspond to a reduction in crumb hardness immediately after baking . this is likely attributed to the high-fat content of croissants , as increased fat levels decrease moisture diffusion . on the other hand , although roll-in fat softens the croissant ’ s initial crumb , its effect on croissant hardness during storage is still unclear . see also . croissan'wich cronut cruffin danish pastry cornetto list of brunch foods list of butter dishes list of french dishes list of pastries torpedo dessert