'Pataphysics

introduction . pataphysics was a concept expressed by jarry in a mock-scientific manner , with undertones of spoofing and quackery , as expounded in his novel exploits and opinions of dr . faustroll , pataphysician . here , jarry toyed with conventional concepts and interpretations of reality . shattuck , roger . '' introduction '' . jarry , alfred . a neo-scientific novel . exact change boston ( 1996 ) page ix and page 21 another attempt at a definition interprets 'pataphysics as an idea that '' the virtual or imaginary nature of things as glimpsed by the heightened vision of poetry or science or love can be seized and lived as real '' . jarry defines 'pataphysics in a number of statements and examples , including that it is '' the science of imaginary solutions , which symbolically attributes the properties of objects , described by their virtuality , to their lineaments '' . jarry 1996 , p.21 . a practitioner of 'pataphysics is a pataphysician or a pataphysicist . definitions . one definition of 'pataphysics is that it 's '' a branch of philosophy or science that examines imaginary phenomena that exist in a world beyond metaphysics ; it is the science of imaginary solutions . '' american heritage dictionary entry at dictionary.com there are over one hundred definitions of 'pataphysics . brotchie et al . 2003 some examples are shown below . etymology . the word pataphysics is a contracted formation , derived from the greek ( tà epì tà metàphusiká ) , a phrase or expression meaning '' that which is above metaphysics '' , and is itself a sly variation on the title of aristotle 's metaphysics , which in greek is '' '' ( ta meta ta physika ) . jarry mandated the inclusion of the apostrophe in the orthography , 'pataphysique and 'pataphysics , '' . to avoid a simple pun '' . the words pataphysician or pataphysicist and the adjective pataphysical should not include the apostrophe . only when consciously referring to jarry 's science itself should the word pataphysics carry the apostrophe . hugill 2012 , p.8 . the term pataphysics is a paronym ( considered a kind of pun in french ) of metaphysics . since the apostrophe in no way affects the meaning or pronunciation of pataphysics , this spelling of the term is a sly notation , to the reader , suggesting a variety of puns that listeners may hear , or be aware of . these puns include patte à physique ( '' physics paw '' ) , as interpreted by jarry scholars keith beaumont and roger shattuck , pas ta physique ( '' not your physics '' ) , and pâte à physique ( '' physics paste '' ) . history . the term first appeared in print in the text of alfred jarry 's play guignol in the 28 april 1893 issue of l'écho de paris littéraire illustré , but it has been suggested that the word has its origins in the same school pranks at the lycée in rennes that led jarry to write ubu roi . hugill 2012 , p.207 . jarry considered ibicrates and sophrotatos the armenian as the fathers of this '' science '' . hugill 2012 , p.20 . . the collège de 'pataphysique . the collège de 'pataphysique , founded in 1948 in paris , france , brotchie 1995 , p.11 . is '' a society committed to learned and inutilious research '' . brotchie 1995 , p.77 . ( the word 'inutilious ' is synonymous with 'useless ' . ) the motto of the college is ( '' i arise again the same though changed '' ) . the permanent head of the college is the inamovable curator , dr . faustroll , assisted by bosse-de-nage ( starosta ) : both are fictional . brotchie 1995 , p.39 . the vice-curator is the '' first and most senior living entity '' in the college 's hierarchy . hugill 2012 , p.113 . the current vice-curatrice is tanya peixoto hiebert 2018 p . 96 . of the london institute of 'pataphysics and bookartbookshop . she was elected in 2014 to succeed her magnificence lutembi – a crocodile hugill 2012 , p.38 . hiebert 2018 pp . 72–73 . who succeeded opach , hiebert 2018 pp . 81–83 . the baron mollet hiebert 2018 pp . 76–79 . and doctor sandomir . hiebert 2018 pp . 134–135 . hiebert 2018 pp . 109–111 . jean-christophe averty was appointed satrap in 1990 . publications of the college , generally called ( '' green candle '' ) , hugill 2012 , p.123 . include the cahiers , dossiers and the subsidia pataphysica . list of publications by the collège de 'pataphysique brotchie 1995 , pp . & nbsp ; 102–104 . notable members have included noël arnaud , jean-christophe averty , rené daumal , luc étienne , latis , françois le lionnais , jean lescure , raymond queneau , boris vian , eugène ionesco , jacques carelman , joan miró , man ray , max ernst , julien torma , roger shattuck , marx brothers , baron jean mollet , philippe de chérisey , irénée louis sandomir , opach , marcel duchamp , rolando villazón , fernando arrabal and gavin bryars . brotchie 1995 , pp . & nbsp ; 10–31 . the oulipo began as a subcommittee of the college . brotchie 1995 , p.22 . . offshoots of the collège de 'pataphysique . although france had been always the centre of the pataphysical globe , there are followers up in different cities around the world . in 1966 juan esteban fassio was commissioned to draw the map of the collège de 'pataphysique and its institutes abroad . the college stopped its public activities between 1975 and 2000 , referred to as its occultation . hugill 2012 , p.39 . brotchie 1995 , p.31 . however through that time , germany , sweden , switzerland , canada , the netherlands , and many other countries showed that the internationalization of 'pataphysics was irreversible . in the 1950s , buenos aires in the western hemisphere and milan in europe were the first cities to have pataphysical institutes . london , edinburgh , budapest , and liège , as well as many other european cities , caught up in the sixties . czechoslovakia . during the communist era , a small group of 'pataphysicists in czechoslovakia started a journal called pako , or pataphysical collegium . hugill 2012 , p . 48 . jarry 's plays had a lasting impression on the country 's underground philosophical scene . london institute of 'pataphysics . the london institute of 'pataphysics was established in september 2000 to promote 'pataphysics in the english-speaking world . the institute has various publications , including a journal , and has six departments : webpage of the london institute of 'pataphysics bureau for the investigation of subliminal images , committee for hirsutism and pogonotrophy , department of dogma and theory , department of potassons , department of reconstructive archaeology , and the office of patentry . the institute also contains a pataphysical museum and archive and organised the anthony hancock paintings and sculptures exhibition in 2002 . anthony hancock paintings and sculptures exhibition the official orchestra of the london institute of 'pataphysics is the london snorkelling team . musée patamécanique . musée patamécanique is a private museum located in bristol , rhode island . webpage of musée patamécanique founded in 2006 , it is open by appointment only to friends , colleagues , and occasionally to outside observers . the museum is presented as a hybrid between an automaton theater and a cabinet of curiosities and contains works representing the field of patamechanics , an artistic practice and area of study chiefly inspired by 'pataphysics . examples of exhibits include a troupe of singing animatronic chipmunks , a time machine the museum claims is the world 's largest automated phenakistoscope , an olfactory clock , a chandelier of singing animatronic nightingales , an undigestulator ( a device that purportedly reconstitutes digested foods ) , a peanuts enlarger , a syzygistic oracle , the earolin ( a 24-inch tall holographic ear that plays the violin ) , and a machine for capturing the dreams of bumble bees . musée patamécanique exhibition . 'pataphysics institute in vilnius . a 'pataphysics institute opened in vilnius , lithuania in may 2013 . . concepts . ; clinamen : a clinamen is the unpredictable swerve of atoms that bök calls '' . the smallest possible aberration that can make the greatest possible difference '' . bök 2002 , pp . & nbsp ; 43–45 . an example is jarry 's merdre , a swerve of ( '' shit '' ) . hugill 2012 , pp . & nbsp ; 15–16 . ; antinomy : an antinomy is the mutually incompatible . it represents the duality of things , the echo or symmetry , the good and the evil at the same time . hugill mentions various examples including the plus minus , the faust-troll , the haldern-ablou , the yes-but , the ha-ha and the paradox . hugill 2012 , pp . & nbsp ; 9–12 . ; syzygy : the syzygy originally comes from astronomy and denotes the alignment of three celestial bodies in a straight line . in a pataphysical context it is the pun . it usually describes a conjunction of things , something unexpected and surprising . serendipity is a simple chance encounter but the syzygy has a more scientific purpose . bök mentions jarry suggesting that the fall of a body towards a centre might not be preferable to the ascension of a vacuum towards a periphery . bök 2002 , pp . & nbsp ; 40–43 . hugill 2012 , pp . & nbsp ; 13–15 . ; absolute : the absolute is the idea of a transcended reality . hugill 2012 , pp . & nbsp ; 16–19 . ; anomaly : an anomaly represents the exception . jarry said that , '' pataphysics will examine the laws governing exceptions , and will explain the universe supplementary to this one . '' bök calls it '' . the repressed part of a rule which ensures that the rule does not work '' . bök 2002 , pp . & nbsp ; 38–40 . hugill 2012 , pp . & nbsp ; 12–13 . ; pataphor : a pataphor is an unusually extended metaphor based on 'pataphysics . as jarry claimed that 'pataphysics exists '' . as far from metaphysics as metaphysics extends from regular reality '' , a pataphor attempts to create a figure of speech that exists as far from metaphor as metaphor exists from non-figurative language . '' paul avion 's pataphor '' . pataphysical calendar . the pataphysical calendar electronic version of the pataphysical calendar is a variation of the gregorian calendar . the collège de 'pataphysique created the calendar reference number 1230 , published 1954 , as listed in the college 's catalogue in 1949 . hugill 2012 , pp . & nbsp ; 21–22 . the pataphysical era ( e.p . ) started on jarry 's birthday , 8 september 1873 vulg . when converting pataphysical dates to gregorian dates , the appendage ( vulg . ) for vulgate ( '' common '' ) is added . the week starts on a sunday . every 1st , 8th , 15th and 22nd is a sunday and every 13th day of a month falls on a friday ( see friday the 13th ) . each day is assigned a specific name or saint . for example , the 27 haha ( 1 november vulg . ) is called or the 14 sable ( 14 december vulg . ) is the day of . brotchie 1995 , pp . & nbsp ; 45–54 . the year has a total of 13 months each with 29 days . the 29th day of each month is imaginary with two exceptions : the 29 gidouille ( 13 july vulg . ) is always non-imaginary the 29 gueules ( 23 february vulg . ) is non-imaginary during leap years the table below shows the names and order of months in a pataphysical year with their corresponding gregorian dates and approximate translations or meanings by hugill . pataphors have also been used in literary criticism , and mentioned in art in america . there is also a book of pataphorical art called pataphor by dutch artist hidde van schie . it is worth noting that a pataphor is not the traditional metaphorical conceit but rather a set of metaphors built upon an initial metaphor , obscuring its own origin rather than reiterating the same analogy in myriad ways . in the disappearance of literature : blanchot , agamben , and the writers of the no , aaron hillyer writes : '' while metaphysics and metaphors attain one degree of separation from reality , pataphors and pataphysics move beyond by two degrees . this allows an idea to assume its own life , a sort of plasticity freed from the harness of rigid representation . in other words , metaphors operate on the level of the same . they juxtapose apparently unrelated material in order to draw out subtle identities . pataphors unsettle this mechanism ; they use the facade of metaphorical similarity as a basis for establishing an entirely new range of references and outlandish articulations : a new world in the midst of the old , the novel taking to the streets . just as kafka sought to forge a new form of life on the basis of absolute separation from historical progress , on cultural 'intransmissibility ' , and just as blanchot pursued the 'pure novel ' that exists in a relationship of absolute refusal of the established world , so the pataphysician seeks to initiate a new world on the grounds of a tenuous unreality . ''