Paul Heyse

life . berlin ( 1830–54 ) . paul heyse was born on 15 march 1830 in heiliggeiststraße , berlin . his father , the distinguished philologist karl wilhelm ludwig heyse , was a professor at the university of berlin who had been the tutor of both wilhelm von humboldt 's youngest son ( during 1815–17 ) and felix mendelssohn ( during 1819–27 ) . his paternal grandfather johann christian august heyse ( 21 april 1764 , nordhausen – 27 july 1829 , magdeburg ) , was a famous german grammarian and lexicographer . paul heyse 's mother was jewish . julius petersen : die wissenschaft von der dichtung , berlin 1944 , p 291 . heyse attended the renamed friedrich-wilhelms-gymnasium until 1847 . he was later remembered as a model student . his family connections gained him early entry to the artistic circles of berlin , where he made the acquaintance of emanuel geibel , a man fifteen years his elder who was to become his literary mentor and lifelong friend , and who introduced him to his future father-in-law , the art historian and writer franz kugler . after leaving school heyse began studying classical philology . he met jacob burckhardt , adolph menzel , theodor fontane and theodor storm , and in 1849 joined the tunnel über der spree literary group . frühlingsanfang 1848 , the first of heyse 's poems to see print , expressed his enthusiasm for the recent revolution . after a brief excursion to see the student militias he returned home without joining them , apparently out of consideration for the concerns of his parents and friends . having studied for two years at the university of berlin he left for bonn in april 1849 in order to study art history and romance languages . in 1850 , he finally resolved on a career as a writer and began a dissertation under the supervision of friedrich diez , a pioneer of romance philology in germany ; but when it was discovered he was conducting an affair with the wife of one of his professors he was sent back to berlin . heyse 's first book , der jungbrunnen ( a collection of tales and poetry ) was published anonymously by his father that same year as was his tragedy francesca von rimini . about the same time , heyse received from the publisher alexander duncker a manuscript by the then-unknown theodor storm . heyse 's enthusiastic critique of sommergeschichten und lieder laid the foundations of their future friendship . in 1851 , heyse won a contest held by the members of the '' tunnel '' for the ballad das tal von espigno , and his first short story , '' marion '' ( 1852 ) , was similarly honoured . it was followed in 1852 by the spanisches liederbuch , a collection of translations of poems and folk songs by geibel and heyse which was to be a favourite with composers , including robert schumann ( opp . 74 & 138 ) , adolf jensen ( op . 21 ) and hugo wolf ( lieder collection spanisches liederbuch , 1891 ) . wolf also set poems from heyse 's collection italienisches liederbuch of 1860 ( lieder collection italienisches liederbuch 189296 ) . throughout his career heyse worked as a translator , above all of italian literature ( leopardi , giusti ) . several members of the '' tunnel '' began to find its formalities and public nature distasteful , and a smaller circle , the rütli , was formed in december 1852 : it included kugler , lepel , fontane , storm , and heyse . in may 1852 , heyse was awarded a doctorate for his work on the troubadours , and a prussian scholarship allowed him to depart for italy to look for old provençal manuscripts . he made friends with arnold böcklin and joseph victor von scheffel but was banned from the vatican library after being discovered copying passages from unpublished manuscripts . he returned to germany in 1853 , where , with the italian landscape still fresh in his mind , he wrote the works which first made him famous : his most famous short story , '' l'arrabbiata '' ( '' the fury '' , 1853 , published in 1855 ) ; and the lieder aus sorrent ( '' songs of sorrento '' , 1852/53 ) . much of his new writing appeared in the argo , the yearbook of the rütli writers . munich ( 1854–1914 ) . emanuel geibel persuaded the king of bavaria , maximilian ii , to grant heyse a titular professorship in munich . heyse was thus appointed professor of romance philology , although he never taught at that city 's university . after his marriage on 15 may to margarete kugler he arrived in munich on 25 may 1854 . at his first audience with the king , heyse presented his verse tales , hermen , and began a productive life as one of the nordlichtern ( '' northern lights '' : geibel , heyse and riehl ) and establishing another literary society , die krokodile , which included felix dahn , wilhelm hertz , hermann lingg , franz von kobell , the cultural historian wilhelm heinrich riehl , friedrich bodenstedt , and the travel writer and art patron adolf friedrich von schack . in december heyse began a long correspondence with eduard mörike . on 22 august 1855 , heyse 's first son , franz , was born . heyse would have four children by his first marriage : franz ( 1855–1919 ) , julie or lulu ( frau baumgarten , 1857–1928 ) , ernst ( 1859–1871 ) and clara ( frau layriz , 1861–1931 ) . in 1859 , obligations to the kugler family led heyse to take up a position as editor of the literaturblatt zum deutschen kunstblatt , and he declined a tempting offer from the grand duke carl alexander von weimar which would have involved moving to thuringia . on 30 september 1862 , his wife margarete died in meran of a lung illness . he completed the historical drama , ludwig der bayer – a bavarian period piece which maximilian ii had long been eager to see – but its theatrical production was a failure . nevertheless , heyse worked throughout the 1860s on new plays , eventually achieving his greatest success with kolberg ( 1865 ) . he married anna schubart in 1867 . over the next three decades , heyse continued to write prolifically . despite a number of bereavements his life was uneventful , and his fame grew steadily until he was a world-famous figure . he was a very early opponent of naturalism , making critical references to it in print long before its influence could be felt in germany . younger critics who favoured naturalism made attacks on his writings , to which he replied in merlin ( 1892 ) : but their influence on the public was negligible . he was dubbed dichterfürst , prince of poetry , and he worked tirelessly to promote international understanding within europe . in 1900 , he was named an honorary citizen of munich , and several special publications honoured his 70th birthday ; and in 1910 , he was made a member of the nobility , before being awarded the nobel prize for literature on 10 december . he could not attend the ceremony , and was represented in sweden by count von pückler . his last published works were letzten novellen and italienischen volksmärchen ( 1914 ) . he died on 2 april 1914 , several months before the outbreak of world war i , and was buried in the old section of the waldfriedhof ( nr . 43-w-27 ) . a street in munich , '' paul-heyse strasse '' is named after him as well as “ heysestrasse ” in hamburg bergedorf . it crosses schwanthaler strasse and it is near the '' theresienwiese '' , the site of munich 's annual bierfest . see also . references . external links . photo and short biography at timeline of nobel winners list of works in paradise , by paul heyse children of the world , by paul heyse list of musical settings at emily ezust 's lied , art song , and choral texts archive