Fecal incontinence

signs and symptoms . fi affects virtually all aspects of peoples ' lives , greatly diminishing physical and mental health , and affect personal , social and professional life . emotional effects may include stress , fearfulness , anxiety , exhaustion , fear of public humiliation , feeling dirty , poor body-image , reduced desire for sex , anger , humiliation , depression , isolation , secrecy , frustration and embarrassment . some people may need to be in control of life outside of fi as means of compensation . the physical symptoms such as skin soreness , pain and odor may also affect quality of life . physical activity such as shopping or exercise is often affected . travel may be affected , requiring careful planning . working is also affected for most . relationships , social activities and self-image likewise often suffer . symptoms may worsen over time . . causes . fi is a sign or a symptom , not a diagnosis , and represents an extensive list of causes . usually , it is the result of a complex interplay of several coexisting factors , many of which may be simple to correct . up to 80 % of people may have more than one abnormality that is contributing . deficits of individual functional components of the continence mechanism can be partially compensated for a certain period of time , until the compensating components themselves fail . for example , obstetric injury may precede onset by decades , but menopause changes in the tissue strength reduce in turn the competence of the compensatory mechanisms . the most common factors in the development are thought to be obstetric injury and after effects of anorectal surgery , especially those involving the anal sphincters and hemorrhoidal vascular cushions . the majority of incontinent persons over the age of 18 fall into one of several groups : those with structural anorectal abnormalities ( sphincter trauma , sphincter degeneration , anal fistula , rectal prolapse ) , neurological disorders ( multiple sclerosis , spinal cord injury , spina bifida , stroke , etc . ) , constipation/fecal loading ( presence of a large amount of feces in the rectum with stool of any consistency ) , cognitive and/or behavioral dysfunction ( dementia , learning disability ) , diarrhea , inflammatory bowel diseases ( e.g . ulcerative colitis , crohn 's disease ) , irritable bowel syndrome , disability related ( people who are frail , acutely unwell , or have chronic/acute disabilities ) , and those cases which are idiopathic ( of unknown cause ) . diabetes mellitus is also known to be a cause , but the mechanism of this relationship is not well understood . . congenital . anorectal anomalies and spinal cord defects may be a cause in children . these are usually picked up and operated upon during early life , but continence is often imperfect thereafter . . anal canal . the functioning of the anal canal can be damaged , traumatically or atraumatically . the resting tone of the anal canal is not the only factor which is important ; both the length of the high pressure zone and its radial translation of force are required for continence . this means that even with normal anal canal pressure , focal defects such as the keyhole defect can be the cause of substantial symptoms . external anal sphincter ( eas ) dysfunction is associated with impaired voluntary control , whereas internal anal sphincter ( ias ) dysfunction is associated with impaired fine tuning of fecal control . lesions which mechanically interfere with , or prevent the complete closure of the anal canal can cause a liquid stool or mucous rectal discharge . such lesions include piles ( inflamed hemorrhoids ) , anal fissures , anal cancer or fistulae . obstetric injury may tear the anal sphincters , and some of these injuries may be occult ( undetected ) . the risk of injury is greatest when labor has been especially difficult or prolonged , when forceps are used , with higher birth weights or when an midline episiotomy is performed . only when there is post operative investigation of fi such as endoanal ultrasound is the injury discovered . fi is a much under-reported complication of surgery . the ias is easily damaged with an anal retractor ( especially the park 's anal retractor ) , leading to reduced resting pressure postoperatively . since the hemorrhoidal vascular cushions contribute 15 % of the resting anal tone , surgeries involving these structures may affect continence status . partial internal sphincterotomy , fistulotomy , anal stretch ( lord 's operation ) , hemorrhoidectomy or transanal advancement flaps may all lead to fi post operatively , with soiling being far more common than solid fi . the '' keyhole deformity '' refers to scarring within the anal canal and is another cause of mucus leakage and minor incontinence . this defect is also described as a groove in the anal canal wall , and may occur after posterior midline fissurectomy or fistulotomy , or with lateral ias defects . rare causes of traumatic injury to the anal sphincters include military or traffic accidents complicated by pelvic fractures , spine injuries or perineum lacerations , insertion of foreign bodies in the rectum , and sexual abuse . nontraumatic conditions causing anal sphincter weakness include scleroderma , damage to the pudendal nerves and ias degeneration of unknown cause . radiation induced fi may involve the anal canal as well as the rectum , when proctitis , anal fistula formation and diminished function of internal and external sphincter occur . irradiation may occur during radiotherapy , e.g . for prostate cancer . pelvic floor . many people with fi have a generalized weakness of the pelvic floor , especially puborectalis . a weakened puborectalis leads to widening of the anorectal angle , and impaired barrier to stool in the rectum entering the anal canal , and this is associated with incontinence to solids . abnormal descent of the pelvic floor can also be a sign of pelvic floor weakness . abnormal descent manifests as descending perineum syndrome ( > 4 & nbsp ; cm perineal descent ) . this syndrome initially gives constipation , and later fi . the pelvic floor is innervated by the pudendal nerve and the s3 and s4 branches of the pelvic plexus . with recurrent straining , e.g . during difficult labour or long term constipation , then stretch injury can damage the nerves supplying levator ani . the pudendal nerve is especially vulnerable to irreversible damage , ( stretch induced pudendal neuropathy ) which can occur with a 12 % stretch . if the pelvic floor muscles lose their innervation , they cease to contract and their muscle fibres are in time replaced by fibrous tissue , which is associated with pelvic floor weakness and incontinence . increased pudendal nerve terminal motor latency may indicate pelvic floor weakness . the various types of pelvic organ prolapse ( e.g . external rectal prolapse , mucosal prolapse and internal rectal intussusception & solitary rectal ulcer syndrome ) may also cause coexisting obstructed defecation . rectum . the rectum needs to be of a sufficient volume to store stool until defecation . the rectal walls need to be '' compliant '' i.e . able to distend to an extent to accommodate stool . rectal sensation is required to detect the presence , nature and amount of rectal contents . the rectum must also be able to evacuate its contents fully . there must also be efficient co-ordination of rectal sensation and relaxation of the anal canal . if the sensory nerves are damaged , detection of stool in the rectum is dulled or absent , and the person will not feel the need to defecate until too late . rectal hyposensitivity may manifest as constipation , fi , or both . rectal hyposensitivity was reported to be present in 10 % of people with fi . pudendal neuropathy is one cause of rectal hyposensitivity , and may lead to fecal loading/impaction , megarectum and overflow fi . normal evacuation of rectal contents is 90-100 % . if there is incomplete evacuation during defecation , residual stool will be left in the rectum and threaten continence once defecation is finished . this is a feature of people with soiling secondary to obstructed defecation . obstructed defecation is often due to anismus ( paradoxical contraction or relaxation failure of the puborectalis ) . whilst anismus is largely a functional disorder , organic pathologic lesions may mechanically interfere with rectal evacuation . other causes of incomplete evacuation include non-emptying defects like a rectocele . orlistat