Period 4 element

properties . every single one of these elements is stable , and many are extremely common in the earth 's crust and/or core ; it is the last period with no unstable elements at all . many of the transition metals in period 4 are very strong , and therefore commonly used in industry , especially iron . three adjacent elements are known to be toxic , with arsenic one of the most well-known poisons , selenium being toxic to humans in large quantities , and bromine , a toxic liquid . many elements are essential to humans ' survival , such as calcium being what forms bones . . atomic structure . progressing towards increase of atomic number , the aufbau principle causes elements of the period to put electrons onto 4s , 3d , and 4p subshells , in that order . however , there are exceptions , such as chromium . the first twelve elements—k , ca , d-block elements—have from 1 to 12 valence electrons respectively , which are placed on 4s and 3d . twelve electrons over the electron configuration of argon reach the configuration of zinc , namely 3d 10 4s 2 . after this element , the filled 3d subshell effectively withdraws from chemistry and the subsequent trend looks much like trends in the periods 2 and 3 . p-block elements of period & nbsp ; 4 have their valence shell composed of 4s and 4p subshells of the fourth shell and obey the octet rule . for quantum chemistry namely this period sees transition from the simplified electron shell paradigm to research of many azimuthal quantum number , relative disposition of whose energy levels is governed by interplay of various physical effects . the period 's s-block metals put their differentiating electron onto 4s having vacancies among nominally lower states & nbsp ; – a phenomenon unseen in lighter elements . contrary , six elements from gallium to krypton are the heaviest where all electron shells below the valence shell are filled completely . this is n't possible in further periods due to existence of f-subshells starting from . list of elements . : ( ) exception to the madelung rule . s-block elements . potassium . potassium ( k ) is an alkali metal , placed under sodium and over rubidium , and is the first element of period 4 . it is one of the most reactive elements in the periodic table , therefore usually only found in compounds . it tends to oxidize in air very rapidly , thus accounting for its rapid reaction with oxygen when freshly exposed to air . when freshly exposed , it is rather silvery , but it quickly begins to tarnish as it reacts with air . it is soft enough to be cut with a knife and it is the second least dense element . potassium has a relatively low melting point ; it will melt just by putting it under a small open flame . it also is less dense than water , and can , in turn , float . . calcium . calcium ( ca ) is the second element in the period . an alkali earth metal , calcium is almost never found in nature due to its high reactivity with water . it has one of the most widely known and acknowledged biological roles in all animals and some plants , making up bones and teeth , and used in some applications in cells , such as signals for cellular processeses . it is regarded as the most abundant mineral in the body 's mass . . d-block elements . scandium . scandium ( sc ) is the third element in the period , and is the first transition metal in the periodic table . scandium is quite common in nature , but difficult to isolate because it is most prevalent in rare earth compounds , which are difficult to isolate elements from . scandium has very few commercial applications because of the aforementioned facts , and currently its only major application is in aluminium alloys . titanium . titanium ( ti ) is an element in group & nbsp ; 4 . titanium is both one of the least dense metals and one of the strongest and most corrosion-resistant , and as such has many applications , especially in alloys with other elements , such as iron . due to its aforementioned properties , it is commonly used in airplanes , golf clubs , and other objects that must be strong , but lightweight . vanadium . vanadium ( v ) is an element in group & nbsp ; 5 . vanadium is never found in pure form in nature , but is commonly found in compounds . vanadium is similar to titanium in many ways , such as being very corrosion-resistant , however , unlike titanium , it oxidizes in air even at room temperature . all vanadium compounds have at least some level of toxicity , with some of them being extremely toxic . chromium . chromium ( cr ) is an element in group & nbsp ; 6 . chromium is , like titanium and vanadium before it , extremely resistant to corrosion , and is indeed one of the main components of stainless steel . chromium also has many colorful compounds , and as such is very commonly used in pigments , such as chrome green . manganese . manganese ( mn ) is an element in group & nbsp ; 7 . manganese is often found in combination with iron . manganese , like chromium before it , is an important component in stainless steel , preventing the iron from rusting . manganese is also often used in pigments , again like chromium . manganese is also poisonous ; if enough is inhaled , it can cause irreversible neurological damage . iron . iron ( fe ) is an element in group & nbsp ; 8 . iron is the most common on earth among elements of the period , and probably the most well-known of them . it is the principal component of steel . iron-56 has the lowest energy density of any isotope of any element , meaning that it is the most massive element that can be produced in supergiant stars . iron also has some applications in the human body ; hemoglobin is partly iron . cobalt . cobalt ( co ) is an element in group & nbsp ; 9 . cobalt is commonly used in pigments , as many compounds of cobalt are blue in color . cobalt is also a core component of many magnetic and high-strength alloys . the only stable isotope , cobalt-59 , is an important component of vitamin b-12 , while cobalt-60 is a component of nuclear fallout and can be dangerous in large enough quantities due to its radioactivity . nickel . nickel ( ni ) is an element in group & nbsp ; 10 . nickel is rare in the earth 's crust , mainly due to the fact that it reacts with oxygen in the air , with most of the nickel on earth coming from nickel iron meteorites . however , nickel is very abundant in the earth 's core ; along with iron it is one of the two main components . nickel is an important component of stainless steel , and in many superalloys . copper . copper ( cu ) is an element in group & nbsp ; 11 . copper is one of the few metals that is not white or gray in color , the only others being gold and caesium . copper has been used by humans for thousands of years to provide a reddish tint to many objects , and is even an essential nutrient to humans , although too much is poisonous . copper is also commonly used as a wood preservative or fungicides . zinc . zinc ( zn ) is an element in group & nbsp ; 12 . zinc is one of the main components of brass , being used since the 10th century bce . zinc is also incredibly important to humans ; almost 2 billion people in the world suffer from zinc deficiency . however , too much zinc can cause copper deficiency . zinc is often used in batteries , aptly named carbon-zinc batteries , and is important in many platings , as zinc is very corrosion resistant . p-block elements . gallium . gallium ( ga ) is an element in boron group , under aluminium . gallium is noteworthy because it has a melting point at about 303 kelvins , right around room temperature . for example , it will be solid on a typical spring day , but will be liquid on a hot summer day . gallium is an important component in the alloy galinstan , along with tin . gallium can also be found in semiconductors . germanium . germanium ( ge ) is an element in carbon group . germanium , like silicon above it , is an important semiconductor and is commonly used in diodes and transistors , often in combination with arsenic . germanium is fairly rare on earth , leading to its comparatively late discovery . germanium , in compounds , can sometimes irritate the eyes , skin , or lungs . arsenic . arsenic ( as ) is an element in pnictogen . arsenic , as mentioned above , is often used in semiconductors in alloys with germanium . arsenic , in pure form and some alloys , is incredibly poisonous to all multicellular life , and as such is a common component in pesticides . arsenic was also used in some pigments before its toxicity was discovered . selenium . selenium ( se ) is an element in chalcogen . selenium is the first nonmetal in period & nbsp ; 4 , with properties similar to sulfur . selenium is quite rare in pure form in nature , mostly being found in minerals such as pyrite , and even then it is quite rare . selenium is necessary for humans in trace amounts , but is toxic in larger quantities . selenium is a calcogen . selenium is red in monomolic structure . but it is metallic gray in its crystalline structure . bromine . bromine ( br ) is an element in halogen . it does not exist in elemental form in nature . bromine is barely liquid at room temperature , boiling at about 330 kelvins . bromine is also quite toxic and corrosive , but bromide ions , which are relatively inert , can be found in halite , or table salt . bromine is often used as a fire retardant because many compounds can be made to release free bromine atoms . krypton . krypton ( kr ) is a noble gas , placed under argon and over xenon . being a noble gas , krypton rarely interacts with itself or other elements ; although compounds have been detected , they are all unstable and decay rapidly , and as such , krypton is often used in fluorescent lights . krypton , like most noble gases , is also used in lighting because of its many spectral lines and the aforementioned reasons . biological role . many period 4 elements find roles in controlling protein function as secondary messengers , structural components , or enzyme cofactors . a gradient of potassium is used by cells to maintain a membrane potential which enables action potential and facilitated diffusion among other processes . calcium is a common signaling molecule for proteins such as calmodulin and plays a critical role in triggering skeletal muscle contraction in vertebrates . selenium is a component of the noncanonical amino acid , selenocysteine ; proteins which contain selenocysteine are known as selenoprotein . manganese enzymes are utilized by both eukaryote and prokaryote , and may play a role in the virulence of some pathogenic bacteria . vanabins , also known as vanadium-associated proteins , are found in the blood cells of some species of ascidiacea . the role of these proteins is disputed , although there is some speculation that they function as oxygen carriers . zinc ions are used to stabilize the zinc finger milleu of many dna-binding protein . period 4 elements can also be found complexed with organic small molecule to form cofactors . the most famous example of this is heme : an iron-containing porphyrin compound responsible for the oxygen-carrying function of myoglobin and hemoglobin as well as the catalytic activity of cytochrome p450 . hemocyanin replaces hemoglobin as the oxygen carrier of choice in the blood of certain invertebrates , including horseshoe crab , tarantula , and octopus . vitamin b12 represents one of the few biochemical applications for cobalt . references .