Marvin the Paranoid Android

name . according to douglas adams , '' marvin came from andrew marshall . he 's another comedy writer , and he 's exactly like that . '' ( indeed , in one of the early drafts for hitchhiker 's , the robot was called marshall . it was changed to '' marvin '' partly to avoid causing offence , but also because it was pointed out to adams that on radio the name would sound like '' martial '' , which would have undesirable military connotations . ) however , adams also admitted that marvin is part of a long line of literary depressives , such as a . a . milne 's eeyore or jacques in shakespeare 's as you like it , and even owes something to adams 's own periods of depression . marvin does not actually display any signs of paranoia , though zaphod beeblebrox refers to him as '' the paranoid android '' . nor does he show any signs of mania , though ford refers to him as a '' manically depressed robot '' . he merely remains consistently morose throughout . in fact , he exhibits remarkable stoicism , being willing to wait hundreds of millions of years for his employers . radio and tv series . according to his autobiography read in the secondary phase of the radio series , marvin was constructed , much against his own wishes , by the sirius cybernetics corporation to prototype human personality artificial intelligence . in his own words : the cutaway illustration of marvin made by kevin j . davies for the '' depreciation society '' featured a '' rat cavity '' . sotcaa records and tapes . sotcaa.org . retrieved on 2017-03-27 . as the menial labourer on the heart of gold spaceship , he grew immensely resentful of the insistence of his new masters ( zaphod beeblebrox and trillian ; later also ford prefect and arthur dent ) that he open doors , check airlocks and pick up pieces of paper . he reserved a particular contempt for the sentient doors , despising their blissful satisfaction with existence . when the heart of gold crew arrive on the ancient planet of magrathea , they abandon marvin on the surface . during an apparently suicidal confrontation with a pair of trigger-happy cops , the crew are teleported directly from magrathea into the future to the restaurant at the end of the universe to find that , in fact , they have n't travelled an inch . the restaurant was constructed on the ruins of the planet they had just left , and , while there , they find marvin , who had been waiting patiently for their return for 576,000,003,579 years ( he counted them ) . according to marvin , '' the first ten million years were the worst , and the second ten million years , they were the worst too . the third ten million i did n't enjoy at all . after that i went into a bit of a decline . '' apparently , the best conversation he had was over 40 million years ago with a coffee machine . deciding they had better leave , the crew make a desperate and futile attempt to engage marvin 's enthusiasm ( he '' has n't got one '' ) before he simply does what they really want and opens the door to the ship they want to steal . the ship turns out to be a haggunenon battle cruiser , and the entire group , including marvin , but excluding ford prefect and arthur dent , who escape , are eaten by its crew . marvin 's subsequent survival is never explained , but against all probability , he eventually finds himself on ursa minor beta , just in time to rescue zaphod from a robotic tank . a subsequent section of marvin 's biography occurs only in the secondary phase of the radio series . marvin rejoins the crew on the heart of gold , and using the improbability drive programmed by zaphod beeblebrox the fourth , takes them to the ravaged planet brontitall . having landed in a giant floating marble copy of a plastic cup , the crew accidentally find themselves falling several miles through the air . the carbon-based members of the crew manage to stay alive by grabbing onto passing giant birds . marvin has no such luck , and , upon impact with the ground , creates his own archaeological excavation site . cruelly intact , he grudgingly saves the crew multiple times from the foot soldiers of the dolmansaxlil shoe corporation . marvin remains in heart of gold whilst ford , zaphod , zarniwoop and arthur bother the ruler of the universe , leaving when an enraged arthur hijacks the ship . however , in the tertiary phase , trillian claims this story is zaphod 's hallucination , especially as reverse temporal engineering explanation has not entered the plot yet . however of the stories of zaphod 's visit to the frogstar , the guide says '' 10 % are 95 % true , 14 % are 65 % true , 35 % are only 5 % true and the rest are told by zaphod beeblebrox '' , and listeners are presented with one '' version '' of that visit . in the television series , the black ship stolen at the restaurant at the end of the universe is actually the stunt ship of the disaster area rock band , and , having taken them back in time two million years before the present , is set on an irreversible course to collide with the sun of kakrafoon . forced to flee in the ship 's barely functional teleport , the crew politely ask marvin to stay behind and operate it . he does so , and stoically awaits his fate '' almost as good as death '' in the heart of the blazing sun . portrayals . radio and tv . marvin 's voice was performed by stephen moore on the first five radio series and television series and by jim broadbent in the sixth radio series . david learner operated his body on television , having previously played and voiced the part for the stage version , . film . thumb warwick davis wore the marvin costume in the 2005 film . he is voiced by alan rickman . this marvin 's design is a departure from the marvin of the television series , featuring shorter with an oversized head and stubby limbs . the original television costume from the 1981 television series was refurbished for a cameo role in the film , standing in a queue in the vogon office on vogsphere , where the main characters are trying to release tricia , with various other life forms as well as in the group near the end of the film . novel series . a difference to the radio and tv series occurs in the novels when the heart of gold crew arrive on the ancient planet of magrathea . marvin inadvertently saves the crew by plugging himself into the onboard computer of a police vehicle , which , when exposed to the true nature of marvin 's view of the universe , commits suicide , taking the two police who were then firing at the ship 's crew with it . the crew leave magrathea on the heart of gold , but are teleported summarily to ursa minor beta , where zaphod 's great grandfather , in an apparent fit of vicious humour , forces marvin to accompany zaphod on his mission of self-discovery . marvin subsequently saves zaphod 's life by engaging in a battle of wits with a vicious ( yet stupid ) automated tank , and then is abandoned on the planet frogstar b when zaphod is sent to the total perspective vortex . eventually the crew arrive at the restaurant at the end of the universe ( which was built over the ruins of frogstar b in this continuity ) and the story continues as with the tv series . in the third novel , life , the universe and everything , we find that marvin survived his collision with the sun of kakrafoon , and was sent back in time by the improbability field projected by the heart of gold to be rescued by a scrap metal merchant on sqornshellous zeta . the merchant grafted a steel rod to marvin 's now lost leg , and sold him to a mind zoo , where excited onlookers would try to make him happy . this made him something of a celebrity on the planet of sqornshellous zeta , and he was asked to open the brand new bridge that was meant to revitalise the planet 's economy . marvin dutifully plugged himself into the bridge 's opening circuit , and , just like the police computer , the bridge committed suicide , taking the entire gathered crowd with it . marvin was left in the swamp , his false leg having trapped him in the mud , so he spent just over 1.5 million years walking around in a circle , '' just to make the point . '' he planned to keep walking in a circle for another million years before trying it backward . '' just for the variety , you understand . '' suddenly , he is kidnapped by a squad of krikkit war robots , who are after his leg , a fragment of the key that will reopen their imprisoned world and restart the genocidal krikkit war . thinking that marvin 's intelligence will be an asset , they wire his brain into the interfaces of their intelligent war computer . this is a mistake . the once formidable krikkit robots find themselves overcome with crippling sorrow and depression , and rather than focusing on their mission of extermination , instead sulk in corners doing quadratic equations . it is also due to marvin 's influence that zaphod and the others ' lives are spared by the krikkit robots . marvin is ( presumably ) rescued by his friends , who bring him back to the heart of gold . from here his story is unknown . marvin reappears in the second-to-last chapter of so long , and thanks for all the fish . arthur and fenchurch find him on the planet where god 's final message to his creation is located . he is barely functional , claiming that , due to time travel , he is now '' thirty-seven times older than the universe itself . '' every part of his body has been replaced , with the exception of '' all the diodes down his left side '' , which have been giving him severe pain for the whole of his existence . arthur and fenchurch end up carrying him , enduring the robot 's constant abuse , to the god 's final message viewing station , where they lift him up to see the words of the message : '' we apologise for the inconvenience . '' astonishingly , marvin responds '' i think . i feel good about it . '' the lights in his eyes go out and his already-worn circuits completely stop working ; marvin is no more . ( in the radio dramatisation , his last words are '' goodbye , arthur . '' marvin 's 'death ' prompts arthur to say , '' miserable git ! '' and then , to his own obvious astonishment , to add , '' i 'll miss him . '' ) however , in the 2005 radio adaptation of the fifth novel in the series , mostly harmless , in which marvin did not originally appear , he has a cameo at the end of the last episode alive and well . he explains that it turned out he was still covered by his warranty agreement , and is back to parking cars at milliways , the restaurant at the end of the universe . songs . stephen moore released two pop singles— '' marvin/metal man '' marvin the paranoid android - marvin ( vinyl ) at discogs . discogs.com . retrieved on 2012-04-15 . and '' reasons to be miserable/marvin i love you '' ( double b-side ) —in the uk in 1981 , though neither reached the top 40 . two of these were re-recorded and rearranged to coincide with the 2005 hitchhiker 's movie release , '' reasons to be miserable ( his name is marvin ) '' and '' marvin '' now being performed by stephen fry ( singing in the third-person , not as marvin ) . '' marvin '' . '' marvin '' was released in 1981 . it was a minor hit , reaching number 52 in the british charts . the song involves marvin describing his woes ( '' my moving parts are in a solid state '' ) and frustrations ( '' you know what really makes me mad ? they clean me with a brillo pad '' ) , to a synthesiser backing . the intro to the song consists of a simple guitar figure , but with the tape reversed so that the notes play backwards . the vocal was performed by stephen moore , who had played marvin on the radio and television series . moore also narrated the ship 's captain on the b-side . '' metal man '' was the b-side . the song involves a spoken exchange between the starship captain ( also played by moore , as is a cameo radio voice ) and the depressed robot marvin . the starship is falling into a black hole , and can only be saved by assigning control to marvin . in thanks for saving the ship , marvin is relegated back to a menial servant . such is the lot of a robot . '' marvin '' was incorporated into the 2012 live radio show . the double b-side . '' reasons to be miserable '' was released in 1981 . its official title was the double ' b'-side , and it was a double b-side single released by polydor marvin the paranoid android - the double b-side ( vinyl ) at discogs . discogs.com . retrieved on 2012-04-15 . on depressive discs . the song involves marvin describing his views on life ( '' i 'd feel a little better if they broke me up for spares '' , '' if i had my time again , i 'd rather be a lemming '' ) , to a synthesiser backing . the title is a reference to the hit song '' reasons to be cheerful , part 3 '' by ian dury and the blockheads . '' marvin i love you '' was the other b-side . marvin describes finding a love letter in his data banks eons after receiving it . the female vocal is provided by kimi and ritz . the song was a frequently requested tune on the dr . demento radio show , and was featured on one of the dr . demento '' greatest hits '' compilation albums . as of 2008 , it is ranked 56 out of the top 100 favorite novelty tunes on the official dr . demento web site . rank . solonor.com . retrieved on 2012-04-15 . . marvin 's lullaby . '' how i hate the night '' , also known as '' marvin 's lullaby '' , was published in the book life , the universe and everything , where it is described as '' a short dolorous ditty of no tone , or indeed tune . '' the first verse of '' marvin 's lullaby '' appears close to the end of the episode '' fit the seventeenth '' , and the second verse soon after the start of '' fit the eighteenth '' as listed below : : now the world has gone to bed : darkness wo n't engulf my head : i can see by infra-red : how i hate the night : now i lay me down to sleep : try to count electric sheep : sweet dream wishes you can keep : how i hate the night the line '' try to count electric sheep '' is a reference to philip k . dick 's novel do androids dream of electric sheep ? , which inspired the movie blade runner . according to do n't panic , douglas adams wrote a guitar tune for the lullaby , and thought it should have been released . in the radio series , stephen moore sings the words to a tune resembling '' abendsegen '' from humperdinck 's opera hansel and gretel . the song was performed at the very end of the 2012 live radio show . outside the hitchhiker 's universe . in the episode '' sibling tsunami '' of the animated series my life as a teenage robot , when asked what 's wrong , xj-7 , a chronically depressed robot character , replied : '' the usual , life , the universe , everything '' , a reference not only to marvin , but the '' ultimate question '' , a central tenet of the series ' storyline ( as well as the title of the third book ) . british alternative rock group radiohead named the lead single from their 1997 album '' paranoid android '' after marvin . marvin 's origins ( including those of the sirius cybernetics corporation , and the hitchhikers handheld device ) are referenced in the 2008 radio series the long dark tea-time of the soul . in episode 4 , dirk gently phones his friend richard mcduff , who now works for a new startup , sirius cybernetics . occasionally , background noises of electronic groans and air-pistons can be heard . at the end of the phone call , the electronic voice of stephen moore says '' richard , i think we might have a problem with these diodes . '' marvin appeared , and was declared the winner in the q-series episode '' quests : part ii '' of the panel game show qi . references . external links . bbc 's page on marvin marvin 's desolated fan page marvin 's depressing corner of the universe zz9 plural z alpha -the official hhgttg appreciation society hu : a galaxis útikalauz stopposoknak szereplőinek listája marvin