Medical cannabis

classification . the national institute on drug abuse defines medical cannabis as '' using the whole , unprocessed marijuana plant or its basic extracts to treat symptoms of illness and other conditions '' . a cannabis plant includes more than 400 different chemicals , of which about 70 are cannabinoids . in comparison , typical government-approved medications contain only one or two chemicals . the number of active chemicals in cannabis is one reason why treatment with cannabis is difficult to classify and study . a 2014 review stated that the variations in ratio of cbd-to-thc in botanical and pharmaceutical preparations determines the therapeutic vs psychoactive effects ( cbd attenuates thc 's psychoactive effects ) of cannabis products . . medical uses . overall research into the health effects of medical cannabis has been of low quality and it is not clear whether it is a useful treatment for any condition , or whether harms outweight any benefit . there is no consistent evidence that it helps with chronic pain and spasticity . low quality evidence suggests its use for reducing nausea during chemotherapy , improving appetite in hiv/aids , improving sleep , and improving tics in tourette syndrome . when usual treatments are ineffective , cannabinoids have also been recommended for anorexia , arthritis , glaucoma , and migraine . it is unclear whether american states might be able to mitigate the adverse effects of the opioid epidemic by prescribing medical cannabis as an alternative pain management drug . it is recommended that cannabis use be stopped in pregnancy . . nausea and vomiting . medical cannabis is somewhat effective in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting ( cinv ) and may be a reasonable option in those who do not improve following preferential treatment . comparative studies have found cannabinoids to be more effective than some conventional antiemetics such as prochlorperazine , promethazine , and metoclopramide in controlling cinv , but these are used less frequently because of side effects including dizziness , dysphoria , and hallucinations . long-term cannabis use may cause nausea and vomiting , a condition known as cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome ( chs ) . a 2016 cochrane review said that cannabinoids were '' probably effective '' in treating chemotherapy-induced nausea in children , but with a high side-effect profile ( mainly drowsiness , dizziness , altered moods , and increased appetite ) . less common side effects were '' ocular problems , orthostatic hypotension , muscle twitching , pruritus , vagueness , hallucinations , lightheadedness and dry mouth '' . . hiv/aids . evidence is lacking for both efficacy and safety of cannabis and cannabinoids in treating patients with hiv/aids or for anorexia associated with aids . as of 2013 , current studies suffer from the effects of bias , small sample size , and lack of long-term data . . pain . research into the use of cannabis for treating chronic pain has yielded inconsistent results for neuropathic pain , spasms associated with multiple sclerosis and pain from rheumatic disorders . cannabis is not effective at treating chronic cancer pain . when cannabis is inhaled to relieve pain , blood levels of cannabinoids rise faster than when oral products are used , peaking within three minutes and attaining an analgesic effect in seven minutes . a 2011 review considered cannabis to be generally safe , and it appears safer than opioids in palliative care . . neurological conditions . cannabis ' efficacy is not clear in treating neurological problems , including multiple sclerosis ( ms ) and movement problems . evidence also suggests that oral cannabis extract is effective for reducing patient-centered measures of spasticity . a trial of cannabis is deemed to be a reasonable option if other treatments have not been effective . its use for ms is approved in ten countries . a 2012 review found no problems with tolerance , abuse , or addiction . in the united states , cannabidiol , one of the cannabinoids found in the marijuana plant , has been approved for treating two severe forms of epilepsy , lennox-gastaut syndrome and dravet syndrome . . posttraumatic stress disorder . there is no good evidence that medical cannabis is effective for treating posttraumatic stress disorder , and its use for this purpose is not recommended . . adverse effects . medical use . there is insufficient data to draw strong conclusions about the safety of medical cannabis . typically , adverse effects of medical cannabis use are not serious ; they include tiredness , dizziness , increased appetite , and cardiovascular and psychoactive effects . other effects can include impaired short-term memory ; impaired motor coordination ; altered judgment ; and paranoia or psychosis at high doses . tolerance to these effects develops over a period of days or weeks . the amount of cannabis normally used for medicinal purposes is not believed to cause any permanent cognitive impairment in adults , though long-term treatment in adolescents should be weighed carefully as they are more susceptible to these impairments . withdrawal symptoms are rarely a problem with controlled medical administration of cannabinoids . the ability to drive vehicles or to operate machinery may be impaired until a tolerance is developed . although supporters of medical cannabis say that it is safe , further research is required to assess the long-term safety of its use . . recreational use . tetrahydrocannabinol ( thc ) , the principal psychoactive constituent of the cannabis plant , has low toxicity while the ld50 ( dose of thc needed to kill 50 % of tested rodents ) is high . acute effects may include anxiety and panic , impaired attention , and memory ( while intoxicated ) , an increased risk of psychotic symptoms , and possibly increased risk of accidents if a person drives a motor vehicle while intoxicated . psychotic episodes are well-documented and typically resolve within minutes or hours . there have been few reports of symptoms lasting longer . according to the united states department of health and human services , there were 455,000 emergency room visits associated with cannabis use in 2011 . these statistics include visits in which the patient was treated for a condition induced by or related to recent cannabis use . the drug use must be '' implicated '' in the emergency department visit , but does not need to be the direct cause of the visit . most of the illicit drug emergency room visits involved multiple drugs . in 129,000 cases , cannabis was the only implicated drug . effects of chronic use may include bronchitis , a cannabis dependence syndrome , and subtle impairments of attention and memory . these deficits persist while chronically intoxicated . compared to non-smokers , people who smoked cannabis regularly in adolescence exhibit reduced connectivity in specific brain regions associated with memory , learning , alertness , and executive function . one study suggested that sustained heavy , daily , adolescent onset cannabis use over decades is associated with a decline in iq by age 38 , with no effects found in those who initiated cannabis use later , or in those who ceased use earlier in adulthood . a follow-up review found that iq deficit may be a precursor , rather than result , of cannabis use , and that social and environmental factors are a likely influence . there has been a limited amount of studies that have looked at the effects of smoking cannabis on the respiratory system . chronic heavy marijuana smoking is associated with coughing , production of sputum , wheezing , coughing , and other symptoms of chronic bronchitis . regular cannabis use has not been shown to cause significant abnormalities in lung function . cannabis smoke contains thousands of organic and inorganic chemical compounds . this tar is chemically similar to that found in tobacco smoke , and over fifty known carcinogens have been identified in cannabis smoke , including nitrosamines , reactive aldehydes , and polycyclic hydrocarbons , including benzapyrene . light and moderate use of cannabis is not believed to increase risk of lung or upper airway cancer . evidence for causing these cancers is mixed concerning heavy , long-term use . in general there are far lower risks of pulmonary complications for regular cannabis smokers when compared with those of tobacco . combustion products are not present when using a vaporizer , consuming thc in pill form , or consuming cannabis edibles . there is serious suspicion among cardiologists , spurring research but falling short of definitive proof , that cannabis use has the potential to contribute to cardiovascular disease . cannabis is believed to be an aggravating factor in rare cases of arteritis , a serious condition that in some cases leads to amputation . because 97 % of case-reports also smoked tobacco , a formal association with cannabis could not be made . if arteritis turns out to be a distinct clinical entity , it might be the consequence of vasoconstrictor activity observed from delta-8-thc and delta-9-thc . other serious cardiovascular events including myocardial infarction , stroke , sudden cardiac death , and cardiomyopathy have been reported to be temporally associated with cannabis use . research in these events is complicated because cannabis is often used in conjunction with tobacco , and drugs such as alcohol and cocaine . these putative effects can be taken in context of a wide range of cardiovascular phenomena regulated by the endocannabinoid system and an overall role of cannabis in causing decreased peripheral resistance and increased cardiac output , which potentially could pose a threat to those with cardiovascular disease . cannabis usually causes no tolerance or withdrawal symptoms except in heavy users . in a survey of heavy users 42.4 % experienced withdrawal symptoms when they tried to quit marijuana such as craving , irritability , boredom , anxiety and sleep disturbances . about 9 % of those who experiment with marijuana eventually become dependent . the rate goes up to one in six among those who begin use as adolescents , and one-quarter to one-half of those who use it daily according to a nida review . a 2013 review estimates daily use is associated with a 10-20 % rate of dependence . the highest risk of cannabis dependence is found in those with a history of poor academic achievement , deviant behavior in childhood and adolescence , rebelliousness , poor parental relationships , or a parental history of drug and alcohol problems . a 2013 literature review found that exposure to marijuana had biologically-based physical , mental , behavioral and social health consequences and was '' associated with diseases of the liver ( particularly with co-existing hepatitis c ) , lungs , heart , and vasculature '' . there are numerous other reasons why people look for medical cannabis and to make people aware of whether they are eligible to accept medical cannabis as a dose , there are numerous websites that are currently providing online consultations through video calling . people are provided licenses with the help of which , they can either grow medical cannabis , or purchase it legally throughout the state . this is done only after precisely reviewing the applications of patients . . cognitive effects . a 2011 systematic review evaluated published studies of the acute and long-term cognitive effects of cannabis . thc intoxication is well established to impair cognitive functioning on an acute basis , including effects on the ability to plan , organize , solve problems , make decisions , and control impulses . the extent of this impact may be greater in novice users , and paradoxically , those habituated to high-level ingestion may have reduced cognition during withdrawal . studies of long-term effects on cognition have provided conflicting results , with some studies finding no difference between long-term abstainers and never-users and others finding long-term deficits . the discrepancies between studies may reflect greater long-term effects among heavier users relative to occasional users , and greater duration of effect among those with heavy use as adolescents compared to later in life . a second systematic review focused on neuroimaging studies found little evidence supporting an effect of cannabis use on brain structure and function . a 2003 meta-analysis concluded that any long-term cognitive effects were relatively modest in magnitude and limited to certain aspects of learning and memory . . impact on psychosis . exposure to thc can cause acute transient psychotic symptoms in healthy individuals and people with schizophrenia . a 2007 meta analysis concluded that cannabis use reduced the average age of onset of psychosis by 2.7 years relative to non-cannabis use . a 2005 meta analysis concluded that adolescent use of cannabis increases the risk of psychosis , and that the risk is dose-related . a 2004 literature review on the subject concluded that cannabis use is associated with a two-fold increase in the risk of psychosis , but that cannabis use is '' neither necessary nor sufficient '' to cause psychosis . a french review from 2009 came to a conclusion that cannabis use , particularly that before age 15 , was a factor in the development of schizophrenic disorders . . other potential long-term effects . a 2008 national institutes of health study of 19 chronic heavy marijuana users with cardiac and cerebral abnormalities ( averaging 28 & nbsp ; g to 272 & nbsp ; g ( 1 to 9+ oz ) weekly ) and 24 controls found elevated levels of apolipoprotein c3 ( apoc-iii ) in the chronic smokers . an increase in apoc-iii levels induces the development of hypertriglyceridemia . pharmacology . the genus cannabis contains two species which produce useful amounts of psychoactive cannabinoids : cannabis indica and cannabis sativa , which are listed as schedule i medicinal plants in the us ; a third species , cannabis ruderalis , has few psychogenic properties . cannabis contains more than 460 compounds ; at least 80 of these are cannabinoids – chemical compounds that interact with cannabinoid receptors in the brain . as of 2012 , more than 20 cannabinoids were being studied by the u.s . fda . the most psychoactive cannabinoid found in the cannabis plant is tetrahydrocannabinol ( or delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol , commonly known as thc ) . other cannabinoids include delta-8-tetrahydrocannabinol , cannabidiol ( cbd ) , cannabinol ( cbn ) , cannabicyclol ( cbl ) , cannabichromene ( cbc ) and cannabigerol ( cbg ) ; they have less psychotropic effects than thc , but may play a role in the overall effect of cannabis . the most studied are thc , cbd and cbn . cb1 and cb2 are the primary cannabinoid receptors responsible for several of the effects of cannabinoids , although other receptors may play a role as well . both belong to a group of receptors called g protein-coupled receptors ( gpcrs ) . cb1 receptors are found in very high levels in the brain and are thought to be responsible for psychoactive effects . cb2 receptors are found peripherally throughout the body and are thought to modulate pain and inflammation . . absorption . cannabinoid absorption is dependent on its route of administration . inhaled and vaporized thc have similar absorption profiles to smoked thc , with a bioavailability ranging from 10 to 35 % . oral administration has the lowest bioavailability of approximately 6 % , variable absorption depending on the vehicle used , and the longest time to peak plasma levels ( 2 to 6 hours ) compared to smoked or vaporized thc . similar to thc , cbd has poor oral bioavailability , approximately 6 % . the low bioavailability is largely attributed to significant first-pass metabolism in the liver and erratic absorption from the gastrointestinal tract . however , oral administration of cbd has a faster time to peak concentrations ( 2 hours ) than thc . due to the poor bioavailability of oral preparations , alternative routes of administration have been studied , including sublingual and rectal . these alternative formulations maximize bioavailability and reduce first-pass metabolism . sublingual administration in rabbits yielded bioavailability of 16 % and time to peak concentration of 4 hours . rectal administration in monkeys doubled bioavailability to 13.5 % and achieved peak blood concentrations within 1 to 8 hours after administration . . distribution . like cannabinoid absorption , distribution is also dependent on route of administration . smoking and inhalation of vaporized cannabis have better absorption than do other routes of administration , and therefore also have more predictable distribution . thc is highly protein bound once absorbed , with only 3 % found unbound in the plasma . it distributes rapidly to highly vascularized organs such as the heart , lungs , liver , spleen , and kidneys , as well as to various glands . low levels can be detected in the brain , testes , and unborn fetuses , all of which are protected from systemic circulation via barriers . thc further distributes into fatty tissues a few days after administration due to its high lipophilicity , and is found deposited in the spleen and fat after redistribution . . metabolism . delta-9-thc is the primary molecule responsible for the effects of cannabis . delta-9-thc is metabolized in the liver and turns into 11-oh-thc . & nbsp ; 11-oh-thc is the first metabolic product in this pathway . both delta-9-thc and 11-oh-thc are psychoactive . the metabolism of thc into 11-oh-thc plays a part in the heightened psychoactive effects of edible cannabis . next , 11-oh-thc is metabolized in the liver into 11-cooh-thc , which is the second metabolic product of thc . & nbsp ; 11-cooh-thc is not psychoactive . ingestion of edible cannabis products lead to a slower onset of effect than the inhalation of it because the thc travels to the liver first through the blood before it travels to the rest of the body . inhaled cannabis can result in thc going directly to the brain , where it then travels from the brain back to the liver in recirculation for metabolism . eventually , both routes of metabolism result in the metabolism of psychoactive thc to inactive 11-cooh-thc . excretion . due to substantial metabolism of thc and cbd , their metabolites are excreted mostly via feces , rather than by urine . after delta-9-thc is hydroxylated into 11-oh-thc via cyp2c9 , cyp2c19 , and cyp3a4 , it undergoes phase ii metabolism into more than 30 metabolites , a majority of which are products of glucuronidation . approximately 65 % of thc is excreted in feces and 25 % in the urine , while the remaining 10 % is excreted by other means . the terminal half-life of thc is 25 to 36 hours , whereas for cbd it is 18 to 32 hours . cbd is hydroxylated by p450 liver enzymes into 7-oh-cbd . its metabolites are products of primarily cyp2c19 and cyp3a4 activity , with potential activity of cyp1a1 , cyp1a2 , cyp2c9 , and cyp2d6 . similar to delta-9-thc , a majority of cbd is excreted in feces and some in the urine . the terminal half-life is approximately 18–32 hours . . administration . smoking has been the means of administration of cannabis for many users , but it is not suitable for the use of cannabis as a medicine . it was the most common method of medical cannabis consumption in the us . it is difficult to predict the pharmacological response to cannabis because concentration of cannabinoids varies widely , as there are different ways of preparing it for consumption ( smoked , applied as oils , eaten , infused into other foods , or drunk ) and a lack of production controls . the potential for adverse effects from smoke inhalation makes smoking a less viable option than oral preparations . cannabis vaporizers have gained popularity because of a perception among users that fewer harmful chemicals are ingested when components are inhaled via aerosol rather than smoke . cannabinoid medicines are available in pill form ( dronabinol and nabilone ) and liquid extracts formulated into an oromucosal spray ( nabiximols ) . oral preparations are '' problematic due to the uptake of cannabinoids into fatty tissue , from which they are released slowly , and the significant first-pass liver metabolism , which breaks down δ9thc and contributes further to the variability of plasma concentrations '' . the us food and drug administration ( fda ) has not approved smoked cannabis for any condition or disease , as it deems that evidence is lacking concerning safety and efficacy . the fda issued a 2006 advisory against smoked medical cannabis stating : '' marijuana has a high potential for abuse , has no currently accepted medical use in treatment in the united states , and has a lack of accepted safety for use under medical supervision . '' . history . ancient . cannabis , called má 麻 ( meaning '' hemp ; cannabis ; numbness '' ) or dàmá 大麻 ( with '' big ; great '' ) in chinese , was used in taiwan for fiber starting about 10,000 years ago . the botanist hui-lin li wrote that in china , '' the use of cannabis in medicine was probably a very early development . since ancient humans used hemp seed as food , it was quite natural for them to also discover the medicinal properties of the plant . '' li , hui-lin ( 1974 ) . '' an archaeological and historical account of cannabis in china '' , economic botany 28.4:437–448 , p . 444 . emperor shen-nung , who was also a pharmacologist , wrote a book on treatment methods in 2737 bce that included the medical benefits of cannabis . he recommended the substance for many ailments , including constipation , gout , rheumatism , and absent-mindedness . cannabis is one of the 50 fundamental herbs in traditional chinese medicine . the ebers papyrus ( c . 1550 bce ) from ancient egypt describes medical cannabis . the ancient egyptians used hemp ( cannabis ) in suppositories for relieving the pain of hemorrhoids . surviving texts from ancient india confirm that cannabis ' psychoactive properties were recognized , and doctors used it for treating a variety of illnesses and ailments , including insomnia , headaches , gastrointestinal disorders , and pain , including during childbirth . the ancient greeks used cannabis to dress wounds and sores on their horses , and in humans , dried leaves of cannabis were used to treat nose bleeds , and cannabis seeds were used to expel tapeworms . in the islamic golden age , islamic medicine made use of the diuretic , antiemetic , antiepileptic , anti-inflammatory , analgesic and antipyretic properties of cannabis sativa , and used it extensively as medication from the 8th to 18th centuries . . landrace strains . cannabis seeds may have been used for food , rituals or religious practices in ancient europe and china . harvesting the plant led to the spread of cannabis throughout eurasia about 10,000 to 5,000 years ago , with further distribution to the middle east and africa about 2,000 to 500 years ago . a landrace strain of cannabis developed over centuries . they are cultivars of the plant that originated in one specific region . widely cultivated strains of cannabis , such as '' afghani '' or '' hindu kush '' , are indigenous to the pakistan and afghanistan regions , while '' durban poison '' is native to africa . there are approximately 16 landrace strains of cannabis identified from pakistan , jamaica , africa , mexico , central america and asia . . modern . an irish physician , william brooke o'shaughnessy , is credited with introducing cannabis to western medicine . o'shaughnessy discovered cannabis in the 1830s while living abroad in india , where he conducted numerous experiments investigating the drug 's medical utility ( noting in particular its analgesic and anticonvulsant effects ) . he returned to england with a supply of cannabis in 1842 , after which its use spread through europe and the united states . in 1845 french physician jacques-joseph moreau published a book about the use of cannabis in psychiatry . hans bangen : geschichte der medikamentösen therapie der schizophrenie . berlin 1992 , page 22 . in 1850 cannabis was entered into the united states pharmacopeia . the use of cannabis in medicine began to decline by the end of the 19th century , due to difficulty in controlling dosages and the rise in popularity of synthetic and opium-derived drugs . also , the advent of the hypodermic syringe allowed these drugs to be injected for immediate effect , in contrast to cannabis which is not water-soluble and therefore can not be injected . in the united states , the medical use of cannabis further declined with the passage of the marihuana tax act of 1937 , which imposed new regulations and fees on physicians prescribing cannabis . cannabis was removed from the u.s . pharmacopeia in 1941 , and officially banned for any use with the passage of the controlled substances act of 1970 . cannabis began to attract renewed interest as medicine in the 1970s and 1980s , in particular due to its use by cancer and aids patients who reported relief from the effects of chemotherapy and cachexia . in 1996 , california became the first u.s . state to legalize medical cannabis in defiance of federal law . in 2001 , canada became the first country to adopt a system regulating the medical use of cannabis . file : da-ma.png the use of cannabis , at least as fiber , has been shown to go back at least 10,000 years in taiwan . '' dà má '' ( pinyin pronunciation ) is the chinese expression for cannabis , the first character meaning '' big '' and the second character meaning '' hemp '' . file : drug bottle containing cannabis.jpg cannabis indica fluid extract , american druggists syndicate , pre-1937 file : cannabisamericana jlhopkins b.jpg an advertisement for cannabis americana distributed by a pharmacist in new york in 1917 file : pebers c41-bc.jpg the ebers papyrus ( c . 1550 bce ) from ancient egypt has a prescription for medical marijuana applied directly for inflammation . . society and culture . legal status . file : map-of-world-medical-cannabis-laws.svg thumb right 380 px alt map of world medical cannabis laws legal status of ( whole-plant ) medical cannabis worldwide -- -- -- -- see also : file : map-of-world-cannabis-laws.svg . countries that have legalized the medical use of cannabis include australia , brazil , canada , chile , colombia , croatia , cyprus , czech republic , finland , germany , greece , israel , italy , jamaica , lebanon , luxembourg , north macedonia , malta , the netherlands , new zealand , peru , poland , portugal , sri lanka , thailand , the united kingdom , and uruguay . other countries have more restrictive laws that allow only the use of isolated cannabinoid drugs such as sativex or epidiolex . countries with the most relaxed policies include canada , uruguay , and the netherlands , where cannabis can be purchased without need for a prescription . in mexico , thc content of medical cannabis is limited to one percent . the same limit applies in switzerland , but no prescription is required to purchase . in the united states , the legality of medical cannabis varies by state . cannabis and its derivatives are subject to regulation under three united nations treaties : the 1961 single convention on narcotic drugs , the 1971 convention on psychotropic substances , and the 1988 convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances . cannabis is classified as a schedule i drug under the single convention treaty , meaning that medical use is allowed but that it is considered to be an addictive drug with a serious risk of abuse – along with other drugs such as opium and cocaine . prior to december 2020 it was also included in schedule iv , a subset of schedule i , which is for only the most dangerous drugs such as heroin and fentanyl . member nations of the un commission on narcotic drugs voted 27–25 to remove it from schedule iv on december 2 , 2020 , following a world health organization recommendation for removal in january 2019 . . united states . in the united states , the use of cannabis for medical purposes is legal in 35 states , four out of five permanently inhabited u.s . territories , and the washington , d.c . an additional 13 states have more restrictive laws allowing the use of low-thc products . cannabis remains illegal at the federal level under the controlled substances act , which classifies it as a schedule i drug with a high potential for abuse and no accepted medical use . in december 2014 , however , the rohrabacher–farr amendment was signed into law , prohibiting the justice department from prosecuting individuals acting in accordance with state medical cannabis laws . . economics . . distribution . the method of obtaining medical cannabis varies by region and by legislation . in the us , most consumers grow their own or buy it from cannabis dispensaries in states where it is legal . marijuana vending machines for selling or dispensing cannabis are in use in the united states and are planned to be used in canada . in 2014 , the startup meadow began offering on-demand delivery of medical marijuana in the san francisco bay area , through their mobile app . almost 70 % of medical cannabis is exported from the united kingdom , according to a 2017 united nations report , with much of the remaining amount coming from canada and the netherlands . . insurance . in the united states , health insurance companies may not pay for a medical marijuana prescription as the food and drug administration must approve any substance for medicinal purposes . before this can happen , the fda must first permit the study of the medical benefits and drawbacks of the substance , which it has not done since it was placed on schedule i of the controlled substances act in 1970 . therefore , all expenses incurred fulfilling a medical marijuana prescription will possibly be incurred as out-of-pocket . however , the new mexico court of appeals has ruled that workers ' compensation insurance must pay for prescribed marijuana as part of the state 's medical cannabis program . . positions of medical organizations . medical organizations that have issued statements in support of allowing access to medical cannabis include the american nurses association , american public health association , american medical student association , national multiple sclerosis society , epilepsy foundation , and leukemia & lymphoma society . organizations that oppose the legalization of medical cannabis include the american academy of pediatrics and american psychiatric association . however , the aap also supports rescheduling for the purpose of facilitating research . the american medical association and american college of physicians do not take a position on the legalization of medical cannabis , but have called for the schedule i classification to be reviewed . the american academy of family physicians and american society of addiction medicine also do not take a position , but do support rescheduling to better facilitate research . the american heart association says that '' many of the concerning health implications of cannabis include cardiovascular diseases '' but that it supports rescheduling to allow '' more nuanced . marijuana legislation and regulation '' and to '' reflect the existing science behind cannabis '' . the american cancer society and american psychological association have noted the obstacles that exist for conducting research on cannabis , and have called on the federal government to better enable scientific study of the drug . cancer research uk say that while cannabis is being studied for therapeutic potential , '' claims that there is solid 'proof ' that cannabis or cannabinoids can cure cancer is highly misleading to patients and their families , and builds a false picture of the state of progress in this area '' . . recreational use . the authors of a report on a 2011 survey of medical cannabis users say that critics have suggested that some users '' game the system '' to obtain medical cannabis ostensibly for treatment of a condition , but then use it for nonmedical purposes – though the truth of this claim is hard to measure . the report authors suggested rather that medical cannabis users occupied a '' continuum '' between medical and nonmedical use . . brand names . in the us , the fda has approved two oral cannabinoids for use as medicine : dronabinol and nabilone . dronabinol , synthetic thc , is listed as schedule ii . nabilone , a synthetic cannabinoid , is also schedule ii , indicating high potential for side effects and addiction . both received approval for sale in the us in 1985 , under the brand names marinol and cesamet . nabiximols , an oromucosal spray derived from two strains of cannabis sativa and containing thc and cbd , is not approved in the united states , but is approved in several european countries , canada , and new zealand as of 2013 . as of 2018 , medical marijuana in canada is being legally distributed to registered patients in bud , drops and capsule forms by such companies as canopy growth corp . and aurora cannabis . as an antiemetic , these medications are usually used when conventional treatment for nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy fail to work . nabiximols is used for treatment of spasticity associated with ms when other therapies have not worked , and when an initial trial demonstrates '' meaningful improvement '' . trials for fda approval in the us are underway . it is also approved in several european countries for overactive bladder and emesis . when sold under the trade name sativex as a mouth spray , the prescribed daily dose in sweden delivers a maximum of 32.4 & nbsp ; mg of thc and 30 & nbsp ; mg of cbd ; mild to moderate dizziness is common during the first few weeks . relative to inhaled consumption , peak concentration of oral thc is delayed , and it may be difficult to determine optimal dosage because of variability in patient absorption . in 1964 , albert lockhart and manley west began studying the health effects of traditional cannabis use in jamaican communities . they developed , and in 1987 gained permission to market , the pharmaceutical '' canasol '' , one of the first cannabis extracts . dr farid f . youssef . '' cannabis unmasked : what it is and why it does what it does '' . uwitoday : june 2010 . . research . medical cannabis research includes any medical research on using cannabis as a treatment for any medical condition . for reasons including increased popular support of cannabis use , a trend of cannabis legalization , and the perception of medical usefulness , more scientists are doing medical cannabis research . medical cannabis is unusually broad as a treatment for many conditions , each of which has its own state of research . similarly , various countries conduct and respond to medical cannabis research in different ways .