Magnetic monopole

historical background . early science and classical physics . many early scientists attributed the magnetism of lodestones to two different '' magnetic fluids '' ( '' effluvia '' ) , a north-pole fluid at one end and a south-pole fluid at the other , which attracted and repelled each other in analogy to positive and negative electric charge . however , an improved understanding of electromagnetism in the nineteenth century showed that the magnetism of lodestones was properly explained not by magnetic monopole fluids , but rather by a combination of electric currents , the electron magnetic moment , and the magnetic moments of other particles . gauss 's law for magnetism , one of maxwell 's equations , is the mathematical statement that magnetic monopoles do not exist . nevertheless , pierre curie pointed out in 1894 that magnetic monopoles could conceivably exist , despite not having been seen so far . quantum mechanics . the quantum theory of magnetic charge started with a paper by the physicist paul dirac in 1931 . paul dirac , '' quantised singularities in the electromagnetic field '' . proc . roy . soc . ( london ) a 133 , 60 ( 1931 ) . journal site , free access in this paper , dirac showed that if any magnetic monopoles exist in the universe , then all electric charge in the universe must be quantized ( dirac quantization condition ) . lecture notes by robert littlejohn , university of california , berkeley , 2007–8 the electric charge is , in fact , quantized , which is consistent with ( but does not prove ) the existence of monopoles . since dirac 's paper , several systematic monopole searches have been performed . experiments in 1975 and 1982 produced candidate events that were initially interpreted as monopoles , but are now regarded as inconclusive . milton p . 60 therefore , it remains an open question whether monopoles exist . further advances in theoretical particle physics , particularly developments in grand unified theories and quantum gravity , have led to more compelling arguments ( detailed below ) that monopoles do exist . joseph polchinski , a string-theorist , described the existence of monopoles as '' one of the safest bets that one can make about physics not yet seen '' . these theories are not necessarily inconsistent with the experimental evidence . in some theoretical models , magnetic monopoles are unlikely to be observed , because they are too massive to create in particle accelerators ( see below ) , and also too rare in the universe to enter a particle detector with much probability . some condensed matter physics propose a structure superficially similar to a magnetic monopole , known as a flux tube . the ends of a flux tube form a magnetic dipole , but since they move independently , they can be treated for many purposes as independent magnetic monopole quasiparticles . since 2009 , numerous news reports from the popular media have incorrectly described these systems as the long-awaited discovery of the magnetic monopoles , but the two phenomena are only superficially related to one another . magnetic monopoles spotted in spin ices , september 3 , 2009 . '' oleg tchernyshyov at johns hopkins university a researcher in this field cautions that the theory and experiments are specific to spin ices , and are not likely to shed light on magnetic monopoles as predicted by dirac . '' '' this is not the first time that physicists have created monopole analogues . in 2009 , physicists observed magnetic monopoles in a crystalline material called spin ice , which , when cooled to near-absolute zero , seems to fill with atom-sized , classical monopoles . these are magnetic in a true sense , but can not be studied individually . similar analogues have also been seen in other materials , such as in superfluid helium . steven bramwell , a physicist at university college london who pioneered work on monopoles in spin ices , says that the 2014 experiment led by david hall is impressive , but that what it observed is not a dirac monopole in the way many people might understand it . '' there 's a mathematical analogy here , a neat and beautiful one . but they 're not magnetic monopoles . '' these condensed-matter systems remain an area of active research . ( see below . ) . poles and magnetism in ordinary matter . all matter ever isolated to date , including every atom on the periodic table and every particle in the standard model , has zero magnetic monopole charge . therefore , the ordinary phenomena of magnetism and magnets have nothing to do with magnetic monopoles . instead , magnetism in ordinary matter comes from two sources . first , electric currents create magnetic fields according to ampère 's law . second , many elementary particles have an intrinsic magnetic moment , the most important of which is the electron magnetic dipole moment , which is related to its spin ( physics ) . mathematically , the magnetic field of an object is often described in terms of a multipole expansion . this is an expression of the field as the sum of component fields with specific mathematical forms . the first term in the expansion is called the monopole term , the second is called dipole , then quadrupole , then octupole , and so on . any of these terms can be present in the multipole expansion of an electric field , for example . however , in the multipole expansion of a magnetic field , the '' monopole '' term is always exactly zero ( for ordinary matter ) . a magnetic monopole , if it exists , would have the defining property of producing a magnetic field whose monopole term is non-zero . a magnetic dipole is something whose magnetic field is predominantly or exactly described by the magnetic dipole term of the multipole expansion . the term dipole means two poles , corresponding to the fact that a dipole magnet typically contains a north pole on one side and a south pole on the other side . this is analogous to an electric dipole , which has positive charge on one side and negative charge on the other . however , an electric dipole and magnetic dipole are fundamentally quite different . in an electric dipole made of ordinary matter , the positive charge is made of protons and the negative charge is made of electrons , but a magnetic dipole does not have different types of matter creating the north pole and south pole . instead , the two magnetic poles arise simultaneously from the aggregate effect of all the currents and intrinsic moments throughout the magnet . because of this , the two poles of a magnetic dipole must always have equal and opposite strength , and the two poles can not be separated from each other . maxwell 's equations . maxwell 's equations of electromagnetism relate the electric and magnetic fields to each other and to the motions of electric charges . the standard equations provide for electric charges , but they posit no magnetic charges . except for this difference , the equations are symmetric under the interchange of the electric and magnetic fields . the fact that the electric and magnetic fields can be written in a symmetric way is specific to the fact that space is three-dimensional . when the equations of electromagnetism are extrapolated to other dimensions , the magnetic field is described as being a rank-two antisymmetric tensor , whereas the electric field remains a true vector . in dimensions other than three , these two mathematical objects do not have the same number of components . maxwell 's equations are symmetric when the charge and electric current density are zero everywhere , which is the case in vacuum . fully symmetric maxwell 's equations can also be written if one allows for the possibility of '' magnetic charges '' analogous to electric charges . with the inclusion of a variable for the density of these magnetic charges , say , there is also a '' magnetic current density '' variable in the equations , . if magnetic charges do not exist & nbsp ; – or if they do exist but are not present in a region of space & nbsp ; – then the new terms in maxwell 's equations are all zero , and the extended equations reduce to the conventional equations of electromagnetism such as ) ; instead , they are sources for other fields , for example the -field , the '' -field '' ( related to superfluid vorticity ) , or various other quantum fields . they are not directly relevant to grand unified theories or other aspects of particle physics , and do not help explain charge quantization—except insofar as studies of analogous situations can help confirm that the mathematical analyses involved are sound . there are a number of examples in condensed-matter physics where collective behavior leads to emergent phenomena that resemble magnetic monopoles in certain respects , making magnetic monopoles , and other exotica , in the lab , symmetry breaking , january 29 , 2009 . retrieved january 31 , 2009 . including most prominently the spin ice materials . while these should not be confused with hypothetical elementary monopoles existing in the vacuum , they nonetheless have similar properties and can be probed using similar techniques . some researchers use the term magnetricity to describe the manipulation of magnetic monopole quasiparticles in spin ice , in analogy to the word “ electricity ” . one example of the work on magnetic monopole quasiparticles is a paper published in the journal science in september 2009 , in which researchers described the observation of quasiparticles resembling magnetic monopoles . a single crystal of the spin ice material dysprosium titanate was cooled to a temperature between 0.6 kelvin and 2.0 kelvin . using observations of neutron scattering , the magnetic moments were shown to align into interwoven tubelike bundles resembling dirac strings . at the defect formed by the end of each tube , the magnetic field looks like that of a monopole . using an applied magnetic field to break the symmetry of the system , the researchers were able to control the density and orientation of these strings . a contribution to the heat capacity of the system from an effective gas of these quasiparticles was also described . this research went on to win the 2012 europhysics prize for condensed matter physics . in another example , a paper in the february 11 , 2011 issue of nature physics describes creation and measurement of long-lived magnetic monopole quasiparticle currents in spin ice . by applying a magnetic-field pulse to crystal of dysprosium titanate at 0.36 k , the authors created a relaxing magnetic current that lasted for several minutes . they measured the current by means of the electromotive force it induced in a solenoid coupled to a sensitive amplifier , and quantitatively described it using a chemical kinetic model of point-like charges obeying the onsager–wien mechanism of carrier dissociation and recombination . they thus derived the microscopic parameters of monopole motion in spin ice and identified the distinct roles of free and bound magnetic charges . in superfluids , there is a field , related to superfluid vorticity , which is mathematically analogous to the magnetic -field . because of the similarity , the field is called a “ synthetic magnetic field ” . in january 2014 , it was reported that monopole quasiparticles for the field were created and studied in a spinor bose–einstein condensate . this constitutes the first example of a quasi-magnetic monopole observed within a system governed by quantum field theory . . see also . bogomolny equations dirac string dyon felix ehrenhaft flatness problem gauss 's law for magnetism ginzburg–landau theory halbach array horizon problem instanton magnetic monopole problem meron soliton 't hooft–polyakov monopole wu–yang monopole . notes . references . bibliography . . external links . magnetic monopole searches ( lecture notes ) particle data group summary of magnetic monopole search 'race for the pole ' dr david milstead freeview 'snapshot ' video by the vega science trust and the bbc/ou . interview with jonathan morris about magnetic monopoles and magnetic monopole quasiparticles . drillingsraum , april 16 , 2010 nature , 2009 sciencedaily , 2009