Spaceport

history . the first rockets to reach space were v-2 rockets launched from peenemünde , germany in 1944 during world war ii . after the war , 70 complete v-2 rockets were brought to white sands for test launches , with 47 of them reaching altitudes between 100 & nbsp ; km and 213 & nbsp ; km . ernst stuhlinger , enabling technology for space transportation ( the century of space science , page 66 , kluwer , the world 's first spaceport for orbital and human launches , the baikonur cosmodrome in southern kazakhstan , started as a soviet military rocket range in 1955 . it achieved the first orbital flight ( sputnik 1 ) in october 1957 . the exact location of the cosmodrome was initially held secret . guesses to its location were misdirected by a name in common with a mining town 320 & nbsp ; km away . the position became known in 1957 outside the soviet union only after u-2 planes had identified the site by following railway lines in the kazakh ssr , although soviet authorities did not confirm the location for decades . russian space web on baikonur the baikonur cosmodrome achieved the first launch of a human into space ( yuri gagarin ) in 1961 . the launch complex used , site 1 , has reached a special symbolic significance and is commonly called gagarin 's start . baikonur was the primary soviet cosmodrome , and is still widely used by russia under a lease arrangement with kazakhstan . in response to the early soviet successes , the united states built up a major spaceport complex at cape canaveral in florida . a large number of unmanned flights , as well as the early human flights , were carried out at cape canaveral space force station . for the apollo programme , an adjacent spaceport , kennedy space center , was constructed , and achieved the first manned mission to the lunar surface ( apollo 11 ) in july 1969 . it was the base for all space shuttle launches and most of their runway landings . for details on the launch complexes of the two spaceports , see list of cape canaveral and merritt island launch sites . the guiana space centre in kourou , french guiana , is the major european spaceport , with satellite launches that benefit from the location 5 degrees north of the equator . in october 2003 the jiuquan satellite launch center achieved the first chinese human spaceflight . breaking with tradition , in june 2004 on a runway at mojave air and space port , california , a human was for the first time launched to space in a privately funded , suborbital spaceflight , that was intended to pave the way for future commercial spaceflights . the spacecraft , spaceshipone , was launched by a carrier airplane taking off horizontally . at cape canaveral , spacex in 2015 made the first successful landing and recovery of a first stage used in a vertical satellite launch . . location . rockets can most easily reach satellite orbits if launched near the equator in an easterly direction , as this maximizes use of the earth 's rotational speed ( 465 & nbsp ; m/s at the equator ) . such launches also provide a desirable orientation for arriving at a geostationary orbit . for polar orbits and molniya orbits this does not apply . in principle , advantages of high altitude launch are reduced vertical distance to travel and a thinner atmosphere for the rocket to penetrate . however , altitude of the launch site is not a driving factor in spaceport placement because most of the delta-v for a launch is spent on achieving the required horizontal orbital speed . the small gain from a few kilometers of extra altitude does not usually off-set the logistical costs of ground transport in mountainous terrain . many spaceports have been placed at existing military installations , such as intercontinental ballistic missile ranges , which are not always physically ideal sites for launch . a rocket launch site is built as far as possible away from major population centers in order to mitigate risk to bystanders should a rocket experience a catastrophic failure . in many cases a launch site is built close to major bodies of water to ensure that no components are shed over populated areas . typically a spaceport site is large enough that , should a vehicle explode , it will not endanger human lives or adjacent launch pads . spaceport earth : the reinvention of spaceflight planned sites of spaceports for sub-orbital tourist spaceflight often make use of existing ground infrastructure , including runways . the nature of the local view from altitude is also a factor to consider . rocket ranges . usa : eastern range , western range . space tourism . the space tourism industry ( see list of private spaceflight companies ) is being targeted by spaceports in numerous locations worldwide . e.g . spaceport america , new mexico . the establishment of spaceports for tourist trips raises legal issues , which are only beginning to be addressed . . with achieved horizontal launches of humans to 100 km . the following table shows spaceports with documented achieved launches of humans to at least 100 & nbsp ; km altitude , starting from a horizontal runway . all the flights were sub-orbital . beyond earth . spaceports have been proposed for locations on the moon , mars , orbiting the earth , at sun-earth and earth-moon lagrange points , and at other locations in the solar system . human-tended outposts on the moon or mars , for example , will be spaceports by definition . the 2012 space studies program of the international space university studied the economic benefit of a network of spaceports throughout the solar system beginning from earth and expanding outwardly in phases , within its team project operations and service infrastructure for space ( oasis ) . oasis official website its analysis claimed that the first phase , placing the '' node 1 '' spaceport with space tug services in low earth orbit ( leo ) , would be commercially profitable and reduce transportation costs to geosynchronous orbit by as much as 44 % ( depending on the launch vehicle ) . the second phase would add a node 2 spaceport on the lunar surface to provide services including lunar ice mining and delivery of rocket propellants back to node 1 . this would enable lunar surface activities and further reduce transportation costs within and out from cislunar space . the third phase would add a node 3 spaceport on the martian moon phobos to enable refueling and resupply prior to mars surface landings , missions beyond mars , and return trips to earth . in addition to propellant mining and refueling , the network of spaceports could provide services such as power storage and distribution , in-space assembly and repair of spacecraft , communications relay , shelter , construction and leasing of infrastructure , maintaining spacecraft positioned for future use , and logistics .