1901 in sports

american football . professional championships western pennsylvania championship – homestead library & athletic club . association football . england the football league – liverpool 45 points , sunderland 43 , notts county 40 , nottingham forest 39 , bury 39 , newcastle united 38 fa cup final – tottenham hotspur 3–1 sheffield united at crystal palace , london ( replay following 2–2 draw at crystal palace ) . tottenham hotspur is the first ( and to date only ) non-league club to win the fa cup since the foundation of the football league . brighton & hove albion fc founded . hungary formation of the hungarian football federation ( i.e . , the magyar labdarúgó szövetség or mlsz ) peru alianza lima , officially founded on february 15 . scotland scottish football league – rangers scottish cup final – hearts 4–3 celtic at ibrox park . athletics . jack caffery wins the fifth running of the boston marathon . . australian rules football . vfl premiership essendon wins the 5th vfl premiership – essendon 6.7 ( 43 ) d collingwood 2.4 ( 16 ) at lake oval . baseball . national championship national league championship – pittsburgh pirates american league championship – chicago white sox events the american league repudiates its minor status and competes with the national league as a second major league . the al abandons four western cities for washington , baltimore , philadelphia and boston . it signs about 30 prominent nl players before the season begins . the national league violates its constitution in the summer and there will be no major-minor agreement until the 1903 season . december – numerous minor leagues establish their own national association of professional baseball leagues , commonly called minor league baseball ( 1902 to date ) . boxing . events barbados joe walcott wins the world welterweight championship . he is ranked by nat fleischer and charley rose as the 1 all-time welterweight ; other sports personalities such as tad dorgan , tom o'rourke , dan morgan and jimmy johnston call him '' the greatest pound for pound fighter who ever lived '' . cyber boxing zone – barbados joe walcott young corbett ii wins the world featherweight championship , defeating terry mcgovern ( boxer ) with a second round knockout the vacant world bantamweight championship is claimed first by harry harris , who fails to defend it and increases his weight , so making himself ineligible . the title is then awarded to harry forbes following his second round knockout of danny dougherty lineal world champions cyber boxing zone world heavyweight championship – james j . jeffries world middleweight championship – tommy ryan world welterweight championship – william '' matty '' matthews → james '' rube '' ferns → barbados joe walcott world lightweight championship – frank erne world featherweight championship – terry mcgovern ( boxer ) → young corbett ii world bantamweight championship – title vacant → harry harris → title vacant → harry forbes . cricket . events no cricket is played in south africa due to the boer war . england county championship – yorkshire minor counties championship – durham most runs – bobby abel 3309 55.15 ( hs 247 ) most wickets – wilfred rhodes 251 15.12 ( bb 8–53 ) wisden cricketers of the year – len braund , charlie mcgahey , frank mitchell , willie quaife , johnny tyldesley australia sheffield shield – victoria most runs – clem hill 620 103.33 ( hs 365 ) most wickets – jack saunders 29 17.13 ( bb 6–70 ) and joe travers 29 20.75 ( bb 9–30 ) india bombay presidency – parsees south africa currie cup – not contested west indies inter-colonial tournament – trinidad and tobago . figure skating . world figure skating championships world men 's champion – ulrich salchow ( sweden ) . golf . major tournaments british open – james braid us open – willie anderson other tournaments british amateur – harold hilton us amateur – walter travis . horse racing . england grand national – grudon 1,000 guineas stakes – aida 2,000 guineas stakes – handicapper the derby – volodyovski the oaks – cap and bells ii st . leger stakes – doricles australia melbourne cup – revenue canada queen 's plate – john ruskin ireland irish grand national – tipperary boy irish derby stakes – carrigavalla usa kentucky derby – his eminence preakness stakes – the parader belmont stakes – commando . ice hockey . stanley cup winnipeg victorias defeats defending champion montreal shamrocks in a cup challenge , two games to nil winnipeg victorias wins the manitoba hockey association ( mha ) title over the winnipeg hockey club and successfully defends the stanley cup title ottawa hockey club wins the canadian amateur hockey league ( cahl ) championship but declines to challenge winnipeg for the stanley cup . lacrosse . events donald mann donates the mann cup . lord minto , the governor general of canada , donates the minto cup . ottawa capitals win the first mann cup and the first minto cup . motor racing . paris–berlin trail the paris–berlin trail is run on 27–29 june over 1105 & nbsp ; km and won by henri fournier ( france ) driving a mors in a time of 15:33:06 . the race is in retrospect sometimes referred to as the vi grand prix de l'acf . paris–bordeaux trail the paris–bordeaux trail is run on 29 may over 527.1 & nbsp ; km and won by henri fournier ( france ) driving a mors in a time of 6:10:44 . the race incorporates the gordon bennett cup ( see below ) . 1901 grand prix and paris races . retrieved on 7 september 2009 . gordon bennett cup the second gordon bennett cup is run from paris to bordeaux in conjunction with the paris–bordeaux trail ( see above ) and won by léonce girardot ( france ) driving a panhard . circuit du sud-ouest the circuit du sud-ouest was run in pau . some anglophone sources wrongly call it the 'pau grand prix ' . this may stem from a mistranslation of the contemporary french sources such as the magazine la france auto of march 1901 . autosport , the nostalgia forum , robert dick quoting ( translating ) from la france automobile , march 1901 it was run in four classes around the streets of pau . the grand prix du palais d ’ hiver was the name of the prizes awarded for the lesser classes ( 'light cars ' and 'voiturettes ' ) . the grand prix de pau was the name of the prize awarded for the 'heavy ' ( fastest ) class . thus maurice farman was awarded the 'grand prix de pau ' for his overall victory in the circuit du sud-ouest driving a panhard . additionally the grand prix du palais d ’ hiver ( 400 à 650 & nbsp ; kg 'light car ' class ) was awarded to henri farman ( darracq ) ; the second grand prix du palais d ’ hiver for the under 400 & nbsp ; kg voiturettesclass was awarded to louis renault ( renault ) ; the prix du béarn was awarded to osmont in a 'de dion ' tricycle . ( autosport , the nostalgia forum , robert dick quoting ( translating ) from la france automobile , march 1901 ( grand prix winners 1895–1949 by hans etzrodt part 1 1895–1916 ) . rowing . the boat race 30 march — oxford wins the 58th the boat race 1901 . rugby league . england championship – not contested challenge cup – batley 6–0 warrington at headingley rugby stadium , leeds rugby league county leagues – oldham rugby league county leagues – bradford f.c . rugby union . home nations championship 19th home nations championship series is won by scotland . speed skating . speed skating world championships men 's all-round champion – franz frederik wathén ( russia ) . tennis . england the championships , wimbledon – arthur gore ( gb ) defeats reginald doherty ( gb ) 4–6 7–5 6–4 6–4 the championships , wimbledon – charlotte cooper sterry defeats blanche bingley hillyard 6–2 6–2 france french men 's singles championship – andré vacherot defeats paul lebreton : details unknown french women 's singles championship – p . girod defeats leroux ( scores unknown ) usa us open ( tennis ) – william larned defeats beals wright 6–2 6–8 6–4 6–4 us open ( tennis ) – elisabeth moore defeats myrtle mcateer 6–4 3–6 7–5 2–6 6–2 davis cup 1901 international lawn tennis challenge – walkover . yacht racing . america 's cup the new york yacht club retains the america 's cup as columbia defeats british challenger shamrock ii , of the royal ulster yacht club , 3 races to 0 . references .