Protectionism

living standards . a 2016 study found that '' trade typically favors the poor '' , as they spend a greater share of their earnings on goods , as free trade reduces the costs of goods . other research found that china 's entry to the wto benefitted us consumers , as the price of chinese goods were substantially reduced . harvard economist dani rodrik argues that while globalization and free trade does contribute to social problems , '' a serious retreat into protectionism would hurt the many groups that benefit from trade and would result in the same kind of social conflicts that globalization itself generates . we have to recognize that erecting trade barriers will help in only a limited set of circumstances and that trade policy will rarely be the best response to the problems of globalization '' . . growth . according to economic historians findlay and o'rourke , there is a consensus in the economics literature that protectionist policies in the interwar period '' hurt the world economy overall , although there is a debate about whether the effect was large or small . '' economic historian paul bairoch argued that economic protection was positively correlated with economic and industrial growth during the 19th century . for example , gnp growth during europe 's '' liberal period '' in the middle of the century ( where tariffs were at their lowest ) , averaged 1.7 % per year , while industrial growth averaged 1.8 % per year . however , during the protectionist era of the 1870s and 1890s , gnp growth averaged 2.6 % per year , while industrial output grew at 3.8 % per year , roughly twice as fast as it had during the liberal era of low tariffs and free trade . one study found that tariffs imposed on manufactured goods increase economic growth in developing countries , and this growth impact remains even after the tariffs are repealed . according to dartmouth economist douglas irwin , '' that there is a correlation between high tariffs and growth in the late nineteenth century can not be denied . but correlation is not causation . there is no reason for necessarily thinking that import protection was a good policy just because the economic outcome was good : the outcome could have been driven by factors completely unrelated to the tariff , or perhaps could have been even better in the absence of protection . '' irwin furthermore writes that '' few observers have argued outright that the high tariffs caused such growth . '' according to oxford economic historian kevin o'rourke , '' it seems clear that protection was important for the growth of us manufacturing in the first half of the 19th century ; but this does not necessarily imply that the tariff was beneficial for gdp growth . protectionists have often pointed to german and american industrialization during this period as evidence in favor of their position , but economic growth is influenced by many factors other than trade policy , and it is important to control for these when assessing the links between tariffs and growth . '' a prominent 1999 study by jeffrey a . frankel and david h . romer found , contrary to free trade skeptics ' claims , while controlling for relevant factors , that trade does indeed have a positive impact on growth and incomes . . developing world . there is broad consensus among economists that free trade helps workers in developing countries , even though they are not subject to the stringent health and labor standards of developed countries . this is because '' the growth of manufacturing—and of the myriad other jobs that the new export sector creates—has a ripple effect throughout the economy '' that creates competition among producers , lifting wages and living conditions . krugman , paul ( 21 march 1997 ) . in praise of cheap labor . slate . the nobel laureates , milton friedman and paul krugman , have argued for free trade as a model for economic development . alan greenspan , former chair of the american federal reserve , has criticized protectionist proposals as leading '' to an atrophy of our competitive ability . if the protectionist route is followed , newer , more efficient industries will have less scope to expand , and overall output and economic welfare will suffer . '' sicilia , david b . & cruikshank , jeffrey l . ( 2000 ) . the greenspan effect , p . 131 . new york : mcgraw-hill . protectionists postulate that new industries may require protection from entrenched foreign competition in order to develop . this was alexander hamilton 's argument in his '' report on manufactures '' , and the primary reason why george washington signed the tariff act of 1789 . mainstream economists do concede that tariffs can in the short-term help domestic industries to develop , but are contingent on the short-term nature of the protective tariffs and the ability of the government to pick the winners . the problems are that protective tariffs will not be reduced after the infant industry reaches a foothold , and that governments will not pick industries that are likely to succeed . economists have identified a number of cases across different countries and industries where attempts to shelter infant industries failed . economists such as paul krugman have speculated that those who support protectionism ostensibly to further the interests of workers in the least developed countries are in fact being disingenuous , seeking only to protect jobs in developed countries . krugman , paul ( 21 november 1997 ) . a raspberry for free trade . slate . additionally , workers in the least developed countries only accept jobs if they are the best on offer , as all mutually consensual exchanges must be of benefit to both sides , or else they would n't be entered into freely . that they accept low-paying jobs from companies in developed countries shows that their other employment prospects are worse . a letter reprinted in the may 2010 edition of econ journal watch identifies a similar sentiment against protectionism from 16 british economists at the beginning of the 20th century . '' convictions opposed to certain popular opinions : the 1903 anti-protectionism letter supported by 16 british economists '' . econ journal watch 7 ( 2 ) : 157–61 , may 2010 . econjwatch.org . conflict . protectionism has also been accused of being one of the major causes of war . proponents of this theory point to the constant warfare in the 17th and 18th centuries among european countries whose governments were predominantly mercantilism and protectionist , the american revolution , which came about ostensibly due to british tariffs and taxes , as well as the protective policies preceding both world war i and world war ii . according to a slogan of frédéric bastiat ( 1801–1850 ) , '' when goods can not cross borders , armies will . '' dilorenzo , t . j . , frederic bastiat ( 1801–1850 ) : between the french and marginalist revolutions . accessed at & 91 ; ludwig von mises institute & 93 ; 2012-04-13 . current world trends . since the end of world war ii , it has been the stated policy of most first world countries to eliminate protectionism through free trade policies enforced by international treaties and organizations such as the world trade organization . certain policies of first world governments have been criticized as protectionist , however , such as the common agricultural policy in the european union , longstanding agricultural subsidies and proposed '' buy american '' provisions in economic recovery packages in the united states . heads of the g20 meeting in london on 2 april 2009 pledged '' we will not repeat the historic mistakes of protectionism of previous eras '' . adherence to this pledge is monitored by the global trade alert , providing up-to-date information and informed commentary to help ensure that the g20 pledge is met by maintaining confidence in the world trading system , deterring beggar-thy-neighbor acts and preserving the contribution that exports could play in the future recovery of the world economy . although they were reiterating what they had already committed to , last november in washington , 17 of these 20 countries were reported by the world bank as having imposed trade restrictive measures since then . in its report , the world bank says most of the world 's major economies are resorting to protectionist measures as the global economic slowdown begins to bite . economists who have examined the impact of new trade-restrictive measures using detailed bilaterally monthly trade statistics estimated that new measures taken through late 2009 were distorting global merchandise trade by 0.25 % to 0.5 % ( about 50 & nbsp ; billion a year ) . since then , however , president donald trump announced in january 2017 the u.s . was abandoning the tpp ( trans-pacific partnership ) deal , saying , “ we ’ re going to stop the ridiculous trade deals that have taken everybody out of our country and taken companies out of our country , and it ’ s going to be reversed . ” . see also . american system ( economic plan ) autarky brexit currency war developmentalism digital millennium copyright act economic nationalism free trade debate globalization henry c . carey historiography of the fall of the western roman empire imperial preference international trade market-preserving federalism national policy not invented here project labor agreement protected geographical status protection or free trade protectionism in the united states protective tariff rent seeking resistive economy smoot-hawley act tariff reform league 1923 united kingdom general election voluntary export restraint washington consensus . further reading . . references . external links .