The Goldbergs (broadcast series)

radio . the program was devised by writer-actress gertrude berg in 1928 and sold to the nbc radio network the following year . it was a domestic comedy featuring the home life of a jewish family , supposedly located at 1038 east tremont avenue in the bronx . in addition to writing the scripts and directing each episode , berg starred as bighearted , lovingly meddlesome , and somewhat stereotypical jewish matriarch molly goldberg . the show began as a portrait of jewish tenement life before later evoking such growing pains as moving into a more suburban setting and struggling with assimilation while sustaining their roots . the goldbergs began as a weekly 15-minute program called the rise of the goldbergs on november 20 , 1929 , going daily in 1931 . the series moved to cbs in 1936 with the title shortened to the goldbergs . like other 15-minute comedies of the day , such as amos ' n ' andy , lum and abner , easy aces , vic and sade and myrt and marge , the goldbergs was a serial with running storylines . berg 's usual introduction ( in character as molly , hollering ) ; '' yoo-hoo ! is anybody . ? '' became a catchphrase . in the 1940s , this was followed by bud collyer announcing ; '' here she is , folks : that 's molly goldberg , a woman with a place in every heart and a finger in every pie '' . when gertrude berg missed a couple of weeks due to illness , stations carrying the popular show were flooded with get-well mail . '' the success of this slice of specifically ethnic , but far from atypical , american experience resulted in eighteen thousand letters pouring into nbc 's office when berg 's illness forced the show off the air for a week . '' at the height of the show 's popularity , life wrote : '' for millions of americans , listening to the goldbergs . has been a happy ritual akin to slipping on a pair of comfortable old shoes that never seem to wear out '' . life , april 25 , 1949 , pg . 59 radio historians frank buxton and bill owen , in the big broadcast 1920–1950 , noted the series ( which they considered a soap opera as much as a comedy ) '' differed from most of the other 'soaps ' in that its leading characters lived through relatively normal situations . even though it was the story of a poor jewish family in the bronx , new york , it had identification for a wide segment of listeners '' . of the 15-minute serial comedies , only amos ' n ' andy enjoyed a longer radio life than the goldbergs . the role of husband jake goldberg was originally played by himan brown and later , james r . waters . when waters died suddenly in 1945 , berg resisted recasting the role . instead , she simply had molly refer to jake , occasionally setting up dialogue in which his reply was not heard when she spoke to him . berg 's portrayal of the jewish mother stereotype emphasized the positive . '' this series has done more to set us jews right with the 'goyim ' than all the sermons ever preached by the rabbis , '' wrote one jewish educator . '' the jewish mother '' , slate , june 13 , 2007 . behind the scenes . berg was not averse to incorporating serious real-world issues which affected jewish families . one 1939 episode addressed kristallnacht and nazi germany ( including a rock through the family window as the goldbergs had their passover seder ) ; other world war ii-era episodes alluded to friends or family members trying to escape the holocaust . but these were sporadic deviations from the show 's main theme of family , neighborhood and the balance between old world values and new world assimilation . molly shows viewers the strong matriarch she is by constantly helping others with their dilemmas and proving to be the hero time and time again . the goldbergs was so popular that performing stars in other arts sought to appear on it . berg cast metropolitan opera star jan peerce almost annually to sing on yom kippur and passover . another famous singer of the day , ernestine schumann-heink , asked berg personally to appear , and berg wrote her into three episodes . regina resnik ( an international soprano , later mezzo who had an international career , including the met opera ) starred in a tv episode . the radio cast included roslyn silber and alfred ryder as children rosalie and sammy , menasha skulnik as uncle david , arnold stang as seymour fingerhood , garson kanin as eli edwards , and zina provendie as sylvia allison , among others . moves into stage and television . in 1948 , berg wrote and staged a theatrical version of the show on broadway , entitled me and molly . a year after that success , berg brought the goldbergs to a national audience on television . . television . the television version ran on cbs from 1949 to 1951 and co-starred philip loeb as jake goldberg . he and gertrude berg reprised their roles in a the goldbergs ( film ) . the show almost did n't get to the small screen at all : cbs executives were uncertain that the show would work on television as well as it did on radio . berg prevailed , however , and picked up general foods ( sanka coffee ) as its sponsor . berg , who continued to write every episode , insisted that no studio audience be used and made sure everyday events formed the base for the stories ; david bianculli . '' mccarthyism killed laughter of 'the goldbergs ' , the augusta chronicle ( reprinted from new york daily news ) , january 14 , 1999 , page b3 . she was once quoted as saying she avoided '' anything that will bother people . unions , fund raising , zionism , socialism , intergroup relations . i keep things average . i do n't want to lose friends . '' a . james rudin . '' ugly stereotypes of jews on television threaten pluralism '' ( opinion column ) , the dallas morning news , december 30 , 2000 , page 5g . berg 's hard work and determination paid off . in 1950 , she won the first best actress emmy award for her role as molly on the goldbergs . the goldbergs was destined to spend almost a decade on television—but not without disruptions . in 1950 , philip loeb was blacklisted and pressure was placed on berg ( who owned the television version as she had the radio original ) to fire him . when she refused , general foods cancelled their sponsorship , and cbs dropped it from their schedule by june 1951 . eight months later , however , nbc & mdash ; the show 's original broadcasting home & mdash ; picked up the series for the 1952–53 season , but informed gertrude berg that if she persisted in allowing philip loeb to remain with the series , it would never be seen on television again . she finally gave in , and the series reappeared in a twice-weekly , early-evening 15-minute format ( with another change in title , to molly , in due course ) , with harold stone and then robert h . harris replacing loeb as jake , though berg quietly continued to pay a salary to loeb . paul lomartire . '' have i got news for you about molly , '' the palm beach post , june 18 , 1994 , page 1d . after the goldbergs ended its cbs run , tom taylor replaced larry robinson in the role of molly 's son , sammy . the rest of the television cast included eli mintz as uncle david , arlene mcquade as rosalie and betty bendyke as dora barnett . on radio , sammy and rosalie had grown up and gotten married ; on television , the characters were revived as teenagers . during this time , gertrude berg and arlene mcquade appeared as their characters of molly and rosalie , respectively , when they guested on nbc-tv 's buick-berle show starring milton berle . in 1954 , the show reverted to a weekly half-hour , moving to the dumont network for a run from april to october . the series was originally intended to run for six months on dumont , but , due to financial difficulties , the network was unable to fulfill the 5 million contract , despite nielsen ratings estimated at ten million viewers . the dumont shows were aired live . a final version , aired in syndication , was filmed in 1955 and aired on local stations until 1956 . this version moved the goldbergs from the bronx to the new york suburb of haverville . in a way this mirrored the real life journey of many jewish families from the bronx to the suburbs and other parts of new york during this period . however , this was considered the death knell of the show , as it was felt that the goldbergs were only the goldbergs in the bronx . also in 1955 , philip loeb , beset by depression and unable to find other work , committed suicide . in 1957 , gertrude berg made her last two appearances as molly goldberg : first on an episode of the nbc-tv variety series washington square with ray bolger , and then on a kate smith special that aired on abc-tv . file : the goldbergs gertrude berg cbs.jpg gertrude berg as molly goldberg on the show 's set file : the goldberg family 1.jpg rosalie , jake and molly file : the goldberg family 2.jpg sammy and dora barnett file : the goldbergs 1954.jpg uncle david and molly with rosalie at the piano . aftermath . gertrude berg returned to television six years later in a situation comedy , mrs . g . goes to college , playing sarah green , a molly goldberg-like character . despite being retitled the gertrude berg show in mid-year , the program was cancelled after one season . the goldbergs is available to collectors and fans in a large number of surviving radio episodes and some surviving television episodes , many of which have lapsed into the public domain . aviva kempner 's documentary yoo-hoo , mrs . goldberg ( 2009 ) deals with the show , and to an extent , gertrude berg 's personal life . most of the dumont episodes survive at the ucla film and television archive , while the 39 filmed episodes survive intact . since 2009 , the series can be seen on the jltv cable network . home media . in march 2010 , shout ! factory released the goldbergs : the ultimate goldbergs on dvd via their retail website . the release includes all 71 extant episodes of the television series . the ucla film and television archive digitally restored all of the episodes , as well as provided 12 radio episodes for the dvd release and the pilot for the short lived series mrs . g goes to college ( 1961 ) . the box set is available from ucla . ucla the ucla archive also holds 130 transcription discs of the radio series , which it has released on youtube . see also . list of radio soaps yoo-hoo , mrs . goldberg list of programs broadcast by the dumont television network list of surviving dumont television network broadcasts . references . listen to . internet archive : the goldbergs webcast on gertrude berg , the paley center for media , '' from the goldbergs to 2005 : the evolution of the family sitcom '' ( november 16 , 2005 ) free otr : the goldbergs ( 59 episodes ) . external links . museum of broadcast communications : the goldbergs the remarkable gertrude berg : the goldbergs yoo-hoo , mrs . goldberg : documentary film on gertrude berg and the goldbergs ucla film & television archive goldberg page dumont historical website the goldbergs ( television program ) at imdb the goldbergs ( 1950 feature film ) at imdb presenting the goldbergs in living portraits ( page 19 ) -radio television mirror-august 1941