Yitzhak Shamir

early and personal life . yitzhak yezernitsky ( later yitzhak shamir ) was born in the predominantly jewish village of ruzhany , . grodno province , . russian empire ( now belarus ) , which after world war i returned to poland , as the son of perla and shlomo , owner of a leather factory . . those close to shamir noted that '' he often recalls his childhood and youth in belarus . '' shamir later moved to białystok , poland , and studied at a hebrew high school network . as a youth , he joined betar , the revisionist zionism youth movement . he studied law at the university of warsaw , but cut his studies short to immigrate to what was then mandatory palestine . obituary : former israeli prime minister yitzhak shamir shamir once stated that '' every pole sucked anti-semitism with his mother 's milk . '' the comment caused controversy within poland and was condemned . his parents and two sisters died during the holocaust . shamir claimed his father was killed just outside his birthplace in ruzhany by villagers who had been his childhood friends , after he had escaped from a german train transporting jews to the death camps , when shamir revealed how his parents and sisters were killed in the holocaust , 30 june 2012 , may 1989 : ‘ my father , shlomo ysernitzky , while seeking shelter among friends in the village where he grew up , they , his friends from childhood , killed him ’ : though this was never confirmed . one author suggests the location for shamir 's story was derechin , belarusian s.s.r . , but misspelt the name as '' derecyn '' and ignored the 1939 border change from poland ( the polish was '' dereczyn '' ) to the soviet union . ( see kati marton , a death in jerusalem , random house , 1994 p.102 ) his mother and a sister died in the concentration camps , and another sister was shot dead . when shamir revealed how his parents and sisters were killed in the holocaust the times of israel shamir once told ehud olmert that when his father , living under nazi occupation , had been informed that the extermination of the jews was imminent , his father had replied that '' i have a son in the land of israel , and he will exact my revenge on them '' . according to an obituary , he had dreamed of living in the land of israel since he was a boy , and felt immediately at home when he would eventually move there . in 1935 , shamir aliyah to palestine , where he worked in an accountant 's office . former israeli prime minister yitzhak shamir dies at 96 israel news haaretz daily newspaper he later adopted as his surname the name he used on a forged underground identity card , shamir . he told his wife this was because shamir means a thorn that stabs and a rock that can cut steel . in 1944 he married shulamit , . whom he met in a detention camp when she migrated to mandate palestine from bulgaria by boat in 1941 and was incarcerated because she entered the territory illegally . they had two children , yair and gilada . shulamit died on july 29 , 2011 . . zionist activism . shamir joined the irgun , a zionist paramilitary group that opposed british control of palestine . . when the irgun split in 1940 , shamir joined the more militant faction lehi , also known as the stern gang , headed by avraham stern . . shamir was imprisoned by british authorities in 1941 . a few months after stern was killed by the british in 1942 , shamir and eliyahu giladi hid under a stack of mattresses in a warehouse of the detention camp at mazra ' a , and at night escaped through the barbed wire fences of the camp . . shamir , together with giladi , anshell shpillman and yehoshua cohen , reorganized the movement into cells and trained its members . in his memoirs , shamir admitted in 1994 what had long been suspected : that the killing of giladi in 1943 was ordered by shamir himself , allegedly due to giladi advocating the assassination of david ben-gurion , and arguing for other violence deemed too extremist by fellow stern members . shamir memoirs say he ordered killing in 1943 in memoirs , shamir admits '43 killing in 1943 , he became one of the three leaders of the group , serving with nathan yellin-mor and israel eldad . shamir sought to emulate the anti-british struggle of the irish republicans and took the nickname '' michael '' after irish republican leader michael collins . . . shamir plotted the 1944 assassination of lord moyne , british minister for middle east affairs , and personally selected eliyahu hakim and eliyahu bet-zuri to carry it out . moyne had been targeted due to his perceived role as an architect of british restrictions on jewish immigration to palestine , and in particular , the patria disaster , which was blamed on him . in july 1946 , shamir was arrested . he had been walking in public in disguise and a british police sergeant , t.g . martin , recognized him by his bushy eyebrows . arrested , he was exiled to africa , and interned in eritrea by british mandatory authorities . lehi members subsequently tracked down and killed martin in september 1946 . marton , kati : a death in jerusalem martin , gus : the sage encyclopedia of terrorism , second edition on january 14 , 1947 , shamir and four irgun members escaped the sembel prison ( a british detention camp ) through a tunnel they had dug , 200 feet in length , and mayer malka of khartoum subsequently arranged for them to be hidden in an oil truck for three days as it was driven over the border to french somaliland . they were re-arrested by the french authorities , but shamir with malka 's assistance , was eventually allowed passage to france and granted political asylum . lehi sent him a forged passport , with which he entered israel after the israeli declaration of independence in 1948 . . . during the 1948 arab–israeli war , most of lehi 's members joined the newly formed israel defense forces . lehi formally disbanded on may 29 , 1948 . . however , the lehi group in jerusalem continued to function independently , outside government control . during a un-imposed truce , shamir , eldad , and yellin-mor authorized the assassination of the united nations representative in the middle east , count folke bernadotte , who was killed in september 1948 , when lehi gunmen ambushed his motorcade in jerusalem . lehi had feared that israel would agree to bernadotte 's peace proposals , which they considered disastrous , unaware that the provisional israeli government had already rejected a proposal by bernadotte the day before . the israeli provisional government drafted an ordinance for the prevention of terrorism and then invoked it to declare lehi a terrorist organisation , consequently rounding up 200 of its members for '' administrative detention '' ( prison ) . they were granted amnesty some months later and given a state pardon . . . anti-polonism . shamir publicly declared his animus for poles by stating that '' every pole sucked anti-semitism with his mother 's milk . '' shamir contradicted his spokesman , who attempted to keep the comment off the record , and insisted that he wanted his comment publicized . anshel pfeffer , haaretz , '' shamir was right about one thing '' the comment caused controversy within poland as being slanderous and libelous . furthermore , adam michnik addressed the comment by stating '' the stubborn categorization of poland as an anti-semitic nation was used in europe and america as an alibi for the western betrayal at yalta . the nation so categorized was seen as unworthy of sympathy , or of help , or of compassion . '' adam michnik , editor-in-chief , gazeta wyborcza , '' poland and the jews '' , a speech at central synagogue in new york . mossad . in the first years of israel 's independence , shamir managed several commercial enterprises . in 1955 , he joined the mossad , serving until 1965 . during his mossad career , he directed operation damocles , the assassinations of german rocket scientists working on the egyptian missile programme . he ran a unit that placed agents in hostile countries , created the mossad 's division for planning and served on its general staff . shamir resigned from the mossad in protest over the treatment of mossad director-general isser harel , who had been compelled to resign after prime minister david ben-gurion ordered an end to operation damocles . targeted killings - a retro fashion very much in vogue . political career . in 1969 , shamir joined the herut party headed by menachem begin and was first elected to the knesset in 1973 as a member of the likud . woolf , alex . the arab-israeli conflict . milwaukee , wi : world almanac library , 2004 . print . he became speaker of the knesset in 1977 , and foreign minister in 1980 which he remained until 1986 , concurrently serving as prime minister from october 1983 to september 1984 after begin 's resignation . prime minister . shamir had a reputation as a likud hard-liner . in 1977 he presided at the knesset visit of egyptian president anwar sadat . he abstained in the knesset votes to approve the camp david accords and the peace treaty with egypt . in 1981 and 1982 , as foreign minister , he guided negotiations with egypt to normalize relations after the treaty . following the 1982 lebanon war he directed negotiations which led to the may 17 agreement with lebanon , which did not materialize . his failure to stabilize israel 's inflationary economy and to suggest a solution to the quagmire of lebanon led to an indecisive election in 1984 , after which a national unity government was formed between his likud party and the alignment led by shimon peres . as part of the agreement , peres held the post of prime minister until september 1986 , when shamir took over . as he prepared to reclaim the office of prime minister , shamir 's hard-line image appeared to moderate . however shamir remained reluctant to change the status quo in israel 's relations with its arab neighbors , and blocked peres 's initiative to promote a regional peace conference as agreed in 1987 with king hussein of jordan in what has become known as the london agreement . re-elected in 1988 , shamir and peres formed a new coalition government until '' the dirty trick '' of 1990 , when the alignment left the government , leaving shamir with a narrow right-wing coalition . shamir urged the us government to stop granting refugee visas to soviet jews , persuading it that they were not refugees because they already had a homeland in israel , and were only moving to the united states for economic reasons . he also termed the emigration of soviet jews to the united states rather than to israel '' defection '' , and called the issuing of us refugee visas to soviet jews when israel was already willing to take them in '' an insult to israel '' . in 1989 , 1990s post-soviet aliyah began from the soviet union after the soviets allowed their jewish population to emigrate freely . in october of that year , the us agreed to his requests , and stopped issuing refugee visas to soviet emigrants . subsequently , israel became the main destination of soviet jewish emigrants . over one million soviet immigrants would subsequently arrive in israel , many of whom would have likely gone to the united states had shamir not pressed the us government to change its policy . during the gulf war , iraq fired scud missiles at israel , many of which struck population centers . iraq hoped to provoke israeli retaliation and thus alienate arab members of the united states-assembled coalition against iraq . shamir deployed israeli air force jets to patrol the northern airspace with iraq . however , after united states and netherlands deployed patriot antimissile batteries to protect israel , and us and british special forces began hunting for scuds , shamir responded to american calls for restraint , recalled the jets , and agreed not to retaliate . during his term , shamir reestablished diplomatic relations between israel and several dozen african , asian and other countries . in may 1991 , as the ethiopian government of mengistu haile mariam was collapsing , shamir ordered the airlifting of 14,000 beta israel , known as operation solomon . he continued his efforts , begun in the late 1960s , to bring soviet jewish refugees to israel . shamir restored diplomatic relation between the soviet union and israel in october 1991 , and following its dissolution , established relations between israel and his native belarus in may 1992 . joffe , emmanuel , the man from ruzhany , belarus , served in the mossad and was the prime minister of israel , vecherny minsk october 17 , 2005 ( monday ) . № 235 ( 10911 ) shamir was dedicated to bringing jews from all over the world to israel , and called on american jews to emigrate to israel in spite of a higher standard of living in the us , saying that he expected even american jewish youth to realize that '' man does not live by bread alone '' but to '' learn and understand jewish history , the bible . and reach the only conclusion : to come on aliya to israel . '' relations with the us were strained in the period after the war over the madrid peace talks , which shamir opposed . as a result , us president george h.w . bush was reluctant to approve loan guarantees to help absorb immigrants from the former soviet union . finally shamir gave in and in october 1991 participated in the madrid talks . his narrow , right-wing government collapsed : the participation of palestinians in the elections from the west bank and gaza , was mandated by law . new elections were necessarily called . electoral defeat and retirement . shamir was defeated by yitzhak rabin 's labour in the 1992 election . he stepped down from the likud leadership in march 1993 , but remained a member of the knesset until the 1996 election . for some time , shamir was a critic of his likud successor , benjamin netanyahu , as being too indecisive in dealing with the arabs . shamir went so far as to resign from the likud in 1998 and endorse herut , a right-wing splinter movement led by benny begin , which later joined the national union during the 1999 election . after netanyahu was defeated , shamir returned to the likud fold and supported ariel sharon in the 2001 election . subsequently , in his late eighties , shamir ceased making public comments . illness and death . in 2004 , shamir 's health declined , with the progression of his alzheimer 's disease , and he was moved to a nursing home . the government turned down a request by the family to finance his stay at the facility . . shamir died on the morning of june 30 , 2012 , at a nursing home in tel aviv where he had spent the last few years as a result of the alzheimer 's disease he had suffered since the mid-1990s . he was given a state funeral , which took place on july 2 at mount herzl , jerusalem , and was buried beside his wife , shulamit , who had died the previous year . as his body was lying in state speaker of the knesset reuven rivlin laid a wreath on his coffin and said : . shamir was buried at mount herzl . reactions . israeli president shimon peres said that '' yitzhak shamir was a brave warrior for israel , before and after its inception . he was a great patriot and his enormous contribution will be forever etched in our chronicles . he was loyal to his beliefs and he served his country with the utmost dedication for decades . may he rest in peace . '' prime minister benjamin netanyahu 's office issued a statement upon hearing of his death that read : '' shamir led israel with a deep loyalty to the nation . the prime minister expresses his deep pain over the announcement of the departure of yitzhak shamir . he was part of a marvelous generation which created the state of israel and struggled for the jewish people . '' this was despite previous feuds between the two once-likud members . . he was also mourned in the knesset . . foreign minister avigdor lieberman added that shamir '' contributed greatly to the foundation of the state , which he served his entire life with loyalty and unwavering dedication . he set an example in each position that he held . i had the privilege to be personally acquainted with shamir , and i will always remember him and his great contribution to the state ; '' while defense minister ehud barak said : '' his whole life , shamir was as stable as granite and maintained focus without compromises . he always strived to ensure israel 's freedom . his devotion knew no bounds and he always sought what 's right for the people of israel and for the country 's security . '' leader of the opposition and labor party head shelly yachimovich offered her condolences to shamir 's family saying that '' he was a determined prime minister who dedicated his life to the state . he followed his ideological path honestly and humbly , as a leader should . the citizens of israel will always remember the wisdom he demonstrated during the first gulf war . he showed restraint and saved israel from undue entanglement in the iraq war . this decision proved to be a brave and wise act of leadership . '' his daughter gilada diamant said : my father belonged to a different generation of leaders , people with values and beliefs . i hope that we have more people like him in the future . his political doing has undoubtedly left its mark on the state of israel . dad was an amazing man , a family man in the fullest sense of the word , a man who dedicated himself to the state of israel but never forgot his family , not even for a moment . he was a special man . . . awards and recognition . in 2001 , shamir received the israel prize , for his lifetime achievements and special contribution to society and the state of israel . . . . . published works . he wrote sikumo shel davar , a book which was published in english by weidenfeld and nicolson , london , as summing up : an autobiography ( 1994 ) . 1994 . see also . list of israel prize recipients . references . bibliography . . external links . - - -