Feeling

distinguishing feelings from emotions . the neuroscientist antonio damasio , distinguishes between emotions and feelings , respectively : the mental images ( i.e . representing either internal or external states of reality ) and the bodily changes accompanying them , vs . the perception of bodily changes . . feelings about feelings . individuals in society predict that something will give them a certain desired outcome or feeling . indulging in what one might have thought would 've made them happy or excited might only cause a temporary thrill , or it might result in the opposite of what was expected and wanted . events and experiences are done and relived to satisfy one 's feelings . details and information about the past is used to make decisions , as past experiences of feelings tend to influence current decision-making , how people will feel in the future , and if they want to feel that way again . gilbert and wilson conducted a study to show how pleased a person would feel if they purchased flowers for themselves for no specific reason ( birthday , anniversary , or promotion etc . ) and how long they thought that feeling would last . people who had no experience of purchasing flowers for themselves and those who had experienced buying flowers for themselves were tested . results showed that those who had purchased flowers in the past for themselves felt happier and that feeling lasted longer for them than for a person who had never experienced purchasing flowers for themselves . arlie russell hochschild , a sociologist , depicted two accounts of emotion . the organismic emotion is the outburst of emotions and feelings . in organismic emotion , emotions/feelings are instantly expressed . social and other factors do not influence how the emotion is perceived , so these factors have no control on how or if the emotion is suppressed or expressed . in interactive emotion , emotions and feelings are controlled . the individual is constantly considering how to react or what to suppress . in interactive emotion , unlike in organismic emotion , the individual is aware of their decision on how they feel and how they show it . erving goffman , a sociologist and writer , compared how actors withheld their emotions to the everyday individual . like actors , individuals can control how emotions are expressed , but they can not control their inner emotions or feelings . inner feelings can only be suppressed in order to achieve the expression one wants people to see on the outside . goffman explains that emotions and emotional experience are an ongoing thing that an individual is consciously and actively working through . individuals want to conform to society with their inner and outer feelings . . self-harm . anger , happiness , joy , stress , and excitement are some of the feelings that can be experienced in life . in response to these emotions , our bodies react as well . for example , nervousness can lead to the sensation of knots in the stomach . feelings can lead to harm . when an individual is dealing with an overwhelming amount of stress and problems in their lives , it can lead to self-harm . when one is in a good state of feeling , they never want it to end ; conversely , when someone is in a bad state , they want that feeling to disappear . inflicting harm or pain to oneself is sometimes the answer for many individuals because they want something to keep their mind off the real problem . these individuals cut , stab , and starve themselves in an effort to feel something other than what they currently feel , as they believe the pain to be not as bad as their actual problem . distraction is not the only reason why many individuals choose to inflict self-harm . some people inflict self-harm to punish themselves for feeling a certain way . . visceral sensations . gut . a gut feeling , or gut reaction , is a visceral emotional reaction to something . it may be negative , such as a feeling of uneasiness , or positive , such as a feeling of trust . gut feelings are generally regarded as not modulated by conscious thought , but sometimes as a feature of intuition rather than rationality . the idea that emotions are experienced in the gut has a long historical legacy , and many nineteenth-century doctors considered the origins of mental illness to derive from the intestines . manon mathias and alison m . moore ( eds ) , gut feeling and digestive health in nineteenth-century literature , history and culture . new york : palgrave , 2018 . : the phrase '' gut feeling '' may also be used as a shorthand term for an individual 's '' common sense '' perception of what is considered '' the right thing to do '' , such as helping an injured passerby , avoiding dark alleys and generally acting in accordance with instinctive feelings about a given situation . it can also refer to simple common knowledge phrases which are true no matter when said , such as '' water is wet '' or '' fire is hot '' , or to ideas that an individual intuitively regards as true ( see '' truthiness '' for examples ) . heart . the heart has a collection of ganglia that is called the '' intrinsic cardiac nervous system '' . . feelings of certainty . the way that we see other people express their emotions or feelings determines how we respond . the way an individual responds to a situation is based on feeling rules . if an individual is uninformed about a situation the way they respond would be in a completely different demeanor than if they were informed about a situation . for example , if a tragic event had occurred and they had knowledge of it , their response would be sympathetic to that situation . if they had no knowledge of the situation , then their response may be indifference . a lack of knowledge or information about an event can shape the way an individual sees things and the way they respond . timothy d . wilson , a psychology professor , tested this theory of the feeling of uncertainty along with his colleague yoav bar-anan , a social psychologist . wilson and bar-ann found that the more uncertain or unclear an individual is about a situation , the more invested they are . since an individual does not know the background or the ending of a story they are constantly replaying an event in their mind which is causing them to have mixed feelings of happiness , sadness , excitement , and et cetera . if there is any difference between feelings and emotions , the feeling of uncertainty is less sure than the emotion of ambivalence : the former is precarious , the latter is not yet acted upon or decided upon . the neurologist robert burton , writes in his book on being certain , that feelings of certainty may stem from involuntary mental sensations , much like emotions or perceptual recognition ( another example might be the tip of the tongue phenomenon ) . individuals in society want to know every detail about something in hopes to maximize the feeling for that moment , but wilson found that feeling uncertain can lead to something being more enjoyable because it has a sense of mystery . in fact , the feeling of not knowing can lead them to constantly think and feel about what could have been . . emotion work . there are two main types of emotion work : evocation and suppression . evocation is used to obtain or bring up a certain feeling and suppression is used to put away or hide certain unwanted feelings . emotion work is done by an individual , others upon them , or them upon others . emotion work is done to achieve a certain feeling that one believes they should feel . three more specific types of emotion work are cognitive , bodily , and expressive . cognitive changes images , bodily changes physical aspects , and expressive changes gestures . a person who is sad uses expressive emotion work to lift their spirits by trying to smile . a person who is stressed uses bodily emotion work by trying to breathe slower in order to lower stress levels . emotion work allows individuals to change their feelings to suit the current situation . feelings are deemed appropriate if they fit the current situation . since individuals want to fit in and be seen as normal , they are constantly working on their feelings in order to fit the situation . emotion work is more so how people want to feel or how they want other people to see them feel . feelings are not permanent , but an ongoing thing because people constantly try to bring up , suppress , or manage feelings . the '' psychophysiology flow '' , as ikemi points out , ikemi , akira ( 2005 ) , carl rogers and eugene gendlin on the bodily felt sense : what they share and where they differ , in : person-centered and experiential psychotherapies , vol 4 , n . 1 is a concept created by carl rogers , founder of the humanistic psychology school , to describe the 'sensory and visceral experiences ' , or the flow of internal sensations that the individual can perceive . social class . class differences influence and varies how a parent raises their child . middle-class parents raise their child through the use of feelings and underclass parents raise their children through behavior control . middle-class parents and lower-class parents raise their children to be like them feeling and behavioral wise . middle-class children get reprimanded for feeling the wrong way and lower-class children are punished for behaving badly . lionel trilling , an author and literary critic , described the technique that the middle- and the lower-class parents use . under-working and overworking their children 's feelings causes them to seek approval of their feelings in the future . when children of lower-class and of working-class families join the workforce , they are less prepared for emotional management than middle-class children . however , the working-class and the middle-class tend to complain of over-management or micromanagement of feelings that distract them from actual work .