Carl Auer von Welsbach

early life . carl auer was born in vienna on 1 september 1858 to therese neuditschka and alois auer . he was the youngest of four siblings : leopoldine , alois , amalie and carl . alois , ennobled in 1860 , was director of the imperial printing office ( k.-k . hof- und staatsdruckerei ) in the days of the austrian empire . carl went to high schools in mariahilf and josefstadt . he attended the realschule josefstadt from 1873 to 1877 , matriculating on july 16 , 1877 . next he joined the austro-hungarian army for one year of voluntary military service . he was commissioned as a second lieutenant . he joined on october 1 , 1877 , and received his patent as a lieutenant on december 15 , 1878 . in 1878 auer entered the university of vienna , studying mathematics , general chemistry , engineering physics , and thermodynamics . he then moved to the university of heidelberg in 1880 , where he continued his studies in spectroscopy under the direction of robert bunsen , ( inventor of the bunsen burner ) . in 1882 he received his degree of ph.d . and returned to vienna to work as an unpaid assistant in professor adolf lieben 's laboratory , working with chemical separation methods for investigations on rare-earth elements . . rare earths . neodymium and praseodymium . in 1885 , auer von welsbach used a method of fractional crystallization that he had developed himself to separate the alloy didymium into its two parts , for the first time . it had previously been believed to be an element . after 167 crystallizations , auer von welsbach differentiated it into two colored salts : he named the green colored salt '' praseodymium '' and the pink one '' neodidymium '' . he announced his achievement to the vienna academy of sciences on 18 june 1885 . his achievement was approved by bunsen , but met with considerable skepticism from others . the name '' neodidymium '' is derived from the greek words neos ( νέος ) , new , and didymos ( διδύμος ) , twin . the name praseodymium comes from the greek prasinos ( πράσινος ) , meaning '' green '' . in naming both elements , and not leaving the original name didymium to the more-abundant component , auer von welsbach diverged from established practice , which was to give a new name only to the less-abundant component . nonetheless , his name for the major fraction , neodidymium , after some modification , became the name of the element neodymium . praseodymium was also accepted as the name of the minor fraction . . lutetium and ytterbium . the rare earth element lutetium was independently discovered by three scientists at around the same time in 1907 : french scientist georges urbain , austrian auer von welsbach , and american charles james . all three were successful in separating the substance then known as ytterbium into two new fractions . to name the newly discovered fraction , urbain suggested the name '' lutecium '' , for the roman city of lutetia that preceded paris . auer von welsbach suggested the name '' cassiopeium '' . james ' work was not yet published when the other 's work appeared , and he did not involve himself in subsequent disputes . lutetium , a slight modification of urbain 's name , was eventually accepted after a long battle between urbain and welsbach . . lighting innovations . gas mantle . thumb on 23 september 1885 , auer von welsbach received a patent on his development of the gas mantle , which he called auerlicht , using a chemical mixture of 60 % magnesium oxide , 20 % lanthanum oxide and 20 % yttrium oxide , which he called actinophor . to produce a mantle , guncotton is impregnated with a mixture of actinophor and then heated , the cotton eventually burns away , leaving a solid ( albeit fragile ) ash , which glows brightly when heated . these original mantles gave off a green-tinted light and were not very successful , and his first company formed to sell them failed in 1889 . in 1890 he introduced a new form of the mantle based on a mixture of 99 % thorium dioxide and 1 % cerium ( iv ) oxide , which he developed in collaboration with his colleague ludwig haitinger . these proved both more robust and having a much '' whiter '' light . another company founded to produce the newer design was formed in 1891 , working with fellow student from the university ignaz kreidl , and the device quickly spread throughout europe . in the united states this technique was adopted by the coleman company and became their logo for the company . in the 1980s it was reported that thorium 's radio-daughters ( decay products ) could be volatilized and released into the air upon incandescence of the mantle . a lawsuit ( wagner v . coleman ) was brought against coleman . the company changed its formulation to use non-radioactive materials , which apparently cost less and last longer . . metal-filament light bulb . auer von welsbach then started work on development of metal-filament mantles , first with platinum wiring , and then osmium . osmium is very difficult to work with , but he developed a new method , which mixed osmium oxide powder with rubber or sugar into a paste , which is then squeezed through a nozzle and fired . the paste burns away , leaving a fine wire of osmium . although originally intended to be a new mantle , it was during this period that electricity was being introduced into the market , and he started experimenting with ways to use the filaments as a replacement for the electric arc lamp . he worked on this until finally developing a workable technique in 1898 and started a new factory to produce his auer-oslight , which he introduced commercially in 1902 . the metal-filament light bulb was a huge improvement on the existing carbon-filament designs , lasting much longer , using about half the electricity for the same amount of light , and being much more robust . . lighting flint . in 1903 auer von welsbach won another patent for a fire striker ( '' flint '' ) composition named ferrocerium . it takes its name from its two primary components : iron ( from , and the rare-earth element cerium . it is also known in europe as '' auermetall '' after its inventor . three different auermetalls were developed : the first was iron and cerium , the second also included lanthanum to produce brighter sparks , and the third added other heavy metals . in auer von welsbach 's first alloy , 30 % iron ( ferrum ) was added to purified cerium , hence the name '' ferro-cerium '' . van weert , ad , joop bromet , alice van weert ( 1995 ) . the legend of the lighter . new york : abbeville press , p . 45 . welsbach 's flints consisted of pyrophoric alloys , 70 % cerium and 30 % iron , which when scratched or struck would give off sparks . this system remains in wide use in lighters today . in 1907 he formed treibacher chemische werke gesmbh to build and market the devices . . radium research . for the rest of his life auer von welsbach turned again to '' pure '' chemistry . he worked largely on his estate at welsbach castle ( schloß welsbach ) near treibach near althofen . in addition to his work on elements and minerals , he made advances in the development of photographic techniques . he was also a devoted gardener , carefully supporting rare and difficult-to-grow plants in his garden , and breeding new varieties of roses and apple trees . he published a number of papers on chemical separation and spectroscopy , working on radioactive elements as early as 1904 . in 1910 , one of his companies helped to establish vienna as a center of radiation research by producing the first major quantity of radium chloride ( 3-4 grams ) in europe . in 1910 , auer von welsbach reported a '' mysterious observation '' , the induction of radioactivity in an inactive substance when exposed to a radioactive substance . based on his report , it is possible that he may have been the first to observe neutron activation . between 1907 and 1918 , auer von welsbach focused on isolating preparations of actinium and thorium as by-products of radium extraction . he kept up an active correspondence with physicist stefan meyer , managing director of the institute for radium research , vienna , to discuss the extraction of actinium . meyer and his staff do not appear to have had the chemical knowledge to understand auer von welsbach 's methods , and auer von welsbach resigned around 1917 . during world war i , he had difficulty finding staff to carry out research . after the war , he was active in supporting the work of the institute , and other scientists . he presented a major paper on his spectroscopic work and the separation of radioactive elements in 1922 . the following photographs show scientific equipment from auer von welsbach 's laboratory , from '' spektroskopische methoden der analytischen chemie '' ( 1922 ) . file : welsbach figure 1 spektroskopische-lytischen-chemie-18.pdf figure i , early version of spark apparatus file : welsbach figure ii spektroskopische-lytischen-chemie-19.pdf figure ii , later version of spark apparatus file : welsbach figure iii spektroskopische-lytischen-chemie-20.pdf figure iii file : welsbach figure iv spektroskopische-lytischen-chemie-21.pdf figure iv , spectral comparison panel in very reduced scale file : welsbach figure v spektroskopische-lytischen-chemie-22.pdf figure v , comparative apparatus for spectra . commemoration . in 2008 ( 150 years after his birth ) auer von welsbach was selected as a main motif for a high-value collectors ' coin : the austrian €25 fascination light . the reverse has a partial portrait of auer on the left-hand side . the sun shines in the middle of the green niobium pill , while several methods of illumination from the gas light from incandescent light bulbs and neon lamps to modern light-emitting diodes spread out around the silver ring . he was also depicted on postage stamps of 1936 , carl auer von welsbach , postage stamp 1936 , colnect 1954 5th memorial anniversary of dr . carl auer-welsbach , postage stamp 1954 , colnect and 2012 . sammler- und geschenksideen , postage stamp 2012 . awards and honors . 1900 , elliott cresson medal , the franklin institute awards , philadelphia , pa , usa 1901 , raised to the hereditary nobility by franz joseph i of austria , with the title of freiherr von welsbach 1920 , werner von siemens ring 1921 , wilhelm exner medal , inaugural awardee , austrian industry association , austria 1988 , the welsbach museum at althofen was opened in april , 1998 2011 , national inventors hall of fame , north canton , ohio , usa