Old Kingdom of Egypt

history . rise of the old kingdom . the first king of the old kingdom was djoser ( sometime between 2691 and 2625 bc ) of the third dynasty , who ordered the construction of a pyramid ( the step pyramid ) in memphis ' necropolis , saqqara . an important person during the reign of djoser was his vizier , imhotep . it was in this era that formerly independent ancient egyptian states became known as nomes , under the rule of the king . the former rulers were forced to assume the role of governors or otherwise work in tax collection . egyptians in this era worshiped their pharaoh as a god , believing that he ensured the annual flooding of the nile that was necessary for their crops . egyptian views on the nature of time during this period held that the universe worked in cycles , and the pharaoh on earth worked to ensure the stability of those cycles . they also perceived themselves as a specially selected people . . height of the old kingdom . the old kingdom and its royal power reached a zenith under the fourth dynasty ( 2613–2494 bc ) , which began with sneferu ( 2613–2589 bc ) . after djoser , pharaoh sneferu was the next great pyramid builder . sneferu commissioned the building of not one , but three pyramids . the first is called the meidum pyramid , named for its location in egypt . sneferu abandoned it after the outside casing fell off of the pyramid . the meidum pyramid was the first to have an above-ground burial chamber . using more stones than any other pharaoh , he built the three pyramids : a now collapsed pyramid in meidum , the bent pyramid at dahshur , and the red pyramid , at north dahshur . however , the full development of the pyramid style of building was reached not at saqqara , but during the building of 'the great pyramids ' at giza . carl roebuck ( 1984 ) , the world of ancient times , p . 57 . sneferu was succeeded by his son , khufu ( 2589–2566 bc ) , who built the great pyramid of giza . after khufu 's death , his sons djedefre ( 2566–2558 bc ) and khafre ( 2558–2532 bc ) may have quarrelled . the latter built the second pyramid and ( in traditional thinking ) the great sphinx of giza . recent re-examination of evidence has led egyptologist vassil dobrev to propose that the sphinx had been built by djedefra as a monument to his father khufu . vassil dobrev , french institute , cairo , link 1 , link 2 alternatively , the sphinx has been proposed to be the work of khafre and khufu himself . there were military expeditions into canaan and nubia , with egyptian influence reaching up the nile into what is today the sudan . p.5 , the collins encyclopedia of military history ( 4th edition , 1993 ) , dupuy & dupuy . the later kings of the fourth dynasty were king menkaure ( 2532–2504 bc ) , who built the smallest pyramid in giza , shepseskaf ( 2504–2498 bc ) and , perhaps , djedefptah ( 2498–2496 bc ) . fifth dynasty . the fifth dynasty ( 2494–2345 bc ) began with userkaf ( 2494–2487 bc ) and was marked by the growing importance of the cult of sun god ra . consequently , fewer efforts were devoted to the construction of pyramid complexes than during the fourth dynasty and more to the construction of sun temples in abusir . userkaf was succeeded by his son sahure ( 2487–2475 bc ) , who commanded an expedition to punt . sahure was in turn succeeded by neferirkare kakai ( 2475–2455 bc ) , who was sahure 's son . neferirkare introduced the prenomen in the royal titulary . he was followed by two short-lived kings , his son neferefre ( 2455–2453 & nbsp ; bc ) and shepseskare , the latter of uncertain parentage . miroslav verner : archaeological remarks on the 4th and 5th dynasty chronology , archiv orientální , volume 69 : 2001 shepseskare may have been deposed by neferefre 's brother nyuserre ini ( 2445–2421 bc ) , a long lived pharaoh who built extensively in abusir and restarted royal activity in giza . the last pharaohs of the dynasty were menkauhor kaiu ( 2421–2414 bc ) , djedkare isesi ( 2414–2375 bc ) and unas ( 2375–2345 ) , the earliest ruler to have the pyramid texts inscribed in his pyramid . egypt 's expanding interests in trade goods such as ebony , incense such as myrrh and frankincense , gold , copper and other useful metals inspired the ancient egyptians to build suitable ships for navigation of the open sea . they traded with lebanon for cedar and travelled the length of the red sea to the kingdom of punt—possibly modern day somalia—for ebony , ivory and aromatic resins . ship builders of that era did not use pegs ( treenails ) or metal fasteners , but relied on rope to keep their ships assembled . planks and the superstructure were tightly tied and bound together . decline into the first intermediate period . during the sixth dynasty ( 2345–2181 bc ) the power of pharaoh gradually weakened in favor of powerful nomarchs ( regional governors ) . these no longer belonged to the royal family and their charge became hereditary , thus creating local dynasties largely independent from the central authority of the pharaoh . however , nile flood control was still the subject of very large works , including especially the canal to lake moeris around 2300 bc , which was likely also the source of water to the giza pyramid complex centuries earlier . internal disorders set in during the incredibly long reign of pepi ii ( 2278–2184 bc ) towards the end of the dynasty . his death , certainly well past that of his intended heirs , might have created succession struggles . the country slipped into civil wars mere decades after the close of pepi ii 's reign . the final blow was the 22nd century bc drought in the region that resulted in a drastic drop in precipitation . for at least some years between 2200 and 2150 bc , this prevented the normal flooding of the nile . whatever its cause , the collapse of the old kingdom was followed by decades of famine and strife . an important inscription on the tomb of ankhtifi , a nomarch during the early first intermediate period , describes the pitiful state of the country when famine stalked the land . art . the most defining feature of art of ancient egypt is its function , as that was the entire purpose of creation . art was not made for enjoyment in the strictest sense , but rather served a role of some kind in egyptian religion and ideology . this fact manifests itself in the artistic style , even as it evolved over the dynasties . the three primary principles of that style , frontality , composite composition , and hierarchy scale , illustrates this quite well . these characteristics , initiated in the early dynastic period and solidified during the old kingdom , persisted with some adaptability throughout the entirety of ancient egyptian history as the foundation of its art . frontality , the first principle , indicates that art was viewed directly from the front . one was meant to approach a piece as they would a living individual , for it was meant to be a place of manifestation . the act of interaction would bring forth the divine entity represented in the art . it was therefore imperative that whomever was represented be as identifiable as possible . the guide lines developed in the old kingdom and the later grid system developed in the middle kingdom ensured that art was axial , symmetrical , proportional , and most importantly reproducible and therefore recognizable . composite composition , the second principle , also contributes to the goal of identification . multiple perspective were used in order to ensure that the onlooker could determine precisely what they saw . though egyptian art almost always includes descriptive text , literacy rates were not high , so the art gave another method for communicating the same information . one of the best examples of composite composition is the human form . in most two-dimensional relief , the head , legs , and feet are seen in profile , while the torso faces directly front . another common example is an aerial view of a building or location . the third principle , hierarchy of scale , illustrates relative importance in society . the larger the figure , the more important the individual . the king is usually the largest , aside from deities . similarity in size equated similarity in position . however , this is not to say that physical differences were n't shown as well . women , for example , are usually shown as smaller than men . children retain adult features and proportions , but are substantially smaller in size . aside from the three primary conventions , there are several characteristics that can help date a piece to a particular time frame . proportions of the human figure are one of the most distinctive , as they vary between kingdoms . old kingdom male figures have characteristically broad shoulders and a long torso , with obvious musculature . on the other hand , females are narrower in the shoulders and waist , with longer legs and a shorter torso . however , in the sixth dynasty , the male figures lose their muscularity and their shoulders narrow . eye also tend to get much larger . in order to help maintain the consistency of these proportions , the egyptians used a series of eight guidelines to divide the body . they occurred at the following locations : the top of the head , the hairline , the base of the neck , the underarms , the tip of the elbow or the bottom of the ribcage , the top of the thigh at the bottom of the buttocks , the knee , and the middle of the lower leg . from the soles of the feet to the hairline was also divided into thirds , one-third between the soles and the knee , another third between the knee and the elbow , and the final third from the elbow to the hairline . the broad shoulders that appeared in the fifth dynasty constituted roughly that one-third length as well . these proportions not only help with the identification of representations and the reproduction of art , but also tie into the egyptian ideal of order , which tied into the solar aspect of their religion and the inundations of the nile . though the above concepts apply to most , if not all , figures in egyptian art , there are additional characteristics that applied to the representations of the king . their appearance was not an exact rendering of the king 's visage , though kings are somewhat identifiable through looks alone . identification could be supplied by inscriptions or context . a huge , more important part of a king 's portrayal was about the ideal of the office of kingship , which were dependent on the time period . the old kingdom was considered a golden age for egypt , a grandiose height to which all future kingdoms aspired . as such , the king was portrayed as young vital , with features that agreed with the standards of beauty of the time . the musculature seen in male figures was also applied to kings . a royal rite , the jubilee run which was established during the old kingdom , involved the king running around a group of markers that symbolized the geographic borders of egypt . this was meant to be a demonstration of the king 's physical vigor , which determined his capacity to continue his reign . this idea of kingly youth and strength were pervasive in the old kingdom and thus shown in the art . sculpture was a major product of the old kingdom . the position of the figures in this period was mostly limited to sitting or standing , either with feet together or in the striding pose . group statues of the king with either gods or family members , typically his wife and children , were also common . it was not just the subject of sculpture that was important , but also the material : the use of hard stone , such as gneiss , graywacke , schist , and granite , was relatively common in the old kingdom . the color of the stone had a great deal of symbolism and was chosen deliberately . four colors were distinguished in the ancient egyptian language : black , green , red , and white . black was associated with egypt due to the color of the soil after the nile flood , green with vegetation and rebirth , red with the sun and its regenerative cycle , and white with purity . the statue of menkaure with hathor and anput is an example of a typical old kingdom sculpture . the three figures display frontality and axiality , while fitting with the proportions of this time period . the graywacke came from the eastern desert in egypt and is therefore associated with rebirth and the rising of the sun in the east . references . further reading . brewer , douglas j . ancient egypt : foundations of a civilization . harlow , uk : pearson , 2005 . callender , gae . egypt in the old kingdom : an introduction . south melbourne : longman , 1998 . kanawati , naguib . governmental reforms in old kingdom egypt . warminster : aris & phillips , 1980 . kanawati , naguib . , and alexandra woods . artists of the old kingdom : techniques and achievements . 1st english ed . egypt : supreme council of antiquities press , 2009 . lehner , mark . the complete pyramids . london : thames and hudson , 1997 . málek , jaromír . , and werner forman . in the shadow of the pyramids : ancient egypt during the old kingdom . norman : university of oklahoma press , 1986 . mcfarlane , a . , and anna-latifa mourad . behind the scenes : daily life in old kingdom egypt . north ryde , n.s.w . : australian centre for egyptology , 2012 . metropolitan museum of art . egyptian art in the age of the pyramids . new york : metropolitan museum of art , 1999 . papazian , hratch . domain of pharaoh : the structure and components of the economy of old kingdom egypt . hildesheim : gerstenberg , 2012 . ryholt , kim s . b . the political situation in egypt during the second intermediate period c . 1800–1550 bc . copenhagen : museum tusculanum , 1997 . sowada , k . , and peter grave . egypt in the eastern mediterranean during the old kingdom : an archaeological perspective . fribourg : academic press , 2009 . strudwick , nigel . the administration of egypt in the old kingdom : the highest titles and their holders . london : kpi , 1985 . warden , leslie anne . pottery and economy in old kingdom egypt . boston : brill , 2013 . wilkinson , toby . early dynastic egypt . london : routledge , 2001 . external links . the fall of the egyptian old kingdom from bbc history middle east on the matrix : egypt , the old kingdom – photographs of many of the historic sites dating from the old kingdom old kingdom of egypt- aldokkan