Ostinato

classical music . ostinati are used in 20th-century music to stabilize groups of pitches , as in stravinsky 's the rite of spring introduction and augurs of spring . a famous type of ostinato , called the rossini crescendo , owes its name to a crescendo that underlies a persistent musical pattern , which usually culminates in a solo vocal cadenza . this style was emulated by other bel canto composers , especially vincenzo bellini ; and later by wagner ( in pure instrumental terms , discarding the closing vocal cadenza ) . applicable in homophonic and contrapuntal textures , they are '' repetitive rhythmic-harmonic schemes '' , more familiar as accompanimental melodies , or purely rhythmic . delone , richard ( 1975 ) . '' timbre and texture in twentieth-century music '' , aspects of 20th century music , p . 123 . wittlich , gary ( ed . ) . englewood cliffs , new jersey : prentice-hall . the technique 's appeal to composers from debussy to avant-garde composers until at least the 1970s '' . lies in part in the need for unity created by the virtual abandonment of functional chord progressions to shape phrases and define tonality '' . similarly , in modal music , '' . relentless , repetitive character help to establish and confirm the modal center '' . their popularity may also be justified by their ease as well as range of use , though , '' . ostinato must be employed judiciously , as its overuse can quickly lead to monotony '' . . medieval . ostinato patterns have been present in european music from the middle ages onwards . in the famous english canon '' sumer is icumen in '' , the main vocal lines are underpinned by an ostinato pattern , known as a pes : later in the medieval era , guillaume dufay 's 15th-century chanson resvelons nous features a similarly constructed ostinato pattern , but this time 5 bars long . over this , the main melodic line moves freely , varying the phrase-lengths , while being '' to some extent predetermined by the repeating pattern of the canon in the lower two voices . '' fallows , d . ( 1982 , p . 89 ) . dufay . london , dent . . ground bass : late renaissance and baroque . ground bass or basso ostinato ( obstinate bass ) is a type of variation form in which a bass line , or harmonic pattern ( see chaconne ; also common in elizabethan england as grounde ) is repeated as the basis of a piece underneath variations . bartlette , christopher , and steven g . laitz ( 2010 ) . graduate review of tonal theory . new york : oxford university press , p . 230 aaron copland copland , aaron and rich , alan ( 2002 ) . what to listen for in music , p . 117 . describes basso ostinato as '' . the easiest to recognize '' of the variation forms wherein , '' . a long phrase—either an accompanimental figure or an actual melody—is repeated over and over again in the bass part , while the upper parts proceed normally with variation '' . however , he cautions , '' it might more properly be termed a musical device than a musical form . '' one striking ostinato instrumental piece of the late renaissance period is '' the bells '' , a piece for virginals by william byrd . here the ostinato ( or 'ground ' ) consists of just two notes : in italy , during the seventeenth century , claudio monteverdi composed many pieces using ostinato patterns in his operas and sacred works . one of these was his 1650 version of '' laetatus sum '' , an imposing setting of psalm 122 that pits a four-note '' ostinato of unquenchable energy . '' stevens , d ( 1978 , p81 ) monteverdi : sacred , secular and occasional music . new jersey , associated university presses . against both voices and instruments : later in the same century , henry purcell became famous for his skilful deployment of ground bass patterns . his most famous ostinato is the descending chromatic ground bass that underpins the aria '' when i am laid in earth '' ( '' dido 's lament '' ) at the end of his opera dido and aeneas : . however , this is not the only ostinato pattern that purcell uses in the opera . dido 's opening aria '' ah , belinda '' is a further demonstration of purcell 's technical mastery : the phrases of the vocal line do not always coincide with the four-bar ground : '' purcell 's compositions over a ground vary in their working out , and the repetition never becomes a restriction . '' harris , ellen t . ( 1987 , p108 ) henry purcell 's dido and aeneas . oxford , clarendon press . purcell 's instrumental music also featured ground patterns . a particularly fine and complex example is his fantasia upon a ground for three violins and continuo : the intervals in the above pattern are found in many works of the baroque period . pachelbel 's canon also uses a similar sequence of notes in the bass part : two pieces by j.s.bach are particularly striking for their use of an ostinato bass : the crucifixus from his mass in b minor and the passacaglia in c minor for organ , which has a ground rich in melodic intervals : a performance of the entire piece can be heard here . late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries . ostinatos feature in many works of the late 18th and early 19th centuries . mozart uses an ostinato phrase throughout the big scene that ends act 2 of the marriage of figaro , to convey a sense of suspense as the jealous count almaviva tries in vain to incriminate the countess , his wife , and figaro , his butler , for plotting behind his back . a famous type of ostinato , called the rossini crescendo , owes its name to a crescendo that underlies a persistent musical pattern , which usually culminates in a solo vocal cadenza . in the energetic scherzo of beethoven ’ s late c sharp minor quartet , op . 131 , there is a harmonically static passage , with '' the repetitiveness of a nursery rhyme '' radcliffe , . p ( 1965 , p.158 ) beethoven ’ s string quartets . london , hutchinson . that consists of an ostinato shared between viola and cello supporting a melody in octaves in the first and second violins : both the first and third acts of wagner 's final opera parsifal feature a passage accompanying a scene where a band of knights solemnly processes from the depths of forest to the hall of the grail . the '' transformation music '' that supports this change of scene is dominated by the iterated tolling of four bells : . twentieth century . debussy featured an ostinato pattern throughout his piano prelude '' des pas sur la neige '' . here , the ostinato pattern stays in the middle register of the piano & nbsp ; – it is never used as a bass . '' remark that the footfall ostinato remains nearly throughout on the same notes , at the same pitch level . this piece is an appeal to the basic loneliness of all human beings , oft-forgotten perhaps , but , like the ostinato , forming a basic undercurrent of our history . '' schmitz , e . r . ( 1950 , pp . & nbsp ; 145–7 ) the piano works of claude debussy . new york , dover . , stravinsky sets up three repeated patterns , which overlap one another and never coincide . '' here a rigid pattern of ( 3+2+2/4 ) bars is laid over a strictly recurring twenty-three-beat tune ( the bars being marked by a cello ostinato ) , so that their changing relationship is governed primarily by the pre-compositional scheme . '' walsh , s . ( 1988 , p57 ) the music of stravinsky . london , routledge . '' the rhythmical current running through the music is what binds together these curious mosaic-like pieces . '' vlad , r ( 1978 , p52 ) stravinsky . oxford university press . a subtler metrical conflict can be found in the final section of stravinsky 's symphony of psalms . the choir sing a melody in triple time , while the bass instruments in the orchestra play a 4-beat ostinato against this . '' this is built up over an ostinato bass ( harp , two pianos and timpani ) moving in fourths like a pendulum . '' white , e.w . ( 1979 , p.365 ) stravinsky : the composer and his works . london , faber . . sub-saharan african music . counter-metric structure . many instruments south of the sahara desert play ostinato melodies . these include lamellophones such as the mbira , as well as xylophones like the balafon , the bikutsi , and the gyil . ostinato figures are also played on string instruments such as the kora , gankoqui bell ensembles , and pitched drums ensembles . often , african ostinatos contain offbeats or cross-beats , that contradict the metric structure . peñalosa , david ( 2010 ) . the clave matrix ; afro-cuban rhythm : its principles and african origins pp . 22–26 , 62 . redway , ca : bembe inc . other african ostinatos generate complete cross-rhythms by sounding both the main beats and cross-beats . in the following example , a gyil sounds the three-against-two cross-rhythm ( hemiola ) . the left hand ( lower notes ) sounds the two main beats , while the right hand ( upper notes ) sounds the three cross-beats . peñalosa , david ( 2010 ) . the clave matrix p . 22 . . african harmonic progressions . popular dance bands in west africa and the congo ( area ) feature ostinato-playing guitars . the african guitar parts are drawn from a variety of sources , including the indigenous mbira , as well as foreign influences such as james brown-type funk riffs . however , the foreign influences are interpreted through a distinctly african ostinato sensibility . african guitar styles began with congolese bands doing cuban '' cover '' songs . the cuban guajeo had a both familiar and exotic quality to the african musicians . gradually , various regional guitar styles emerged , as indigenous influences became increasingly dominant within these africanized guajeos . roberts , john storm . afro-cuban comes home : the birth of congo music . original music cassette tape ( 1986 ) . as moore states , '' one could say that i & nbsp ; – iv & nbsp ; – v & nbsp ; – iv chord progressions is to african music what the 12-bar blues is to north american music . '' moore , kevin ( 2011 ) . ritmo oriental 's first album of the 70s . web . timba.com . such progressions seem superficially to follow the conventions of western music theory . however , performers of african popular music do not perceive these progressions in the same way . harmonic progressions which move from the tonic to the subdominant ( as they are known in european music ) have been used in traditional sub-saharan african harmony for hundreds of years . their elaborations follow all the conventions of traditional african harmonic principles . gehard kubik concludes : the harmonic cycle of c–f–g–f i–iv–v–iv prominent in congo/zaire popular music simply can not be defined as a progression from tonic to subdominant to dominant and back to subdominant ( on which it ends ) because in the performer 's appreciation they are of equal status , and not in any hierarchical order as in western music— ( kubik 1999 ) . kubik , gerhard ( 1999 ) . africa and the blues . jackson , mi : university press of mississippi . . afro-cuban guajeo . a guajeo is a typical cuban ostinato melody , most often consisting of arpeggiated chords in syncopated patterns . the guajeo is a hybrid of the african and european ostinato . the guajeo was first played as accompaniment on the tres in the folkloric changüí and son . lapidus , ben ( 2008 ) . origins of cuban music and dance ; changüí p . 16–18 . lanham , ma : scarecrow press . the term guajeo is often used to mean specific ostinato patterns played by a tres , piano , an instrument of the violin family , or saxophones . mauleón , rebeca ( 1993 ) salsa guidebook for piano and ensemble . p . 255 . petaluma , california : sher music . the guajeo is a fundamental component of modern-day salsa , and latin jazz . the following example shows a basic guajeo pattern . the guajeo is a seamless afro-euro ostinato hybrid , which has had a major influence upon jazz , r & b , rock ' n ' roll and popular music in general . the beatles ' '' i feel fine '' guitar riff is guajeo-like . riff . in various popular music styles , riff refers to a brief , relaxed phrase repeated over changing melodies . it may serve as a refrain or melody , often played by the rhythm section instruments or solo instruments that form the basis or accompaniment of a musical composition . new harvard dictionary of music ( 1986 ) p . 708 . cambridge , ma : harvard university press . though they are most often found in rock music , heavy metal music , latin , funk and jazz , classical music is also sometimes based on a simple riff , such as ravel 's boléro . riffs can be as simple as a tenor saxophone honking a simple , catchy rhythmic figure , or as complex as the riff-based variations in the head arrangements played by the count basie orchestra . david brackett ( 1999 ) defines riffs as '' short melodic phrases '' , while richard middleton ( 1999 ) defines them as '' short rhythmic , melodic , or harmonic figures repeated to form a structural framework '' . rikky rooksby states : '' a riff is a short , repeated , memorable musical phrase , often pitched low on the guitar , which focuses much of the energy and excitement of a rock song . '' in jazz and r & b , riffs are often used as the starting point for longer compositions . the riff from charlie parker 's bebop number '' now 's the time '' ( 1945 ) re-emerged four years later as the r & b dance hit '' the hucklebuck '' . the verse of '' the hucklebuck '' —another riff—was '' borrowed '' from the artie matthews composition '' weary blues '' . glenn miller 's '' in the mood '' had an earlier life as wingy manone 's '' tar paper stomp '' . all these songs use twelve bar blues riffs , and most of these riffs probably precede the examples given . covach , john . form in rock music : a primer , p . & nbsp ; 71 , in stein , deborah ( 2005 ) . engaging music : essays in music analysis . new york : oxford university press . neither of the terms 'riff ' or 'lick ' are used in classical music . instead , individual musical phrases used as the basis of classical music pieces are called ostinatos or simply phrases . contemporary jazz writers also use riff- or lick-like ostinatos in modal music . latin jazz often uses guajeo-based riffs . vamp . in music , a vamp is a repeating musical figure , section , marshall , wolf ( 2008 ) . stuff ! good guitar players should know , p . 138 . or accompaniment used in blues , jazz , gospel , soul , and musical theater . vamps are also found in rock , funk , reggae , r & b , pop , country , and post-sixties jazz . vamps are usually harmonically sparse : a vamp may consist of a single chord or a sequence of chords played in a repeated rhythm . the term frequently appeared in the instruction 'vamp till ready ' on sheet music for popular songs in the 1930s and 1940s , indicating the accompanist should repeat the musical phrase until the vocalist was ready . vamps are generally symmetrical , self-contained , and open to variation . the equivalent in classical music is an ostinato , in hip hop and electronic music the loop , and in rock music the riff . the slang term vamp comes from the middle english word vampe ( sock ) , from old french avanpie , equivalent to modern french avant-pied , literally before-foot . '' vamp : definition , synonyms and much more '' . answers.com . answers corporation . many vamp-oriented songwriters begin the creative process by attempting to evoke a mood or feeling while riffing freely on an instrument or scat singing . many well known artists primarily build songs with a vamp/riff/ostinato based approach—including john lee hooker ( '' boogie chillen '' , '' house rent boogie '' ) , bo diddley ( '' hey bo diddley '' , '' who do you love ? '' ) , jimmy page ( '' ramble on '' , '' bron yr aur '' ) , nine inch nails ( '' closer '' ) , and beck ( '' loser '' ) . classic examples of vamps in jazz include '' a night in tunisia '' , '' take five '' , '' a love supreme '' , '' maiden voyage '' , and '' cantaloupe island '' . rock examples include the long jam at the ends of '' loose change '' by neil young and crazy horse and '' ogre tones '' by king 's x . jazz , fusion , and latin jazz . in jazz , fusion , and related genres , a background vamp provides a performer with a harmonic framework supporting improvisation . in latin jazz guajeos fulfill the role of piano vamp . a vamp at the beginning of a jazz tune may act as a springboard to the main tune ; a vamp at the end of a song is often called a tag . examples . '' take five '' begins with a repeated , syncopated figure in time , which pianist dave brubeck plays throughout the song ( except for joe morello 's drum solo and a variation on the chords in the middle section ) . the music from miles davis 's modal period 1958–1963 ) was based on improvising songs with a small number of chords . the jazz standard '' so what '' uses a vamp in the two-note '' sooooo what ? '' figure , regularly played by the piano and the trumpet throughout . jazz scholar barry kernfeld calls this music vamp music . examples include the outros to george benson 's '' body talk '' and '' plum '' , and the solo changes to '' breezin ' '' . the following songs are dominated by vamps : john coltrane , kenny burrell , and grant green 's versions of '' my favorite things '' , herbie hancock 's '' watermelon man '' and '' chameleon '' , wes montgomery 's '' bumpin ' on sunset '' , and larry carlton 's '' room 335 '' . the afro-cuban vamp style known as guajeo is used in the bebop/latin jazz standard '' a night in tunisia '' . depending upon the musician , a repeating figure in '' a night in tunisia '' could be called an ostinato , guajeo , riff , or vamp . the cuban-jazz hybrid spans the disciplines that encompass all these terms . gospel , soul , and funk . in gospel and soul music , the band often vamps on a simple ostinato groove at the end of a song , usually over a single chord . in soul music , the end of recorded songs often contains a display of vocal effects—such as rapid scales , arpeggios , and improvised passages . for recordings , sound engineers gradually fade out the vamp section at the end of a song , to transition to the next track on the album . salsoul singers such as loleatta holloway have become notable for their vocal improvisations at the end of songs , and they are sampled and used in other songs . andrae crouch extended the use of vamps in gospel , introducing chain vamps ( one vamp after the other , each successive vamp drawn from the first ) . jacqueline cogdell djedje , eddie s . meadows ( 1998 ) . california soul , p . 224 . 1970s-era funk music often takes a short one or two bar musical figure based on a single chord one would consider an introduction vamp in jazz or soul music , and then uses this vamp as the basis of the entire song ( '' funky drummer '' by james brown , for example ) . jazz , blues , and rock are almost always based on chord progressions ( a sequence of changing chords ) , and they use the changing harmony to build tension and sustain listener interest . unlike these music genres , funk is based on the rhythmic groove of the percussion , rhythm section instruments , and a deep electric bass line , usually all over a single chord . '' in funk , harmony is often second to the 'lock , ' the linking of contrapuntal parts that are played on guitar , bass , and drums in the repeating vamp . '' examples include stevie wonder 's vamp-based '' superstition '' and little johnny taylor 's '' part time love '' , which features an extended improvisation over a two-chord vamp . . musical theater . in musical theater , a vamp , or intro , is the few bars , one to eight , of music without lyrics that begin a printed copy of a song . craig , david ( 1990 ) . on singing onstage , p . 22 . the orchestra may repeat the vamp or other accompaniment during dialogue or stage business , as accompaniment for onstage transitions of indeterminate length . the score provides a one or two bar vamp figure , and indicates , '' vamp till cue '' , by the conductor . the vamp gives the onstage singers time to prepare for the song or the next verse , without requiring the music to pause . once the vamp section is over , the music continues to the next section . the vamp may be written by the composer of the song , a copyist employed by the publisher , or the arranger for the vocalist . the vamp serves three main purposes : it provides the key , establishes the tempo , and provides emotional context . craig ( 1990 ) , p . 23 . the vamp may be as short as a bell tone , sting ( a harmonized bell tone with stress on the starting note ) , or measures long . the rideout is the transitional music that begins on the downbeat of the last word of the song and is usually two to four bars long , though it may be as short as a sting or as long as a roxy rideout . craig ( 1990 ) , p . 26 . . indian classical music . in indian classical music , during tabla or pakhawaj solo performances and kathak dance accompaniments , a conceptually similar melodic pattern known as the lehara ( sometimes spelled lehra ) or nagma is played repeatedly throughout the performance . this melodic pattern is set to the number of beats in a rhythmic cycle ( tala or taal ) being performed and may be based on one or a blend of multiple ragas . the basic idea of the lehara is to provide a steady melodious framework and keep the time-cycle for rhythmic improvisations . it serves as an auditory workbench not only for the soloist but also for the audience to appreciate the ingenuity of the improvisations and thus the merits of the overall performance . in indian classical music , the concept of 'sam ' ( pronounced as 'sum ' ) carries paramount importance . the sam is the target unison beat ( and almost always the first beat ) of any rhythmic cycle . the second most important beat is the khali , which is a complement of the sam . besides these two prominent beats , there are other beats of emphasis in any given taal , which signify 'khand 's ( divisions ) of the taal . e.g . 'roopak ' or 'rupak ' taal , a 7-beat rhythmic cycle , is divided 3–2–2 , further implying that the 1st , 4th , and 6th beats are the prominent beats in that taal . therefore , it is customary , but not essential , to align the lehara according to the divisions of the taal . it is done with a view to emphasize those beats that mark the divisions of the taal . the lehara can be played on a variety of instruments , including the sarangi , harmonium , sitar , sarod , flute and others . the playing of the lehara is relatively free from the numerous rules and constraints of raga sangeet , which are upheld and honoured in the tradition of indian classical music . the lehara may be interspersed with short and occasional improvisations built around the basic melody . it is also permissible to switch between two or more disparate melodies during the course of the performance . it is essential that the lehara be played with the highest precision in laya ( tempo ) and swara control , which requires years of specialist training ( taalim ) and practice ( riyaaz ) . it is considered a hallmark of excellence to play lehara alongside a recognised tabla or pakhawaj virtuoso as it is a difficult task to keep a steady pulse while the percussionist is improvising or playing difficult compositions in counterpoint . while there may be scores of individually talented instrumentalists , there are very few who are capable of playing the lehra for a tabla / pakhawaj solo performance . . see also . traditional sub-saharan african harmony canto ostinato chaconne chanking fill ( music ) folia glossary of musical terminology hook ( music ) imitation ( music ) leitmotif music sequencer o fortuna passacaglia pedal point sequence ( music ) . references . further reading . . external links . jazz guitar riffs explanation with musical examples .