Billy Tipton

early life . born dorothy lucille tipton in oklahoma city , tipton grew up in kansas city , missouri , where he was raised by an aunt after his parents divorced when he was four . as a high school student , tipton went by the nickname '' tippy '' and became interested in music ( especially jazz ) , playing piano and saxophone . tipton was not allowed to join the all-male school band at southwest high school . he returned to oklahoma for his final year of high school and joined the school band at connors state college high school . around 1933 , tipton started breast binding and dressing as a man to fit in with the typical jazz band image of the era . as tipton began a more serious music career , he '' decided to permanently take on the role of a male musician '' , adopting the name billy lee tipton . by 1940 , tipton was living as a man in private life as well . . career . early work . in 1936 , tipton was the leader of a band playing on kfxr radio . in 1938 , tipton joined louvenie 's western swingbillies , a band that played on radio station ktok and had a steady gig at brown 's tavern . in 1940 he was touring the midwest playing at dances with scott cameron 's band . in 1941 he began a two and a half-year run performing at the joplin , missouri , cotton club with george meyer 's band before touring with the ross carlyle band for a while . he then played music in texas for two years . in 1949 , tipton began touring the pacific northwest with meyer . while this tour was far from glamorous , the band 's appearances at roseburg , oregon 's shalimar room were recorded by a local radio station , and so recordings exist of tipton 's work during this time , including '' if i knew then '' and '' sophisticated swing '' . the trio 's signature song was '' flying home '' , performed in a close imitation of pianist teddy wilson and benny goodman 's band . as george meyer 's band became more successful , they began getting more work , performing at the boulevard club in coeur d'alene , idaho , sharing the bill with others such as the ink spots , the delta rhythm boys , and billy eckstine . . bandleader . tipton began playing piano alone at the elks club in longview , washington , in 1951 . in longview , he started the billy tipton trio , which included dick o'neil on drums , and kenny richards ( and later ron kilde ) on bass . the trio gained local popularity . in 1956 , while on tour performing at king 's supper club in santa barbara , california , a talent scout from tops records heard them play and got them a contract . the billy tipton trio recorded two albums of jazz standards for tops : sweet georgia brown and billy tipton plays hi-fi on piano , both released early in 1957 . among the pieces performed were '' ca n't help lovin ' dat man '' , '' willow weep for me '' , '' what 'll i do '' , and '' do n't blame me '' . in 1957 , the albums sold 17,678 copies , a '' respectable '' sum for a small independent record label . in 1958 , after the success of both albums , the billy tipton trio was offered a position as house band at the holiday hotel casino in reno , nevada , as well as open for fellow musician liberace . tops records also invited the trio to record four more albums . tipton declined both offers , choosing instead to move to spokane , washington , where he worked as a talent broker and the trio performed weekly . in the late 1970s , worsening arthritis forced tipton to retire from music . . personal life . tipton was never legally married , but there were five women who called themselves mrs . tipton at various points . in 1934 , tipton began living with a woman named non earl harrell in a relationship that other musicians thought of as lesbian . the relationship ended in 1942 . tipton 's sex was reportedly concealed from the four women who would later call themselves '' mrs . tipton '' . tipton kept the secret of his extrinsic sexual characteristics from them by telling them he had been in a serious car accident that resulted in damaged genitals and broken ribs . tipton 's next relationship , with a singer known only as '' june '' , lasted for several years . for seven years , tipton lived with betty cox , who was 18 years old when they became involved . cox remembered tipton as '' the most fantastic love of my life '' . in 1954 , tipton 's relationship with cox ended , and he then entered a relationship with a woman named maryann . the pair moved to spokane , washington , in 1958 . maryann later stated that in 1960 , she discovered that tipton had become involved with nightclub dancer kitty kelly . tipton and kelly settled down together in 1961 . they adopted three sons , john , scott , and william ; the adoptions were illegal . after they separated around 1977 , tipton resumed a relationship with maryann . maryann reportedly discovered tipton 's birth certificate and asked tipton about it once , but was given no reply other than a '' terrible look '' . . death , post-mortem outing , and aftermath . in 1989 , at the age of 74 , tipton had symptoms which he attributed to the emphysema he had contracted from heavy smoking and refused to call a doctor . he was actually suffering from a hemorrhaging peptic ulcer which , untreated , was fatal . while paramedics were trying to save tipton 's life , his son , william , learned that his father was physically female . this information '' came as a shock to nearly everyone , including the women who had considered themselves his wives , as well as his sons and the musicians who had traveled with him '' . in an attempt to keep tipton 's biological sex a secret , kitty arranged for his body to be cremated ; later , following financial offers from the media , kitty and one of their sons went public with the story . the first newspaper article was published the day after tipton 's funeral and it was quickly picked up by wire services . stories about tipton appeared in a variety of papers including tabloids such as national enquirer and star as well as people , the new york times and the seattle times . tipton 's family even made talk show appearances . tipton left two wills : one handwritten and not notarized that left everything to william jr . ; and the second , notarized , leaving everything to john clark , the first child the tiptons adopted . a court upheld the first will , and william inherited almost everything , with john and scott receiving one dollar each . according to a 2009 episode of the documentary program the will : family secrets revealed , which featured interviews with all three sons , it was revealed that a final court judgment awarded all three sons an equal share of his wife kitty tipton 's estate ( not billy tipton 's ) , which , after lawyers ' fees , amounted to 35,000 for each son . two of the illegally adopted sons changed their names not long after learning of tipton 's deception . . works inspired by tipton . stevie wants to play the blues was a play based on tipton 's life written by eduardo machado and performed in los angeles , directed by simon callow and starring amy madigan and paula kelly . '' the legend of billy tipton '' , by the punk band the video dead , is about the story of billy tipton . orfão , jorge ( 2012 ) . '' female masculinities : the tipton/moody transgender case '' . ma dissertation in feminist studies presented at the faculdade de letras da universidade de coimbra , coordinated by professor doctor adriana bebiano . november 8 . soita minulle billy call me billy , a finnish play with joanna haartti playing tipton , presented at theatre jurka in 2011 and again at the 2012 helsinki festival . d . c . simpson 's comic strip phoebe and her unicorn is set in a town named for tipton . the slow drag ( 1996 ) , by carson kreitzer , a '' jazz cabaret '' with a live band onstage featuring the character , johnny christmas , based on tipton . trumpet , a 1998 novel by jackie kay , tells the story of fictional scottish jazz musician joss moody , inspired by tipton . the tiptons sax quartet , previously known as the billy tipton memorial saxophone quartet , is a jazz saxophone quartet from seattle , washington . the name of the quartet was inspired by tipton . a cabaret musical called a girl named bill , starring nellie mckay , tells the story of tipton . no ordinary man , a documentary film about tipton by aisling chin-yee and chase joynt , premiered at the 2020 toronto international film festival . pat mullen , '' ‘ inconvenient indian ’ , ‘ new corporation ’ , ‘ no ordinary man ’ rep canadian docs in tiff line-up '' . point of view , july 30 , 2020 . tipton ’ s name appears in the lyrics of the le tigre song '' hot topic . '' . discography .