Hagiography

christian . development . hagiography constituted an important literary genre in the early christian church , providing some informational history along with the more inspirational stories and legends . a hagiographic account of an individual saint can consist of a biography ( vita ) , a description of the saint 's deeds or miracles , an account of the saint 's martyrdom ( passio ) , or be a combination of these . the genre of lives of the saints first came into being in the roman empire as legends about christian martyrs were recorded . the dates of their deaths formed the basis of martyrology . in the 4th century , there were three main types of catalogs of lives of the saints : annual calendar catalogue , or menaion ( in greek , , menaion means '' monthly '' ( adj , neut ) , lit . '' lunar '' ) , biographies of the saints to be read at sermons ; synaxarion ( '' something that collects '' ; greek , from , synaxis i.e . '' gathering '' , '' collection '' , '' compilation '' ) , or a short version of lives of the saints , arranged by dates ; paterikon ( '' that of the fathers '' ; greek ; in greek and latin , pater means '' father '' ) , or biography of the specific saints , chosen by the catalog compiler . in western europe , hagiography was one of the more important vehicles for the study of inspirational history during the middle ages . the golden legend of jacob de voragine compiled a great deal of medieval hagiographic material , with a strong emphasis on miracle tales . lives were often written to promote the cult of local or national states , and in particular to develop pilgrimages to visit relics . the bronze gniezno doors of gniezno cathedral in poland are the only romanesque doors in europe to feature the life of a saint . the life of saint adalbert of prague , who is buried in the cathedral , is shown in 18 scenes , probably based on a lost illuminated copy of one of his lives . the bollandist society continues the study , academic assembly , appraisal and publication of materials relating to the lives of christian saints . ( see acta sanctorum . ) . medieval england . many of the important hagiographical texts composed in medieval england were written in the vernacular dialect anglo-norman . with the introduction of latin literature into england in the 7th and 8th centuries the genre of the life of the saint grew increasingly popular . when one contrasts it to the popular heroic poem , such as beowulf , one finds that they share certain common features . in beowulf , the titular character battles against grendel and his mother , while the saint , such as athanasius ' anthony ( one of the original sources for the hagiographic motif ) or the character of guthlac , battles against figures no less substantial in a spiritual sense . both genres then focus on the hero-warrior figure , but with the distinction that the saint is of a spiritual sort . imitation of the life of christ was then the benchmark against which saints were measured , and imitation of the lives of saints was the benchmark against which the general population measured itself . in anglo-saxon and medieval england , hagiography became a literary genre par excellence for the teaching of a largely illiterate audience . hagiography provided priests and theologians with classical handbooks in a form that allowed them the rhetorical tools necessary to present their faith through the example of the saints ' lives . of all the english hagiographers no one was more prolific nor so aware of the importance of the genre as abbot ælfric of eynsham . his work lives of the saints contains set of sermons on saints ' days , formerly observed by the english church . the text comprises two prefaces , one in latin and one in old english , and 39 lives beginning on december 25 with the nativity of christ and ending with three texts to which no saints ' days are attached . the text spans the entire year and describes the lives of many saints , both english and continental , and hearkens back to some of the earliest saints of the early church . there are two known instances where saint 's lives were adapted into vernacular plays in britain . these are the cornish language works beunans meriasek and beunans ke , about the lives of saints meriasek and kea , respectively . other examples of hagiographies from england include : the chronicle by hugh candidus barbara yorke , nunneries and the anglo-saxon royal houses ( continuum , 2003 ) p . & nbsp ; 22 the secgan stowe ms 944 , british library g . hickes , dissertatio epistolaris in linguarum veterum septentrionalium thesaurus grammatico-criticus et archeologicus ( oxford 1703–05 ) , p . 115 . the list of john leyland john leland , the collectanea of british affairs , volume 2 . p . & nbsp ; 408 . possibly the book life by saint cadog p . 345 vita sancti ricardi episcopi et confessoris cycestrensis/ life of richard of chichester by ralph bocking . the margery kempe is an example of autohagiography , in which the subject dictates her life using the hagiographic form . medieval ireland . ireland is notable in its rich hagiographical tradition , and for the large amount of material which was produced during the middle ages . irish hagiographers wrote primarily in latin while some of the later saint 's lives were written in the hagiographer 's native vernacular irish . of particular note are the lives of st . patrick , columba and brigit of kildare—ireland 's three patron saints . additionally , several irish calendars relating to the feastdays of christian saints ( sometimes called martyrology or martyrology ) contained abbreviated synopses of saint 's lives , which were compiled from many different sources . notable examples include the martyrology of tallaght and the félire óengusso . such hagiographical calendars were important in establishing lists of native irish saints , in imitation of continental calendars . eastern orthodoxy . in the 10th century , a byzantine monk simeon metaphrastes was the first one to change the genre of lives of the saints into something different , giving it a moralizing and panegyrical character . his catalog of lives of the saints became the standard for all of the western and eastern hagiographers , who would create relative biographies and images of the ideal saints by gradually departing from the real facts of their lives . over the years , the genre of lives of the saints had absorbed a number of narrative plots and poetic images ( often , of pre-christian origin , such as dragon fighting etc . ) , mediaeval parables , short stories and anecdotes . the genre of lives of the saints was introduced in the slavic world in the bulgarian empire in the late 9th and early 10th century , where the first original hagiographies were produced on cyril and methodius , clement of ohrid and saint naum . eventually the bulgarians brought this genre to kievan rus ' together with writing and also in translations from the greek language . in the 11th century , the rus ' began to compile the original life stories of the first rus'ian saints , e.g . boris and gleb , theodosius pechersky etc . in the 16th century , metropolitan macarius expanded the list of the rus'ian saints and supervised the compiling process of their life stories . they would all be compiled in the so-called velikiye chet'yi-minei catalog ( великие четьи-минеи , or great menaion reader ) , consisting of 12 volumes in accordance with each month of the year . they were revised and expanded by st . dimitry of rostov in 1684–1705 . today , the works in the genre of lives of the saints represent a valuable historical source and reflection of different social ideas , world outlook and aesthetic concepts of the past . oriental orthodoxy . traditional ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church hagiography in ge'ez language is known as the gadl ( saint 's life ) . they are , in addition of the axumite inscriptions and the ethiopian royal chronicles , among the most important ethiopian empire written sources . however , their historical accuracy is in question . they were created by the disciples of the saints . some were written a long time after the death of a saint , but others were written not long after the saint 's demise . . islamic . hagiography in islam began in the arabic language with biographical writing about the prophet muhammad in the 8th century ce , a tradition known as sīra . from about the 10th century ce , a genre generally known as manāqib also emerged , which comprised biographies of the imams ( madhāhib ) who founded different schools of islamic thought ( madhhab ) about sharia , and of ṣūfī saints . over time , hagiography about ṣūfīs and their miracles came to predominate in the genre of manāqib . ch . pellat , '' manāḳib '' , in encyclopaedia of islam , ed . by p . bearman , th . bianquis , c.e . bosworth , e . van donzel , and w.p . heinrichs , 2nd edn , 12 vols ( leiden : brill , 1960–2005 ) , . likewise influenced by early islamic hadith studies and other biographical information about the prophet , persian scholars began writing persian hagiography , again mainly of sūfī saints , in the eleventh century ce . the islamicisation of the turkish regions led to the development of turkish biographies of saints , beginning in the 13th century ce and gaining pace around the 16th . production remained dynamic and kept pace with scholarly developments in historical biographical writing until 1925 , when mustafa kemal atatürk ( d . 1938 ) placed an interdiction on ṣūfī brotherhoods . as turkey relaxed legal restrictions on islamic practice in the 1950s and the 1980s , ṣūfīs returned to publishing hagiography , a trend with continues in the 21st century . alexandre papas , “ hagiography , persian and turkish ” , in encyclopaedia of islam , three , ed . by kate fleet , gudrun krämer , denis matringe , john nawas , and everett rowson ( leiden : brill , 2007– ) , .