Book of the Dead

development . the book of the dead developed from a tradition of funerary manuscripts dating back to the egyptian old kingdom . the first funerary texts were the pyramid texts , first used in the pyramid of king unas of the 5th dynasty , around 2400 bce . faulkner p . 54 these texts were written on the walls of the burial chambers within pyramids , and were exclusively for the use of the pharaoh ( and , from the 6th dynasty , the queen ) . the pyramid texts were written in an unusual hieroglyphic style ; many of the hieroglyphs representing humans or animals were left incomplete or drawn mutilated , most likely to prevent them causing any harm to the dead pharaoh . taylor 2010 , p . 54 the purpose of the pyramid texts was to help the dead king take his place amongst the gods , in particular to reunite him with his divine father ra ; at this period the afterlife was seen as being in the sky , rather than the underworld described in the book of the dead . towards the end of the old kingdom , the pyramid texts ceased to be an exclusively royal privilege , and were adopted by regional governors and other high-ranking officials . in the middle kingdom , a new funerary text emerged , the coffin texts . the coffin texts used a newer version of the language , new spells , and included illustrations for the first time . the coffin texts were most commonly written on the inner surfaces of coffins , though they are occasionally found on tomb walls or on papyri . the coffin texts were available to wealthy private individuals , vastly increasing the number of people who could expect to participate in the afterlife ; a process which has been described as the '' democratization of the afterlife '' . d'auria et al p.187 the book of the dead first developed in thebes toward the beginning of the second intermediate period , around 1700 bce . the earliest known occurrence of the spells included in the book of the dead is from the coffin of queen mentuhotep , of the 13th dynasty , where the new spells were included amongst older texts known from the pyramid texts and coffin texts . some of the spells introduced at this time claim an older provenance ; for instance the rubric to spell 30b states that it was discovered by the prince hordjedef in the reign of king menkaure , many hundreds of years before it is attested in the archaeological record . taylor 2010 , p.34 by the 17th dynasty , the book of the dead had become widespread not only for members of the royal family , but courtiers and other officials as well . at this stage , the spells were typically inscribed on linen shrouds wrapped around the dead , though occasionally they are found written on coffins or on papyrus . taylor 2010 , p . 55 the new kingdom saw the book of the dead develop and spread further . the famous spell 125 , the 'weighing of the heart ' , is first known from the reign of hatshepsut and thutmose iii , c.1475 bce . from this period onward the book of the dead was typically written on a papyrus scroll , and the text illustrated with vignettes . during the 19th dynasty in particular , the vignettes tended to be lavish , sometimes at the expense of the surrounding text . taylor 2010 , p.35 & ndash ; 7 in the third intermediate period , the book of the dead started to appear in hieratic script , as well as in the traditional hieroglyphics . the hieratic scrolls were a cheaper version , lacking illustration apart from a single vignette at the beginning , and were produced on smaller papyri . at the same time , many burials used additional funerary texts , for instance the amduat . taylor 2010 , p.57 & ndash ; 8 during the 25th and 26th dynasty , the book of the dead was updated , revised and standardised . spells were ordered and numbered consistently for the first time . this standardised version is known today as the 'saite recension ' , after the saite ( 26th ) dynasty . in the late period and ptolemaic period , the book of the dead continued to be based on the saite recension , though increasingly abbreviated towards the end of the ptolemaic period . new funerary texts appeared , including the book of breathing and book of traversing eternity . the last use of the book of the dead was in the 1st century bce , though some artistic motifs drawn from it were still in use in roman times . taylor 2010 , p.59 & nbsp ; 60 . spells . the book of the dead is made up of a number of individual texts and their accompanying illustrations . most sub-texts begin with the word ro , which can mean '' mouth '' , '' speech '' , '' spell '' , '' utterance '' , '' incantation '' , or '' chapter of a book '' . this ambiguity reflects the similarity in egyptian thought between ritual speech and magical power . faulkner 1994 , p.145 ; taylor 2010 , p.29 in the context of the book of the dead , it is typically translated as either chapter or spell . in this article , the word spell is used . at present , some 192 spells are known , faulkner 1994 , p.18 though no single manuscript contains them all . they served a range of purposes . some are intended to give the deceased mystical knowledge in the afterlife , or perhaps to identify them with the gods : for instance , spell 17 is an obscure and lengthy description of the god atum . taylor 2010 , p.51 , 56 others are incantations to ensure the different elements of the dead person 's being were preserved and reunited , and to give the deceased control over the world around him . still others protect the deceased from various hostile forces or guide him through the underworld past various obstacles . famously , two spells also deal with the judgement of the deceased in the weighing of the heart ritual . such spells as 26–30 , and sometimes spells 6 and 126 , relate to the heart and were inscribed on scarabs . the texts and images of the book of the dead were magical as well as religious . magic was as legitimate an activity as praying to the gods , even when the magic was aimed at controlling the gods themselves . faulkner 1994 , p.146 indeed , there was little distinction for the ancient egyptians between magical and religious practice . faulkner 1994 , p.145 the concept of magic ( heka ) was also intimately linked with the spoken and written word . the act of speaking a ritual formula was an act of creation ; taylor 2010 , p.30 there is a sense in which action and speech were one and the same thing . the magical power of words extended to the written word . hieroglyphic script was held to have been invented by the god thoth , and the hieroglyphs themselves were powerful . written words conveyed the full force of a spell . this was even true when the text was abbreviated or omitted , as often occurred in later book of the dead scrolls , particularly if the accompanying images were present . taylor 2010 , p.32 & ndash ; 3 ; faulkner 1994 , p.148 the egyptians also believed that knowing the name of something gave power over it ; thus , the book of the dead equips its owner with the mystical names of many of the entities he would encounter in the afterlife , giving him power over them . taylor 2010 , p.30 & ndash ; 1 the spells of the book of the dead made use of several magical techniques which can also be seen in other areas of egyptian life . a number of spells are for magical amulets , which would protect the deceased from harm . in addition to being represented on a book of the dead papyrus , these spells appeared on amulets wound into the wrappings of a mummy . everyday magic made use of amulets in huge numbers . other items in direct contact with the body in the tomb , such as headrests , were also considered to have amuletic value . pinch 1994 , p.104 & ndash ; 5 a number of spells also refer to egyptian beliefs about the magical healing power of saliva . . organization . almost every book of the dead was unique , containing a different mixture of spells drawn from the corpus of texts available . for most of the history of the book of the dead there was no defined order or structure . taylor 2010 , p.55 in fact , until paul barguet 's 1967 '' pioneering study '' of common themes between texts , egyptologists concluded there was no internal structure at all . faulkner 1994 , p.141 it is only from the saite period ( 26th dynasty ) onwards that there is a defined order . taylor , p.58 the books of the dead from the saite period tend to organize the chapters into four sections : chapters 1–16 the deceased enters the tomb and descends to the underworld , and the body regains its powers of movement and speech . chapters 17–63 explanation of the mythic origin of the gods and places . the deceased is made to live again so that he may arise , reborn , with the morning sun . chapters 64–129 the deceased travels across the sky in the sun ark as one of the blessed dead . in the evening , the deceased travels to the underworld to appear before osiris . chapters 130–189 having been vindicated , the deceased assumes power in the universe as one of the gods . this section also includes assorted chapters on protective amulets , provision of food , and important places . . egyptian concepts of death and afterlife . the spells in the book of the dead depict egyptian beliefs about the nature of death and the afterlife . the book of the dead is a vital source of information about egyptian beliefs in this area . preservation . one aspect of death was the disintegration of the various kheperu , or modes of existence . taylor 2010 , p.16-17 funerary rituals served to re-integrate these different aspects of being . mummification served to preserve and transform the physical body into sah , an idealised form with divine aspects ; taylor 2010 , p.17 & 20 the book of the dead contained spells aimed at preserving the body of the deceased , which may have been recited during the process of mummification . for instance , spell 154 . taylor 2010 , p.161 the heart , which was regarded as the aspect of being which included intelligence and memory , was also protected with spells , and in case anything happened to the physical heart , it was common to bury jewelled heart scarabs with a body to provide a replacement . the ka , or life-force , remained in the tomb with the dead body , and required sustenance from offerings of food , water and incense . in case priests or relatives failed to provide these offerings , spell 105 ensured the ka was satisfied . taylor 2010 , p.163-4 the name of the dead person , which constituted their individuality and was required for their continued existence , was written in many places throughout the book , and spell 25 ensured the deceased would remember their own name . taylor 2010 , p.163 the ba was a free-ranging spirit aspect of the deceased . it was the ba , depicted as a human-headed bird , which could '' go forth by day '' from the tomb into the world ; spells 61 and 89 acted to preserve it . taylor 2010 , p.17 , 164 finally , the shut , or shadow of the deceased , was preserved by spells 91 , 92 and 188 . taylor 2010 , p.164 if all these aspects of the person could be variously preserved , remembered , and satiated , then the dead person would live on in the form of an akh . an akh was a blessed spirit with magical powers who would dwell among the gods . taylor 2010 , p.17 . afterlife . the nature of the afterlife which the dead people enjoyed is difficult to define , because of the differing traditions within ancient egyptian religion . in the book of the dead , the dead were taken into the presence of the god osiris , who was confined to the subterranean duat . there are also spells to enable the ba or akh of the dead to join ra as he travelled the sky in his sun-barque , and help him fight off apep . spells 100 & ndash ; 2 , 129 & ndash ; 131 and 133 & ndash ; 136 . taylor 2010 , p.239 & ndash ; 241 as well as joining the gods , the book of the dead also depicts the dead living on in the 'field of reeds ' , a paradisiac likeness of the real world . spells 109 , 110 and 149 . taylor 2010 , p.238 & ndash ; 240 the field of reeds is depicted as a lush , plentiful version of the egyptian way of living . there are fields , crops , oxen , people and waterways . the deceased person is shown encountering the ennead , a group of gods , as well as his or her own parents . while the depiction of the field of reeds is pleasant and plentiful , it is also clear that manual labour is required . for this reason burials included a number of statuettes named shabti , or later ushabti . these statuettes were inscribed with a spell , also included in the book of the dead , requiring them to undertake any manual labour that might be the owner 's duty in the afterlife . taylor 2010 , p.242 & ndash ; 245 it is also clear that the dead not only went to a place where the gods lived , but that they acquired divine characteristics themselves . in many occasions , the deceased is mentioned as '' the osiris – name '' in the book of the dead . thumb the path to the afterlife as laid out in the book of the dead was a difficult one . the deceased was required to pass a series of gates , caverns and mounds guarded by supernatural creatures . taylor 2010 , p.135 these terrifying entities were armed with enormous knives and are illustrated in grotesque forms , typically as human figures with the heads of animals or combinations of different ferocious beasts . their names—for instance , '' he who lives on snakes '' or '' he who dances in blood '' —are equally grotesque . these creatures had to be pacified by reciting the appropriate spells included in the book of the dead ; once pacified they posed no further threat , and could even extend their protection to the dead person . taylor 2010 , p.136 & ndash ; 7 another breed of supernatural creatures was 'slaughterers ' who killed the unrighteous on behalf of osiris ; the book of the dead equipped its owner to escape their attentions . taylor 2010 , p . 188 as well as these supernatural entities , there were also threats from natural or supernatural animals , including crocodiles , snakes , and beetles . taylor 2010 , p . 184 & ndash ; 7 . judgment . if all the obstacles of the duat could be negotiated , the deceased would be judged in the '' weighing of the heart '' ritual , depicted in spell 125 . the deceased was led by the god anubis into the presence of osiris . there , the dead person swore that he had not committed any sin from a list of 42 sins , taylor 2010 , p . 208 reciting a text known as the '' negative confession '' . then the dead person 's heart was weighed on a pair of scales , against the goddess maat , who embodied truth and justice . maat was often represented by an ostrich feather , the hieroglyphic sign for her name . taylor 2010 , p.209 at this point , there was a risk that the deceased 's heart would bear witness , owning up to sins committed in life ; spell 30b guarded against this eventuality . if the scales balanced , this meant the deceased had led a good life . anubis would take them to osiris and they would find their place in the afterlife , becoming maa-kheru , meaning '' vindicated '' or '' true of voice '' . taylor 2010 , p.215 if the heart was out of balance with maat , then another fearsome beast called ammit , the devourer , stood ready to eat it and put the dead person 's afterlife to an early and unpleasant end . taylor 2010 , p.212 this scene is remarkable not only for its vividness but as one of the few parts of the book of the dead with any explicit moral content . the judgment of the dead and the negative confession were a representation of the conventional moral code which governed egyptian society . for every '' i have not . '' in the negative confession , it is possible to read an unexpressed '' thou shalt not '' . faulkner 1994 , p.14 while the ten commandments of jewish and christian ethics are rules of conduct laid down by a perceived divine revelation , the negative confession is more a divine enforcement of everyday morality . taylor 2010 , p.204 & ndash ; 5 views differ among egyptologists about how far the negative confession represents a moral absolute , with ethical purity being necessary for progress to the afterlife . john taylor points out the wording of spells 30b and 125 suggests a pragmatic approach to morality ; by preventing the heart from contradicting him with any inconvenient truths , it seems that the deceased could enter the afterlife even if their life had not been entirely pure . ogden goelet says '' without an exemplary and moral existence , there was no hope for a successful afterlife '' , while geraldine pinch suggests that the negative confession is essentially similar to the spells protecting from demons , and that the success of the weighing of the heart depended on the mystical knowledge of the true names of the judges rather than on the deceased 's moral behaviour . pinch 1994 , p.155 . producing a book of the dead . image : pinedjemiibookofthedead-britishmuseum-august21-08.jpg thumb right part of the book of the dead of pinedjem ii . the text is hieratic , except for hieroglyphics in the vignette . the use of red pigment , and the joins between papyrus sheets , are also visible . image : papyrus ani curs hiero.jpg thumb right a close-up of the papyrus of ani , showing the cursive hieroglyphs of the text a book of the dead papyrus was produced to order by scribes . they were commissioned by people in preparation for their own funerals , or by the relatives of someone recently deceased . they were expensive items ; one source gives the price of a book of the dead scroll as one deben of silver , taylor 2010 , p . & nbsp ; 62 perhaps half the annual pay of a labourer . faulkner 1994 , p . & nbsp ; 142 papyrus itself was evidently costly , as there are many instances of its re-use in everyday documents , creating palimpsests . in one case , a book of the dead was written on second-hand papyrus . taylor 2010 , p . & nbsp ; 264 most owners of the book of the dead were evidently part of the social elite ; they were initially reserved for the royal family , but later papyri are found in the tombs of scribes , priests and officials . most owners were men , and generally the vignettes included the owner 's wife as well . towards the beginning of the history of the book of the dead , there are roughly 10 & nbsp ; copies belonging to men for every 1 for a woman . however , during the third intermediate period , 2 were for women for every 1 for a man ; and women owned roughly a third of the hieratic papyri from the late and ptolemaic periods . taylor 2010 , p . & nbsp ; 62 & ndash ; 63 the dimensions of a book of the dead could vary widely ; the longest is 40 & nbsp ; m long while some are as short as 1 & nbsp ; m . they are composed of sheets of papyrus joined together , the individual papyri varying in width from 15 & nbsp ; cm to 45 & nbsp ; cm . the scribes working on book of the dead papyri took more care over their work than those working on more mundane texts ; care was taken to frame the text within margins , and to avoid writing on the joints between sheets . the words peret em heru , or coming forth by day sometimes appear on the reverse of the outer margin , perhaps acting as a label . books were often prefabricated in funerary workshops , with spaces being left for the name of the deceased to be written in later . taylor 2010 , p . & nbsp ; 267 for instance , in the papyrus of ani , the name '' ani '' appears at the top or bottom of a column , or immediately following a rubric introducing him as the speaker of a block of text ; the name appears in a different handwriting to the rest of the manuscript , and in some places is mis-spelt or omitted entirely . the text of a new kingdom book of the dead was typically written in cursive hieroglyphs , most often from left to right , but also sometimes from right to left . the hieroglyphs were in columns , which were separated by black lines – a similar arrangement to that used when hieroglyphs were carved on tomb walls or monuments . illustrations were put in frames above , below , or between the columns of text . the largest illustrations took up a full page of papyrus . taylor 2010 , p . & nbsp ; 266 from the 21st dynasty onward , more copies of the book of the dead are found in hieratic script . the calligraphy is similar to that of other hieratic manuscripts of the new kingdom ; the text is written in horizontal lines across wide columns ( often the column size corresponds to the size of the papyrus sheets of which a scroll is made up ) . occasionally a hieratic book of the dead contains captions in hieroglyphic . the text of a book of the dead was written in both black and red ink , regardless of whether it was in hieroglyphic or hieratic script . most of the text was in black , with rubric used for the titles of spells , opening and closing sections of spells , the instructions to perform spells correctly in rituals , and also for the names of dangerous creatures such as the demon apep . taylor 2010 , p . & nbsp ; 270 the black ink used was based on carbon , and the red ink on ochre , in both cases mixed with water . taylor 2010 , p . & nbsp ; 277 the style and nature of the vignettes used to illustrate a book of the dead varies widely . some contain lavish colour illustrations , even making use of gold leaf . others contain only line drawings , or one simple illustration at the opening . taylor 2010 , p . & nbsp ; 267 & ndash ; 8 book of the dead papyri were often the work of several different scribes and artists whose work was literally pasted together . it is usually possible to identify the style of more than one scribe used on a given manuscript , even when the manuscript is a shorter one . the text and illustrations were produced by different scribes ; there are a number of books where the text was completed but the illustrations were left empty . taylor 2010 , p . & nbsp ; 268 . discovery , translation , interpretation and preservation . image : carl richard lepsius ( 1810-1884 ) . jpg thumb right karl richard lepsius , first translator of a complete book of the dead manuscript the existence of the book of the dead was known as early as the middle ages , well before its contents could be understood . since it was found in tombs , it was evidently a document of a religious nature , and this led to the widespread but mistaken belief that the book of the dead was the equivalent of a bible or qur'an . faulkner 1994 , p.13 taylor 210 , p.288 & nbsp ; 9 in 1842 karl richard lepsius published a translation of a manuscript dated to the ptolemaic era and coined the name '' book of the dead '' ( das todtenbuch ) . he also introduced the spell numbering system which is still in use , identifying 165 different spells . lepsius promoted the idea of a comparative edition of the book of the dead , drawing on all relevant manuscripts . this project was undertaken by édouard naville , starting in 1875 and completed in 1886 , producing a three-volume work including a selection of vignettes for every one of the 186 spells he worked with , the more significant variations of the text for every spell , and commentary . in 1867 samuel birch of the british museum published the first extensive english translation . '' egypt 's place in universal history '' , vol 5 , 1867 in 1876 he published a photographic copy of the papyrus of nebseny . taylor 2010 , p.289 & nbsp ; 92 the work of e . a . wallis budge , birch 's successor at the british museum , is still in wide circulation – including both his hieroglyphic editions and his english translations of the papyrus of ani , though the latter are now considered inaccurate and out-of-date . taylor 2010 , p.291 more recent translations in english have been published by t . g . allen ( 1974 ) and raymond o . faulkner ( 1972 ) . hornung 1999 , p.15 & ndash ; 16 as more work has been done on the book of the dead , more spells have been identified , and the total now stands at 192 . in the 1970s , ursula rößler-köhler at the university of bonn began a working group to develop the history of book of the dead texts . this later received sponsorship from the german state of north rhine-westphalia and the german research foundation , in 2004 coming under the auspices of the german academies of sciences and arts . today the book of the dead project , as it is called , maintains a database of documentation and photography covering 80 % of extant copies and fragments from the corpus of book of the dead texts , and provides current services to egyptologists . müller-roth 2010 , p.190-191 it is housed at the university of bonn , with much material available online . das altagyptische totenbuch : ein digitales textzeugenarchiv ( external link ) affiliated scholars are authoring a series of monograph studies , the studien zum altägyptischen totenbuch , alongside a series that publishes the manuscripts themselves , handschriften des altägyptischen totenbuches . müller-roth 2010 , p.191 both are in print by harrassowitz verlag . orientverlag has released another series of related monographs , totenbuchtexte , focused on analysis , synoptic comparison , and textual criticism . research work on the book of the dead has always posed technical difficulties thanks to the need to copy very long hieroglyphic texts . initially , these were copied out by hand , with the assistance either of tracing paper or a camera lucida . in the mid-19th century , hieroglyphic fonts became available and made lithographic reproduction of manuscripts more feasible . in the present day , hieroglyphics can be rendered in desktop publishing software and this , combined with digital print technology , means that the costs of publishing a book of the dead may be considerably reduced . however , a very large amount of the source material in museums around the world remains unpublished . taylor 2010 , p.292 & ndash ; 7 . chronology . c . 3150 bce & nbsp ; – first preserved hieroglyphs , on small labels in the tomb of a king buried ( in tomb u-j ) at abydos c . 3000 bce – the beginning of the numbered dynasties of kings of ancient egypt ' c . 2345 bce – first royal pyramid , of king unas , to contain the pyramid texts , carved precursors ( intended only for the king ) to the funerary literature from which the book of the dead ultimately developed c . 2100 bce – first coffin texts , developed from the pyramid texts and for a time painted on the coffins of commoners . many spells of the book of the dead are closely derived from them c . 1600 bce – earliest spells of the book of the dead , on the coffin of queen menthuhotep , an ancestor of kings from the new kingdom c . 1550 bce – from this time onward to the beginning of the new kingdom , papyrus copies of the book of the dead are used instead of inscribing spells on the walls of the tombs c . 600 bce – approximately when the order of the spells became standard 42–553 ce – christianity spreads to egypt , gradually replacing the native religion as successive emperors alternately tolerate or suppress them , culminating in the last temple at philae ( also site of the last known religious inscription in demotic , dating from 452 ) being closed by order of emperor justinian in 533 2nd century ce – possibly the last copies of the book of the dead were produced , but it is a poorly documented era of history 1798 ce – napoleon 's invasion of egypt encourages european interests in ancient egypt ; 1799 , vivant denon was handed a copy of the book of the dead 1805 ce – j . marc cadet makes the first publication , on 18 & nbsp ; plates , of a book of the dead , copie figurée d'un roleau de papyrus trouvé à thèbes dans un thombeau des rois , accompagnèe d'une notice descriptive , paris , levrault 1822 ce – jean-françois champollion announces the key to the decipherment of ancient egyptian hieroglyphic writing , subsequently developed in his later publications , the most extensive after his death in 1832 1842 ce – lepsius publishes the first major study of the book of the dead , begins the numbering of the spells or chapters , and brings the name '' book of the dead '' into general circulation . see also . aaru bardo thodol ( tibetan book of the dead ) book of the dead of amen-em-hat book of the dead of qenna ghosts in ancient egyptian culture necronomicon ( h . p . lovecraft 's book of the dead ) qenna shūjin e no pert-em-hru joseph smith papyri . collection includes books of the dead of tasheritmin , nefer-ir-nebu and amenhotep . references . further reading . james p . allen , middle egyptian – an introduction to the language and culture of hieroglyphs , first edition , cambridge university press , 2000 . allen , thomas george , the egyptian book of the dead : documents in the oriental institute museum at the university of chicago . university of chicago press , chicago 1960 . allen , thomas george , the book of the dead or going forth by day . ideas of the ancient egyptians concerning the hereafter as expressed in their own terms , saoc vol . 37 ; university of chicago press , chicago , 1974 . jan assmann ( 2005 ) 2001 . death and salvation in ancient egypt . translated by david lorton . cornell university press . d'auria , s ( et al . ) mummies and magic : the funerary arts of ancient egypt . museum of fine arts , boston , 1989 . faulkner , raymond o ; andrews , carol ( editor ) , the ancient egyptian book of the dead . university of texas press , austin , 1972 . faulkner , raymond o ( translator ) ; von dassow , eva ( editor ) , the egyptian book of the dead , the book of going forth by day . the first authentic presentation of the complete papyrus of ani . chronicle books , san francisco , 1994 . hornung , erik ; lorton , d ( translator ) , the ancient egyptian books of the afterlife . cornell university press , 1999 . lapp , g , the papyrus of nu ( catalogue of books of the dead in the british museum ) . british museum press , london , 1997 . müller-roth , marcus , '' the book of the dead project : past , present and future . '' british museum studies in ancient egypt and sudan 15 ( 2010 ) : 189-200 . niwinski , andrzej , studies on the illustrated theban funerary papyri of the 11th and 10th centuries b.c . obo vol . 86 ; universitätsverlag , freiburg , 1989 . pinch , geraldine , magic in ancient egypt . british museum press , london , 1994 . taylor , john h . ( editor ) , ancient egyptian book of the dead : journey through the afterlife . british museum press , london , 2010 . external links . the mummy chamber brooklyn museum exhibit das altägyptische totenbuch - ein digitales textzeugenarchiv complete digital archive of all witnesses for the book of the dead ( with descriptions of the ( c . 3000 ) objects and ( c . 20,000 ) images ) online readable text , with several images and reproductions of egyptian papyri papyrus of hunefer , with many scenes and their formula english translations , from the copy now in the british museum video : british museum curator introduces the book of the dead