Symphony No. 8 (Mahler)

history . background . by the summer of 1906 , mahler had been director of the vienna hofoper for nine years . throughout this time his practice was to leave vienna at the close of the hofoper season for a summer retreat , where he could devote himself to composition . since 1899 this had been at maiernigg , near the resort town of maria wörth in carinthia , southern austria , where mahler built a villa overlooking the wörthersee . blaukopf , p . 137 in these restful surroundings mahler completed his symphonies no . & nbsp ; 4 , no . & nbsp ; 5 , no . & nbsp ; 6 and no . & nbsp ; 7 , his rückert songs and his song cycle kindertotenlieder ( '' songs on the death of children '' ) . blaukopf , pp . 158 , 165 , 203 until 1901 , mahler 's compositions had been heavily influenced by the german folk-poem collection des knaben wunderhorn ( '' the youth 's magic horn '' ) , which he had first encountered around 1887 . ( 4 . prague 1885–86 and leipzig 1886–88 ) the music of mahler 's many wunderhorn settings is reflected in his symphonies no . & nbsp ; 2 , no . & nbsp ; 3 and no . & nbsp ; 4 , which all employ vocal as well as instrumental forces . from about 1901 , however , mahler 's music underwent a change in character as he moved into the middle period of his compositional life . cooke , p . 71 here , the more austere poems of friedrich rückert replace the wunderhorn collection as the primary influence ; the songs are less folk-related , and no longer infiltrate the symphonies as extensively as before . mitchell , vol . ii p . 32 during this period symphonies no . & nbsp ; 5 , no . & nbsp ; 6 and no . & nbsp ; 7 were written , all as purely instrumental works , portrayed by mahler scholar deryck cooke as '' more stern and forthright & nbsp ; . , more tautly symphonic , with a new granite-like hardness of orchestration '' . mahler arrived at maiernigg in june 1906 with the draft manuscript of his seventh symphony ; he intended to spend time revising the orchestration until an idea for a new work should strike . la grange ( 2000 ) , pp . 426–427 the composer 's wife alma mahler , in her memoirs , says that for a fortnight mahler was '' haunted by the spectre of failing inspiration '' ; a . mahler , p . 102 mahler 's recollection , however , is that on the first day of the vacation he was seized by the creative spirit , and plunged immediately into composition of the work that would become his eighth symphony . a . mahler , p . 328 . composition . two notes in mahler 's handwriting dating from june 1906 show that early schemes for the work , which he may not at first have intended as a fully choral symphony , were based on a four-movement structure in which two '' hymns '' surround an instrumental core . la grange ( 2000 ) , p . 889 these outlines show that mahler had fixed on the idea of opening with the latin hymn , but had not yet settled on the precise form of the rest . the first note is as follows : hymn : veni creator scherzo adagio : caritas ( '' christian love '' ) hymn : die geburt des eros ( '' the birth of eros '' ) the second note includes musical sketches for the veni creator movement , and two bars in b minor which are thought to relate to the caritas . the four-movement plan is retained in a slightly different form , still without specific indication of the extent of the choral element : veni creator caritas weihnachtsspiele mit dem kindlein ( '' christmas games with the child '' ) schöpfung durch eros . hymne ( '' creation through eros . hymn '' ) from mahler 's later comments on the symphony 's gestation , it is evident that the four-movement plan was relatively short-lived . he soon replaced the last three movements with a single section , essentially a dramatic cantata , based on the closing scenes of goethe 's faust , the depiction of an ideal of redemption through eternal womanhood ( das ewige-weibliche ) . kennedy , p . 77 mahler had long nurtured an ambition to set the end of the faust epic to music , '' and to set it quite differently from other composers who have made it saccharine and feeble . '' mitchell , vol . iii p . 519 in comments recorded by his biographer richard specht , mahler makes no mention of the original four-movement plans . he told specht that having chanced on the veni creator hymn , he had a sudden vision of the complete work : '' i saw the whole piece immediately before my eyes , and only needed to write it down as though it were being dictated to me . '' the work was written at a frantic pace— '' in record time '' , according to the musicologist henry-louis de la grange . la grange ( 2000 ) , p . 890 it was completed in all its essentials by mid-august , even though mahler had to absent himself for a week to attend the salzburg festival . kennedy , p . 149 la grange ( 2000 ) , pp . 432–447 mahler began composing the veni creator hymn without waiting for the text to arrive from vienna . when it did , according to alma mahler , '' the complete text fitted the music exactly . intuitively he had composed the music for the full strophes verses . '' although amendments and alterations were subsequently carried out to the score , there is very little manuscript evidence of the sweeping changes and rewriting that occurred with his earlier symphonies as they were prepared for performance . mitchell , vol . iii pp . 523–525 with its use of vocal elements throughout , rather than in episodes at or near the end , the work was the first completely choral symphony to be written . kennedy , p . 151 mahler had no doubts about the ground-breaking nature of the symphony , calling it the grandest thing he had ever done , and maintaining that all his previous symphonies were merely preludes to it . '' try to imagine the whole universe beginning to ring and resound . there are no longer human voices , but planets and suns revolving . '' it was his '' gift to the nation & nbsp ; . a great joy-bringer . '' la grange ( 2000 ) , p . 926 . reception and performance history . . premiere . mahler made arrangements with the impresario emil gutmann for the symphony to be premiered in munich in the autumn of 1910 . he soon regretted this involvement , writing of his fears that gutmann would turn the performance into '' a catastrophic barnum and bailey show '' . blaukopf , pp . 229–232 preparations began early in the year , with the selection of choirs from the choral societies of munich , leipzig and vienna . the munich zentral-singschule provided 350 students for the children 's choir . meanwhile , bruno walter , mahler 's assistant at the vienna hofoper , was responsible for the recruitment and preparation of the eight soloists . through the spring and summer these forces prepared in their home towns , before assembling in munich early in september for three full days of final rehearsals under mahler . carr , pp . 206–207 his youthful assistant otto klemperer remarked later on the many small changes that mahler made to the score during rehearsal : '' he always wanted more clarity , more sound , more dynamic contrast . at one point during rehearsals he turned to us and said , 'if , after my death , something does n't sound right , then change it . you have not only a right but a duty to do so . ' '' heyworth , p . 48 for the premiere , fixed for 12 september , gutmann had hired the newly built neue musik-festhalle , in the munich international exhibition grounds near theresienhöhe ( now a branch of the deutsches museum ) . this vast hall had a capacity of 3,200 ; to assist ticket sales and raise publicity , gutmann devised the nickname '' symphony of a thousand '' , which has remained the symphony 's popular subtitle despite mahler 's disapproval . among the many distinguished figures present at the sold-out premiere were the composers richard strauss , camille saint-saëns and anton webern ; the writers thomas mann and arthur schnitzler ; and the leading theatre director of the day , max reinhardt . also in the audience was the 28-year-old british conductor leopold stokowski , who six years later would lead the first united states performance of the symphony . up to this time , receptions of mahler 's new symphonies had usually been disappointing . however , the munich premiere of the eighth symphony was an unqualified triumph ; as the final chords died away there was a short pause before a huge outbreak of applause which lasted for twenty minutes . back at his hotel mahler received a letter from thomas mann , which referred to the composer as '' the man who , as i believe , expresses the art of our time in its profoundest and most sacred form '' . a . mahler , p . 342 the symphony 's duration at its first performance was recorded by the critic-composer julius korngold as 85 minutes . la grange ( 2000 ) , pp . 913 and 918 this performance was the last time that mahler conducted a premiere of one of his own works . eight months after his munich triumph , he died at the age of 50 . his remaining works—das lied von der erde ( '' the song of the earth '' ) , his symphony no . & nbsp ; 9 and the unfinished symphony no . & nbsp ; 10—were all premiered after his death . . subsequent performances . on the day following the munich premiere mahler led the orchestra and choruses in a repeat performance . during the next three years , according to the calculations of mahler 's friend guido adler the eighth symphony received a further 20 performances across europe . carr , p . 222 these included the dutch premiere , in amsterdam under willem mengelberg on 12 & nbsp ; march 1912 , and the first prague performance , given on 20 & nbsp ; march 1912 under mahler 's former vienna hofoper colleague , alexander von zemlinsky . vienna itself had to wait until 1918 before the symphony was heard there . in the us , leopold stokowski persuaded an initially reluctant board of the philadelphia orchestra to finance the american premiere , which took place on 2 & nbsp ; march 1916 . the occasion was a great success ; the symphony was played several more times in philadelphia before the orchestra and choruses travelled to new york , for a series of equally well-received performances at the metropolitan opera house . at the amsterdam mahler festival in may 1920 , mahler 's completed symphonies and his major song cycles were presented over nine concerts given by the concertgebouw orchestra and choruses , under mengelberg 's direction . blaukopf , p . 241 the music critic samuel langford , who attended the occasion , commented that '' we do not leave amsterdam greatly envying the diet of mahler first and every other composer afterward , to which mengelberg is training the music-lovers of that city . '' the austrian music historian oscar bie , while impressed with the festival as a whole , wrote subsequently that the eighth was '' stronger in effect than in significance , and purer in its voices than in emotion '' . painter , p . 358 langford had commented on the british '' not being very eager about mahler '' , and the eighth symphony was not performed in britain until 15 & nbsp ; april 1930 , when henry wood presented it with the bbc symphony orchestra . the work was played again eight years later by the same forces ; among those present in the audience was the youthful composer benjamin britten . impressed by the music , he nevertheless found the performance itself '' execrable '' . the years after world war ii saw a number of notable performances of the eighth symphony , including sir adrian boult 's broadcast from the royal albert hall on 10 & nbsp ; february 1948 , the japanese premiere under kazuo yamada in tokyo in december 1949 , and the australian premiere under sir eugene goossens in 1951 . a carnegie hall performance under stokowski in 1950 became the first complete recording of the symphony to be issued . after 1950 the increasing numbers of performances and recordings of the work signified its growing popularity , but not all critics were won over . theodor w . adorno found the piece weak , '' a giant symbolic shell '' ; carr , p . 186 this most affirmative work of mahler 's is , in adorno 's view , his least successful , musically and artistically inferior to his other symphonies . la grange ( 2000 ) , p . 928 the composer-critic robert simpson , usually a champion of mahler , referred to part & nbsp ; ii as '' an ocean of shameless kitsch . '' mahler biographer jonathan carr finds much of the symphony '' bland '' , lacking the tension and resolution present in the composer 's other symphonies . deryck cooke , on the other hand , compares mahler 's eighth to beethoven 's choral ( ninth ) symphony . to cooke , mahler 's is '' the choral symphony of the twentieth century : like beethoven 's , but in a different way , it sets before us an ideal of redemption which we are as yet far from realising—even perhaps moving away from—but which we can hardly abandon without perishing '' . cooke , pp . 93–95 in the late 20th century and into the 21st , the symphony was performed in all parts of the world . a succession of premieres in the far east culminated in october 2002 in beijing , when long yu led the china philharmonic orchestra in the first performance of the work in the people 's republic of china . the sydney olympic arts festival in august 2000 opened with a performance of the eighth by the sydney symphony orchestra under its chief conductor edo de waart . the popularity of the work , and its heroic scale , meant that it was often used as a set piece on celebratory occasions ; on 15 & nbsp ; march 2008 , yoav talmi led 200 instrumentalists and a choir of 800 in a performance in quebec city , to mark the 400th anniversary of the city 's foundation . in london on 16 & nbsp ; july 2010 the opening concert of the bbc proms celebrated the 150th anniversary of mahler 's birth with a performance of the eighth , with jiří bělohlávek conducting the bbc symphony orchestra . this performance was its eighth in the history of the proms . . analysis . structure and form . the eighth symphony 's two parts combine the sacred text of the 9th-century latin hymn veni creator spiritus with the secular text from the closing passages from goethe 's 19th-century dramatic poem faust . despite the evident disparities within this juxtaposition , the work as a whole expresses a single idea , that of redemption through the power of love . la grange ( 2000 ) , pp . 905–907 mitchell ( 1980 ) , pp . 523–524 the choice of these two texts was not arbitrary ; goethe , a poet whom mahler revered , believed that veni creator embodied aspects of his own philosophy , and had translated it into german in 1820 . mitchell : '' the creating of the eighth '' p . 11 once inspired by the veni creator idea , mahler soon saw the faust poem as an ideal counterpart to the latin hymn . la grange ( 2000 ) , p . 891 the unity between the two parts of the symphony is established , musically , by the extent to which they share thematic material . in particular , the first notes of the veni creator theme — : e → b → a : \new staff \with la grange draws attention to the notably high tessitura for the sopranos , for soloists and for choral singers . he characterises the alto solos as brief and unremarkable ; however , the tenor solo role in part & nbsp ; ii is both extensive and demanding , requiring on several occasions to be heard over the choruses . the wide melodic leaps in the pater profundus role present particular challenges to the bass soloist . . publication . only one autograph score of symphony no . & nbsp ; 8 is known to exist . once the property of alma mahler , it is held by the bayerische staatsbibliothek in munich . in 1906 mahler signed a contract with the viennese publishing firm universal edition ( ue ) , which thus became the main publisher of all his works . la grange ( 2000 ) , pp . 501–502 the full orchestral score of the eighth symphony was published by ue in 1912 . mitchell , vol . iii p . 592 a russian version , published in moscow by izdatel'stvo muzyka in 1976 , was republished in the united states by dover publications in 1989 , with an english text and notes . the international gustav mahler society , founded in 1955 , has as its main objective the production of a complete critical edition of all of mahler 's works . as of 2016 its critical edition of the eighth remains a project for the future . . recordings . sir adrian boult 's 1948 broadcast performance with the bbc symphony orchestra was recorded by the bbc , but not issued until 2009 when it was made available in mp3 form . the first issued recording of the complete symphony was stokowski 's carnegie hall performance with the new york philharmonic and combined new york choirs on 9 & nbsp ; april 1950 . nearly two years before , in july 1948 , the hungarian-born conductor eugene ormandy had recorded the '' veni creator spiritus '' movement at the hollywood bowl . since stokowski 's version , at least 70 recordings of the symphony have been made by many of the world 's leading orchestras and singers , mostly during live performances . . notes and references . notes . . references . . sources . . external links . german and latin texts , with english translation , taken from the naxos 85505533-34 recording cond . antoni wit