DVD player

technical details . a dvd player has to complete these tasks : read a dvd in iso – udf version 1.02 format optionally decrypt the data with either css and/or macrovision read and obey the dvds regional lockout codes and display a warning if the player is not authorized to play the dvd decode the mpeg-2 video stream with a maximum of 10 mbit/s ( peak ) or 8 mbit/s ( continuous ) decode sound in mp2 , pcm or ac-3 format and output ( with optional ac-3 to stereo downmixing ) on stereo connector , optical or electric digital connector output a video signal , either an analog one ( in ntsc or pal format ) on the composite , s-video , scart , or component video connectors , or a digital one on the dvi or hdmi connectors . dvd players can not play blu-ray discs due to using different wavelength laser 's blu ray use a blue violet laser instead of a red laser . however , all blu-ray players are '' backwards compatible '' and they will play dvds and some are compatible with cd and other disc formats . cd/dvd/avi/mp4 playback . additionally , most dvd players allow users to play audio cds ( cd-da , mp3 , etc . ) and video cds ( vcd ) . a few include a home cinema decoder ( i.e . dolby digital , digital theater systems ( dts ) ) . some newer devices also play videos in the mpeg-4 asp video compression format ( such as divx ) popular in the internet . portable players . most hardware dvd players must be connected to a television ; there are portable devices which have an attached lcd screen and stereo speakers . portable dvd players are often used for long road trips and travel . they often have a plug for the 12 volt power jack in cars . some models have two screens , so that two people in the back seat can both watch the movie . other portable dvd players have a single screen that opens up like a laptop computer screen . output . due to multiple audio ( and video ) output devices , there are many outputs on a dvd player , such as an rca jack , component outputs , and an hdmi output . consumers may become confused with how to connect a player to a tv or amplifier . most systems include an optional digital audio connector for this task , which is then paired with a similar input on the amplifier . the physical connection is typically rca connectors or toslink , which transmits a s/pdif stream carrying either uncompressed digital audio ( pcm ) or the original compressed audio data ( dolby digital , dts , mpeg audio ) to be decoded by the audio equipment . video . video is another issue which continues to present most problems . early generations of dvd players usually outputted analog video only , via both composite video on an rca jack and s-video . however , neither connector was intended to be used for progressive video , and most later players sold then gained another set of connectors , component video , which keeps the three components of the video , luminance and two color differentials , on fully separate wires . this video information is taken directly from the dvd itself . the three components compare well to s-video , which uses two wires , uniting and degrading the two color signals , and composite , which uses only wire one , uniting and degrading all three signals . the connectors are further confused by using a number of different physical connectors on different player models , rca or bnc , as well as using vga cables in a non-standard way ( vga is normally analog rgb & mdash ; a different , incompatible form of component video ) . even worse , there are often two sets of component outputs , one carrying interlaced video , and the other progressive , or an interlaced/progressive switch ( either a physical switch or a menu setting ) . in europe ( but not most other pal areas ) , scart connectors are generally used , which can carry composite and analog rgb interlaced video signals ( rgb can be progressive , but not all dvd players and displays support this mode ) or y/c ( s-video ) , as well as analog two-channel sound and automatic 4:3 or 16:9 ( widescreen ) switching on a single convenient multi-wire cable . the analog rgb component signal offers video quality which is superior to s-video and identical to ypbpr component video . however , analog rgb and s-video signals can not be carried simultaneously , due to each using the same pins for different uses , and displays often must be manually configured as to the input signal , since no switching mode exists for s-video . ( a switching mode does exist to indicate whether composite or rgb is being used . ) some dvd players and set-top boxes offer ypbpr component video signals over the wires in the scart connector intended for rgb , though this violates the official specification and manual configuration is again necessary . ( hypothetically , unlike rgb component , ypbpr component signals and s-video y/c signals could both be sent over the wire simultaneously , since they share the luminance ( y ) component . ) hdmi is a digital connection for carrying high-definition video , similar to dvi . along with video , hdmi also supports up to eight-channel digital audio . dvd players with connectors for high-definition video can upconvert the source to formats used for higher definition video ( e.g . , 720p , 1080i , 1080p , etc . ) , before outputting the signal . by no means , however , will the resulting signal be high-definition video ; that is , aside from optional deinterlacing , upconverting generally consists of merely scaling the video 's dimensions to match that of higher resolution formats , foregoing the scaling that would normally occur in the output device . usb . some dvd players include a usb video recorder . as well as such , there are also have dvd players with a usb port to be able to play digital media types as well as mp4 , mp3 , etc . wireless . wireless connections ( bluetooth and/or wi-fi ) are useful to manage ( play/record ) wirelessly content from or to other devices ( i.e . cell phones ) . prices . , retail prices for such a device , depending on its optional features ( such as digital sound or video output ) , start between 30 and 80 usd/euro . they are usually cheaper than vcrs . manufacture . the largest producer of dvd players is china ; in 2002 they produced 30 million players , more than 70 % of the world output . these producers have to pay us 15– 20 per player in license fees , to the patent holders of the dvd technology ( sony , philips , toshiba and time warner ) as well as for mpeg-2 licenses . to avoid these fees , china has developed the enhanced versatile disc standard as an intended successor of dvd ; , evd players were only being sold in china . software . software dvd players are programs that allow users to view dvd videos on a computer with a dvd drive . some examples are the vlc media player , 5kplayer and mplayer ( all free software ) , as well as windvd , totalmedia theatre , powerdvd and dvd player . among others , there are variants & huge kinds of software dvd players as well as multimedia player software which has dvd video playback capability , whether its proprietary-type ( as commercial software ) , freeware , shareware or just a free software are available in the market . successors . in the battle to succeed and to improve upon the role of the dvd player as the mainstream medium for stored audiovisual content on optical disc , there were two major contestants : the hd dvd player and the blu-ray disc player , utilizing two incompatible technologies that reproduced higher resolution video images and more complete audio information than was possible with dvd . on february 19 , 2008 , toshiba , creator of the former technology , announced it would cease production on all hd dvd products , leaving blu-ray as the high definition successor to dvd players . as technology improved , various players were sold , some of which were also blu-ray players , that could upscale and up-convert dvd content , increasing the overall perceived picture quality .