William C. McCool

personal information . william mccool was born september 23 , 1961 , in san diego , california . his parents divorced when he was young and his mother married barent mccool , a naval aviator . mccool was active in the boy scouts of america where he became an eagle scout . william c . '' willie '' mccool at scouting.org his favorite song was '' imagine '' by john lennon , which was played during the sts-107 mission . his favorite band was radiohead , and the song '' fake plastic trees '' was played by mission control as a wake-up call . mccool died on february 1 , 2003 , when space shuttle columbia broke up over the southern united states during re-entry . he was survived by his wife , lani , and their three sons . he is buried in anacortes , washington , where he lived at the time of his death . . education . 1976–77 : attended john f . kennedy high school , tamuning , guam bongioanni , carlos . guam remembers former resident , columbia astronaut mccool , stars and stripes , february 7 , 2003 . retrieved january 1 , 2019 . 1979 : graduated from coronado high school , lubbock , texas . 1983 : received a bachelor of science degree in applied science from the united states naval academy . 1985 : received a master of science degree in computer science from the university of maryland , college park . 1991 : graduated from united states naval test pilot school , naval air station patuxent river - class 101 . 1992 : received a master of science degree in aeronautical engineering from the u.s . naval postgraduate school . . flight experience . mccool completed flight training and was designated a naval aviator in august 1986 . he was assigned to tactical electronic warfare squadron 129 ( vaq-129 ) at nas whidbey island , washington , for initial ea-6b prowler training . his first operational tour was with tactical electronic warfare squadron 133 ( vaq-133 ) , where he made two deployments aboard the aircraft carrier to the mediterranean sea , and received designation as a wing-qualified landing signal officer ( lso ) . in november 1989 , he was selected for the u.s . naval postgraduate school/test pilot school ( tps ) cooperative education program . after graduating from tps in june 1992 , he worked as a ta-4j and ea-6b test pilot in flight systems department of strike aircraft test directorate at nas patuxent river , maryland . he was responsible for the management and conduct of a wide variety of projects , ranging from airframe fatigue life studies to numerous avionics upgrades . his primary efforts , however , were dedicated to flight test of the advanced capability ea-6b . following his patuxent river tour , mccool returned to whidbey island , and was assigned to tactical electronic warfare squadron 132 ( vaq-132 ) aboard the carrier . he served as administrative and operations officer with the squadron through their work-up cycle , receiving notice of his nasa selection while embarked on enterprise for her final pre-deployment at sea period . mccool accumulated over 2,800 hours flight experience in 24 aircraft and over 400 carrier arrestments . nasa experience . selected by nasa in april 1996 , mccool reported to the johnson space center in august 1996 . he completed two years of training and evaluation , and was qualified for flight assignment as a pilot . initially assigned to the computer support branch , mccool also served as technical assistant to the director of flight crew operations , and worked shuttle cockpit upgrade issues for the astronaut office . spaceflight experience . mccool was pilot of space shuttle mission sts-107 , january 16 to february 1 , 2003 , logging 15 days , 22 hours and 20 minutes in space . the 16-day flight was a dedicated science and research mission . working 24 hours a day , in two alternating shifts , the crew successfully conducted approximately 80 experiments . sts-107 's mission ended abruptly on february 1 , 2003 , when columbia disintegrated during re-entry , 16 minutes before scheduled landing . all seven crew members were killed . organizations . u.s . naval academy alumni association . awards . posthumously awarded : the nasa space flight medal the nasa distinguished service medal the defense distinguished service medal ( ddsm ) the congressional space medal of honor . special honors . eagle scout served as team captain of the u.s . naval academy cross country team his senior year graduated second of 1,083 in the class of 1983 at the u.s . naval academy presented '' outstanding student '' and '' best dt-ii thesis '' awards as graduate of u.s . naval test pilot school , class 101 awarded navy commendation medal ( 2 ) awarded navy achievement medal ( 2 ) . tributes . asteroid 51829 williemccool was posthumously named for mccool . mccool hill in the columbia hills on mars was posthumously named for mccool . mccool hall , in the columbia village apartments at the florida institute of technology , is named after him . guam south elementary/middle school , a dodea school in santa rita , guam , was renamed cdr william c . mccool elementary/middle school on august 29 , 2003 . willie mccool track and field at coronado high school in lubbock , texas , was posthumously named for mccool . willie mccool bronze sculpture placed in the library at coronado high school in lubbock , texas . willie mccool memorial was dedicated on saturday , may 7 , 2005 , at huneke park at 82nd and quaker avenue in lubbock , texas . the william mccool science center , located on the campus of the frank lamping elementary school in henderson , nevada , is a facility where elementary students throughout the clark county school district have an opportunity to learn about space and other fields of science . a gawad kalinga village in moncada , tarlac , philippines , will be named '' usn commander willie mccool gk village '' . in the star trek book mirror universe – glass empires , the shuttlecraft of the u.s.s . defiant in the short story '' age of the empress '' is named the mccool . mccool track at the naval academy preparatory school , naval station newport , rhode island is named after him . the spacefaring game elite : dangerous contains a starport in the jaroua systen named '' mccool city '' . the willie mccool monument was dedicated on december 2 , 2007 , at the u.s . naval academy golf course . the monument stands where willie would have been 16 minutes from the finish line during his fastest race on navy 's home course . the willie mccool memorial model air field park located in north las vegas , nevada was posthumously named for mccool on october 23 , 2004 . mccool hall , located on tinker afb , oklahoma is a navy bachelors enlisted quarters named after mccool . camp mccool , located in bagram airfield , is the home of rotating ea-6b prowler squadrons currently supporting isaf in afghanistan . the faa named a fix/waypoint mccul near naval air station whidbey island ( also near anacortes , wa ) located at 48 13.11n , 123 07.03w . navy pilots are routinely vectored to the mccool waypoint . the mccool breakthrough award is named after willie mccool and is given to an individual who has made a significant breakthrough in the spirit of ichrie 's mission . the commander william c . mccool academy is lubbock isd ’ s newest magnet middle school with specialized programming integrating science and technology , interpreted through engineering and the arts , all based in mathematical elements . as the only school in the lubbock area with a focus on project based learning , the curriculum at mccool academy creates a student-driven learning environment that fosters inquiry , problem-solving , innovation and a growth mindset for 21st-century success skills . . quote . : : this article includes text from nasa 's '' william c . mccool : nasa astronaut biographical data '' , a work in the public domain .