Causeway Bay

location . causeway bay borders the eastern district . causeway bay includes tsing fung street , causeway bay market , the victoria park , the royal hong kong yacht club , oil street , noonday gun , the police officers club , queen 's college and the hong kong central library . the western border of causeway bay is considered to be marked by canal road , which separates it from the wan chai area . since 1982 , two electoral constituencies of causeway bay ( causeway bay north and causeway bay south ) had been grouped into the eastern district of district board elections , whilst causeway bay central was grouped with the wan chai district to the west . however , local government decisions—other than electoral demarcations—still affect the region as a whole . since 1994 , hong kong district board elections have further been subdivided into smaller constituencies . the northern sector consists of the area around victoria park , the middle sector coincides with the central business district , and the southern sector forms the area around tin hau . to cope with population change , the constituency boundary between wan chai district and eastern district was changed in the new year 's day of 2016 ( effective on voting in 2019 hong kong local elections ) . as a result , the victoria park and tin hau constituencies became a part of wan chai district starting from that day . as a consequence , the whole of causeway bay is now part of wan chai district . but the easternmost parts of the area , such as oil street , and the western side of tin hau temple road , remain in the eastern district . town planning is managed by the causeway bay outline zoning plan , which is not related to the electoral boundaries as drawn by the electoral affairs commission . the ozp also manages the other neighbourhoods of tai hang and so kon po . the ozp , however , does not manage victoria park , which was reclaimed from the causeway bay/tung lo wan body of water , nor tin hau , which is historically part of tung lo wan . tung lo wan is the chinese name that collectively refers to the waters and lands around the bay . causeway bay market and causeway bay fire station are in fact located in tin hau , and are outside the jurisdiction of the ozp , but in terms of the electoral constituency , the market , the fire station , and victoria park are located within the victoria park constituency . added to this confusion , wan chai fire station is located in the canal road constituency but some non-government sources consider it as part of the causeway bay area . the wan chai fire station is not part of causeway bay ozp . . history . the causeway bay typhoon shelter and the tin hau temple reveal that the area was once a fishing village . before urban development and massive land reclamation , causeway bay was a heavily silted bay . its former shape can be found on maps by tracing tung lo wan road , which goes along the former bay . in the early stage of development , a causeway was built , which is the present-day causeway road . in the 1950s , the coastline was further pushed forward when the remains of the bay were reclaimed for the victoria park , when the statue of queen victoria was brought back from japan . the statue had been taken away during the second world war from statue square at chater road , central . kellett island off the coast of causeway bay has disappeared and connected as a result of the land reclamation . the original causeway bay proper is actually the area now known as tin hau , near the present-day tin hau station and the causeway bay tin hau temple , whereas the causeway bay station is at the area historically called east point . the present-day usage of the name causeway bay is usually confused with east point , an area named after a spit on the coastline , eastern end of formerly victoria city . the names of yee wo street , jardine 's bazaar , and jardine 's crescent reveal that the land in this area was sold by the british colonial government to jardines in the early 19th century . another area often mistaken as causeway bay is bowrington area or in chinese ngo keng ( now part of canal road ( constituency ) ) , literally '' goose 's neck '' , where is known for villain hitting activity , a voodoo-like tradition of hong kong . features . causeway bay or east point is one of hong kong 's major shopping districts . it includes the 13-storey japanese-style department store sogo , as well as shopping centres such as times square and hysan place . there are also smaller malls such as world trade centre , windsor house , hang lung centre , fashion island , fashion walk , lee garden one and lee garden two . causeway bay is one of the most crowded and central areas in hong kong . the area contains many trendy shops carrying both locally made and imported fashion and products from around the world . as such , it is a popular social spot for young people . many shops are open until after midnight . notable hotels in causeway bay include the excelsior and regal hong kong hotel . several boutique hotels have opened recently , including mira moon hotel on jaffe road . for years , jardine matheson has fired a cannon shot at noon every day in causeway bay , by victoria harbour , slightly eastward of the former kellett island . the gunshots have served as time signals for many generations of old inhabitants of hong kong . this tradition still continues today . this is the '' noonday gun '' mentioned in the noël coward song '' mad dogs and englishmen '' . although the names of certain landmarks in the western part of causeway bay start with '' wan chai '' ( e.g . wan chai fire station ) , the landmarks are across the local customary limit of wan chai on canal road . places in causeway bay . leisure and cultural . hong kong central library noonday gun royal hong kong yacht club victoria park . shopping . sogo times square world trade centre hysan place windsor house . economy . joy city property limited ( formerly hong kong parkview group ) - 33rd floor of the cofco tower - traditional chinese address : '' 香港銅鑼灣 告士打道262號 中糧大廈33樓 '' - simplified chinese address : '' 香港铜锣湾 告士打道262号 中粮大厦33楼 '' wilson parking : world trade centre ( 世界貿易中心 ) - traditional chinese and simplified chinese versions google hong kong : suite 2501 , tower 2 , times square '' google locations . '' google . retrieved 25 may 2016 . '' google hong kong suite 2501 tower 2 , times square 1 matheson street , causeway bay , hong kong '' . transport . main roads . king 's road causeway road gloucester road canal road hennessy road yee wo street . public transport . for the mtr , it is connected by the island line : tin hau and causeway bay stations . both tram and bus services provides connections along causeway bay as a first and last mile connection . see also . list of buildings , sites and areas in hong kong . references . external links .