Spectral line

types of line spectra . image : simple spectroscope.jpg thumb 300px right continuous spectrum of an incandescent lamp ( mid ) and discrete spectrum lines of a fluorescent lamp ( bottom ) spectral lines are the result of interaction between a quantum system ( usually atoms , but sometimes molecules or atomic nuclei ) and a single photon . when a photon has about the right amount of energy ( which is connected to its frequency ) einstein , albert ( 1905 ) . '' annus mirabilis papers photoelectric effect '' . to allow a change in the energy state of the system ( in the case of an atom this is usually an electron changing orbitals ) , the photon is absorbed . then it will be spontaneously re-emitted , either in the same frequency as the original or in a cascade , where the sum of the energies of the photons emitted will be equal to the energy of the one absorbed ( assuming the system returns to its original state ) . a spectral line may be observed either as an emission line or an absorption line . which type of line is observed depends on the type of material and its temperature relative to another emission source . an absorption line is produced when photons from a hot , broad spectrum source pass through a cold material . the intensity of light , over a narrow frequency range , is reduced due to absorption by the material and re-emission in random directions . by contrast , a bright emission line is produced when photons from a hot material are detected in the presence of a broad spectrum from a cold source . the intensity of light , over a narrow frequency range , is increased due to emission by the material . spectral lines are highly atom-specific , and can be used to identify the chemical composition of any medium capable of letting light pass through it . several elements were discovered by spectroscopic means , including helium , thallium , and caesium . spectral lines also depend on the physical conditions of the gas , so they are widely used to determine the chemical composition of stars and other celestial bodies that can not be analyzed by other means , as well as their physical conditions . mechanisms other than atom-photon interaction can produce spectral lines . depending on the exact physical interaction ( with molecules , single particles , etc . ) , the frequency of the involved photons will vary widely , and lines can be observed across the electromagnetic spectrum , from radio waves to gamma rays . nomenclature . strong spectral lines in the visible part of the spectrum often have a unique fraunhofer line designation , such as k for a line at 393.366 & nbsp ; nm emerging from singly-ionized ca + , though some of the fraunhofer '' lines '' are blends of multiple lines from several different species . in other cases the lines are designated according to the level of ionization by adding a roman numeral to the designation of the chemical element , so that ca + also has the designation ca & nbsp ; ii or ca ii . neutral atoms are denoted with the roman numeral & nbsp ; i , singly ionized atoms with ii , and so on , so that , for example , fe ix ( ix , roman nine ) represents eight times ionized iron . more detailed designations usually include the line wavelength and may include a multiplet number ( for atomic lines ) or band designation ( for molecular lines ) . many spectral lines of atomic hydrogen also have designations within their respective series , such as the lyman series or balmer series . originally all spectral lines were classified into series : the principle series , sharp series , and diffuse series . these series exist across atoms of all elements , and the patterns for all atoms are well-predicted by the rydberg-ritz formula . for this reason , the nist spectral line database contains a column for ritz calculated lines . these series were later associated with suborbitals . line broadening and shift . there are a number of effects which control spectral line shape . a spectral line extends over a range of frequencies , not a single frequency ( i.e . , it has a nonzero linewidth ) . in addition , its center may be shifted from its nominal central wavelength . there are several reasons for this broadening and shift . these reasons may be divided into two general categories – broadening due to local conditions and broadening due to extended conditions . broadening due to local conditions is due to effects which hold in a small region around the emitting element , usually small enough to assure local thermodynamic equilibrium . broadening due to extended conditions may result from changes to the spectral distribution of the radiation as it traverses its path to the observer . it also may result from the combining of radiation from a number of regions which are far from each other . broadening due to local effects . . natural broadening . the lifetime of excited states results in natural broadening , also known as lifetime broadening . the uncertainty principle relates the lifetime of an excited state ( due to spontaneous emission or the auger effect ) with the uncertainty of its energy . a short lifetime will have a large energy uncertainty and a broad emission . this broadening effect results in an unshifted lorentzian profile . the natural broadening can be experimentally altered only to the extent that decay rates can be artificially suppressed or enhanced . for example , in the following article , decay was suppressed via a microwave cavity , thus reducing the natural broadening : . thermal doppler broadening . the atoms in a gas which are emitting radiation will have a distribution of velocities . each photon emitted will be '' red '' - or '' blue '' -shifted by the doppler effect depending on the velocity of the atom relative to the observer . the higher the temperature of the gas , the wider the distribution of velocities in the gas . since the spectral line is a combination of all of the emitted radiation , the higher the temperature of the gas , the broader the spectral line emitted from that gas . this broadening effect is described by a gaussian profile and there is no associated shift . pressure broadening . the presence of nearby particles will affect the radiation emitted by an individual particle . there are two limiting cases by which this occurs : impact pressure broadening or collisional broadening : the collision of other particles with the light emitting particle interrupts the emission process , and by shortening the characteristic time for the process , increases the uncertainty in the energy emitted ( as occurs in natural broadening ) . the duration of the collision is much shorter than the lifetime of the emission process . this effect depends on both the density and the temperature of the gas . the broadening effect is described by a lorentzian profile and there may be an associated shift . quasistatic pressure broadening : the presence of other particles shifts the energy levels in the emitting particle , thereby altering the frequency of the emitted radiation . the duration of the influence is much longer than the lifetime of the emission process . this effect depends on the density of the gas , but is rather insensitive to temperature . the form of the line profile is determined by the functional form of the perturbing force with respect to distance from the perturbing particle . there may also be a shift in the line center . the general expression for the lineshape resulting from quasistatic pressure broadening is a 4-parameter generalization of the gaussian distribution known as a stable distribution . pressure broadening may also be classified by the nature of the perturbing force as follows : linear stark broadening occurs via the linear stark effect , which results from the interaction of an emitter with an electric field of a charged particle at a distance r , causing a shift in energy that is linear in the field strength . ( \delta e \sim 1/r^2 ) resonance broadening occurs when the perturbing particle is of the same type as the emitting particle , which introduces the possibility of an energy exchange process . ( \delta e \sim 1/r^3 ) quadratic stark broadening occurs via the quadratic stark effect , which results from the interaction of an emitter with an electric field , causing a shift in energy that is quadratic in the field strength . ( \delta e \sim 1/r^4 ) van der waals broadening occurs when the emitting particle is being perturbed by van der waals forces . for the quasistatic case , a lévy distribution '' van der waals profile '' appears as lowercase in almost all sources , such as : statistical mechanics of the liquid surface by clive anthony croxton , 1980 , a wiley-interscience publication , , ; and in journal of technical physics , volume 36 , by instytut podstawowych problemów techniki ( polska akademia nauk ) , publisher : państwowe wydawn . naukowe . , 1995 , is often useful in describing the profile . the energy shift as a function of distance is given in the wings by e.g . the lennard-jones potential . ( \delta e \sim 1/r^6 ) . inhomogeneous broadening . inhomogeneous broadening is a general term for broadening because some emitting particles are in a different local environment from others , and therefore emit at a different frequency . this term is used especially for solids , where surfaces , grain boundaries , and stoichiometry variations can create a variety of local environments for a given atom to occupy . in liquids , the effects of inhomogeneous broadening is sometimes reduced by a process called motional narrowing . broadening due to non-local effects . certain types of broadening are the result of conditions over a large region of space rather than simply upon conditions that are local to the emitting particle . opacity broadening . electromagnetic radiation emitted at a particular point in space can be reabsorbed as it travels through space . this absorption depends on wavelength . the line is broadened because the photons at the line center have a greater reabsorption probability than the photons at the line wings . indeed , the reabsorption near the line center may be so great as to cause a self reversal in which the intensity at the center of the line is less than in the wings . this process is also sometimes called self-absorption . macroscopic doppler broadening . radiation emitted by a moving source is subject to doppler shift due to a finite line-of-sight velocity projection . if different parts of the emitting body have different velocities ( along the line of sight ) , the resulting line will be broadened , with the line width proportional to the width of the velocity distribution . for example , radiation emitted from a distant rotating body , such as a star , will be broadened due to the line-of-sight variations in velocity on opposite sides of the star . the greater the rate of rotation , the broader the line . another example is an imploding plasma shell in a z-pinch . radiative broadening . radiative broadening of the spectral absorption profile occurs because the on-resonance absorption in the center of the profile is saturated at much lower intensities than the off-resonant wings . therefore , as intensity rises , absorption in the wings rises faster than absorption in the center , leading to a broadening of the profile . radiative broadening occurs even at very low light intensities . combined effects . each of these mechanisms can act in isolation or in combination with others . assuming each effect is independent , the observed line profile is a convolution of the line profiles of each mechanism . for example , a combination of the thermal doppler broadening and the impact pressure broadening yields a voigt profile . however , the different line broadening mechanisms are not always independent . for example , the collisional effects and the motional doppler shifts can act in a coherent manner , resulting under some conditions even in a collisional narrowing , known as the dicke effect . spectral lines of chemical elements . visible light . for each element , the following table shows the spectral lines which appear in the visible spectrum at about 400-700 nm . other wavelengths . without qualification , '' spectral lines '' generally implies that one is talking about lines with wavelengths which fall into the range of the visible spectrum . however , there are also many spectral lines which show up at wavelengths outside this range . at the much shorter wavelengths of x-rays , these are known as characteristic x-rays . other frequencies have atomic spectral lines as well , such as the lyman series , which falls in the ultraviolet range .