Polynesian languages

languages . polynesian languages fall into two branches , tongic and nuclear polynesian . tongan and niuean constitute the tongic branch ; all the rest are part of the nuclear polynesian branch . nuclear polynesian ellicean ellicean–outlier tuvaluan nukuoro ( nukuoro in the federated states of micronesia ) kapingamarangi ( on kapingamarangi in federated states of micronesia ) nukuria ( nuguria in eastern papua new guinea ) marck , jeff ( 2000 ) , topics in polynesian languages and culture history . canberra : pacific linguistics takuu ( takuu atoll in eastern papua new guinea ) nukumanu ( nukumanu in the east of papua new guinea ) ontong java ( or luangiua ; ontong java , solomon islands ) sikaiana ( sikaiana , solomon islands ) pileni ( reef islands , solomon islands ) samoic samoan tokelauan eastern polynesian rapa nui ( easter island ) central–eastern polynesian marquesic marquesan–mangareva marquesan ( marquesas islands , french polynesia ) mangareva ( gambier islands , french polynesia ) hawaiian ( hawaii , united states ) tahitic tahitian ( society islands , french polynesia ) austral ( austral islands , french polynesia ) rapa ( rapa iti , french polynesia ) tuamotuan ( tuamotu , french polynesia ) rarotongan ( cook islands māori , cook islands ) rakahanga-manihiki ( rakahanga and manihiki , northern cook islands ) penrhyn ( or tongarevan ; tongareva , northern cook islands ) māori–moriori māori ( new zealand ) moriori ( chatham islands , new zealand ) † futunic : wallisian or east uvean ( fakaʻuvea ) ( wallis island , wallis and futuna ) fakafutuna or ( east ) futunan ( futuna island , wallis and futuna ) west uvean or faga uvea ( ouvéa off new caledonia ) pukapukan ( pukapuka , northern cook islands ) anuta ( anuta , solomon islands ) rennellese ( rennell and bellona island , solomon islands ) tikopia ( tikopia , solomon islands ) futuna-aniwa or west futunan ( futuna and aniwa in vanuatu ) mele-fila ( mele island , vanuatu ) emae ( emae , vanuatu ) tongic tongan niuafoʻou ( on niuafoʻou , tonga ) niuean . history of classification . the contemporary classification of the polynesian languages began with certain observations by andrew pawley in 1966 based on shared innovations in phonology , vocabulary and grammar showing that the east polynesian languages were more closely related to samoan than they were to tongan , calling tongan and its nearby relative niuean '' tongic '' and samoan and all other polynesian languages of the study '' nuclear polynesian '' . pawley , andrew , 1966 , polynesian languages : a subgrouping based upon shared innovations in morphology . journal of the polynesian society 75 ( 1 ) :39–64 . previously , there had been only lexicostatistical studies elbert , samuel h . , 1953 , internal relationships of polynesian languages and dialects . southwestern journal of anthropology 9 ( 2 ) :147–173 . emory , kenneth p . , 1963 , east polynesian relationships : settlement pattern and time involved as indicated by vocabulary agreements . journal of the polynesian society 72 ( 2 ) :78–100 . that squarely suggested a '' west polynesian '' group composed of at least tongan and samoan and that an '' east polynesian '' group was equally distant from both tongan and samoan . lexicostatistics is a controversial . since pawley 's 1966 publication , inferring the ancient relationships of the polynesian languages and the proofs of shared innovations . pawley published another study in 1967 . pawley , andrew , 1967 , the relationships of polynesian outlier languages . journal of the polynesian society 76 ( 3 ) :259–296 . it began the process of extracting relationships from polynesian languages on small islands in melanesia , the '' polynesian outliers '' , whose languages pawley was able to trace to east futuna in the case of those farther south and perhaps to samoa itself in the case of those more to the north . except for some minor differentiation of the east polynesian tree , further study paused for almost twenty years until wilson wilson , william h . , 1985 , evidence for an outlier source for the proto-eastern-polynesian pronominal system . oceanic linguistics 24 ( 1/2 ) :85-133 . published a study of polynesian pronominal systems in 1985 suggesting that there was a special relationship between the east polynesian languages and all other nuclear polynesian but for futunic , and calling that extra-futunic group the '' ellicean languages '' . furthermore , east polynesian was found to more likely have emerged from extra-samoan ellicean than out of samoa itself , an astonishing suggestion given the long assumption of a samoan homeland for the origins of east polynesian . wilson named this new group '' ellicean '' after the pre-independence name of tuvalu and presented fine-grained evidence for subgroups within that overarching category . marck , marck , jeff ( 2000 ) , topics in polynesian languages and culture history . canberra : pacific linguistics . in 2000 , was able to offer some support for some aspects of wilson 's suggestion through comparisons of shared sporadic ( irregular , unexpected ) sound changes , e . & nbsp ; g . , proto-polynesian and proto-nuclear-polynesian mafu 'to heal ' becoming proto-ellicean mafo . this was made possible by the massive polynesian language comparative lexicon ( '' pollex '' – with reconstructions ) of biggs and clark . biggs , bruce ( 1990 , 1991 , 1992 , 1993 , 1994 ) and bruce biggs and ross clark ( 1996 ) , pollex : comparative polynesian lexicon ( computer data base ) . auckland : department of anthropology , university of auckland . despite the relative low number of polynesian languages , and the relative abundance of data already available on many of them , the comparative method was often reduced to comparisons of vocabulary , shared sporadic sound changes and , as wilson had done in 1985 , comparison of pronominal systems , which is perhaps the second most commonly described aspect of '' minor '' languages often available for comparison after the lexicostatistical lists . wilson has a forthcoming work wilson , william h . , 2012 , whence the east polynesians ? further linguistic evidence for a northern outlier source . oceanic linguistics 51 ( 2 ) :289–359 . providing further evidence of fine grained subgroups within ellicean and a consideration of other recent work e.g . , kirch , patrick vinton and roger green ( 2001 ) hawaiki , ancestral polynesia : an essay in historical anthropology . cambridge university press . cambridge . pawley , andrew ( 2009 ) polynesian paradoxes : subgroups , wave models and the dialect geography of proto polynesian . unpublished paper delivered at the 11th international conference on austronesian linguistics . aussois , france . on the matter of ellicean internal relations . wilson 's new work brings the matter to the approximate limits of current data available , incorporating much data unknown to most other researchers . returning to lexicostatistics , it must be emphasised that the method does not make the best possible use of its short word lists of 100 or 200 words . dyen 's dyen , isidore , 1965 . a lexicostatistical classification of the austronesian languages . international journal of american linguistics ( memoir 19 ) . massive lexicostatistical study of austronesian , for instance , showed a great deal of ( lexicostatistical ) diversity in the austronesian languages of western melanesia . this was sometimes on par with the lexicostatistical distance of taiwan austronesian languages from other austronesian including taiwan austronesian languages from each other ( taiwan now definitively known to be the homeland of the language family itself ) . but the low lexicostatistical agreement of many western melanesian oceanic languages with other oceanic austronesian can be easily dismissed as of little subgrouping interest because those languages are nevertheless full of diagnostic innovations of oceanic austronesian in their sound systems and vocabulary , including many oceanic lexical innovations found in the 100 and 200 lexicostatistical word lists ( and the deadly conclusive evidence of the shared phonological innovations of those low-scoring groups with all other oceanic austronesian ) . the western oceanic melanesian '' diversity '' of lexicostatistical studies was never of any interest in terms of attributing any special time depth or subgrouping significance to it . they are just languages with accelerated loss of vocabulary , sometimes , in the western oceanic case , because they involve certain more ancient peoples of the region shifting to oceanic speech after oceanic-speaking peoples arrived . ross , malcolm , 2008 . the integrity of the austronesian language family : from taiwan to oceania , in alicia sanchez-mazas , roger blench , malcolm d . ross , ilia peiros and marie lin ( ed . ) , past human migrations in east asia : matching archaeology , linguistics and genetics , routledge , taylor & francis group , great britain , pp . 161–181 . . internal correspondences . partly because polynesian languages split from one another comparatively recently , many words in these languages remain similar to corresponding words in others . the table below demonstrates this with the words for 'sky ' , 'north wind ' , 'woman ' , 'house ' and 'parent ' in a representative selection of languages : tongan ; niuean ; samoan ; sikaiana ; takuu ; rapanui language ; tahitian ; cook islands māori ( rarotongan ) ; māori ; north marquesan ; south marquesan ; hawaiian and mangarevan . . orthography . written polynesian languages use orthography based on latin script . most polynesian languages have five vowel qualities , corresponding roughly to those written i , e , a , o , u in classical latin . however , orthographic conventions for phonemes that are not easily encoded in standard latin script had to develop over time . influenced by the traditions of orthographies of languages they were familiar with , the missionaries who first developed orthographies for unwritten polynesian languages did not explicitly mark phonemic vowel length or the glottal stop . by the time that linguists trained in more modern methods made their way to the pacific , at least for the major languages , the bible was already printed according to the orthographic system developed by the missionaries , and the people had learned to read and write without marking vowel length or the glottal stop . this situation persists in many languages . despite efforts at reform by local academies , the general conservative resistance to orthographic change has led to varying results in polynesian languages , and several writing variants co-exist . the most common method , however , uses a macron to indicate a long vowel , while a vowel without that diacritical mark is short , for example , ā versus a . sometimes , a long vowel is written double , e.g . maaori . the glottal stop ( not present in all polynesian languages , but , where present , one of the most common consonants ) is indicated by an apostrophe , for example , ' a versus a . this is somewhat of an anomaly as the apostrophe is most often used to represent letters that have been omitted , while the glottal stop is rather a consonant that is not represented by a traditional latin letter . hawaiʻian uses the ʻokina , also called by ʻokina names , a unicase consonant letter used within the latin script to mark the phoneme glottal stop . it is also used in many other polynesian languages , each of which has its own name for the character . ( see ʻokina . ) apart from the ʻokina or the somewhat similar tahitian ʻeta , a common method is to change the simple apostrophe for a curly one , taking a normal apostrophe for the elision and the inverted comma for the glottal stop . the latter method has come into common use in polynesian languages . see also . proto-polynesian language – the reconstructed ancestral language from which modern polynesian languages are derived . ʻokina – a glyph shaped like ( but distinct from ) an apostrophe : used to represent the glottal-stop consonant in some polynesian latin-based scripts . rongorongo – the undeciphered script of easter island ( rapanui ) . list of english words of polynesian origin . notes . further reading . at archive.org . . references . geoffrey irwin ( 1992 ) . the prehistoric exploration and colonisation of the pacific . cambridge : cambridge university press . krupa v . ( 1975–1982 ) . polynesian languages , routledge and kegan paul lynch , j . ( 1998 ) . pacific languages : an introduction . university of hawai ' i press . lynch , john , malcolm ross & terry crowley ( 2002 ) . the oceanic languages . richmond , surrey : curzon press . marck , jeff ( 2000 ) , topics in polynesian languages and culture history . canberra : pacific linguistics . external links .