Merrimack River

etymology and spelling . the etymology of the name of the merrimack river - from which all subsequent uses derive , such as the name of the civil war ironclad - remains uncertain . there is some evidence that it is native american . in 1604 the natives of later new england told pierre dugua , sieur de monts , who was leading a colony of french language speakers to acadia ( later nova scotia ) , of a beautiful river to the south . the french promptly pronounced its native name as merremack . in 1605 samuel de champlain followed this lead , found the river and renamed it riviere du gas . the french and their name did not remain on the merrimack . the natives dwelling along the river at that time were the agawam on the lower reaches , the pawtucket at lowell , massachusetts , the nashua , souhegan and namoskeag around manchester , new hampshire , the pennacook northward from bow , new hampshire , and the winnepisseogee at the source , lake winnipesaukee . these were all members of a nation of algonquian speakers known as the nipmuck , meaning '' still water place '' . meade 170 according to joseph b . walker , pages 414-415 . relying on chandler eastman potter 's the history of manchester ( 1856 ) , merremack contains the elements merruh ( '' strong '' ) and auke ( '' place '' —a recognizable locative ending ) , and means '' the place of strong current , - a term not inappropriate , when we consider . the river 's rapids . '' potter was an authority on native american affairs in colonial new england . by contrast , in a week on the concord and merrimack rivers , henry david thoreau implies that '' its name signifies the sturgeon river . '' johnson 319 walker goes on to cite spellings of '' merimacke '' , '' merimack '' and '' merrimacke '' in '' the colonial records of massachusetts '' , as well as the '' merrimake '' and '' merrymake '' of a 1721 land grant at penacook , new hampshire . william wood 's new england 's prospect of 1634 calls the river the '' merrimacke '' and locates it eight miles beyond agowamme ( ipswich , massachusetts ) . it hosts , he says , '' sturgeon , sammon and basse , and divers other kinds of fish . '' currier ( 1902 ) , page 23 . merrimac , massachusetts , settled in 1638 and originally part of amesbury , massachusetts , was called west amesbury until 1876 , at which time it adopted its current name and spelling . merrimack , new hampshire , was incorporated in 1746 , spelling its name '' marrymac '' in the record of its first town meeting . it is referred to as '' merrimac '' into the early 19th century : in the 1810 decennial census , it was spelled '' merrimac '' , but in the 1820 census and afterwards , '' merrimack '' . in 1914 , us congressman john jacob rogers ( ma ) petitioned that the official spelling be '' merrimack '' . frederick w . coburn , history of lowell and its people vi ( 1920 ) . history . prior to glaciation , the merrimack continued its southward course far beyond the present day new hampshire-massachusetts border to enter the gulf of maine near boston . upon the glacier 's retreat , debris deposited north of boston filled the lower merrimack valley , redirecting the river into its current northeast bend at lowell . the neville archaeological site is located along the river 's banks in new hampshire . on the merrimack river 's banks are a number of cities built to take advantage of water power in the 19th century , when textile mills dominated the new england economy : concord , manchester , and nashua in new hampshire , and lowell , lawrence , and haverhill in massachusetts . at the mouth of the river is the small city of newburyport . prior to the construction of the middlesex canal , newburyport was an important shipbuilding city , in a location to receive new hampshire timber that had been floated downriver . geography . the merrimack river watershed covers in southern new hampshire and northeastern massachusetts . it is the fourth largest river basin in new england . the river begins in the city of franklin , new hampshire , at the confluence of the pemigewasset and winnipesaukee rivers . from there , the river flows south through concord , manchester , and nashua , entering massachusetts at the town of tyngsborough , where it turns northeast and winds past or through chelmsford , lowell , dracut , tewksbury , andover , methuen , lawrence , north andover , haverhill , groveland , west newbury , merrimac , and amesbury , to its mouth at the gulf of maine between the city of newburyport and the town of salisbury . major sub-basins . in addition to the merrimack river mainstem , there are dozens of sub-basins in new hampshire and massachusetts making up the watershed . the u.s . geological survey categorizes them into six fourth-level sub-basins using hydrological codes with the prefix 0107 . ; new hampshire pemigewasset river ( huc 01070001 ) winnipesaukee river ( huc 01070002 ) contoocook river ( huc 01070003 ) ; new hampshire and massachusetts nashua river ( huc 01070004 ) merrimack river ( huc 01070006 ; smaller tributaries ) ; massachusetts sudbury/assabet/concord rivers ( sometimes referred to simply as the concord sub-basin or the '' suasco '' sub-basin ) ( huc 01070005 ) . other major rivers . the following are some of the other significant rivers found within the six major sub-basins in the watershed , listed moving downstream along the merrimack : soucook river suncook river piscataquog river ( not to be confused with the piscataqua river , part of the piscataqua-salmon falls watershed ) cohas brook souhegan river salmon brook stony brook beaver brook spicket river shawsheen river little river powwow river . navigation . the merrimack is listed as one of the navigable waters of the united states , subject to section 10 , rivers and harbors act jurisdiction . navigable waters of the united states in new england / subject to section 10 , rivers and harbors act jurisdiction . may 2006 flooding . image : lowellflood.jpg left thumb the flooded merrimack river as seen from the pawtucket gatehouse in lowell , massachusetts image : merrimack-flood-2005.jpg left thumb merrimack river in flood , october 2005 , manchester , new hampshire while the merrimack river is prone to minor flooding , on may 15 , 2006 , rainfall raised the river more than above flood stage , forcing evacuations , damaging property , and breaking the main sewage pipeline in the city of haverhill , massachusetts , dumping 35 million gallons of raw sewage waste into the river per day . reports of total rainfall vary , but most areas appear to have received around a foot of rain with some areas receiving as much as . according to the boston globe , around 1,500 people evacuated their homes to escape the flood . this flood also prompted the massachusetts city of lowell to install a modern ( albeit temporary ) flood control gate comprising square steel beams at the site of the historic francis gate , a 19th and 20th-century wooden flood gate . when lowered , the francis gate seals the city 's canal system off from its source on the merrimack . the great gate , as it is also called , was built in 1850 under the direction of james b . francis . considered unnecessary when it was first constructed , '' francis ' folly '' first saved the city in 1852 and subsequently in 1936 . other flooding events . the most significant flood in the recorded history of the merrimack was in march 1936 , when a double flood of rain and melting snow and ice swelled the merrimack at lowell to , higher than the 2006 flood . part of the jack kerouac book doctor sax is set during this event . in addition to the 1936 flood , the 1852 flood , and the mother 's day flood of 2006 , the new england hurricane of 1938 and a flood in april 2007 round out the river 's most serious flood events , measured at lowell . the francis gate had been left in place after being dropped in 1936 , so it prevented flooding in 1938 as well . in 2007 , the steel beam system was again assembled in place . in media . the song '' merrimack river '' and its instrumental reprise are featured on the 2009 album amanda leigh by nashua , new hampshire , native mandy moore . anya seton 's historical novel avalon includes a section depicting the fictional pre-columbian arrival of 9th century irish and english travelers at the merrimack river and their interactions with local native americans .