Lou Harrison

biography . harrison was born in portland , oregon , but moved with his family to a number of locations around the san francisco bay area as a child . he graduated from burlingame high school in burlingame , california in 1934 , then he moved to san francisco . leta e . miller , liner notes for argo cd 455 590–2 the diverse music which he was to be exposed to there , including cantonese opera , native american music , mexican music , and jazz as well as classical music , was to have a major influence on him . he also heard recordings of indonesian music early in life . harrison took henry cowell 's '' music of the peoples of the world '' course , and also studied counterpoint and composition with him . in 1941 , he went to the university of california at los angeles to work at the dance department as a dancer and accompanist . while there , he took lessons from arnold schoenberg which led to an interest in schoenberg 's twelve-tone technique . miller , leta . '' lou harrison - in retrospect '' . liner notes . new world records . the pieces he was writing at this time , however , were largely percussive works using unconventional materials , such as car brake drums , as musical instruments . these pieces were similar to those being written by john cage around the same time , and the two sometimes worked together . in 1943 , harrison moved to new york city , where he worked as a music critic for the herald tribune . while there he met charles ives , became his friend , and did a good deal in bringing ives to the attention of the musical world , which had largely ignored him up to that point . with the assistance of his mentor cowell , harrison prepared and conducted the premiere of ives 's symphony no . 3 , and in return received help from ives financially . when ives won the pulitzer prize for music for that piece , he gave half of the money to harrison . harrison also edited a large number of ives 's works , receiving compensation often in excess of what he billed . harrison supported and promoted the music of a number of unconventional composers in addition to ives . these included edgard varèse , carl ruggles , and alan hovhaness . radio.org/tools/media/player/composersdatebook/0207/020407_datebook.ram harrison taught music at various colleges and universities , including mills college from 1936 to 1939 and again from 1980 to 1985 , san jose state university , cabrillo college , reed college , and black mountain college . in 1953 he moved back to california , settling in aptos near santa cruz , where he lived the rest of his life . following in the path of canadian composer colin mcphee , who had done extensive research in indonesian music in the 1930s and wrote a number of compositions incorporating balinese and javanese elements , harrison 's style began to change , showing the influence of gamelan music more clearly if only in timbre : '' it was the sound itself that attracted me . in new york , when i changed gears out of twelve tonalism , i explored this timbre . the gamelan movements in my suite for violin , piano , and small orchestra 1951 are aural imitations of the generalized sounds of gamelan '' . virgil thomson ( with whom harrison also studied ) gave him a copy of harry partch 's book on musical tuning , genesis of a music , which prompted harrison to start writing music in just intonation . he did not abandon equal temperament altogether , but often expressed a desire to do so . in an oft-quoted comment referring to the frequency ratios used in just intonation , he said , '' i 'd long thought that i would love a time when musicians were numerate as well as literate . i 'd love to be a conductor and say , 'now , cellos , you gave me 10:9 there , please give me a 9:8 instead , ' i 'd love to get that ! '' although much influenced by asian music , harrison did not visit the continent until a 1961 trip to japan and korea and a 1962 trip to taiwan . he and his partner william colvig later constructed a tuned percussion ensemble , using resonated aluminum keys and tubes , as well as oxygen tanks and other found percussion instruments . they called this '' an american gamelan , '' in order to distinguish it from those in indonesia . they also constructed ? gamelan-type instruments tuned to just pentatonic scales from unusual materials such as tin cans and aluminium furniture tubing . he wrote '' la koro sutro '' ( in esperanto ) lou harrison centennial birthday celebration , 1917-2017 , part 2 of 5 . for these instruments and chorus , as well as '' suite for violin and american gamelan . '' in addition , harrison played and composed for the chinese guzheng zither , and presented ( with colvig , his student richard dee , and the singer lily chin ) over 300 concerts of traditional chinese music in the 1960s . metroactive music bill colvig he was a composer-in-residence at san jose state university in san jose , california during the 1960s . the university honored him with an all-harrison concert in morris daley auditorium in 1969 , featuring dancers , singers , and musicians . the highlight of the concert was the world premiere of harrison 's depiction of the story of orpheus , which utilized soloists , the san jose state university a cappella choir , as well as a unique group of percussionists . like many other 20th-century composers , harrison found it hard to support himself with his music , and took a number of other jobs to earn a living , including record salesman , florist , animal nurse , and forestry firefighter . harrison was outspoken about his political views , such as his pacifism ( he was an active supporter of the international language esperanto ) , and the fact that he was gay . he was also politically active and informed , including knowledge of gay history . he wrote many pieces with political texts or titles , writing , for instance , homage to pacifica for the opening of the berkeley headquarters of the pacifica radio , and accepting commissions from the portland gay men 's chorus ( 1988 and 1985 ) and by the seattle men 's chorus to arrange ( 1987 ) his strict songs , originally for eight baritones , for '' a chorus of 120 male singing enthusiasts . some of them good ; some not so good . but the number is so fabulous '' . lawrence mass describes : : with lou harrison.being gay is something affirmative . he 's proud to be a gay composer and interested in talking about what that might mean . he does n't feel threatened that this means he wo n't be thought of as an american composer who is also great and timeless and universal . janice giteck describes harrison as : : unabashedly androgynous in his way of approaching creativity . he has a vital connection to the feminine as well as to the masculine . the female part is apparent in the sense of beingness . but at the same time , lou is very male , too , ferociously active and assertive , rhythmic , pulsing , and aggressive . on november 2 , 1990 , the brooklyn philharmonic premiered harrison 's fourth symphony , which he titled last symphony . he combined native american music , ancient music , and asian music , tying it all together with lush orchestral writing . a special inclusion was a series of navajo '' coyote stories . '' he made a number of revisions to the symphonies before completing a final version in 1995 , which was recorded by barry jekowsky and the california symphony for argo records at skywalker ranch in nicasio , california in march 1997 . the cd also included harrison 's elegy , to the memory of calvin simmons ( a tribute to the former conductor of the oakland symphony , who drowned in a boating accident in 1982 ) , excerpts from solstice , concerto in slendro , and double music ( his collaboration with john cage ) . argo records liner notes harrison and colvig built two full javanese-style gamelan , modeled on the instrumentation of kyai udan mas at u.c . berkeley . one was named si betty for the art patron betty freeman ; the other , built at mills college , was named si darius/si madeliene . harrison held the darius milhaud chair of musical composition at mills college from 1980 until his retirement in 1985 . one of his students at mills was jin hi kim . he also taught at san jose state university and cabrillo college . he was awarded the edward macdowell medal in 2000 . . personal life . harrison lived for many years with william colvig in aptos , california . he and colvig purchased land in joshua tree , california , where they designed and built the harrison house retreat , a straw bale house . harrison died in lafayette , indiana , from a heart attack while on his way to a festival of his music at the ohio state university . harrison 's music . many of harrison 's early works are for percussion instruments , often made out of what would usually be regarded as junk or found objects such as garbage cans and steel brake drums . he also wrote a number of pieces using schoenberg 's twelve tone technique , including the opera rapunzel and his symphony on g ( symphony no . 1 ) ( 1952 ) . several works feature the tack piano , a kind of prepared piano with small nails inserted into the hammers to give the instrument a more percussive sound . harrison 's mature musical style is based on '' melodicles '' , short motifs which are turned backwards and upside down to create a musical mode the piece is based on . his music is typically spartan in texture but lyrical , and harmony usually simple or sometimes lacking altogether , with the focus instead being on rhythm and melody . ned rorem describes , '' lou harrison 's compositions demonstrate a variety of means and techniques . in general he is a melodist . rhythm has a significant place in his work , too . harmony is unimportant , although tonality is . he is one of the first american composers to successfully create a workable marriage between eastern and western forms . '' source ? an often used technique is '' interval control '' , in which only small number of melodic intervals , either ascending or descending , are used , without inversion . leta e . miller and fredric lieberman ( summer , 1999 ) . '' lou harrison and the american gamelan '' , american music , vol . 17 , no . 2 , p.168 . for example , for the opening of the fourth symphony , the permitted intervals are minor third , minor sixth , and major second . another component of harrison 's aesthetic is what harry partch would call corporeality , an emphasis on the physical and the sensual including live , human , performance and improvisation , timbre , rhythm , and the sense of space in his melodic lines , whether solo or in counterpoint , and most notably in his frequent dance collaborations . the american dancer and choreographer mark morris used harrison 's serenade for guitar with optional percussion ( 1978 ) as the '' basis of a new kind of dance . or , at least , one i 've morris never seen or done before . '' among harrison 's better known works are the concerto in slendro , concerto for violin with percussion orchestra , organ concerto with percussion ( 1973 ) , which was given at the proms in london in 1997 ; the double concerto ( 1981–82 ) for violin , cello , and javanese gamelan ; the piano concerto ( 1983–85 ) for piano tuned in kirnberger 2 ( a form of well temperament ) and orchestra , which was written for keith jarrett ; american made - books - baltimore city paper and a concerto for piano and javanese gamelan ; as well as four numbered orchestral symphonies . he also wrote a large number of works in non-traditional forms . harrison was fluent in several languages including american sign language , mandarin and esperanto , and several of his pieces have esperanto titles and texts , most notably la koro sutro ( 1973 ) . like charles ives , harrison completed four symphonies . he typically combined a variety of the musical forms and languages that he preferred . this is quite apparent in the fourth symphony , recorded by the california symphony for argo records , as well as his third symphony , which was performed and broadcast by dennis russell davies and the san francisco symphony orchestra . russell davies also recorded the third symphony with the cabrillo music festival orchestra . films . 1986 – lou harrison : '' cherish , conserve , consider , create . '' directed by eric marin . 1995 – musical outsiders : an american legacy – harry partch , lou harrison , and terry riley . directed by michael blackwood . 2012 - lou harrison : a world of music . directed by eva soltes . works . chamber works . ariadne ( 1987 ) , flute & percussion at the tomb of charles ives ( 1963 ) , chamber orchestra concerto for flute & percussion ( 1939 ) concerto for organ with percussion orchestra ( 1951 ) , percussion ensemble , organ and ensemble concerto for piano and javanese gamelan ( 1986–87 ) concerto for pipa with string orchestra ( 1997 ) , asian instrument and ensemble concerto for violin and percussion orchestra ( 1959 ) concerto in slendro ( 1961 ) double concerto for violin and cello with javanese gamelan ( 1981–82 ) new first suite for strings ( 1995 ) , string orchestra pacifika rondo ( 1963 ) , chamber orchestra serenado por gitaro ( 1952 ) , guitar solo praise for the beauty of hummingbirds ( 1951 ) , mixed quintet rhymes with silver ( 1996 ) , violoncello and ensemble , mixed quintet serenade for guitar with optional percussion ( 1978 ) , mixed duo , guitar solo seven pastorales ( 1949 aug.- 1951 oct . ) , chamber orchestra solstice ( 1949 ) , octet ( flute , oboe , trumpet , 2 cellos , string bass , celesta , tack piano ) songs in the forest ( 1951 ) , mixed quartet string quartet set ( 1978 ) suite for cello and harp ( 1949 ) suite for percussion ( for five percussionists , 1942 ) suite for violin with american gamelan ( 1973 ) suite for violin with string orchestra ( 1997 ) suite for violoncello and piano ( 1995 ) suites for cello and string orchestra ( 1984 , 1990 ) the perilous chapel ( 1948 ) , mixed quartet varied trio ( 1986 ) , rice bowls , violin , vibraphone , piano ( written for the abel-steinberg-winant trio ) . orchestral works . symphony on g ( no . 1 ) ( 1947 ) symphony no . 2 'elegiac ( 1942 ) suite from marriage at the eiffel tower ( 1961 ) for the santa cruz symphony music for violin with various instruments , european , asian , and african ( 1967 ) , string solo and orchestra symphony no . 3 ( 1982 ) for the cabrillo music festival piano concerto ( 1983–85 ) , for piano tuned in kirnberger 2 ( a form of well temperament ) and orchestra last symphony ( no . 4 ) ( 1990 , rev . 1995 ) a parade for mtt ( 1995 ) . vocal works . air from rapunzel ( 1952-3 ) , high voice and ensemble alma redemptoris mater ( 1949–51 ) , low voice and ensemble la koro sutro ( 1970 ) , mixed chorus and gamelan , mixed chorus and ensemble mass to saint anthony ( 1939 ) , mixed chorus and ensemble orpheus ( 1969 ) , soloists , mixed chorus and ensemble strict songs ( 1955 ) , baritone solo , chorus and chamber orchestra three songs ( 1985 ) , men 's chorus and ensemble vestiunt silve ( 1951 ) , for soprano and four instruments . keyboard works . six sonatas for cembalo ( 1943 ) , piano solo , harpsichord solo reel ( homage to henry cowell ) , piano solo a summerfield set ( 1988 ) , piano solo , harpsichord solo waltz for evelyn hinrichsen , piano solo . opera . rapunzel ( 1952 ) young caesar ( 1970 ) . see also . list of lgbt people from portland , oregon . references . further reading . . external links . archives . lou harrison archive at the university of california , santa cruz san jose state university school of music & dance lou harrison music manuscripts , sketches , poetry , and drawings , 1945-1991 at isham memorial library , harvard university . obituaries and remembrances . obituary from the musical times remembrance by don gillespie , from newmusicbox i remember lou , from other minds obituary from esperanto magazine ( written in esperanto ) . interviews . duffie , bruce . '' composer lou harrison : a conversation with bruce duffie . '' april 1987 . golden , barbara . '' conversation with lou harrison . '' econtact ! 12.2 — interviews ( 2 ) ( april 2010 ) . montréal : cec . clark , philip . '' chimes of freedom '' the wire , august 2002 , pp 28–32 . other links . lou harrison : middle period works new albion artists : lou harrison peermusic classical : lou harrison composer 's publisher and bio lou harrison artist page from frog peak music site other minds : lou harrison lou harrison documentary project lou harrison : an interview by dr geoff smith rapunzel by william morris , inspiration for lou harrison 's opera lou harrison at music of the united states of america ( musa ) . listening . art of the states : lou harrison seven works by the composer lou harrison tribute from other minds festival 9 , 2003 epitonic.com : lou harrison including tracks from rhymes with silver and la koro sutro del sol quartet : tear with harrison 's song of palestine from string quartet set by del sol quartet