Peter I Island

history . the first sighting of peter i island was made on 21 october 1821 by fabian gottlieb von bellingshausen 's expedition , rubin ( 2005 ) : 180 who commanded the ships vostok and mirny under the russian flag . he named the island for tsar peter i the great of russia . drift ice made it impossible for bellinghausen to come nearer than from the island . it was the first land to have been spotted south of the antarctic circle , and was thus also the southernmost sighted land at the time of its discovery . barr ( 1987 ) : 67 in january 1910 , the french expedition led by jean-baptiste charcot and his ship pourquoi-pas ? confirmed bellingshausen 's discovery , but they also did not land , being stopped from the island by pack ice . in 1926 and 1927 , norwegian eyvind tofte circumnavigated and surveyed the island from odd i . however , he was also prevented from landing . the norwegian whale-ship owner lars christensen financed several expeditions to the antarctic , in part for research and in part to claim land for norway . the latter was motivated by the british taxation of whaling in the antarctic , and christensen hoped to be able to establish stations on norwegian territory to gain better privileges and so at least the taxes went to his home country . kyvik et.al ( 2008 ) : 52 the first expedition to land on the island was the christensen-financed second norvegia expedition , led by nils larsen and ola olstad . they landed on 2 february 1929 and claimed the island for norway . larsen attempted to land again in 1931 , but was hindered by pack ice . on 6 march 1931 , a norwegian royal proclamation declared the island under norwegian sovereignty and on 23 march 1933 the island was declared a dependency . the next landing occurred on 10 february 1948 by larsen 's ship brategg . biosurvey , geological and hydrographic surveys underwent for three days , before the pack ice forced the expedition to leave . the expedition built a hut and placed a copy of the document of occupation from 1929 inside . on 23 june 1961 , peter i island became subject to the antarctic treaty , after norway 's signing of the treaty in 1959 . barr ( 1987 ) : 79 since then , there have been several landings on the island by various nations for scientific investigations , as well as a limited number of ships that have successfully landed tourists on the island . in 1987 , the norwegian polar institute sent five scientists to spend eleven days on the island . the main focuses were aerial photography and topography measurements to allow an accurate map of the island to be produced . the second important area was marine biological investigations , although also geological , biological and other surveys were conducted . the team also built an automatic weather station . barr ( 1987 ) : 68 three dx-peditions have been sent to the island , in 1987 , 1994 and 2006 . . geography . peter i island is a volcanic island located off the coast of ellsworth land of continental antarctica , and about to the south-west of smith island , the nearest of the south shetland islands . it has an area of . the island is almost entirely covered by glacier , with about 95 % of the surface covered by ice . barr ( 1987 ) : 65 surrounding the island is a tall ice front and vertical cliffs . the long stretches of ice caps are supplemented with rock outcrops . landing is only possible at three points , and only during the short period of the year in which the island is not surrounded by pack ice . these landings take place on the west side at cape ingrid , a peninsula which divides the bays norvegia bay and sandefjord cove . on the cape are some narrow strips of beach , which are suitable for landing . the beach in norvegiabukta is just wide and is entered via the natural arch tsarporten . on the west side is a plateau , while the north and south coasts feature ice shelves . the eastern side is the steepest and features two rock columns with flat tops in the sea . the island is a shield volcano , although it is not known if it is still active , and it has been categorized as either holocene or historic , based on date samples ranging from years ago . the summit , lars christensen peak , is a wide circular crater . an ultra-prominent peak at elevation , it is named after lars christensen . it is not known whether this volcano is extinct or not , because the upper part is apparently unmodified by glaciation , indicating an eruption several centuries ago . lemasurier ( 1990 ) : 512 . environment . the island 's vegetation consists exclusively of mosses and lichens which have adapted to the extreme antarctic climate . the island has a very harsh climate with strong winds and freezing temperatures . the steady snowfall keeps vegetation to a minimum . the island is a habitat for a few seabirds , particularly southern fulmars , but also wilson 's storm petrels and antarctic terns . penguins , including adélie and chinstrap penguins , visit the island infrequently . there are numerous seals , particularly crabeater seals , leopard seals and smaller numbers of southern elephant seals . . politics . peter i island is one of norway 's two territorial claims in antarctica , the other being queen maud land . peter i island is the only claim within 90°w and 150°w and is also the only claim which is not a sector . kyvik et.al ( 2008 ) : 57 being south of 60°s , the island is subject to the antarctic treaty . the treaty ensures free access to the island for any scientific investigation , and states that it can be used only for peaceful purposes . norway , australia , france , new zealand and the united kingdom have all mutually recognized each other 's claims in antarctica . norwegian administration of the island is handled by the polar affairs department of the ministry of justice and public security , located in oslo . the annexation of the island is regulated by the dependency act of 24 march 1933 . it establishes that norwegian criminal law , private law and procedural law applies to the island , in addition to other laws that explicitly state they are valid on the island . it further establishes that all land belongs to the state , and prohibits the storage and detonation of nuclear products . since 5 may 1995 , law of norway has required all norwegian activity in antarctica , including peter i island , to follow international environmental law for antarctica . all norwegian citizens who plan activities on peter i island must therefore report to the norwegian polar institute , who may deny any non-conforming activity . all people visiting the island must follow laws regarding protection of nature , treatment of waste , pollution and insurance for search and rescue operations .