Knot theory

adding knots . two knots can be added by cutting both knots and joining the pairs of ends . the operation is called the knot sum , or sometimes the connected sum or composition of two knots . this can be formally defined as follows : consider a planar projection of each knot and suppose these projections are disjoint . find a rectangle in the plane where one pair of opposite sides are arcs along each knot while the rest of the rectangle is disjoint from the knots . form a new knot by deleting the first pair of opposite sides and adjoining the other pair of opposite sides . the resulting knot is a sum of the original knots . depending on how this is done , two different knots ( but no more ) may result . this ambiguity in the sum can be eliminated regarding the knots as oriented , i.e . having a preferred direction of travel along the knot , and requiring the arcs of the knots in the sum are oriented consistently with the oriented boundary of the rectangle . the knot sum of oriented knots is commutative and associative . a prime knot if it is non-trivial and can not be written as the knot sum of two non-trivial knots . a knot that can be written as such a sum is composite . there is a prime decomposition for knots , analogous to prime and composite numbers . for oriented knots , this decomposition is also unique . higher-dimensional knots can also be added but there are some differences . while you can not form the unknot in three dimensions by adding two non-trivial knots , you can in higher dimensions , at least when one considers smooth knots in codimension at least 3 . tabulating knots . traditionally , knots have been catalogued in terms of crossing number . knot tables generally include only prime knots , and only one entry for a knot and its mirror image ( even if they are different ) . the number of nontrivial knots of a given crossing number increases rapidly , making tabulation computationally difficult . tabulation efforts have succeeded in enumerating over 6 billion knots and links . the sequence of the number of prime knots of a given crossing number , up to crossing number 16 , is 0 , 0 , 1 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 7 , 21 , 49 , 165 , 552 , 2176 , 9988 , , , . while exponential upper and lower bounds for this sequence are known , it has not been proven that this sequence is strictly increasing . the first knot tables by tait , little , and kirkman used knot diagrams , although tait also used a precursor to the dowker notation . different notations have been invented for knots which allow more efficient tabulation . the early tables attempted to list all knots of at most 10 crossings , and all alternating knots of 11 crossings . the development of knot theory due to alexander , reidemeister , seifert , and others eased the task of verification and tables of knots up to and including 9 crossings were published by alexander–briggs and reidemeister in the late 1920s . the first major verification of this work was done in the 1960s by john horton conway , who not only developed a new notation but also the alexander–conway polynomial . this verified the list of knots of at most 11 crossings and a new list of links up to 10 crossings . conway found a number of omissions but only one duplication in the tait–little tables ; however he missed the duplicates called the perko pair , which would only be noticed in 1974 by kenneth perko . this famous error would propagate when dale rolfsen added a knot table in his influential text , based on conway 's work . conway 's 1970 paper on knot theory also contains a typographical duplication on its non-alternating 11-crossing knots page and omits 4 examples — 2 previously listed in d . lombardero 's 1968 princeton senior thesis and 2 more subsequently discovered by alain caudron . see perko ( 1982 ) , primality of certain knots , topology proceedings less famous is the duplicate in his 10 crossing link table : 2.-2.-20.20 is the mirror of 8 -20 : -20 . see perko ( 2016 ) , historical highlights of non-cyclic knot theory , j . knot theory ramifications . in the late 1990s hoste , thistlethwaite , and weeks tabulated all the knots through 16 crossings . in 2003 rankin , flint , and schermann , tabulated the alternating knots through 22 crossings . alexander–briggs notation . this is the most traditional notation , due to the 1927 paper of james w . alexander and garland b . briggs and later extended by dale rolfsen in his knot table ( see image above and list of prime knots ) . the notation simply organizes knots by their crossing number . one writes the crossing number with a subscript to denote its order amongst all knots with that crossing number . this order is arbitrary and so has no special significance ( though in each number of crossings the twist knot comes after the torus knot ) . links are written by the crossing number with a superscript to denote the number of components and a subscript to denote its order within the links with the same number of components and crossings . thus the trefoil knot is notated 3 1 and the hopf link is 2 . alexander–briggs names in the range 10 162 to 10 166 are ambiguous , due to the discovery of the perko pair in charles newton little 's original and subsequent knot tables , and differences in approach to correcting this error in knot tables and other publications created after this point . '' the revenge of the perko pair '' , richardelwes.co.uk . accessed february 2016 . richard elwes points out a common mistake in describing the perko pair . . dowker–thistlethwaite notation . the dowker–thistlethwaite notation , also called the dowker notation or code , for a knot is a finite sequence of even integers . the numbers are generated by following the knot and marking the crossings with consecutive integers . since each crossing is visited twice , this creates a pairing of even integers with odd integers . an appropriate sign is given to indicate over and undercrossing . for example , in this figure the knot diagram has crossings labelled with the pairs ( 1,6 ) ( 3 , & minus ; 12 ) ( 5,2 ) ( 7,8 ) ( 9 , & minus ; 4 ) and ( 11 , & minus ; 10 ) . the dowker–thistlethwaite notation for this labelling is the sequence : 6 , & minus ; 12 , 2 , 8 , & minus ; 4 , & minus ; 10 . a knot diagram has more than one possible dowker notation , and there is a well-understood ambiguity when reconstructing a knot from a dowker–thistlethwaite notation . conway notation . the conway notation for knots and links , named after john horton conway , is based on the theory of tangles . the advantage of this notation is that it reflects some properties of the knot or link . the notation describes how to construct a particular link diagram of the link . start with a basic polyhedron , a 4-valent connected planar graph with no digon regions . such a polyhedron is denoted first by the number of vertices then a number of asterisks which determine the polyhedron 's position on a list of basic polyhedra . for example , 10 denotes the second 10-vertex polyhedron on conway 's list . each vertex then has an algebraic tangle substituted into it ( each vertex is oriented so there is no arbitrary choice in substitution ) . each such tangle has a notation consisting of numbers and + or & minus ; signs . an example is 1 2 & minus ; 3 2 . the 1 denotes the only 1-vertex basic polyhedron . the 2 & minus ; 3 2 is a sequence describing the continued fraction associated to a rational tangle . one inserts this tangle at the vertex of the basic polyhedron & nbsp ; 1 . a more complicated example is 8 3.1.2 0.1.1.1.1.1 here again 8 refers to a basic polyhedron with 8 vertices . the periods separate the notation for each tangle . any link admits such a description , and it is clear this is a very compact notation even for very large crossing number . there are some further shorthands usually used . the last example is usually written 8 3:2 0 , where the ones are omitted and kept the number of dots excepting the dots at the end . for an algebraic knot such as in the first example , 1 is often omitted . conway 's pioneering paper on the subject lists up to 10-vertex basic polyhedra of which he uses to tabulate links , which have become standard for those links . for a further listing of higher vertex polyhedra , there are nonstandard choices available . gauss code . gauss code , similar to the dowker–thistlethwaite notation , represents a knot with a sequence of integers . however , rather than every crossing being represented by two different numbers , crossings are labeled with only one number . when the crossing is an overcrossing , a positive number is listed . at an undercrossing , a negative number . for example , the trefoil knot in gauss code can be given as : 1 , −2,3 , −1,2 , −3 gauss code is limited in its ability to identify knots . this problem is partially addressed with by the extended gauss code . see also . contact geometry legendrian submanifolds and knots knots and graphs list of knot theory topics molecular knot quantum knots quantum topology circuit topology ribbon theory . references . . further reading . introductory textbooks . there are a number of introductions to knot theory . a classical introduction for graduate students or advanced undergraduates is . other good texts from the references are and . adams is informal and accessible for the most part to high schoolers . lickorish is a rigorous introduction for graduate students , covering a nice mix of classical and modern topics . . surveys . menasco and thistlethwaite 's handbook surveys a mix of topics relevant to current research trends in a manner accessible to advanced undergraduates but of interest to professional researchers . . external links . '' mathematics and knots '' this is an online version of an exhibition developed for the 1989 royal society '' popmath roadshow '' . its aim was to use knots to present methods of mathematics to the general public . history . movie of a modern recreation of tait 's smoke ring experiment history of knot theory ( on the home page of andrew ranicki ) . knot tables and software . knotinfo : table of knot invariants and knot theory resources the knot atlas — detailed info on individual knots in knot tables knotplot — software to investigate geometric properties of knots knotscape — software to create images of knots knoutilus — online database and image generator of knots knotdata.html — wolfram mathematica function for investigating knots