1963 in literature

events . january – novy mir publishes '' matryona 's home '' , the first of three more stories by aleksandr solzhenitsyn critical of the soviet regime . they will be the last of his works to be published in the soviet union until 1990 . january 2 – the traverse theatre opens in edinburgh . february 11 – the american-born poet sylvia plath ( age 30 ) commits suicide by carbon monoxide poisoning in her london flat about a month after her only novel , the semi-autobiographical the bell jar , appears and six days after writing her last poem , '' edge '' . march – the publications and entertainments act in south africa enables the government to impose strict censorship . des troye 's novel an act of immorality ( an attack on miscegenation provisions in the country 's immorality act ) is among the first to be prohibited . march/april – the bologna children 's book fair is inaugurated . march 19 – joan littlewood 's theatre workshop premières the ensemble musical oh , what a lovely war ! at the theatre royal stratford east , london . may 17 – the first galician literature day is held . july 16 – a day after admission to the acland hospital in oxford , c . s . lewis suffers a heart attack . though later discharged , he dies at home four months later . a . n . wilson ( 2002 ) 1990 . c . s . lewis : a biography . w . w . norton . august 20 – the royal shakespeare company introduces its performance cycle of shakespeare 's history plays under the title the war of the roses , adapted and directed by john barton and peter hall at the royal shakespeare theatre , stratford-upon-avon . september – publication in india of bhalchandra nemade 's bildungsroman , kosala ( 'cocoon ' ) , considered the first existentialism novel in marathi literature , written in the author 's native village . october 21 – the first film from merchant ivory productions is released : the householder with a screenplay adapted by ruth prawer jhabvala from her own novel . october 22 – the royal national theatre company is newly formed in the u.k . under artistic director laurence olivier . its first performance is with peter o'toole as hamlet , in london . november – tom wolfe 's essay '' there goes ( varoom ! varoom ! ) that kandy-kolored ( thphhhhhh ! ) tangerine-flake streamline baby ( rahghhh ! ) around the bend ( brummmmmmmmmmmmmmm ) . '' is published in esquire magazine in the united states . november 17 – fictional hero 8 man , created by science fiction writer kazumasa hirai and manga artist jiro kuwata , appears in print for the first time . november 20–29 – a high court case in london over the rights in ian fleming 's james bond novel thunderball ( 1961 ) determines that future editions will be described as '' based on a screen treatment by kevin mcclory , jack whittingham , and ian fleming '' . unknown dates russian poet anna akhmatova 's requiem , an elegy on soviet sufferings in the great purge , composed 1935–1961 , is first published complete in book form , without her knowledge , in munich . the first modern publication by mainstream publishers in the u.k . and the united states of john cleland 's novel fanny hill ( memoirs of a woman of pleasure , 1748–1749 ) causes it to be banned for obscenity in massachusetts , triggering a court case by its publisher , and prosecution of a london retailer . leslie charteris publishes his last collection of stories with simon templar : the saint in the sun . all subsequent saint books will be ghost-written by others . grace ogot 's short story '' a year of sacrifice '' ( later retitled '' the rains came '' ) is published in black orpheus . . new books . fiction . j . g . ballard the four-dimensional nightmare passport to eternity simone de beauvoir – force of circumstance ( la force des choses ) thomas bernhard – frost john bingham – a case of libel heinrich böll – the clown ( ansichten eines clowns ) pierre boulle – planet of the apes ( la planète des singes ) pearl s . buck – the living reed anthony burgess – inside mr . enderby dino buzzati – a love affair taylor caldwell – grandmother and the priests morley callaghan – that summer in paris victor canning – the limbo line john dickson carr – the men who explained miracles agatha christie – the clocks julio cortázar – hopscotch ( rayuela ) oskar davičo ćutnje ( silences ) gladi ( hungers ) l . sprague de camp – a gun for dinosaur and other imaginative tales l . sprague de camp ( as editor ) – swords and sorcery len deighton – horse under water august derleth ( as stephen grendon ) – mr . george and other odd persons j.p . donleavy – a singular man daphne du maurier – the glass-blowers nell dunn – up the junction john fowles – the collector ian fleming on her majesty 's secret service thrilling cities jane gaskell – the serpent natalia ginzburg – family sayings winston graham – the grove of eagles günter grass – dog years ( hundejahre ) georgette heyer – false colours ismail kadare – the general of the dead army ( gjenerali i ushtrisë së vdekur ) james kennaway the bells of shoreditch the mindbenders damon knight – first flight : maiden voyages in space and time john le carré – the spy who came in from the cold j . m . g . le clézio – le procès-verbal ( the interrogation ) primo levi – la tregua ( the truce , reawakening ) liu yichang – jiutu ( 酒徒 , the drunkard , or the alcoholic ) mary mccarthy – the group john mcgahern – the barracks richard mckenna – the sand pebbles alistair maclean – ice station zebra james a . michener – caravans spike milligan – puckoon yukio mishima ( 三島 由紀夫 ) – the sailor who fell from grace with the sea ( 午後の曳航 , the afternoon towing ) emily cheney neville – it 's like this , cat john o'hara – elizabeth appleton marcel pagnol the water of the hills ( l'eau des collines ) jean de florette manon des sources živojin pavlović – krivudava reka ( curved river , short stories ) sylvia plath ( as victoria lucas ) – the bell jar laurens van der post – the seed and the sower thomas pynchon – v . john rechy – city of night susan sontag – benefactor muriel spark – the girls of slender means richard stark ( donald e . westlake ) – the man with the getaway face rex stout – the mother hunt erwin strittmatter – ole bienkopp boris and arkady strugatsky – far rainbow walter tevis – the man who fell to earth jim thompson – the grifters rosemary tonks – opium fogs mario vargas llosa – the time of the hero ( la ciudad y los perros ) jack vance – the dragon masters tarjei vesaas – is-slottet ( the ice palace ) kurt vonnegut – cat 's cradle keith waterhouse – billy liar charles webb – the graduate david weiss – naked came i manly wade wellman – who fears the devil ? morris west – the shoes of the fisherman christa wolf – der geteilte himmel ( divided heaven , they divided the sky ) . children and young people . nina bawden – the secret passage hester burton – time of trial paul gallico – the day the guinea-pig talked rumer godden – little plum edward gorey – the gashlycrumb tinies ted hughes – how the whale became norton juster – the dot and the line clive king – stig of the dump madeleine l'engle – a wrinkle in time sterling north – rascal ruth manning-sanders – a book of giants charles m . schulz – happiness is a warm puppy maurice sendak – where the wild things are donald j . sobol – encyclopedia brown , boy detective ( first in a series of 29 books ) rosemary sutcliff – sword at sunset colin thiele – storm boy bill peet – the pinkish , purplish , bluish egg feodor stepanovich rojankovsky – the cow went over the mountain . drama . arthur adamov – la politique des restes ( the politics of rubbish ) alan ayckbourn – mr . whatnot john barton and peter hall ( adapted from shakespeare ) – the war of the roses samuel beckett – play ( première in german as spiel ) emilio carballido – ¡silencio pollos pelones , ya les van a echar su maíz ! václav havel – the garden party ( zahradní slavnost ) rolf hochhuth – the deputy ( der stellvertreter . ein christliches trauerspiel ) john mortimer – a voyage round my father ( original radio version ) bill naughton alfie all in good time barry reckord – skyvers theatre workshop – oh , what a lovely war ! . poetry . t . s . eliot – collected poems 1909–1962 ( selected by author , published on 75th birthday ) lionel kearns – songs of circumstance h . p . lovecraft – collected poems rosemary tonks – notes on cafés and bedrooms . non-fiction . nelson algren – who lost an american ? ( travel book ) hannah arendt eichmann in jerusalem on revolution james baldwin – the fire next time thomas b . costain – william the conqueror l . sprague de camp – the ancient engineers milovan đilas – montenegro richard p . feynman – six easy pieces robert newton flew ( died 1962 ) – jesus and his way . a study of the ethics of the new testament shelby foote – the civil war : a narrative – vol . 2 : fredicksburg to meridian betty friedan – the feminine mystique w . l . guttsman – the british political elite jules henry – culture against man richard hofstadter – anti-intellectualism in american life c . l . r . james – beyond a boundary martin luther king jr . – letter from birmingham jail h . p . lovecraft – autobiography : some notes on a nonentity william h . mcneill – the rise of the west : a history of the human community jessica mitford – the american way of death margaret murray – my first hundred years ( autobiography ) iris origo – the world of san bernardino stanisław ossowski – class structure in the social consciousness ( struktura klasowa w społecznej świadomości , 1957 ) w . g . runciman – social science and political theory e . p . thompson – the making of the english working class unesco – history of mankind – vol . 1 . births . january 3 – alex wheatle , black british young adult fiction writer january 11 – jan arnald ( arne dahl ) , swedish novelist and critic january 18 – peter stamm , swiss writer , dramatist and journalist january 30 – thomas brezina , austrian author march 26 – natsuhiko kyogoku ( 京極 夏彦 ) , japanese mystery writer april 27 – russell t . davies , welsh television writer may 5 – scott westerfeld , american young-adult novelist may 8 – robin jarvis , english novelist may 19 – michael symmons roberts , english poet may 24 – michael chabon , american author may 26 – simon armitage , english poet laureate june 23 – liu cixin ( 刘慈欣 ) , chinese speculative fiction writer june 25 – yann martel , canadian author august 15 – jan sonnergaard , danish short-story writer ( died 2016 ) september 2 – thor kunkel , german novelist september 4 – louise doughty , english novelist and radio dramatist september 6 – alice sebold , american novelist october 8 – nick earls , australian novelist and children 's writer october 25 – dominic dromgoole , english theatre director and writer december 23 – donna tartt , american novelist uncertain dates jeff abbott , american genre novelist joanna briscoe , english novelist don paterson , scottish poet , writer and musician . deaths . january 8 – kay sage , american poet ( suicide , born 1898 ) january 14 – gustav regler , german socialist novelist ( born 1898 ) january 29 – robert frost , american poet ( born 1874 ) february 4 – brinsley macnamara ( john weldon ) , irish novelist and playwright ( born 1890 ) february 11 – sylvia plath , american-born poet and novelist ( suicide , born 1932 ) february 24 – herbert asbury , american journalist and writer ( born 1889 ) march 4 – william carlos williams , american writer ( born 1883 ) march 11 deirdre cash ( criena rohan ) , australian novelist ( born 1924 ) james lennox kerr ( peter dawlish , gavin douglas ) , scottish novelist and children 's writer ( born 1899 ) march 29 – pola gojawiczyńska , polish writer ( born 1896 ) may 12 – a . w . tozer , american religious writer and pastor ( born 1897 ) may 28 – ion agârbiceanu , romanian writer and pastor ( born 1882 ) june 3 – nâzım hikmet ran , turkish poet , playwright and novelist ( heart attack , born 1892 ) june 17 – john cowper powys , english novelist ( born 1872 ) august 1 – theodore roethke , american poet ( heart attack , born 1908 ) august 18 – clifford odets , american dramatist ( cancer , born 1906 ) august 27 – w . e . b . du bois , american writer , scholar and activist ( born 1868 ) september 3 – louis macneice , irish poet ( pneumonia , born 1907 ) september 9 – ernst kantorowicz , german historian ( born 1895 ) october 11 – jean cocteau , french poet , novelist and short story writer ( born 1889 ) october – jolán földes , hungarian novelist and playwright ( born 1902 ) november 13 – margaret murray , indian-born english archeologist and historian ( born 1863 ) november 22 mary findlater , scottish novelist ( born 1866 ) aldous huxley , english novelist ( cancer , born 1894 ) raychel haugrud reiff ( 2009 ) . '' aldous huxley : brave new world '' . p . 35 . marshall cavendish c . s . lewis , irish novelist and children 's and religious writer ( renal failure , born 1898 ) december 25 – tristan tzara ( samuel rosenstock ) , romanian-born french poet and essayist ( born 1896 ) . awards . american academy of arts and letters gold medals poetry : william carlos williams carnegie medal for children 's literature : hester burton , time of trial eric gregory award : ian hamilton , stewart conn , peter griffith , david wevill james tait black memorial prize for fiction : gerda charles , a slanting light james tait black memorial prize for biography : georgina battiscombe , john keble : a study in limitations miles franklin award : sumner locke elliott , careful , he might hear you newbery medal for children 's literature : madeleine l'engle , a wrinkle in time nobel prize for literature – giorgos seferis premio nadal : manuel mejía vallejo , el día señalado prix goncourt : armand lanoux , quand la mer se retire pulitzer prize for drama : no award given pulitzer prize for fiction : william faulkner – the reivers pulitzer prize for poetry : william carlos williams : pictures from brueghel and other poems queen 's gold medal for poetry : william plomer . references .