Electronic publishing

about . electronic publishing has become common in scientific publishing where it has been argued that peer-reviewed scientific journals are in the process of being replaced by electronic publishing . it is also becoming common to distribute books , magazines , and newspapers to consumers through tablet computer , a market that is growing by millions each year , generated by online vendors such as apple 's itunes bookstore , amazon 's bookstore for kindle , and books in the google play bookstore . market research suggests that half of all magazine and newspaper circulation will be via digital delivery by the end of 2015 rebecca mcpheters , magazines and newspapers need to build better apps , advertising age , january 13 , 2012 . and that half of all reading in the united states will be done without paper by 2015 . dale maunu and norbert hildebrand , the e-book reader and tablet market report , insight media , october 2010 . as reported by richard hart , e-books look to be hit over holiday season , abc 7 news , november 21 , 2010 . although distribution via the internet ( also known as online publishing or web publishing when in the form of a website ) is nowadays strongly associated with electronic publishing , there are many non-network electronic publications such as encyclopedias on cd and dvd , as well as technical and reference publications relied on by mobile users and others without reliable and high speed access to a network . electronic publishing is also being used in the field of test-preparation in developed as well as in developing economies for student education ( thus partly replacing conventional books ) – for it enables content and analytics combined – for the benefit of students . the use of electronic publishing for textbooks may become more prevalent with apple books from apple inc . and apple 's negotiation with the three largest textbook suppliers in the u.s . yinka adegoke , apple jumps into digital textbooks fray , yahoo news , january 19 , 2012 . electronic publishing is increasingly popular in works of fiction . electronic publishers are able to respond quickly to changing market demand , because the companies do not have to order printed books and have them delivered . e-publishing is also making a wider range of books available , including books that customers would not find in standard book retailers , due to insufficient demand for a traditional '' print run '' . e-publication is enabling new authors to release books that would be unlikely to be profitable for traditional publishers . while the term '' electronic publishing '' is primarily used in the 2010s to refer to online and web-based publishers , the term has a history of being used to describe the development of new forms of production , distribution , and user interaction in regard to computer-based production of text and other interactive media . history . digitization . the first digitization initiative was in 1971 in the united states , by michael s . hart . he was a student at the university of illinois , and decided to launch the project gutenberg . marie lebert , les mutations du livre à l'heure de l'internet , net des études françaises , montréal , 2007 the project was about making literature more accessible to everyone , through internet . it took a while to develop , and in 1989 there were only 10 texts that were manually recopied on computer by michael s . hart himself and some volunteers . but with the appearance of the web 1.0 in 1991 and its ability to connect documents together through static pages , the project moved quickly forward . many more volunteers helped in developing the project by giving access to public domain classics . in the 1970s , cnrs digitized 1 000 books from diverse subjects , mostly literature but also philosophy and science , from the 1180s to present times , as to build the foundations of a big dictionary , the trésor de la langue française . this foundation of e-texts , named frantext , was first published on cd under the name of discotext , and then published on the web in 1998 . the frantext is always enhanced , and in 2016 they registered 4 516 texts . mass-scale digitization . in 1974 , ray kurzweil developed a scanner that was equipped with an omnifont software that enabled optical character recognition for numeric inputs . the digitization projects could then be a lot more ambitious since the time needed for digitization decreased considerably , and digital libraries were on the rise . all over the world , e-libraries started to emerge . the abu ( association des bibliophiles universels ) , was a public digital library project created by the cnam in 1993 . it was the first french digital library in the network ; suspended since 2002 , they reproduced over a hundred texts that are still available . in 1992 , the bibliothèque nationale de france launched a vast digitization program . the president françois mitterrand had wanted since 1988 to create a new and innovative digital library , and it was published in 1997 under the name of gallica . in december 2004 , google created google books , a project to digitize all the books available in the word ( over 130 million books ) to make them accessible online . 10 years later , 25 000 000 books , from a hundred countries and in 400 languages , are on the platform . this was possible because by that time , robotic scanners could digitize around 6 000 books per hour . in 2008 , the prototype of europeana was launched ; and by 2010 , the project had been giving access to over 10 million digital objects . the europeana library is a european catalog that offers index cards on millions of digital objects and links to their digital libraries . in the same year , hathitrust was created to put together the contents of many university e-libraries from usa and europe , as well as google books and internet archive . in 2016 , over six millions of users had been using hathitrust . '' 14 million books & 6 million visitors : hathitrust growth and usage in 2016 ( pdf ) . electronic publishing . the first digitization projects were transferring physical content into digital content . electronic publishing is aiming to integrate the whole process of editing and publishing ( production , layout , publication ) in the digital world . alain mille , in the book pratiques de l'édition numérique ( edited by michael e . sinatra and marcello vitali-rosati ) , says that the beginnings of internet and the web are the very core of electronic publishing , since they pretty much determined the biggest changes in the production and diffusion patterns . internet has a direct effect on the publishing questions , letting creators and users go further in the traditional process ( writer-editor-publishing house ) . the traditional publishing , and especially the creation part , were first revolutionized by new desktop publishing softwares appearing in the 1980s , and by the text databases created for the encyclopedias and directories . at the same time the multimedia was developing quickly , combining book , audiovisual and computer science characteristics . cds and dvds appear , permitting the visualization of these dictionaries and encyclopedias on computers . the arrival and democratization of internet is slowly giving small publishing houses the opportunity to publish their books directly online . some websites , like amazon , let their users buy ebooks ; internet users can also find many educative platforms ( free or not ) , encyclopedic websites like wikipedia , and even digital magazines platforms . the ebook then becomes more and more accessible through many different supports , like the e-reader and even smartphones . the digital book had , and still has , an important impact on publishing houses and their economical models ; it is still a moving domain , and they yet have to master the new ways of publishing in a digital era . . online edition . based on new communications practices of the web 2.0 and the new architecture of participation , online edition opens the door to a collaboration of a community to elaborate and improve contents on internet , while also enriching reading through collective reading practices . the web 2.0 not only links documents together , as did the web 1.0 , it also links people together through social media : that 's why it 's called the web 2.0 . many tools were put in place to foster sharing and creative collective contents . one of the many is the wikipedia encyclopedia , since it is edited , corrected and enhanced by millions of contributors . openstreetmap is also based on the same principle . blogs and comment systems are also now renown as online edition and publishing , since it is possible through new interactions between the author and its readers , and can be an important method for inspiration but also for visibility . . process . the electronic publishing process follows some aspects of the traditional paper-based publishing process chicago manual of style , chapter 1 but differs from traditional publishing in two ways : 1 ) it does not include using an offset printing press to print the final product and 2 ) it avoids the distribution of a physical product ( e.g . , paper books , paper magazines , or paper newspapers ) . because the content is electronic , it may be distributed over the internet and through electronic bookstores , and users can read the material on a range of electronic and digital devices , including desktop computers , laptops , tablet computers , smartphones or e-reader tablets . the consumer may read the published content online a website , in an application on a tablet device , or in a pdf document on a computer . in some cases , the reader may print the content onto paper using a consumer-grade ink-jet or laser printer or via a print on demand system . some users download digital content to their devices , enabling them to read the content even when their device is not connected to the internet ( e.g . , on an airplane flight ) . distributing content electronically as software applications ( '' apps '' ) has become popular in the 2010s , due to the rapid consumer adoption of smartphones and tablets . at first , native apps for each mobile platform were required to reach all audiences , but in an effort toward universal device compatibility , attention has turned to using html5 to create web apps that can run on any browser and function on many devices . the benefit of electronic publishing comes from using three attributes of digital technology : xml tags to define content , chicago manual of style , chapter 9 style sheets to define the look of content , and metadata ( data about data ) to describe the content for search engines , thus helping users to find and locate the content ( a common example of metadata is the information about a song 's songwriter , composer , genre that is electronically encoded along with most cds and digital audio files ; this metadata makes it easier for music lovers to find the songs they are looking for ) . with the use of tags , style sheets , and metadata , this enables reflowable document that adapts to various reading devices ( tablet , smartphone , e-reader , etc . ) or electronic delivery methods . because electronic publishing often requires text mark-up ( e.g . , hyper text markup language or some other markup language ) to develop online delivery methods , the traditional roles of typesetters and book designers , who created the printing set-ups for paper books , have changed . designers of digitally published content must have a strong knowledge of mark-up languages , the variety of reading devices and computers available , and the ways in which consumers read , view or access the content . however , in the 2010s , new user friendly design software is becoming available for designers to publish content in this standard without needing to know detailed programming techniques , such as adobe systems ' adobe indesign and apple 's ibooks author . the most common file format is . epub , used in many e-book formats . epub is a free and open standard available in many publishing programs . another common format is . folio , which is used by the adobe digital publishing suite to create content for apple 's ipad tablets and apps . academic publishing . after an article is submitted to an academic journal for consideration , there can be a delay ranging from several months to more than two years g . ellison ( 2002 ) . '' the slowdown of the economics publishing process '' . journal of political economy 110 ( 5 ) : 947–993 before it is published in a journal , rendering journals a less than ideal format for disseminating current research . in some fields such as astronomy and some areas of physics , the role of the journal in disseminating the latest research has largely been replaced by preprint repositories such as arxiv.org . however , scholarly journals still play an important role in quality control and establishing scientific credit . in many instances , the electronic materials uploaded to preprint repositories are still intended for eventual publication in a peer-reviewed journal . there is statistical evidence that electronic publishing provides wider dissemination , online or invisible ? by steve lawrence of the nec research institute because when a journal is available online , a larger number of researchers can access the journal . even if a professor is working in a university that does not have a certain journal in its library , she may still be able to access the journal online . a number of journals have , while retaining their longstanding peer review process to ensure that the research is done properly , established electronic versions or even moved entirely to electronic publication . copyright . in the early 2000s , many of the existing copyright laws were designed around printed books , magazines and newspapers . for example , copyright laws often set limits on how much of a book can be mechanically reproduced or copied . electronic publishing raises new questions in relation to copyright , because if an e-book or e-journal is available online , millions of internet users may be able to view a single electronic copy of the document , without any '' copies '' being made . emerging evidence suggests that e-publishing may be more collaborative than traditional paper-based publishing ; e-publishing often involves more than one author , and the resulting works are more accessible , since they are published online . at the same time , the availability of published material online opens more doors for plagiarism , unauthorized use , or re-use of the material . chennupati k . ramaiah , schubert foo and heng poh choo , elearning and digital publishing . some publishers are trying to address these concerns . for example , in 2011 , harpercollins limited the number of times that one of its e-books could be lent in a public library . randall stross , publishers vs . libraries : an e-book tug of war . other publishers , such as penguin , are attempting to incorporate e-book elements into their regular paper publications . examples . electronic versions of traditional media . cd-rom e-book electronic journal online magazine online newspaper pdf . new media . blog collaborative software digital publication app enhanced publication file sharing mobile apps podcast . business models . digital distribution online advertising open access ( publishing ) pay-per-view print on demand self-publishing subscriptions non-subsidy publishing the term '' non-subsidy publisher '' is used to distinguish an electronic publisher that uses the traditional method of accepting submissions from authors without payment by the author . it is , therefore , to be distinguished from any form of self-publishing . it is traditional publishing , probably using a non-traditional medium , like electronic , or pod . see also : subsidy publishing vs . self-publishing : what 's the difference ? . see also . desktop publishing electronic typesetting mobile publishing . references . external links . w3c digital publishing activity