Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation

history . the river don is known to have been navigable up to doncaster as early as 1343 , when a commission looked at the problems caused by bridges and weirs . it underwent major changes in the 1620s , when cornelius vermuyden closed the channel which crossed hatfield chase to reach the river trent at adlingfleet , and diverted all of the water northwards to the river aire . following flooding and riots , a new outlet was cut from newbridge to goole , which was known as the dutch river . serious thought was given to improving the river from 1691 , but disagreements between groups from doncaster , rotherham and sheffield prevented progress . finally , the sheffield cutlers obtained an act of parliament in 1726 to improve the river up to tinsley . doncaster corporation then obtained an act in 1727 to authorise improvements below doncaster . the dutch river was difficult to navigate , and in 1793 , the stainforth and keadby canal was authorised , to provide a link from the don at stainforth to the trent at keadby . although notionally independent , it was effectively under the control of the don navigation when it opened , probably in 1802 . the dearne and dove canal was also authorised in 1793 , from swinton to barnsley , and was again under don navigation control , since most of the shareholders were also shareholders in the don . a canal from tinsley into sheffield was delayed for years by opposition from the don navigation , but was authorised in 1815 and opened in 1819 . by the 1840s , there were a number of proposals to build railways in the region , and the river don navigation company acted to ensure they would remain in business . an attempted takeover of the barnsley canal in 1845 was not concluded , but gave them some bargaining power while it appeared likely . they bought out the dearne and dove canal in 1846 , and acquired the sheffield canal from the manchester , sheffield and lincolnshire railway in 1848 , which , as the sheffield and lincolnshire junction railway , a predecessor and constituent company , had bought it in 1846 . after protracted negotiations , they absorbed the stainforth and keadby canal in 1849 . they then amalgamated with the south yorkshire , doncaster and goole railway in 1850 , to become the south yorkshire railway and river dun company . this in turn was leased to the manchester , sheffield and lincolnshire railway for 999 years in 1864 . by the 1880s , there was dissatisfaction among the users that the rates for traffic were higher than on the railways , and the canals were failing to modernise , as steam boats were banned , despite them having been in use for 50 years on the neighbouring aire and calder navigation . formation . with the manchester ship canal under construction , and other large canals being proposed , a committee was formed to investigate a new canal from sheffield to the sea . t & c hawksley , assisted by james abernethy , were asked to report on whether a canal from sheffield suitable for medium-sized coasters could be built , to the ouse , the trent or the humber . their report , presented in october 1888 , suggested that the existing locks on the route from sheffield to keadby were inadequate , but that the waterway could be upgraded to take 300- to 500-ton boats by building new locks alongside the old , without disrupting traffic . the estimated cost of this work , which included a new canal from tinsley to sheffield , but did not include buying the canals from the railway company , was put at £1 & nbsp ; million . the sheffield and south yorkshire canal company limited was formed in november 1888 , with a capital of £30,000 , to promote this new venture and obtain the necessary act of parliament . the new company obtained an act of parliament on 26 august 1889 , creating the sheffield and south yorkshire navigation company , which was authorised to raise £1.5 & nbsp ; million and to purchase the four canals either by negotiation , or by compulsory purchase if after nine months negotiations with the railway company had failed to reach an agreement . they could also improve the canals they bought , or build new ones , and could also act as inland carriers . the intent was to rebuild the don and the stainforth and keadby routes to allow 300- or 400-ton barges to be used , and to develop coal-handling facilities at keadby so that it would rival goole on the aire and calder navigation . in addition , the dearne and dove canal would be dredged , so that tom pudding , like those on the aire and calder , could be used for the transport of coal . the railway company was unwilling to sell , and did nothing until the initial nine-month period had passed . when a notice was served under the terms of the act , which required them to sell the canals , they attempted to obstruct the new company by taking legal action against them . in 1891 , the courts found in favour of the canal company , but negotiations dragged on . meanwhile , negotiations had also taken place with the aire and calder , and an agreement had been reached to connect the two systems together by a canal , so that the improved don could use goole for the export of coal , rather than having to develop keadby . by 1893 , agreement had been reached as to what the railway company was selling , and a price of £1.14 & nbsp ; million had been fixed , of which £600,000 was to be paid in cash . the rest could be paid in shares in the new company , which would give the railway places on the board unless the canal company bought all of the shares back . this was enshrined in a new act of parliament obtained on 31 july 1893 , but the clause about railway representation meant that the aire and calder declined to purchase any shares , and the company struggled to raise the capital . the new company finally took over the four canals on 1 march 1895 . it had only succeeded in raising £625,000 , which was less than the purchase price of the canals . the railway company therefore nominated half of the ten directors , and there was no capital to fund the ambitious plans for the modernisation of the system , although some further developments took place . development . while the company had hoped to have £1 & nbsp ; million to fund improvements , there was no working capital , and the enlargement of the locks to take 300- or 500-ton barges did not take place . the largest boats that could be accommodated were 110-ton vessels , although some of the locks were lengthened to take compartment boats . the dearne and dove canal was regularly affected by subsidence , causing a drain on limited resources . in 1906 , the worsbrough branch ceased to be navigable , and became just a water feeder , and in 1909 , the company effectively conceded defeat , by allowing coal to be mined under the canal . the elsacar branch closed in 1928 , and most of the rest of the canal was closed in 1934 , although formal closure did not take place until 1961 . despite the lack of capital , the new company somehow managed to finance improvements to sheffield basin , including a four-storey warehouse which straddled part of the basin . banks were raised and the canals were dredged , and for the first and only time , tonnage carried exceeded one million tons in 1896 . they were also faced with the prospect of funding their half of the new junction canal , to provide the connection with the aire and calder navigation . this was achieved by creating £150,000 of debenture stock and by mortgages . the final cost of the new canal when it was opened on 2 january 1905 had been £300,000 shared between the two companies . some straightening of the navigation near doncaster had been carried out , but they noted that more would be required at sprotborough and doncaster to make full use of compartment boats . between 1905 and 1913 , traffic rose from 835,982 tons to 961,774 tons , despite the fact that the system was antiquated and made little use of motor barges until after the first world war . west riding of yorkshire , who reported on its state in 1907 as part of the royal commission on canals , blamed the inadequacies on the fact that the navigation was virtually controlled by the great central railway . doncaster lock was extended in 1909 and 1910 , and improvements were made at doncaster , rotherham and tinsley , but trade declined significantly with the onset of the first world war , as many of the steam trawlers which had previously used coal from the waterway were requisitioned by the admiralty , and were fuelled elsewhere . as the war drew towards its end , the sheffield city council pushed for major improvements to the system . while they thought that the waterway should be nationalised , they were in principle willing to part-fund improvements providing control by the railway company was ended . they commissioned sir john wolfe-barry , lyster and partners to produce a report in 1919 , and from the options suggested , chose to promote one of them . this involved increasing the depth of the waterway from tinsley to keadby to , making the channel wider and straighter , rebuilding the bridges to give more room through them , and replacing the locks with eighteen new ones , each . they were to be fitted with multiple gates , and be sized for 300-ton craft or four 110-ton barges . the estimated cost for these improvements was £1,483,426 , but the economic circumstances of the time meant that the government was not prepared to support the scheme , and whereas the neighbouring corporation of nottingham funded improvements to the river trent without government support , sheffield were not prepared to do the same for the don . there were also proposals for a ship canal from doncaster to trent falls at the same time . nationalisation . in 1948 the company was nationalised and became a part of british waterways . by the 1960s traffic was dwindling and the official head of the main line of the navigation became the new steelworks at aldwarke , below rotherham . repeated proposals were made in the 1960s and 1970s to upgrade the system to allow larger vessels as far as rotherham . go-ahead was finally given in the early 1980s : the channel was deepened to 8 feet and the locks were rebuilt to take 700 ton vessels . a new wharf and freight terminal were built in rotherham utilising the disused riverside bus depot as warehousing ; various other facilities on the navigation below rotherham were upgraded . the improvements were opened in 1983 . although these have received traffic sporadically since ( and are still used in a limited fashion today ) , the upgrade was not the success that was hoped . by the 1970s , boats rarely ventured above rotherham . the effort made in the 1980s to attract traffic to the waterway below rotherham did not extend to the stretch above the town : the locks remained suitable only for much smaller barges . over time parts of the sheffield canal gradually slid towards dereliction through lack of use . in 1990 there was a concerted effort by sheffield city council and british waterways to revitalise the waterway , which brought traffic back to a redeveloped sheffield basin ( now focussed on leisure and commercial activities and renamed victoria quays ) . today the system is open to navigation throughout the main line , the stainforth and keadby and new junction canals , and is mostly used for leisure boating . some commercial carrying does take place from the quarry at cadeby and the wharves at rotherham and doncaster ; plus there is an active commercial barge-yard at swinton and leisure boatyard and boat-builder at sheffield . in 2008–09 the system carried 290,000 tonnes of freight , of which 266,100 tonnes were limestone from cadeby . the rother link is a scheme that would see the river rother upgraded to navigable status from rotherham as far as killamarsh , where a short canal would link to the chesterfield canal to complete a leisure cruising circuit . a canal restoration group is also seeking the re-opening of the dearne and dove canal , has performed some restoration work at elsecar and commissioned an engineer 's report into reopening . see also . canals of the united kingdom history of the british canal system . bibliography . . references . . external links . sheffield canal basin and '' virtual cruise '' pennine waterways