Heavy fighter

netherlands . the fokker g.i was a private venture design by dutch aircraft manufacturer fokker in 1936 . the g.i was designed to serve on the heavier end of the spectrum of heavy fighters , as a jachtkruiser or a bomber destroyer , and was comparable to early models of the german messerschmitt bf 110 . the g.i was formidably armed relative even to other early heavy fighters ; with twin 23 & nbsp ; mm ( . 91 in ) madsen cannons , and a pair of 7.9 & nbsp ; mm ( . 31 in ) madsen machine guns ( later up-armed to eight machine guns ) in the nose . for defensive purposes , a single madsen 7.9 & nbsp ; mm machine gun was mounted in a rear-facing turret , manned by the second crew-member . prior to the battle of the netherlands , the g.i was actively involved in air-border patrols in order to ensure neutrality & the integrity of dutch airspace . on 20 march 1940 , a g.i forced down an armstrong whitworth whitley from no . 77 squadron raf when it strayed into dutch air space . on 10 may 1940 , when nazi germany invaded , 23 g.i aircraft were serviceable . in the '' five-day war '' , the available g.i fighters were mainly deployed in ground attack missions , strafing advancing german infantry units , but were also used to attack junkers ju 52 . although reports are fragmentary and inaccurate as to the results , g.i fighters were employed over rotterdam and the hague , contributing to the loss of 167 ju 52s , scoring up to 14 confirmed aerial kills . with relentless attacks by the luftwaffe on dutch airfields , and overwhelming german air superiority , the g.i suffered heavy losses . at the conclusion of hostilities , several g.is were captured by the germans , and utilized as heavy-fighter trainers for bf 110 crews at wiener neustadt . for the next two years , flugzeugführerschule ( b ) 8 flew the g.i until attrition grounded the fleet . on 5 may 1941 , a fokker test pilot , hidde leegstra , accompanied by engineer ( and member of the fokker board of directors ) dr . piet vos , managed to fly a g.i to england from the occupied netherlands . after landing in england , the g.i was conscripted by miles aircraft . the company had designed an all-wooden fighter-bomber , and was interested in the g.i wing structure and its resistance to the rigours of a british climate . despite being left outdoors for the remainder of the war , the g.i survived only to be eventually scrapped after 1945 . there are no surviving g.is today , although a replica has been built , and is now displayed at the dutch nationaal militair museum ( national military museum ) . name '' tracesofwar.com '' / > . france . in 1934 , the french ministry of air issued a specification for a new two or three-seat multi-role fighter , capable of functioning as a bomber escort and night fighter , as well as providing fighter direction ( leading formations of single-engine fighters to their targets ) . the specification also required , at minimum , two forward-facing 20 & nbsp ; mm cannons , as well as a rearward-facing machine gun for defensive purposes . this was relatively heavy armament for a fighter in 1934 . danel 1967 , p . 4 . in response to this specification , french aircraft manufacturer potez developed the potez 630 . danel 1967 , p . 4 . rickard , j ( 19 may 2011 ) , potez 630 , the basic design was extremely close to the original specification ; that of either a 2 or 3 seat , dual-engine heavy fighter , armed with two 20 & nbsp ; mm hispano-suiza hs.404 cannons in gondolas under the fuselage and a rearward-facing machine gun for defense . numerous variants and sub-variants of the 63 series would be designed and produced , including day fighter , night fighter , reconnaissance , and light bomber variants . danel 1967 , p . 4 . while the 63 series was primarily developed for the french air force and french naval air arm , they would serve with numerous other nations , both axis and allied powers , via either pre-armistice sales by the french government , or via use of captured aircraft . breffort and jouineau 2005 , p . 67 danel 1967 , pp . 4 , 6 . in french service the series saw action during the battle of france , and post-armistice within both the vichy french vichy french air force , and the free french free french air forces . on 20 may 1940 , the light bomber variant , the potez 633 , took part in a ground attack against german troops near arras . three 633s took part in the attack . this was the type 's only operational mission over france as two days later the 633 was withdrawn from front-line service . green 1967 , p . 54 . the day/night fighter variant , the potez 631 , had quickly proved to be an ineffectual interceptor ; it was slower than some german bomber aircraft and 130 & nbsp ; km/h slower than the messerschmitt bf 109 e-variant fighter . perhaps the most successful unit operating the potez 631 was the flottille f1c of the french naval air arm . between 10–21 may 1940 , aircraft of the flottille shot down 12 enemy aircraft in exchange for 8 of their own losses prior to its withdrawal from active combat . danel 1967 , p . 12 . the reconnaissance variants , the potez 637 and 63.11 , equipped numerous groupes de reconnaissance of the french air force , with more than 700 reconnaissance potez 63.11s having been delivered . danel 1967 , p . 11 . the potez 63.11 suffered the heaviest losses of any french type . one factor contributing to the high losses was the near-complete lack of spares , rendering 70 63.11s unserviceable even prior to the german invasion ; many aircraft were destroyed on the ground by enemy bombing and strafing attacks , and entire units were wiped out without conducting a single mission . danel 1967 , p . 12 . in addition to the potez 63 series , another aircraft was developed from the original 1934 heavy fighter specification . this was the bréguet 693 , designed and manufactured originally by bréguet aviation . while the bréguet 690 was not selected to serve as france 's primary heavy fighter , the french air force command staff was still intrigued by the sturdy and versatile design . rickard , j ( 2 october 2009 ) , bréguet 690 , by 1938 , with france falling behind in ground-attack/close-air support aircraft , the decision was made by the air force to re-designate the bréguet 690 as the bréguet 691 , and to utilize it as a ground-attack aircraft . the 691 's engines proved unreliable in testing , and the decision was made to mount new engines on the design , which was finally designated as the bréguet 693 . rickard , j ( 2 october 2009 ) , breguet 691 ab2 ( assaut bombardement – biplace/ two-seat attack bomber ) , few 693s were completed before the battle of france , however , enough were completed to see some action . the 693 made its combat debut on 12 may 1940 when twelve 693s were sent to attack a german mechanized column near tongeren . six to eight were shot down by german flak , two more 693s were lost while attempting to return to base , and of those that made it home safely , one was written off ( most of the twenty four crewmen survived or were captured alive , although three died during the attack and some of the survivors were badly wounded ) . as the fighting drew to a close the french attempted to fly as many 693s as possible to north africa , but only three made the flight , and none were used by the vichy air force in north africa . in november 1942 with the case anton , the remaining bréguets were seized . some had their engines removed for use in german aircraft , while others were passed on to the italians , who used them as training aircraft . rickard , j ( 2 october 2009 ) , breguet 693 ab2 ( assaut bombardement – biplace/ two-seat attack bomber ) , . germany . a major heavy fighter design was the messerschmitt bf 110 , a german fighter that , prior to the war , was considered by the german luftwaffe more important than their single-engine fighters . many of the best pilots were assigned to bf 110 wings , specifically designated as zerstörergeschwader ( '' destroyer squadron '' ) wings . while lighter fighters were intended for defense , the destroyers were intended for offensive missions : to escort bombers on missions at long range , then use its superior speed to outrun defending fighters that would be capable of outmaneuvering it . this doctrine proved to be a costly mistake . in practice the bf 110 was capable of using this combination of features for only a short time , until the late summer of 1940 . it served well against the hawker hurricane during the battle of france , but was easily outperformed by – and up to 50 & nbsp ; km/h ( 31 & nbsp ; mph ) slower in top speed than – the supermarine spitfire during the battle of britain . eventually bf 110s were converted to interceptors , and were particularly successful in the later marks of the bf 110g series from 1942/3 onwards as night fighters , serving as the primary aircraft of the luftwaffe nachtjagdgeschwader night fighter wings , using various versions of the lichtenstein radar for nocturnal interception of raf bomber command heavy bombers , as well as finding some use as ground-attack aircraft . the me 210 and me 410 hornisse were all-new aircraft designs meant to replace the bf 110 , but also could not outrun contemporary single-engine fighters , with the me 210 having serious aerodynamic problems from mistakes in the design of its wing planform and the initial design of its rear fuselage . aside from the bf 110 and me 210/410 , the luftwaffe also utilized various light bombers , medium bombers , and schnellbombers ( german ; literally '' fast bomber '' ) in the heavy fighter role . due to their relatively large size , these were mostly used as night fighter-bomber destroyers , as there was ample room to install airborne intercept radar systems as well as heavy armament . bombers utilized in such a role included the junkers ju 88 and ju 388 ; the heinkel he 219 ; the focke-wulf ta 154 ; and the dornier do 215 and do 217 . towards the end of the war , the dornier do 335 could have been an ideal twin-engine zerstörer fighter design for the luftwaffe due to its push-pull configuration , which placed its fuselage-mounted twin db 603 engines ' propellers on opposing ends of the fuselage , and potentially allowed much better maneuverability , while essentially using the same engines as the conventional-layout twin-engine me 410 . the centre-line thrust design of the do 335 , the first-ever front-line combat fighter to use it , did allow dramatically higher speeds ( just over 750 & nbsp ; km/h or 465 & nbsp ; mph ) than any other twin-piston-engine aircraft of its era , but was never produced in quantity . following the example set by the bf 110 , the japanese built the broadly similar kawasaki ki-45 toryu . likewise neutral netherlands built the twin-boom fokker g.i , only to be seized by the luftwaffe after the german invasion of the netherlands . united kingdom . before the war the british sought both twin-engined fighters with turret-mounted and nose-mounted ( cannon ) armament . the former because it was expected to give greater opportunity for attack at higher speeds compared to the biplane era ; the latter because of loss of accuracy expected with heavy weapons installed in wings . one example of an aircraft to meet the latter was the gloster f.9/37 ; later development into a night-fighter was curtailed in 1941 so that gloster 's design team could concentrate on gloster e.28/39 . the limitations of pure turret fighters ( though the single engine boulton paul defiant was successfully adapted as a nightfighter ) and aerodynamics of multiple cannon installations in turrets ( such as boulton paul p.92 ) curtailed introduction of designs into service . perhaps in the belief that '' the bomber will always get through '' , britain lagged behind in heavy fighter development . mr baldwin on aerial warfare – a fear for the future . the times newspaper , 11 november 1932 p7 column b . apart from the westland whirlwind and the high-altitude welkin , both built only in modest numbers ( the former due to lack of engines , the latter due to changed requirement ) , the royal air force 's wartime twin-engined fighters were all adapted from contemporary bombers . during the battle of britain , bristol blenheim bombers were fitted , as an interim measure and in utmost secrecy , with radars and ventral gun packs , turning them into the raf 's first night fighters . more successful was the bristol beaufighter , started in 1938 as an interim aircraft to cover for delays in introduction of a cannon-armed fighter ( the westland whirlwind ) . the beaufighter design reused major portions of the earlier beaufort torpedo bomber . armed with six . 303 inch ( 7.7 mm ) machine guns , four 20 & nbsp ; mm cannon and rockets , bombs or torpedoes , the beaufighter was potent in the anti-ship and ground attack role in the pacific and europe . with the addition of radar , it was one of the royal air force 's main night fighters . similarly , the successful de havilland mosquito fast bomber was simultaneously adapted for both day and night fighter use . a parallel single-seat twin merlin engine fighter the de havilland hornet entered service in the immediate post-war period and served until 1955 . when there appeared to be a threat from german high-altitude bombers , the westland welkin was developed . this was a twin engine design with wide wings to be able to intercept at . the threat never materialised and welkins did not see combat service . a contemporary design the six cannon armed vickers type 432 , which itself descended from a requirement for a fighter with 40mm cannon , got no further than the prototype . due to the different requirements for naval fighter aircraft , the british put into service some heavyweight single-engine fighters such as the fairey firefly . united states . during the late 1930s , bell aircraft of the united states designed the yfm-1 airacuda '' bomber destroyer '' . very large and heavily armed , the airacuda was plagued with design flaws ; only 13 prototypes were built , none of which participated in world war ii . during the war the curtis xp-71 project was a long range escort fighter/bomber destroyer design based on 75mm gun ( the same as intended for the lockheed xp-58 ) but interest waned and the span aircraft did not progress beyond the mockup . buttler , t and griffith , a american secret projects : fighters bombers and attack aircraft 1937 to 1945 p 73-74 another bomber destroyer was the beech model 28 with a 75 & nbsp ; mm gun and twin turrets for defence . the design was repurposed as a ground attack aircraft with armour and bunkers as targets , the xa-38 , but for reasons including need of the chosen powerplant for b-29 bombers it did not enter service . buttler and griffith , p144 the us military never designated an aircraft as a '' heavy fighter , '' but some american fighters were relatively heavy in weight . one of these was the lockheed p-38 lightning . it was designed as a twin-engine bomber interceptor to climb quickly and carry heavy armament at high speed , with the lighter bell p-39 airacobra meeting the single-engine version of the same requirement . an advanced design , the p-38 performed best in the pacific theater where its long range proved a pivotal advantage . this range allowed a team of 16 early p-38 models to operation vengeance during his inspection tour . the p-38 proved adaptable to undertake multiple roles including fighter escort , reconnaissance ( as the f-4 and f-5 variants of which over 1,200 were built ) , and fighter-bomber . as an escort fighter , the p-38 accompanied b-17 flying fortress raids deep into german-held europe . the p-38 and the much lighter north american p-51 mustang were the first two american fighters over berlin in march 1944 . the grumman f7f tigercat was the first twin-engine fighter aircraft to enter service with the united states navy , using two pratt & whitney double wasp radial engines , achieving a top speed of 460 & nbsp ; mph ( 740 & nbsp ; km/h ) . it was among the fastest piston-engine aircraft ever built , and heavily armed with four 20mm m2 cannon and four . 50 bmg ( 12.7 mm ) m2 browning machine guns , with hard points for bombs or a torpedo . although grumman designed and developed the aircraft during world war ii , it entered service too late to see action before vj day . it served in the korean war and retired in 1954 . ussr . during the interwar period the ussr , as with many other nations , set about developing twin-engine fighters with recoilless rifle armament to function in the heavy-fighter role , particularly as interceptors and bomber destroyers . designs such as the tupolev ant-29 or petlyakov vi-100 were proposed , but never made it past the prototype stage . with the operation barbarossa in 1941 , the soviet air forces were caught off-guard ; with only lighter , single-engined , relatively lightly-armed fighters to intercept luftwaffe bombers , and no dedicated night fighters ( a role typically filled by heavy fighters ) . after the german night bombing raids of moscow in 1941 , the people 's commissariat of defense of the soviet union ( nko ) sought to rapidly correct this deficiency . in order to create a fighter that would fill the needed specifications quickly , it was determined that it would utilize a pre-existing airframe . the nko selected the petlyakov pe-2 – a twin-engined light bomber – to be modified , and within 4 days the newly minted petlyakov pe-3 took flight . numerous issues were identified with the pe-3 , primarily stemming from the added gun and cannon armament . various improvements , workarounds , and modifications were tested to address these issues . the aircraft was placed under further scrutiny when it was issued on a trial-basis to the 95th high-speed bomber regiment within the moscow military district in late 1941 . the regiment 's experiences revealed further deficiencies not found during initial testing ; firing the aircraft 's forward-facing armament at night temporarily blinded the pilots , crews complained about a lack of frontal armor , and heavier armament was requested . ground crews would rectify two of these issues on their own ; flash-hiders were installed on the forward armament , and rs-82 and rs-132 rocket launchers were sometimes mounted for ground-attack missions , while a dag-10 aerial grenade launcher was occasionally mounted in the tail . most of the problems found during trials and operational field-testing would be rectified by the petlyakov with the introduction of the pe-3bis ( pe-3 'improved ' ) . pe-3bis production began in april 1942 , although 207 standard pe-3s were produced in the intervening months . however , additional issues were again discovered with the pe-3bis , and in may 1942 the petlyakov design bureau switched production over to a pe-3bis with further minor modifications ; no name or designation change was made . a reconnaissance variant , with an onboard camera system and greater range was also produced in small numbers ; this variant was often referred to as either the pe-3r or pe-3f . the pe-3 and pe-3bis would serve as the only widely fielded heavy fighter of the soviet air forces during wwii . other heavy fighter designs ; such as the grushin gr-1 , mikoyan-gurevich dis , polikarpov tis , and the tairov ta-3 ; were proposed , but never moved beyond test stages . after world war ii . like other military types , piston-engine heavy fighters such as the de havilland hornet and sea hornet , as well as the north american f-82 twin mustang continued in service in the years immediately after the war . all were developed at the end of world war & nbsp ; ii for use in the pacific theatre , though none reached operational squadrons until after vj day , the hornet in 1946 , the sea hornet in 1947 and the twin mustang in 1948 . 4th-generation and 5th-generation air superiority fighters are designed to wrest air superiority from the enemy in hostile territory , and thus usually have greater range than tactical fighters or interceptors . they therefore typically have two engines , the breguet range equation shows range is independent of size and engine count ( twin jets get slightly less due to more boat-tail drag ) . to a first order range depends on fuel fraction , relative drag ( per pound ) , and engine efficiency . that is why the single engine f-16 had superior range to every other american fighter when it was introduced . see range ( aeronautics ) . and often carry a larger number of air-to-air missiles than their smaller brethren . they typically also have more capable and complex radar and electronic systems , with the result that in older air-superiority fighters such as the mcdonnell douglas f-4 phantom ii or grumman f-14 tomcat , a second dedicated crew member was carried to manage radar and weapon-systems . see also . bomber destroyer interceptor aircraft light fighter night fighter . references .