Politeness

types . anthropologists penelope brown and stephen levinson identified two kinds of politeness , deriving from erving goffman 's concept of face : negative politeness : making a request less infringing , such as '' if you do n't mind . '' or '' if it is n't too much trouble . '' ; respects a person 's right to act freely . in other words , deference . there is a greater use of indirect speech acts . also considered a part of being assertive . non-assertive politeness : when a person refrains from making a comment or asserting their beliefs during a discussion so as to remain polite to others present . also when a person goes along with a decision made by someone else so as not to appear impolite . assertive politeness : when a person offers their opinion in a positive and constructive way to be assistive and helpful during an interaction . or to refrain from agreeing with something they do not actually agree with in a way that does not offend others . positive politeness : seeks to establish a positive relationship between parties ; respects a person 's need to be liked and understood . direct speech acts , swearing and flouting gricean maxim can be considered aspects of positive politeness because : they show an awareness that the relationship is strong enough to cope with what would normally be considered impolite ( in the popular understanding of the term ) ; they articulate an awareness of the other person 's values , which fulfills the person 's desire to be accepted . some cultures seem to prefer one of these kinds of politeness over the other . in this way politeness is culturally bound . history . image : spectator.jpg thumb the spectator fostered a culture of politeness among the middle-classes of early 18th century england . during the enlightenment era , a self-conscious process of the imposition of polite norms and behaviours became a symbol of being a genteel member of the upper class . upwardly mobile middle class bourgeoisie increasingly tried to identify themselves with the elite through their adopted artistic preferences and their standards of behaviour . they became preoccupied with precise rules of etiquette , such as when to show emotion , the art of elegant dress and graceful conversation and how to act courteously , especially with women . influential in this new discourse was a series of essays on the nature of politeness in a commercial society , penned by the philosopher lord shaftesbury in the early 18th century . shaftesbury defined politeness as the art of being pleasing in company : : 'politeness ' may be defined a dext'rous management of our words and actions , whereby we make other people have better opinion of us and themselves . periodicals , such as the spectator , founded as a daily publication by joseph addison and richard steele in 1711 , gave regular advice to its readers on how to be a polite gentleman . its stated goal was '' to enliven morality with wit , and to temper wit with morality.to bring philosophy out of the closets and libraries , schools and colleges , to dwell in clubs and assemblies , at tea-tables and coffeehouses '' it provided its readers with educated , topical talking points , and advice in how to carry on conversations and social interactions in a polite manner . the art of polite conversation and debate was particularly cultivated in the coffeehouses of the period . conversation was supposed to conform to a particular manner , with the language of polite and civil conversation considered to be essential to the conduct of coffeehouse debate and conversation . klein , 1996 p 34 '' politeness and the interpretation of the british eighteenth century '' , lawrence e . klein , the historical journal , vol . 45 , no . 4 ( dec . , 2002 ) , pp . 869-898 . the concept of 'civility ' referred to a desired social interaction which valued sober and reasoned debate on matters of interest . cowan , 2005 . p 101 established rules and procedures for proper behaviour as well as conventions , were outlined by gentleman 's clubs , such as harrington 's rota club . periodicals , including the tatler and the spectator , infused politeness into english coffeehouse conversation , as their explicit purpose lay in the reformation of english manners and morals . mackie , 1998 . p 1 . techniques . expressing uncertainty and ambiguity through hedging and indirectness . polite lie use of euphemisms ( which make use of ambiguity as well as connotation ) preferring tag questions to direct statements , such as '' you were at the store , were n't you ? '' modal tags request information of which the speaker is uncertain . '' you have n't been to the store yet , have you ? '' affective tags indicate concern for the listener . '' you have n't been here long , have you ? '' softeners reduce the force of what would be a brusque demand . '' hand me that thing , could you ? '' facilitative tags invite the addressee to comment on the request being made . '' you can do that , ca n't you ? '' some studies lakoff , r . ( 1975 ) language and woman 's place . new york : harper & row . beeching , k . ( 2002 ) gender , politeness and pragmatic particles in french . amsterdam : john benjamins publishing company . have shown that women are more likely to use politeness formulas than men , though the exact differences are not clear . most current research has shown that gender differences in politeness use are complex , holmes , j . 1995 women men and language , longman ; mills , gender and politeness , cambridge university press , 2003 since there is a clear association between politeness norms and the stereotypical speech of middle class white women , at least in the uk and us . it is therefore unsurprising that women tend to be associated with politeness more and their linguistic behaviour judged in relation to these politeness norms . linguistic devices . besides and additionally to the above , many languages have specific means to show politeness , deference , respect , or a recognition of the social status of the speaker and the hearer . there are two main ways in which a given language shows politeness : in its lexicon ( for example , employing certain words in formal occasions , and colloquial forms in informal contexts ) , and in its morphology ( for example , using special verb forms for polite discourse ) . the t-v distinction is a common example in western languages . some languages have complex politeness systems , such as korean speech levels and honorific speech in japanese . criticism of the theory . brown and levinson 's theory of politeness has been criticised as not being universally valid , by linguists working with east asian languages , including japanese . matsumoto matsumoto , y . ( 1988 ) '' reexamination of the universality of face : politeness phenomena in japanese '' . journal of pragmatics 12 : 403–426 . and ide ide , s . ( 1989 ) '' formal forms and discernment : two neglected aspects of universals of linguistic politeness '' . multilingua 8 ( 2/3 ) : 223–248 . claim that brown and levinson assume the speaker 's volitional use of language , which allows the speaker 's creative use of face-maintaining strategies toward the addressee . in east asian cultures like japan , politeness is achieved not so much on the basis of volition as on discernment ( wakimae , finding one 's place ) , or prescribed social norms . wakimae is oriented towards the need for acknowledgment of the positions or roles of all the participants as well as adherence to formality norms appropriate to the particular situation . japanese is perhaps the most widely known example of a language that encodes politeness at its very core . japanese has two main levels of politeness , one for intimate acquaintances , family and friends , and one for other groups , and verb morphology reflects these levels . besides that , some verbs have special hyper-polite suppletion forms . this happens also with some nouns and interrogative pronouns . japanese also employs different personal pronouns for each person according to gender , age , rank , degree of acquaintance , and other cultural factors . see honorific speech in japanese , for further information . see also . congeniality bias : see confirmation bias courtesy etiquette formality intercultural competence polite fiction politeness maxims ( geoffrey leech ) politeness theory , which elaborates terms such as '' positive politeness '' and '' negative politeness '' register ( sociolinguistics ) respect valediction , expression used to say farewell ( e.g . to end a letter ) or the act of saying parting . references . further reading . brown , p . and levinson , s . ( 1987 ) politeness : some universals in language usage . cambridge : cambridge university press . holmes , j . 1995 women men and politeness london : longman mills , s . ( 2003 ) gender and politeness , cambridge : cambridge university press moumni , hassan ( 2005 ) . politeness in parliamentary discourse : a comparative pragmatic study of british and moroccan mps ’ speech acts at question time . unpub . ph.d . thesis . mohammed v university , rabat , morocco . watts , r.j . ( 2003 ) politeness . cambridge : cambridge university press . spencer-oatey , h . ( 2000 ) culturally speaking , continuum . kadar , d . and m . haugh ( 2013 ) '' understanding politeness '' . cambridge : cambridge university press . external links . model citizenship real-life examples of civil politeness sociolinguistics : politeness sociolinguistics : politeness in spanish wiki project in comparative politeness : european communicative strategies ( ecstra ) ( directed by joachim grzega ) politeness , bbc radio 4 discussion with amanda vickery , david wootton & john mullan ( in our time , sep . 30 , 2004 ) zh-yue : 禮貌