Patients' rights

india . under the direction of the ministry of health and family welfare ( mohfw ) , india 's national human rights commission drafted a charter of patients ' rights in 2018 . following a recommendation by the national council of clinical establishments , mohfw submitted the draft in the public domain for comments and suggestions on august 2018 . the charter draws upon different provisions relevant to patients ' rights that were previously scattered across the constitution of india , the drugs and cosmetic act of 1940 , the clinical establishment act of 2010 , and various judgments by the supreme court of india , among other sources . the charter aims to : provide a reference for state governments to enact or modify existing regulation . provide a framework of healthcare standards for service providers . and , raise awareness among patients about their rights . . recognized patients ' rights . the charter of patients ' rights lists seventeen rights that patients are entitled to : right to information : every patient has the right to know what is the illness that they are suffering , its causes , the status of the diagnosis ( provisional or confirmed ) , expected costs of treatment . furthermore , service providers should communicate this in a manner that is understandable for the patient . right to records and reports : the patient has the right to access his/her medical records and investigation reports . service providers should make these available upon the patients ' payment of any photocopy fees as applicable . right to emergency care : public and private hospitals have an obligation to provide emergency medical care regardless of the patients ' capacity to pay for the services . right to informed consent : patients have the right to be asked for their informed consent before submitting to potentially hazardous treatment . physicians should clearly explain the risks from receiving the treatment and only administer the treatment after getting explicit written consent from the patient . right to confidentiality , human dignity and privacy : doctors should observe strict confidentiality of a patient 's condition , with the only exception of potential threats to public health . in case of a physical inspection by a male doctor on a female patient , the latter has the right to have a female person present throughout the procedure . hospitals also have an obligation to secure patient information from any external threats . right to second opinion : patients are entitled to seek a second opinion and hospitals should facilitate any information or records that the patient requires to do so . right to transparency in rates , and care according to prescribed rates wherever relevant : hospitals should display the rates that they charge in a visible manner and patients should receive an itemized bill when payment is required . essential medicines , devices and implants should comply with rates established by the national pharmaceutical pricing authority ( nppa ) . right to non-discrimination : service providers can not deny treatment on the basis of gender , caste , religion , age , sexual orientation or social origins . additionally , it is against the charter to deny treatment on the basis of a patients ' health condition , including hiv status . right to safety and quality care according to standards : hospitals must ensure a hygienic and sanitized environment to provide their services . right to choose alternative treatment options if available : patients have the right to consider treatment alternatives and even refuse treatment . right to choose source for obtaining medicines or tests : any registered pharmacy and laboratory is eligible to provide patients with goods and services they require . right to proper referral and transfer , which is free from perverse commercial influences : in case of transfers or referrals , the patient has the right to an explanation that justifies the transfer , as well as confirmation from the hospital receiving the patient about their acceptance of the transfer . right to protection for patients involved in clinical trials : clinical trials should comply with all the standards and protocols under the directorate general of health services . right to protection of participants involved in biomedical and health research : studies involving patients should follow the national ethical guidelines for biomedical and health research involving human participants . right to take discharge of patient , or receive body of deceased from hospital : patients have the right to be discharged and may not be detained at a health service provider facility because of procedural reasons such as payment disputes . right to patient education : in addition to information about their condition , patients have the right to know about public health services such as insurance schemes and charitable hospitals . right to be heard and seek redressal : feedback and comments to their health service providers and file complaints as required . they additionally have the right to redressal in cases where any of their rights are violated . united kingdom . in the uk , the patient 's charter was introduced and revised in the 1990s . it was replaced by the nhs constitution for england in 2013 . united states . in the united states there have been a number of attempts to enshrine a patient 's bill of rights in law , including a bill rejected by congress in 2001 . bill of 2001 . the united states congress considered a bill designed to safeguard patients ' rights in 2001 . the '' bipartisan patient protection act '' ( s.1052 ) , sponsored by senators edward kennedy and john mccain , contained new rules for what health maintenance organizations had to cover and granted new rights for patients to sue in state or federal courts , if they are denied needed care . the house of representatives and senate passed differing versions of the proposed law . although both bills would have provided patients key rights , such as prompt access to emergency care and medical specialists , only the senate-passed measure would provide patients with adequate means to enforce their rights . the senate 's proposal would have conferred a broad array of rights on patients . it would have ensured that patients with health care plans had the right to : have their medical decisions made by a doctor ; see a medical specialist ; go to the closest emergency room ; the bill was passed by the us senate by a vote of 59–36 in 2001 , it was then amended by the house of representatives and returned to the senate . however , it ultimately failed . industry resistance . wendell potter , former senior executive at cigna turned whistleblower , has written that the insurance industry has worked to kill '' any reform that might interfere with insurers ' ability to increase profits '' by engaging in extensive and well-funded , anti-reform campaigns . the industry , however , '' goes to great lengths to keep its involvement in these campaigns hidden from public view , '' including the use of '' front groups . '' indeed , in a successful 1998 effort to kill the patient bill of rights then , “ the insurers formed a front group called the health benefits coalition to kill efforts to pass a patients bill of rights . while it was billed as a broad-based business coalition that was led by the national federation of independent business and included the u.s . chamber of commerce , the health benefits coalition in reality got the lion ’ s share of its funding and guidance from the big insurance companies and their trade associations . like most front groups , the health benefits coalition was set up and run out of one of washington ’ s biggest p.r . firms . the p.r . firm provided all the staff work for the coalition . the tactics worked . industry allies in congress made sure the patients ’ bill of rights would not become law . ” . aaps proposal . some have cited differences between positive rights and political freedom . asserting that medical care '' must be rendered under conditions that are acceptable to both patient and physician , '' the association of american physicians and surgeons ( aaps ) adopted a list of patient freedoms in 1990 , which was modified and adopted as a 'patients ' bill of rights ' in 1995 : the text of the aaps patients ' bill of rights reads : '' all patients should be guaranteed the following freedoms : to seek consultation with the physician ( s ) of their choice ; to contract with their physician ( s ) on mutually agreeable terms ; to be treated confidentially , with access to their records limited to those involved in their care or designated by the patient ; to use their own resources to purchase the care of their choice ; to refuse medical treatment even if it is recommended by their physician ( s ) ; to be informed about their medical condition , the risks and benefits of treatment and appropriate alternatives ; to refuse third-party interference in their medical care , and to be confident that their actions in seeking or declining medical care will not result in third-party-imposed penalties for patients or physicians ; to receive full disclosure of their insurance plan in plain language , including : contracts : a copy of the contract between the physician and health care plan , and between the patient or employer and the plan ; incentives : whether participating physicians are offered financial incentives to reduce treatment or ration care ; cost : the full cost of the plan , including copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles ; coverage : benefits covered and excluded , including availability and location of 24-hour emergency care ; qualifications : a roster and qualifications of participating physicians ; approval procedures : authorization procedures for services , whether doctors need approval of a committee or any other individual , and who decides what is medically necessary ; referrals : procedures for consulting a specialist , and who must authorize the referral ; appeals : grievance procedures for claim or treatment denials ; gag rule : whether physicians are subject to a gag rule , preventing criticism of the plan . '' . see also . health care reform in the united states human experimentation in the united states disability rights pregnant patients ' rights medical ethics mental health systems act of 1980 — earlier u.s . patients ' rights legislation . references . external links . american iatrogenic association '' promoting accountability for medical professionals and institutions '' summary of the mccain-edwards-kennedy patients ' bill of rights s.1052 2001 . consumer patient rights and responsibilities advisory commission on consumer protection and quality in the health care industry american hospital association - patient care partnership this plain language brochure replaces the aha 's patients ' bill of rights . world health organization - patients ' rights