Criminal justice

law . the law from old english lagu ( something laid down or fixed ) ; legal comes from latin legalis , from lex '' law , '' '' statute '' is a system of rules usually enforced through a set of institutions . the purpose of law is to provide an objective set of rules for governing conduct and maintaining order in a society . the oldest known codified law is the code of hammurabi , dating back to about 1754 bc . the preface directly credits the laws to the code of hammurabi of ur . in different parts of the world , law could be established by philosophers or religion . in the modern world , laws are typically created and enforced by governments . these codified laws may coexist with or contradict other forms of social control , such as religious proscriptions , professional rules and ethics , or the cultural mores and customs of a society . within the realm of codified law , there are generally two forms of law that the courts are concerned with . civil laws are rules and regulations which govern transactions and grievances between individual citizens . criminal law is concerned with actions which are dangerous or harmful to society as a whole , in which prosecution is pursued not by an individual but rather by the state . the purpose of criminal law is to provide the specific definition of what constitutes a crime and to prescribe punishments for committing such a crime . no criminal law can be valid unless it includes both of these factors . the subject of criminal justice is , of course , primarily concerned with the enforcement of criminal law . criminal justice system . definition . the criminal-justice system consists of three main parts : law enforcement agencies , usually the police courts and accompanying prosecutor and defence lawyers agencies for detaining and supervising offenders , such as prisons and probation agencies . in the criminal justice system , these distinct agencies operate together as the principal means of maintaining the rule of law within society . . law enforcement . the first contact a defendant has with the criminal justice system is usually with the police ( or law enforcement ) who investigates the suspected wrongdoing and makes an arrest , but if the suspect is dangerous to the whole nation , a national level law enforcement agency is called in . when warranted , law enforcement agencies or police officers are empowered to use force and other forms of legal coercion and means to effect public and social order . the term is most commonly associated with police departments of a state that are authorized to exercise the police power of that state within a defined legal or territorial area of responsibility . the word comes from the latin politia ( '' civil administration '' ) , which itself derives from the ancient greek πόλις , for polis ( '' city '' ) . the first police force comparable to the present-day police was established in 1667 under king louis xiv in france , although modern police usually trace their origins to the 1800 establishment of the thames river police in london , the glasgow police , and the napoleonic police of paris . police are primarily concerned with keeping the peace and enforcing criminal law based on their particular mission and jurisdiction . formed in 1908 , the federal bureau of investigation began as an entity which could investigate and enforce specific federal laws as an investigative and '' law enforcement agency '' in the united states ; this , however , has constituted only a small portion of overall policing activity . policing has included an array of activities in different contexts , but the predominant ones are concerned with public order and the provision of services . during modern times , such endeavors contribute toward fulfilling a shared mission among law enforcement organizations with respect to the traditional policing mission of deterring crime and maintaining societal order . . courts . the courts serve as the venue where disputes are then settled and justice is administered . with regard to criminal justice , there are a number of critical people in any court setting . these critical people are referred to as the courtroom work group and include both professional and non professional individuals . these include the judge , prosecutor , and the defense attorney . the judge , or magistrate , is a person , elected or appointed , who is knowledgeable in the law , and whose function is to objectively administer the legal proceedings and offer a final decision to dispose of a case . in the u.s . and in a growing number of nations , guilt or innocence ( although in the u.s . a jury can never find a defendant '' innocent '' but rather '' not guilty '' ) is decided through the adversarial system . in this system , two parties will both offer their version of events and argue their case before the court ( sometimes before a judge or panel of judges , sometimes before a jury ) . the case should be decided in favor of the party who offers the most sound and compelling arguments based on the law as applied to the facts of the case . the prosecutor , or district attorney , is a lawyer who brings charges against a person , persons or corporate entity . it is the prosecutor 's duty to explain to the court what crime was committed and to detail what evidence has been found which incriminates the accused . the prosecutor should not be confused with a plaintiff or plaintiff 's counsel . although both serve the function of bringing a complaint before the court , the prosecutor is a servant of the state who makes accusations on behalf of the state in criminal proceedings , while the plaintiff is the complaining party in civil proceedings . a defense attorney counsels the accused on the legal process , likely outcomes for the accused and suggests strategies . the accused , not the lawyer , has the right to make final decisions regarding a number of fundamental points , including whether to testify , and to accept a plea offer or demand a jury trial in appropriate cases . it is the defense attorney 's duty to represent the interests of the client , raise procedural and evidentiary issues , and hold the prosecution to its burden of proving guilt beyond a reasonable doubt . defense counsel may challenge evidence presented by the prosecution or present exculpatory evidence and argue on behalf of their client . at trial , the defense attorney may attempt to offer a rebuttal to the prosecutor 's accusations . in the u.s . , an accused person is entitled to a government-paid defense attorney if he or she is in jeopardy of losing his or her life and/or liberty . those who can not afford a private attorney may be provided one by the state . historically , however , the right to a defense attorney has not always been universal . for example , in tudor england criminals accused of treason were not permitted to offer arguments in their defense . in many jurisdictions , there is no right to an appointed attorney , if the accused is not in jeopardy of losing his or her liberty . the final determination of guilt or innocence is typically made by a third party , who is supposed to be disinterested . this function may be performed by a judge , a panel of judges , or a jury panel composed of unbiased citizens . this process varies depending on the laws of the specific jurisdiction . in some places the panel ( be it judges or a jury ) is required to issue a unanimous decision , while in others only a majority vote is required . in america , this process depends on the state , level of court , and even agreements between the prosecuting and defending parties . some nations do not use juries at all , or rely on theological or military authorities to issue verdicts . some cases can be disposed of without the need for a trial . in fact , the vast majority are . if the accused confesses his or her guilt , a shorter process may be employed and a judgment may be rendered more quickly . some nations , such as america , allow plea bargaining in which the accused pleads guilty , nolo contendere or not guilty , and may accept a diversion program or reduced punishment , where the prosecution 's case is weak or in exchange for the cooperation of the accused against other people . this reduced sentence is sometimes a reward for sparing the state the expense of a formal trial . many nations do not permit the use of plea bargaining , believing that it coerces innocent people to plead guilty in an attempt to avoid a harsh punishment . the courts nowadays are seeking alternative measures as opposed to throwing someone into prison right away . the entire trial process , whatever the country , is fraught with problems and subject to criticism . bias and discrimination form an ever-present threat to an objective decision . any prejudice on the part of the lawyers , the judge , or jury members threatens to destroy the court 's credibility . some people argue that the often byzantine rules governing courtroom conduct and processes restrict a layman 's ability to participate , essentially reducing the legal process to a battle between the lawyers . in this case , the criticism is that the decision is based less on sound justice and more on the lawyer 's eloquence and charisma . this is a particular problem when the lawyer performs in a substandard manner . the jury process is another area of frequent criticism , as there are few mechanisms to guard against poor judgment or incompetence on the part of the layman jurors . judges themselves are very subject to bias subject to things as ordinary as the length of time since their last break . '' we find that the percentage of favorable rulings drops gradually from ≈65 % to nearly zero within each decision session and returns abruptly to ≈65 % after a break . '' manipulations of the court system by defense and prosecution attorneys , law enforcement as well as the defendants have occurred and there have been cases where justice was denied . . corrections and rehabilitation . offenders are then turned over to the correctional authorities , from the court system after the accused has been found guilty . like all other aspects of criminal justice , the administration of punishment has taken many different forms throughout history . early on , when civilizations lacked the resources necessary to construct and maintain prisons , exile and execution were the primary forms of punishment . historically shame punishments and exile have also been used as forms of censure . the most publicly visible form of punishment in the modern era is the prison . prisons may serve as detention centers for prisoners after trial . for containment of the accused , jails are used . early prisons were used primarily to sequester criminals and little thought was given to living conditions within their walls . in america , the quaker movement is commonly credited with establishing the idea that prisons should be used to reform criminals . this can also be seen as a critical moment in the debate regarding the purpose of punishment . punishment ( in the form of prison time ) may serve a variety of purposes . first , and most obviously , the incarceration of criminals removes them from the general population and inhibits their ability to perpetrate further crimes . a new goal of prison punishments is to offer criminals a chance to be rehabilitated . many modern prisons offer schooling or job training to prisoners as a chance to learn a vocation and thereby earn a legitimate living when they are returned to society . religious institutions also have a presence in many prisons , with the goal of teaching ethics and instilling a sense of morality in the prisoners . if a prisoner is released before his time is served , he is released as a parole . this means that they are released , but the restrictions are greater than that of someone on probation . there are numerous other forms of punishment which are commonly used in conjunction with or in place of prison terms . monetary fines are one of the oldest forms of punishment still used today . these fines may be paid to the state or to the victims as a form of reparation . probation and house arrest are also sanctions which seek to limit a person 's mobility and his or her opportunities to commit crimes without actually placing them in a prison setting . furthermore , many jurisdictions may require some form of public or community service as a form of reparations for lesser offenses . in corrections , the department ensures court-ordered , pre-sentence chemical dependency assessments , related drug offender sentencing alternative specific examinations and treatment will occur for offenders sentenced to drug offender sentencing alternative in compliance with rcw 9.94a.660 . execution or capital punishment is still used around the world . its use is one of the most heavily debated aspects of the criminal justice system . some societies are willing to use executions as a form of political control , or for relatively minor misdeeds . other societies reserve execution for only the most sinister and brutal offenses . others still have discontinued the practice entirely , accepting the use of execution to be excessively cruel and/or irreversible in case of an erroneous conviction . ( acjs ) 1963 justice sciences 2015-04-25 . 2015-05-07 acjs history 243-252 criminal justice.4:243-2546790 . academic discipline . the functional study of criminal justice is distinct from criminology , which involves the study of crime as a social phenomenon , causes of crime , criminal behavior , and other aspects of crime . it emerged as an academic discipline in the 1920s , beginning with berkeley police chief august vollmer who established a criminal justice program at the university of california , berkeley in 1916 . vollmer 's work was carried on by his student , o.w . wilson , who led efforts to professionalize policing and reduce corruption . other programs were established in the united states at indiana university , michigan state university , san jose state university , and the university of washington . as of 1950 , criminal justice students were estimated to number less than 1,000 . until the 1960s , the primary focus of criminal justice in the united states was on policing and police science . throughout the 1960s and 1970s , crime rates soared and social issues took center stage in the public eye . a number of new laws and studies focused federal resources on researching new approaches to crime control . the warren court ( the supreme court under chief justice earl warren ) , issued a series of rulings which redefined citizen 's rights and substantially altered the powers and responsibilities of police and the courts . the civil rights era offered significant legal and ethical challenges to the status quo . in the late 1960s , with the establishment of the law enforcement assistance administration ( leaa ) and associated policy changes that resulted with the omnibus crime control and safe streets act of 1968 . the leaa provided grants for criminology research , focusing on social aspects of crime . by the 1970s , there were 729 academic programs in criminology and criminal justice in the united states . largely thanks to the law enforcement education program , criminal justice students numbered over 100,000 by 1975 . over time , scholars of criminal justice began to include criminology , sociology , and psychology , among others , to provide a more comprehensive view of the criminal justice system and the root causes of crime . criminal justice studies now combine the practical and technical policing skills with a study of social deviance as a whole . criminal justice degree programs at four-year institutions typically include coursework in statistics , methods of research , criminal justice , policing , u.s court systems , criminal courts , corrections , community corrections , criminal procedure , criminal law , victimology , juvenile justice , and a variety of special topics . a number of universities offer a bachelor of criminal justice . history . the modern criminal justice system has evolved since ancient times , with new forms of punishment , added rights for offenders and victims , and policing reforms . these developments have reflected changing customs , political ideals , and economic conditions . in ancient times through the middle ages , exile was a common form of punishment . during the middle ages , payment to the victim ( or the victim 's family ) , known as wergild , was another common punishment , including for violent crimes . for those who could not afford to buy their way out of punishment , harsh penalties included various forms of corporal punishment . these included mutilation , branding , and flogging , as well as execution . though a prison , le stinche , existed as early as the 14th century in florence , italy , incarceration was not widely used until the 19th century . correctional reform in the united states was first initiated by william penn , towards the end of the 17th century . for a time , pennsylvania 's criminal code was revised to forbid torture and other forms of cruel punishment , with jails and prisons replacing corporal punishment . these reforms were reverted , upon penn 's death in 1718 . under pressure from a group of quakers , these reforms were revived in pennsylvania toward the end of the 18th century , and led to a marked drop in pennsylvania 's crime rate . patrick colquhoun , henry fielding and others led significant reforms during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries . the first official criminal justice system was created by the british during the american revolution , as they created the system to primarily justify hangings to the citizens of their government . in each selected area or/and district there was a magistrate , who in today 's time would be known as a judge . these individuals were in charge of determining if the crown or also known as the british government had enough evidence to hang an individual for a crime . the british would not always hang an individual for committing a crime , there would also be trials for punishments that would be carried out by cleaning ships , prison ships , or be locked up on british mainland . during the american revolution the primary type of punishment was to be hanged or sent to prison ships such as the notorious hms jersey . after the american revolution the british-based criminal justice system was then adopted by other developing nations ( such as the united states ) . modern police . the first modern police force is commonly said to be the metropolitan police in london , established in 1829 by sir robert peel . based on the peelian principles , it promoted the preventive role of police as a deterrent to urban crime and disorder . in the united states , police departments were first established in boston in 1838 , and new york city in 1844 . early on , police were not respected by the community , as corruption was rampant . in the 1920s , led by berkeley , california police chief , august vollmer and o.w . wilson , police began to professionalize , adopt new technologies , and place emphasis on training and professional qualifications of new hires . despite such reforms , police agencies were led by highly autocratic leaders , and there remained a lack of respect between police and the community . following urban unrest in the 1960s , police placed more emphasis on community relations , enacted reforms such as increased diversity in hiring , and many police agencies adopted community policing strategies . in the 1990s , compstat was developed by the new york police department as an information-based system for tracking and mapping crime patterns and trends , and holding police accountable for dealing with crime problems . compstat has since been replicated in police departments across the united states and around the world , with problem-oriented policing , intelligence-led policing , and other information-led policing strategies also adopted . see also . outline of criminal justice & ndash ; structured list of topics related to criminal justice , organized by subject area criminal justice ethics criminal justice reform academy of criminal justice sciences criminal responsibility in french law american society of criminology public criminology . references . further reading . dale , elizabeth . criminal justice in the united states , 1789–1939 ( cambridge university press , 2011 ) 184 pp fuller , john randolph . criminal justice : mainstream and crosscurrents 2005 . prentice hall . upper saddle river , nj . serge guinchard and jacques buisson . criminal procedural law in france lexinexis editor , 7th edition , september 2011 , 1584 pages . hanes , richard c . and sharon m . hanes . crime and punishment in america . volume 1 . 2005 . thomas gale . farmington hills , mi friedman , lawrence m . crime and punishment in american history . 1993 . basic books . new york , ny . sunga , lyal s . the emerging system of international criminal law : developments in codification and implementation , 1997 . kluwer law international . the hague , the netherlands . walker , samuel popular justice : a history of american criminal justice . 1980 . oxford university press , inc . new york . external links . academy of criminal justice sciences the international center for transitional justice 's ( ictj ) criminal justice page scottish centre for crime and justice research , a well-respected academic research centre focusing on crime and justice issues .