Effects of cannabis

chemistry . cannabinoids and cannabinoid receptors . the most prevalent psychoactive substances in cannabis are cannabinoids , particularly thc . some varieties , having undergone careful selection and growing techniques , can yield as much as 34 % thc . another psychoactive cannabinoid present in cannabis sativa is tetrahydrocannabivarin ( thcv ) , but it is only found in small amounts and is a cannabinoid antagonist . there are similar compounds in cannabis that do not exhibit psychoactive response but are obligatory for functionality : cannabidiol ( cbd ) , an isomer of thc ; cannabivarin ( cbv ) , an analog of cannabinol ( cbn ) with a different side chain , cannabidivarin ( cbdv ) , an analog of cbd with a different side chain , and cannabinolic acid . cbd is believed to regulate the metabolism of thc by inactivating cytochrome p450 enzymes that metabolize drugs . thc is converted rapidly to 11-hydroxy-thc , which is also pharmacologically active , so the euphoria outlasts measurable thc levels in blood . . biochemical mechanisms in the brain . cannabinoids usually contain a 1,1'-di-methyl-pyran ring , a variedly derivatized aromatic ring and a variedly unsaturated cyclohexyl ring and their immediate chemical precursors , constituting a family of about 60 bi-cyclic and tri-cyclic compounds . like most other neurological processes , the effects of cannabis on the brain follow the standard protocol of signal transduction , the electrochemical system of sending signals through neurons for a biological response . it is now understood that cannabinoid receptors appear in similar forms in most vertebrates and invertebrates and have a long evolutionary biology of 500 million years . the binding of cannabinoids to cannabinoid receptors decrease adenylyl cyclase activity , inhibit calcium n channels , and disinhibit potassium channel . there are at least two types of cannabinoid receptors ( cb1 and cb2 ) . . sustainability in the body . most cannabinoids are lipophilic ( fat soluble ) compounds that are easily stored in fat , thus yielding a long elimination half-life relative to other recreational drugs . the thc molecule , and related compounds , are usually detectable in drug tests from 3 days up to 10 days according to redwood laboratories ; long-term users can produce positive tests for two to three months after ceasing cannabis use ( see drug test ) . . toxicities . related to cannabinoids . no fatal overdoses with cannabis use have been reported . a review published in the british journal of psychiatry in february 2001 said that '' no deaths directly due to acute cannabis use have ever been reported '' . ( deaths by indirect means , such as dehydration from cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome ( chs ) , have been reported . '' it 's honestly hell . '' hospitals see rare vomiting syndrome in heavy marijuana consumers ) thc , the principal psychoactive constituent of the cannabis plant , has an extremely low toxicity and the amount that can enter the body through the consumption of cannabis plants poses no threat of death . in dogs , the minimum lethal dose of thc is over 3 g/kg . according to the merck index , 1996 . the merck index , 12th ed . , merck & co . , rahway , new jersey the of thc ( the dose which causes the death of 50 % of individuals ) is 1270 & nbsp ; mg/kg for male rats and 730 & nbsp ; mg/kg for female rats from oral consumption in sesame oil , and 42 & nbsp ; mg/kg for rats from inhalation . it is important though to note that cannabinoids and other molecules present in cannabis can alter the metabolism of other drugs , especially due to competition for clearing metabolic pathways such as cytochromes cyp450 , cannabinoids and cytochrome p450 interactions . o , dovrtělová g , nosková k , turjap m , šulcová a , hanuš l , juřica j . curr drug metab . 2016 ; 17 ( 3 ) :206-26 . a review thus leading to drug toxicities by medications that the person consuming cannabis may be taking . related to smoking . a 2007 study found that while tobacco and cannabis smoke are quite similar , cannabis smoke contained higher amounts of ammonia , hydrogen cyanide , and nitrogen oxides , but lower levels of carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( pahs ) . this study found that directly inhaled cannabis smoke contained as much as 20 times as much ammonia and 5 times as much hydrogen cyanide as tobacco smoke and compared the properties of both mainstream and sidestream ( smoke emitted from a smouldering 'joint ' or 'cone ' ) smoke . mainstream cannabis smoke was found to contain higher concentrations of selected polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( pahs ) than sidestream tobacco smoke . however , other studies have found much lower disparities in ammonia and hydrogen cyanide between cannabis and tobacco , and that some other constituents ( such as polonium-210 , lead , arsenic , nicotine , and tobacco-specific nitrosamines ) are either lower or non-existent in cannabis smoke . cannabis smoke contains thousands of organic and inorganic chemical compounds . this tar is chemically similar to that found in tobacco smoke or cigars . over fifty known carcinogens have been identified in cannabis smoke . these include nitrosamines , reactive aldehydes , and polycylic hydrocarbons , including benzapyrene . marijuana smoke was listed as a cancer agent in california in 2009 . a study by the british lung foundation published in 2012 identifies cannabis smoke as a carcinogen and also finds awareness of the danger is low compared with the high awareness of the dangers of smoking tobacco particularly among younger users . other observations include possible increased risk from each cigarette ; lack of research on the effect of cannabis smoke alone ; low rate of addiction compared to tobacco ; and episodic nature of cannabis use compared to steady frequent smoking of tobacco . professor david nutt , a uk drug expert , points out that the study cited by the british lung foundation has been accused of both '' false reasoning '' and '' incorrect methodology '' . further , he notes that other studies have failed to connect cannabis with lung cancer , and accuses the blf of '' scaremongering over cannabis '' . . short-term effects . when smoked , the short-term effects of cannabis manifest within seconds and are fully apparent within a few minutes , typically lasting for 1–3 hours , varying by the person and the strain of cannabis . after oral ingestion of cannabis , the onset of effect is delayed relative to smoking , taking 30 minutes to 2 hours , but the duration is prolonged due to continued slow absorption . the duration of noticeable effects has been observed to diminish after prolonged , repeated use and the development of increased tolerance to cannabinoids . psychological effects . the psychoactive effects of cannabis , known as a '' high '' , are subjective and vary among persons and the method of use . when thc enters the blood stream and reaches the brain , it binds to cannabinoid receptors . the endogenous ligand of these receptors is anandamide , the effects of which thc emulates . this agonist of the cannabinoid receptors results in changes in the levels of various neurotransmitters , especially dopamine and norepinephrine ; neurotransmitters which are closely associated with the acute effects of cannabis ingestion , such as euphoria and anxiety . some effects may include a general altered state of consciousness , euphoria , feelings of well-being , relaxation or stress reduction , increased appreciation of the arts , including humor and music ( especially discerning its various components/instruments ) , joviality , metacognition and introspection , enhanced recollection ( episodic memory ) , increased sensuality , increased awareness of sensation , increased libido , and creativity . abstract or philosophical thinking , disruption of linear memory and paranoia or anxiety are also typical . anxiety is the most commonly reported negative side effect of smoking marijuana . between 20 and 30 percent of recreational users experience intense anxiety and/or panic attacks after smoking cannabis ; however , some report anxiety only after not smoking cannabis for a prolonged period of time . inexperience and use in an unfamiliar environment are major contributing factors to this anxiety . cannabidiol ( cbd ) , another cannabinoid found in cannabis in varying amounts , has been shown to ameliorate the adverse effects of thc , including anxiety , that some consumers experience . cannabis produces many other subjective effects , including an increased enjoyment of food taste and aroma , and marked cannabis and time perception ( where experiencing a '' rush '' of ideas can create the subjective impression of much time passing ) . at higher doses , effects can include altered body image , auditory and/or visual illusions , pseudohallucinations , and ataxia from selective impairment of polysynaptic reflexes . in some cases , cannabis can lead to acute psychosis and dissociative states such as depersonalization and derealization . any episode of acute psychosis that accompanies cannabis use usually abates after six hours , but in rare instances , heavy users may find the symptoms continuing for many days . if the episode is accompanied by aggression or sedation , physical restraint may be necessary . while psychoactive drugs are typically categorized as stimulant , depressant , or hallucinogen , cannabis exhibits a mix of all of them , perhaps leaning more towards hallucinogenic or psychedelic properties , though with other effects quite pronounced . thc is considered the primary active component of the cannabis plant . research have suggested that other cannabinoids like cbd may also play a significant role in its psychoactive effects . . somatic effects . some of the short-term physical effects of cannabis use include increased heart rate , dry mouth , reddening of the eyes ( congestion of the conjunctival blood vessels ) , a reduction in intra-ocular pressure , muscle relaxation and a sensation of cold or hot hands and feet and / or flushed face . electroencephalography or eeg shows somewhat more persistent alpha waves of slightly lower frequency than usual . cannabinoids produce a '' marked depression of motor activity '' via activation of neuronal cannabinoid receptors belonging to the cb1 subtype . . duration . peak levels of cannabis-associated intoxication occur approximately 30 minutes after smoking it and last for several hours . . smoked . the total short-term duration of cannabis use when smoked depends on the potency , method of smoking – e.g . whether pure or in conjunction with tobacco – and how much is smoked . peak levels of intoxication typically last an average of three to four hours . . oral . when taken orally ( in the form of capsules , food , or drink ) , the psychoactive effects take longer to manifest and generally last longer , typically lasting for an average of four to six hours after consumption . oral ingestion use eliminates the need to inhale toxic combustion products created by smoking and therefore negates the risk of respiratory harm associated with cannabis smoking . effects on driving . while several studies have shown increased risk associated with cannabis use by drivers , other studies have not found increased risk . cannabis usage has been shown in some studies to have a negative effect on driving ability . the british medical journal indicated that '' drivers who consume cannabis within three hours of driving are nearly twice as likely to cause a vehicle collision as those who are not under the influence of drugs or alcohol '' . in cannabis and driving : a review of the literature and commentary , the united kingdom 's department for transport reviewed data on cannabis and driving , finding although impaired , '' subjects under cannabis treatment appear to perceive that they are indeed impaired . where they can compensate , they do . '' . in a review of driving simulator studies , researchers note that '' even in those who learn to compensate for a drug 's impairing effects , substantial impairment in performance can still be observed under conditions of general task performance ( i.e . when no contingencies are present to maintain compensated performance ) . '' a 2012 meta-analysis found that acute cannabis use increased the risk of an automobile crash . an extensive 2013 review of 66 studies regarding crash risk and drug use found that cannabis was associated with minor , but not statistically significant increased odds of injury or fatal accident . in the largest and most precisely controlled study of its kind carried out by the u.s . department of transportation 's national highway traffic safety administration , it was found that other '' studies that measure the presence of thc in the drivers ' blood or oral fluid , rather than relying on self-report tend to have much lower ( or no ) elevated crash risk estimates . likewise better controlled studies have found lower ( or no ) elevated crash risk estimates '' . the study found that '' after adjusting for age , gender , race and alcohol use , drivers who tested positive for marijuana were no more likely to crash than those who had not used any drugs or alcohol prior to driving '' . on the other hand , a recent study of journal of transport & health indicated that the numbers of fatal crashes involving marijuana after the recreational marijuana legalization or decriminalization have significantly increased in colorado , washington , and massachusetts . . cardiovascular effects . short-term ( one to two hours ) effects on the cardiovascular system can include increased heart rate , dilation of blood vessels , and fluctuations in blood pressure . marijuana 's cardiovascular effects are not associated with serious health problems for most young , healthy users . researchers reported in the international journal of cardiology , '' marijuana use by older people , particularly those with some degree of coronary artery or cerebrovascular disease , poses greater risks due to the resulting increase in catecholamines , cardiac workload , and carboxyhemoglobin levels , and concurrent episodes of profound postural hypotension . indeed , marijuana may be a much more common cause of myocardial infarction than is generally recognized . in day-to-day practice , a history of marijuana use is often not sought by many practitioners , and even when sought , the patient 's response is not always truthful '' . a 2013 analysis of 3,886 myocardial infarction survivors over an 18-year period showed '' no statistically significant association between marijuana use and mortality '' . a 2008 study by the national institutes of health biomedical research centre in baltimore found that heavy , chronic smoking of marijuana ( 138 joints per week ) changed blood proteins associated with heart disease and stroke . a 2000 study by researchers at boston 's beth israel deaconess medical center , massachusetts general hospital and harvard school of public health found that a middle age person 's risk of heart attack rises nearly fivefold in the first hour after smoking marijuana , '' roughly the same risk seen within an hour of sexual activity '' . cannabis arteritis is a very rare peripheral vascular disease similar to buerger 's disease . there were about 50 confirmed cases from 1960 to 2008 , all of which occurred in europe . . combination with other drugs . a confounding factor in cannabis research is the prevalent usage of other recreational drugs , especially alcohol and nicotine . such complications demonstrate the need for studies on cannabis that have stronger controls , and investigations into alleged symptoms of cannabis use that may also be caused by tobacco . some critics question whether agencies doing the research make an honest effort to present an accurate , unbiased summary of the evidence , or whether they '' cherry-pick '' their data to please funding sources which may include the tobacco industry or governments dependent on cigarette tax revenue ; others caution that the raw data , and not the final conclusions , are what should be examined . the australian national household survey of 2001 aihw cat no . phe 41 . showed that cannabis in australia is rarely used without other drugs . 95 % of cannabis users also drank alcohol ; 26 % took amphetamines ; 19 % took ecstasy and only 2.7 % reported not having used any other drug with cannabis . aihw cat no . phe 35 . while research has been undertaken on the combined effects of alcohol and cannabis on performing certain tasks , little research has been conducted on the reasons why this combination is so popular . evidence from a controlled experimental study undertaken by lukas and orozco suggests that alcohol causes thc to be absorbed more rapidly into the blood plasma of the user . data from the australian national survey of mental health and wellbeing found that three-quarters of recent cannabis users reported using alcohol when cannabis was not available , this suggests that the two are substitutes . . memory and learning . studies on cannabis and memory are hindered by small sample sizes , confounding drug use , and other factors . the strongest evidence regarding cannabis and memory focuses on its temporary negative effects on short-term and working memory . in a 2001 study looking at neuropsychological performance in long-term cannabis users , researchers found '' some cognitive deficits appear detectable at least 7 days after heavy cannabis use but appear reversible and related to recent cannabis exposure rather than irreversible and related to cumulative lifetime use '' . on his studies regarding cannabis use , lead researcher and harvard professor harrison pope said he found marijuana is not dangerous over the long term , but there are short-term effects . from neuropsychological tests , pope found that chronic cannabis users showed difficulties , with verbal memory in particular , for '' at least a week or two '' after they stopped smoking . within 28 days , memory problems vanished and the subjects '' were no longer distinguishable from the comparison group '' . lyons , casey ( october 2012 ) lost in the weeds : legalizing medical marijuana in massachusetts . boston magazine . researchers from the university of california , san diego school of medicine failed to show substantial , systemic neurological effects from long-term recreational use of cannabis . their findings were published in the july 2003 issue of the journal of the international neuropsychological society . minimal long-term effects of marijuana use found . journal of the international neuropsychological society ( june 27 , 2003 ) the research team , headed by dr igor grant , found that cannabis use did affect perception , but did not cause permanent brain damage . researchers looked at data from 15 previously published controlled studies involving 704 long-term cannabis users and 484 nonusers . the results showed long-term cannabis use was only marginally harmful on the memory and learning . other functions such as reaction time , attention , language , reasoning ability , perceptual and motor skills were unaffected . the observed effects on memory and learning , they said , showed long-term cannabis use caused '' selective memory defects '' , but that the impact was '' of a very small magnitude '' . beasley , deena ( 27 june 2003 ) study – pot does n't cause permanent brain damage . reuters health e-line a study at johns hopkins university school of medicine showed that very heavy use of marijuana is associated with decrements in neurocognitive performance even after 28 days of abstinence . . appetite . the feeling of increased appetite following the use of cannabis has been documented for hundreds of years , and is known colloquially as '' the munchies '' in the english-speaking world . clinical studies and survey data have found that cannabis increases food enjoyment and interest in food . bonsor , kevin . '' how marijauan works : other physiological effects '' . howstuffworks . retrieved on 2007-11-03 a 2015 study suggests that cannabis triggers uncharacteristic behaviour in pomc neurons , which are usually associated with decreasing hunger . endogenous cannabinoids ( '' endocannabinoids '' ) were discovered in cow 's milk and soft cheeses . endocannabinoids are also found in human breast milk . the endocannabinoid-cb receptor system : importance for development and in pediatric disease neuroendocrinology letters nos.1/2 , feb-apr vol.25 , 2004 . cannabinoids and feeding : the role of the endogenous cannabinoid system as a trigger for newborn suckling women and cannabis : medicine , science , and sociology , 2002 the haworth press , inc . it is widely accepted that the neonatal survival of many species '' is largely dependent upon their suckling behavior , or appetite for breast milk '' and recent research has identified the endogenous cannabinoid system to be the first neural system to display complete control over milk ingestion and neonatal survival . it is possible that '' cannabinoid receptors in our body interact with the cannabinoids in milk to stimulate a suckling response in newborns so as to prevent growth failure '' . . pathogens and microtoxins . most microorganisms found in cannabis only affect plants and not humans , but some microorganisms , especially those that proliferate when the herb is not correctly dried and stored , can be harmful to humans . some users may store marijuana in an airtight bag or jar in a refrigerator to prevent fungal and bacterial growth . . fungi . the fungi aspergillus flavus , aspergillus fumigatus , aspergillus niger , aspergillus parasiticus , aspergillus tamarii , aspergillus sulphureus , aspergillus repens , mucor hiemalis ( not a human pathogen ) , penicillium chrysogenum , penicillium italicum and rhizopus nigricans have been found in moldy cannabis . aspergillus mold species can infect the lungs via smoking or handling of infected cannabis and cause opportunistic and sometimes deadly aspergillosis . some of the microorganisms found create aflatoxins , which are toxic and carcinogenic . researchers suggest that moldy cannabis should thus be discarded to avoid these serious risks . mold is also found in smoke from mold-infected cannabis , and the lungs and nasal passages are a major means of contracting fungal infections . levitz and diamond ( 1991 ) suggested baking marijuana in home ovens at 150 & nbsp ; °c 302 & nbsp ; °f , for five minutes before smoking . oven treatment killed conidia of a . fumigatus , a . flavus and a . niger , and did not degrade the active component of marijuana , tetrahydrocannabinol ( thc ) . '' . bacteria . cannabis contaminated with salmonella muenchen was positively correlated with dozens of cases of salmonellosis in 1981 . '' thermophilic actinomycetes '' were also found in cannabis . . long-term effects . exposure to marijuana may have biologically-based physical , mental , behavioral , and social health consequences and is '' associated with diseases of the liver ( particularly with co-existing hepatitis c ) , lungs , heart , eyesight , and vasculature '' according to a 2013 literature review by gordon and colleagues . the association with these diseases has only been reported in cases where people have smoked cannabis . the authors cautioned that '' evidence is needed , and further research should be considered , to prove causal associations of marijuana with many physical health conditions '' . cannabis dependence is defined in the fifth revision of the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders ( dsm-5 ) as a condition requiring treatment . several drugs have been investigated in an attempt to ameliorate the symptoms of stopping cannabis use . such drugs include bupropion , divalproex , nefazodone , lofexidine , and dronabinol . of these , dronabinol ( a trade name for thc ) has proven the most effective . a 2019 meta-analysis found that 34 % of people with cannabis-induced psychosis transitioned to schizophrenia . this was found to be comparatively higher than hallucinogens ( 26 % ) and amphetamines ( 22 % ) . . effects in pregnancy . cannabis consumption in pregnancy might be associated with restrictions in growth of the fetus , miscarriage , and cognitive deficits in offspring based on animal studies , although there is limited evidence for this in humans at this time . a 2012 systematic review found although it was difficult to draw firm conclusions , there was some evidence that prenatal exposure to cannabis was associated with '' deficits in language , attention , areas of cognitive performance , and delinquent behavior in adolescence '' . a report prepared for the australian national council on drugs concluded cannabis and other cannabinoids are contraindicated in pregnancy as it may interact with the endocannabinoid system . . see also . cannabis smoking psychoactive drug . references . further reading . study indicates states with legalized marijuana have higher crash rates . external links . cannabis use and psychosis from national drug and alcohol research centre , australia provision of marijuana and other compounds for scientific research recommendations of the national institute on drug abuse national advisory council scientific american magazine ( december 2004 issue ) the brain 's own marijuana ramström , j . ( 2003 ) , adverse health consequences of cannabis use , a survey of scientific studies published up to and including the autumn of 2003 , national institute of public health , sweden , stockholm . hall , w . , solowij , n . , lemon , j . , the health and psychological consequences of cannabis use . canberra : australian government publishing service ; 1994 . world health organisation , programme on substance abuse , cannabis : a health perspective and research agenda ; 1997 . the national cannabis prevention and information centre ( australia ) eu research paper on the potency of cannabis ( 2004 ) cannabis and mental health information leaflet from mental health charity the royal college of psychiatrists