Brigitte Fontaine

early life . the daughter of two teachers , brigitte fontaine developed her taste for writing and drama very early . she spent her childhood in small villages of finistère , then in morlaix . at 17 years old , she moved to paris in order to become an actress . in 1971 , she was one of the women who signed the manifesto of the 343 , publicly admitting to having an abortion at a time when it was illegal in france . le manifeste des 343 . artistic overview . 1963–1968 . in 1963 , she turned to singing and appeared in several parisian theatres , interpreting her own works . in 1964 , she opened for barbara and george brassens 's show at the bobino . even so , she did not give up theatre . with jacques higelin and actor rufus , she created the play maman j'ai peur ( '' mom i am afraid '' ) , which played first at the vieille-grille theatre , and then at the théâtre des champs-elysées . it met with such a critical and popular success that it stayed in paris for more than two seasons and toured throughout europe . in 1965 and then in 1968 , she made two albums , one jazz and one avant-pop , as well as two 45s with jacques higelin . in 1969 , she began what would be a long collaboration with kabyle musician areski belkacem . with belkacem and in the company of higelin , she conceived niok , an innovative spectacle of theatre and song , for the lucernaire theatre . soon after , fontaine wrote a series of works in free verse and prose which comprised the show comme à la radio at the théâtre du vieux-colombier before being turned into an comme à la radio . recorded with the art ensemble of chicago , this album marks a clean break with traditional french songs , building the first bridges to world music . 1969–1979 . brigitte fontaine became a major figure in the french underground . in a half-dozen albums , the majority of which were released through the independent label saravah , fontaine explored different poetic worlds . she renounced the use of rhyme , and using talk-over sometimes , she recorded , with very little means and often on two tracks , songs which addressed topics with humour or gravity , according to the mood , as various as death ( '' dommage que tu sois mort '' ) , life ( '' l ’ été , l ’ été '' ) , alienation ( '' comme à la radio '' ) , madness ( '' ragilia '' ) , love ( '' je t ’ aimerai '' ) , social injustice ( '' c ’ est normal '' ) , the inequality of the sexes ( '' patriarcat '' ) and racism ( '' y ' a du lard '' ) . however , she also knew how to make light of herself ( '' l'auberge ( révolution ) '' ) . because they sail among pop , folk , electro and world music , the albums l'incendie and vous et nous by the areski-fontaine duo figure among the most unclassifiable records of the french scene . almost thirty years later , the international audience of these lps ( since re-edited for cd ) is comparable to that of the cult record histoire de melody nelson by serge gainsbourg and jean-claude vannier , notably due to the enthusiastic remarks made by members of the band sonic youth in the english-speaking press . 1980–1990 . the 1980s were a period of silence , musically speaking , for brigitte fontaine and her partner areski belkacem . far from the recording studio , she devoted herself to writing and the theatre . always active , she appeared onstage in quebec , she performed her play acte 2 in a grand tour of the french-speaking world , interpreted les bonnes by jean genet in paris , and published a novel ( paso doble ) as well as a collection of short stories ( nouvelles de l ’ exil ) . in 1984 , she recorded a single ( '' les filles d ’ aujourd ’ hui '' ) . after having given a series of concerts in tokyo and other large japanese cities , she had to wait about five years for a french company to distribute her new album french corazon ( written and composed in 1984 but released in 1988 in japan ) . having been broadcast notably on french television , the video for the single '' le nougat '' , directed by comics artist olivia tele clavel , prepared the public for the big return of the singer to the french stage which commenced with a concert in 1993 at the bataclan . 1990–2001 . in the 1990s , brigitte fontaine moved closer to the musical worlds of björk and massive attack by testing new , more electric musical forms and , especially , more electronic forms than before . her lyrics mark a return to a more classical , versified form . the release of her album genre humain , in 1995 , met with great success ( more so on the part of the critics than the general public ) with surprising titles like '' conne '' ( produced by étienne daho ) , lyric titles like '' la femme à barbe '' ( produced by les valentins ) , and poetic ones like '' il se mêle à tout ça '' ( produced by yann cortella and areski belkacem ) . in 1997 , while she published a new novel ( la limonade bleue ) , she recorded les palaces and its landmark track '' ah que la vie est belle ! '' . the album , very well received by the press , is enriched by the collaboration of areski belkacem , jacques higelin and alain bashung . 2001–present . her albums kékéland ( 2001 ) and rue saint louis en l'île ( 2004 ) benefited from prestigious collaborations with artists such as noir désir ( with whom she also co-wrote and recorded the 23-minute track l'europe on des visages des figures l'europe lyrics , noir desir & brigitte fontaine ) , sonic youth , archie shepp , - m- , gotan project , zebda , etc . in 2005 , after having given a series of concerts with her usual band ( but also with la compagnie des musiques à ouïr ) , she published a new novel , la bête curieuse , whose erotic ambiance somewhat foretold the tonality of her sixteenth album , libido ( 2006 ) . this new album renewed her concerts with a lively energy and gave them a very '' baroque ' n ' roll '' ambiance , in which teresa of avila , sufis , hollywood films , and melody nelson are invoked . in october 2006 , fontaine appeared at the barbican centre in london along with jarvis cocker , badly drawn boy and other english artists , for the first public interpretation of the mythic '' histoire de melody nelson '' . in january 2007 , she appeared onstage with graphic novelist blutch at the angoulême international comics festival . on 29 march 2007 , she invested in the olympia music hall , supported by her friends jacno , arthur h , christophe , anaïs , jacques higelin , maya barsony and jean-claude vannier . in april , she played at the printemps de bourges music festival and participated in her québécois admirer pierre lapointe 's concert for a duo of '' la symphonie pastorale '' . after having given a series of intimate concerts all through september on a barge anchored under the pont des arts on the seine river in paris , fontaine toured throughout france . between two concerts , she went into the studio with olivia ruiz to record a new single , '' partir ou rester '' , for which she wrote the lyrics . in february 2008 , she published a new novel , travellings by flammarion , while benoît mouchart wrote a monograph on her life and work ( '' brigitte fontaine , intérieur/extérieur '' ) , published by panama . a new album titled prohibition and produced by ivor guest including collaborations with grace jones and philippe katerine was subsequently released in the fall of 2009 . the lyrics of this new work mark the return of brigitte fontaine to an anti-authority political position . in march 2011 she released a new album , also produced by ivor guest . it is called l'un n'empêche pas l'autre , and consists primarily of duets , among others the dance track 'dancefloor ' with grace jones , which polydor uploaded on their official site . in 2013 , she released her latest album , named j'ai l'honneur d'être . the video for the first single '' crazy horse '' has been directed by enki bilal . list of works . references . sources . benoît mouchart , brigitte fontaine , intérieur/extérieur , éditions panama-archimbaud , 2008 . external links . brigitte fontaine on europopmusic.eu ( english )