Plot device

stories using plot devices . many stories , especially in the fantasy genre , feature an object or objects with some great magical power , such as a crown , sword , or jewel . often what drives the plot is the hero 's need to find the object and use it for good , before the villain can use it for evil , or if the object has been broken by the villains , to retrieve each piece that must be gathered from each antagonist to restore it , or , if the object itself is evil , to destroy it . in some cases destroying the object will lead to the destruction of the villain . in the indiana jones film series , jones is always on the hunt for some mystical artifact . in raiders of the lost ark , he is trying to retrieve the ark of the covenant ; in indiana jones and the last crusade , jones is on a search for the holy grail . this plot device is also used in the arabian nights tale of '' the city of brass , '' in which a group of travelers on an archaeology expedition journeys across the sahara to find a brass vessel that solomon once used to trap a jinn . several books in the harry potter series orient around a search for a special object . in harry potter and the philosopher 's stone , harry believes there is a magical stone in hogwarts with special powers . lord voldemort needs this stone to bring back his body , and harry looks for the stone first to prevent voldemort 's return . the one ring from j . r . r . tolkien 's novel , the lord of the rings has been labeled a plot device , since the quest to destroy it drives the entire plot of the novel . however , as british classical scholar nick lowe puts it : '' tolkien , on the whole , gets away with the trick by minimizing the arbitrariness of the ring 's plot-power and putting more stress than his imitators on the way the ring 's power moulds the character of its wielder and vice-versa . '' . examples . deus ex machina . the term deus ex machina is used to refer to a narrative ending in which an improbable event is used to resolve all problematic situations and bring the story to a ( generally happy ) conclusion . the latin phrase '' deus ex machina '' has its origins in the conventions of greek tragedy , and refers to situations in which a mechane ( crane ) was used to lower actors playing a god or gods onto the stage at the end of a play . the greek tragedy euripides is notorious for using this plot device as a means to resolve a hopeless situation . for example , in euripides ' play alcestis , the eponymous heroine agrees to give up her own life to death in exchange for sparing the life of her husband , admetus . in doing so , however , admetus grows to regret his choice , realizing the grief of her passing would never leave him . admetus is seized by guilt and sadness , wishing to keep her or die alongside her , but held by his obligations to raise their children . in the end , though , heracles shows up and seizes alcestis from death , restoring her to life and freeing admetus from the grief that consumed him . another example of a deus ex machina is gandalf in the hobbit . with the help of seemingly limitless magical capabilities , he rescues the other main characters from all sorts of troubles . the first person known to have criticized the device was aristotle in his poetics , where he argued that the resolution of a plot must arise internally , following from previous action of the play . . love triangle . a frequently used plot mechanism in romances and dramas is a '' love triangle , where two men try to get the same woman . '' from '' janine functions largely as a plot mechanism : as a foil for the two lovers , as a voyeur , and finally as an unwitting trigger of disaster when she leads in the gestapo . '' from . macguffin . a macguffin is a term , popularized by film director alfred hitchcock , referring to a plot device wherein a character pursues an object , though the object 's actual nature is not important to the story . another object would work just as well if the characters treated it with the same importance . regarding the macguffin , alfred hitchcock stated , '' in crook stories it is almost always the necklace and in spy stories it is almost always the papers . '' this contrasts with , for example , the one ring from the lord of the rings , whose very nature is essential to the entire story . not all film directors or scholars agree with hitchcock ’ s understanding of a macguffin . according to george lucas , '' the audience should care about it the macguffin almost as much as the dueling heroes and villains on-screen '' . '' keys to the kingdom '' . vanity fair . february 2008 . archived from the original on january 2 , 2014 . retrieved january 2 , 2014 . thus macguffins , according to lucas , are important to the characters and plot . macguffins are sometimes referred to as plot coupons ( especially if multiple ones are required ) as the protagonist only needs to '' collect enough plot coupons and trade them in for a dénouement '' . the term was coined by nick lowe . in normal usage , when people talk of a plot device they mean something in the story that 's just a little bit too obviously functional to be taken seriously . . plot voucher . a plot voucher , as defined by nick lowe , is an object given to a character ( especially to the protagonist ) before they encounter an obstacle that requires the use of the object . an example of a plot voucher is a gift received by a character , which later impedes a deadly bullet . quibble . a quibble is based on an argument that an agreement 's intended meaning holds no legal value and that only the exact , literal words agreed on apply . for example , william shakespeare used a quibble in the merchant of venice : portia saves antonio in a court of law by pointing out that the agreement called for a pound of flesh , but no blood , so shylock can collect only if he sheds no blood . red herring . the function of a red herring is to divert the audience 's attention away from something significant . red herrings are very common plot devices in mystery , horror , and crime stories . the typical example is in whodunits , in which facts are presented so that the audience is tricked into thinking that a given character is the murderer , when it is actually another character . shoulder angel . a shoulder angel is a plot device used for either dramatic or humorous effect in animation and comic strips ( and occasionally in live-action television ) . the angel represents conscience and is often accompanied by a shoulder devil representing temptation . they are handy for easily showing inner conflict of a character . usually , the angel is depicted on ( or hovering near ) the right shoulder and the devil or demon on the left , as the left side traditionally represents dishonesty or impurity ( see left-handedness negative associations of language ) . the shoulder angel and shoulder devil are both derived from the concept of the id , ego and super-ego in psychoanalysis , with the person in the center of the dispute being the ego between the super-ego angel and the id devil .