Roland TR-808

development . and place accents on individual beats . users can also set the tempo and time signature , including unusual signatures such as and . the 808 was the first drum machine with which users could program a percussion track from beginning to end , complete with breaks and rolls . keyboard ( magazine ) , volume 7 , issues 1–6 , 1981 : '' the roland tr-808 will undoubtedly become the standard for rhythm machines of the future because it does what no rhythm machine of the past has ever done . not only does the tr-808 allow programming of individual rhythm patterns , it can also program the entire percussion track of a song from beginning to end , complete with breaks , rolls , literally anything you can think of . '' it includes volume knobs for each voice , numerous audio outputs , and a din sync port ( a precursor to midi ) to synchronize with other devices . its three trigger outputs can synchronize with synthesizers and other equipment . the 808 's sounds do not resemble real percussion , and have been described as '' clicky and hypnotic '' , '' robotic '' , '' spacey '' , '' toy-like '' and '' futuristic '' . fact described them as a combination of '' synth tones and white noise '' that resembled '' bursts coming from the bbc radiophonic workshop '' more than a real drum kit . the machine is noted for its powerful bass drum sound , built from a sine oscillator , low-pass filter , and voltage-controlled amplifier . the bass drum decay control allows users to lengthen the sound , creating uniquely low frequencies that flatten slightly over time , possibly not by design . the new yorker described the kick drum as the 808 's defining feature . . release . the 808 launched in 1980 with a list price of . roland marketed it as an affordable alternative to the linn lm-1 , manufactured by linn electronics , which used samples of real drum kits . the 808 sounded simplistic and synthetic by comparison ; electronic music had yet to become mainstream and many musicians and producers wanted realistic-sounding drum machines . many reports state that one review dismissed the machine as sounding like '' marching anteaters '' , though this was likely referring to machines that predated it . keyboard ( magazine ) wrote a positive review , predicting that it would become '' the standard for rhythm machines of the future '' . despite some early adopters , the 808 was a commercial failure and fewer than 12,000 units were sold . roland ended production in 1983 after semiconductor improvements made it impossible to restock the faulty transistors essential to its design . . legacy . though the 808 was commercially unsuccessful , it has had a lasting influence on popular music and was eventually used on more hit records than any other drum machine . roland credits the first use in a live performance to the japanese electronic group yellow magic orchestra with '' bgm ( album ) '' in 1980 . the first records to feature the 808 were released in 1981 : yellow magic orchestra 's bgm and the monitors ' '' nobody told me '' . in 1982 , the american r & b artist marvin gaye released the first hit single that featured the 808 , '' sexual healing '' . gaye was drawn to the instrument because he could use it to create music without other musicians or producers . by the time roland discontinued the 808 in 1983 , it had become common on the used market , often selling for under 100 . its ease of use , affordability , and idiosyncratic sound earned it a cult following among underground musicians and producers , and it became a cornerstone of the developing electronic and hip hop genres . in 1982 , afrika bambaataa and the soulsonic force released their single '' planet rock '' , which made extensive use of the 808 to create '' strange , futuristic percussion that became hugely popular on dancefloors '' . the track influenced the development of electronic and hip hop and subgenres including miami bass and detroit techno , and popularized the 808 as a '' fundamental element of futuristic sound '' . according to slate , '' planet rock '' '' did n't so much put the 808 on the map so much as reorient an entire world of post-disco dance music around it '' . the 808 was subsequently used by hip hop acts including run-dmc , ll cool j , and public enemy . it has been described as hip hop 's equivalent to the fender stratocaster guitar , which dramatically influenced the development of rock music . the 808 bass drum , in particular , became so essential that hank shocklee of the bomb squad production group declared that '' it 's not hip hop without that sound '' . the new yorker wrote that the '' trembling feeling of the 808 bass drum , booming down boulevards in oakland , the bronx , and detroit , are part of america 's cultural dna '' . even after the 808 fell out of use by east coast hip hop producers in the 1990s , it remained a staple of southern hip hop . the 808 's limited pattern storage encouraged artists to push its limits ; according to slate , '' those eight-bar units became veritable playgrounds for invention and creativity '' . artists manipulated the bass drum to produce new sounds , such as on the 1984 single '' set it off '' , in which producer strafe used it to imitate the sound of an underground nuclear test . producer rick rubin popularized the technique of lengthening the bass drum decay and tuning it to different pitches to create basslines . on their 1986 track '' paul revere '' , the beastie boys reversed a recording of an 808 to produce backwards-sounding percussion . the 808 also saw extensive use beyond hip hop , such as on whitney houston 's 1987 pop hit '' i wan na dance with somebody ( who loves me ) '' . in the 1984 talking heads concert film stop making sense , singer david byrne performs '' psycho killer '' on acoustic guitar accompanied by an 808 , stumbling against its '' gunshot '' -like sounds . songwriter phil collins found the machine useful for looping rhythms for long periods , since human drummers would be tempted to add variations and fills . the new yorker wrote that '' the introduction of roland 's magic box was indisputably the big bang of pop 's great age of disruption , from 1983 to 1986 . the 808 's defiantly inorganic timbres & nbsp ; . sketched out the domain of a new world of music . '' in the united kingdom , the 808 was popularized by the electronic group 808 state , which took its name from the machine and used it extensively . 808 state 's graham massey said , '' the roland gear began to be a kind of esperanto in music . the whole world began to be less separated through this technology , and there was a classiness to it—you could transcend your provincial music with this equipment . '' with the rise of rave , a precursor to acid house , the 808 became a staple sound on british radio . . the 808 is one of the most influential inventions in popular music . in 2019 , djmag wrote that it is '' probably the most used drum machine in the last 40 years '' . samples of its sounds are common in music software , and it has inspired numerous synthesiser clone . flavorwire wrote that '' the 808 has become so ubiquitous over the years that its beats are almost a language of their own—you know the sounds even if you have no idea what a drum machine is , and as such , you also notice when somebody messes with them or uses them in unusual contexts '' . the new yorker wrote in 2015 that the 808 was the bedrock of the modern '' urban-youth-culture soundtrack '' , particularly in trap music , and had influenced a new blend of dance and retro hip hop that '' embraces and fetishizes & nbsp ; . street music from the past '' . according to slate , it was instrumental in pop music 's shift from conventional structure and harmonic progression to '' thinking in terms of sequences , discrete passages of sound and time to be repeated and revised ad infinitum '' . . successors . the 808 was followed in 1983 by the tr-909 , the first roland drum machine to use samples . like the 808 , the 909 was influential on popular music , influencing genres such as techno , house and acid . 808 samples were included in rebirth rb-338 , an early software synthesiser developed by propellerhead software . according to andy jones of musictech , rebirth was '' especially incredible as it made the sound of the tr-808 and tb-303 , two iconic roland dance beasts that everyone had tried to recreate in hardware , and here was something doing it… in software ? '' rebirth was retired in 2017 as roland said it infringed on its intellectual property . roland has included 808 samples in several drum machines , including 808 its groovebox in the 1990s , the tr-8 in 2014 , and the tr-8s in 2018 . in 2017 , roland released the tr-08 , a miniaturized 808 featuring an led display , midi and usb connections , expanded sequencer control , and a built-in speaker . roland released the first official software emulations of the 808 and 909 in 2018 . in 2019 , behringer released an 808 clone , the behringer rd-8 rhythm designer . unlike roland 's tr-08 and tr-8s , which use samples and virtual synthesis to recreate the 808 sounds , the rd-8 uses analogue circuitry . . see also . 808 ( film ) – 2015 documentary about the roland tr-808 . references . further reading . . external links . official roland site in-browser emulation of the 808 pattern for 808 drum machines roland tr808 – sound on sound review ( archive.org )