Names of Korea

history . the earliest records of korean history are written in chinese characters called hanja . even after the invention of hangul , koreans generally recorded native korean names with hanja , by translation of meaning , transliteration of sound , or even combinations of the two . furthermore , the pronunciations of the same character are somewhat different in korean and the various korean dialects , and have changed over time . for all these reasons , in addition to the sparse and sometimes contradictory written records , it is often difficult to determine the original meanings or pronunciations of ancient names . ancient history . . gojoseon . until 108 bc , northern korea and part of manchuria were controlled by gojoseon . in contemporaneous china records , it was written as , which is pronounced in modern korean as joseon . the prefixing of go- ( korea became independent after world war ii ( 1945 ) and the country was then divided . in 1948 , the south adopted the provisional government 's name of daehan minguk , ; see above ) , known in english as the republic of korea , though commentators have noted that the english name is not a direct translation of the korean one . meanwhile , the north became the democratic people 's republic of korea , , chosŏn minjujuŭi inmin konghwaguk ) . each component of the name was carefully selected . chosŏn was the natural choice for the short form , '' korea '' , since it had been used throughout the colonial period to denote the peninsula . for the long form of the name , konghwaguk was used for republic because of its leftist connotations over minguk . north koreans wanted to adopt something that had already been used in the eastern bloc to borrow legitimacy . a choice was presented between a '' people 's republic '' and a '' democratic republic '' , because they had been used in the names of the short-lived ukrainian people 's republic of soviets and the finnish democratic republic , respectively . '' people 's republic '' was favored by pak hon-yong of the communist party of korea and it had already been used by the temporary people 's republic of korea ( prk ) formed in seoul after liberation . '' democratic republic '' , on the other hand , was associated with mao zedong 's concept of new democracy , which influenced kim tu-bong of the new people 's party of korea . after his party merged with the workers ' party of north korea , the concept found its way to kim il-sung 's parlance . kim began to speak of a '' democratic people 's republic '' . this was echoed by what the true authorities of the country , the soviet civil administration , prescribed , albeit in different order : '' people's-democratic republic '' . thus the name of the country became the '' korea ( n ) democratic people 's republic '' in korean and '' korean people's-democratic republic '' in russian so that both parties could claim that they were behind the coining . . current usage . east asia . . korea . today , south koreans use hanguk , to refer to just south korea or korea as a whole , namhan , ; '' south han '' ) for south korea , and bukhan , ; '' north han '' ) for north korea . south korea less formally refers to north korea as ibuk , ; '' the north '' ) . south koreans often refer to korea as '' uri nara '' , meaning '' our nation '' or '' our country '' . in addition , the official name for the republic of korea in the korean language is '' daehan minguk '' , ; which is usually translated as '' the republic of korea '' ) . north koreans use chosŏn , namjosŏn , ; '' south chosŏn '' ) , and pukchosŏn , ; '' north chosŏn '' ) when referring to korea , south korea , and north korea , respectively . the term pukchosŏn , however , is rarely used in the north , although it may be found in pre-war sources , such as the song of general kim il-sung . in the 1970s , kim il-sung suggested that in the event of a north korean takeover of south korea , '' koryo '' could become the korean name of the country . in the tourist regions in north korea and the official meetings between south korea and north korea , namcheuk , and bukcheuk , , or '' southern side '' and '' northern side '' , are used instead of namjosŏn and bukhan . the korean language is called hangugeo , , referring to the korean language ) or hangungmal , , referring to spoken korean only ) in the south and chosŏnmal , or chosŏnŏ , in the north . the korean script is called hangul in south korea and chosŏn'gŭl in north korea . the korean peninsula is called hanbando , in the south and chosŏn pando , in the north . chinese-speaking areas . in chinese-speaking areas such as china , hong kong , macau and taiwan , different naming conventions on several terms have been practiced according to their political proximity to whichever korean government although there is a growing trend for convergence . in the chinese language , the korean peninsula is usually called cháoxiǎn bàndǎo and in rare cases called hán bàndǎo . ethnic koreans are also called cháoxiǎnzú , instead of dàhán mínzú . however , the term hánguó ren may be used to specifically refer to south koreans . before establishing diplomatic relations with south korea , the people 's republic of china tended to use the historic korean name cháoxiǎn '' joseon '' or '' chosŏn '' ) , by referring to south korea as nán cháoxiǎn '' south joseon '' ) . since diplomatic ties were restored , china has used the names that each of the two sides prefer , by referring to north korea as cháoxiǎn and to south korea as hánguó '' hanguk '' ) . the korean language can be referred to as either cháoxiǎnyǔ or hánguóyǔ . the korean war is officially called the kàngměi yuáncháo zhànzhēng '' war to resist america and aid korea '' ) although the term cháoxiǎn zhànzhēng is also used in unofficial contexts . taiwan , on the other hand , uses the south korean names , referring to north korean as běihán '' north han '' ) and south korean as nánhán '' south han '' ) . the republic of china previously maintained diplomatic relations with south korea , but has never had relations with north korea . as a result , in the past , hánguó had been used to refer to the whole korea , and taiwanese textbooks treated korea as a unified nation . the ministry of foreign affairs of the republic of china under the democratic progressive party government considered north and south koreas two separate countries . however , general usage in taiwan is still to refer to north korea as běihán '' north hanguk '' ) and south korea as nánhán '' south hanguk '' ) while use of – which in taiwan is not pronounced cháoxiǎn but cháoxiān – is generally limited to ancient korea . the korean language is usually referred to as hányǔ . similarly , general usage in hong kong and macau has traditionally referred to north korea as bak hon '' north han '' ) and south korea as nam hon '' south han '' ) . under the influence of official usage , which is itself influenced by the official usage of the people 's republic of china government , the mainland practice of naming the two koreas differently has become more common . in the chinese language used in singapore and malaysia , north korea is usually called cháoxiǎn '' chosŏn '' ) with běi cháoxiǎn '' north chosŏn '' ) and běihán '' north han '' ) less often used , while south korea is usually called hánguó '' hanguk '' ) with nánhán '' south hanguk '' ) and nán cháoxiǎn '' south chosŏn '' ) less often used . in hokkien speaking areas of chinese communities in countries like taiwan and around southeast asia , korea is called hân-kok '' hanguk '' ) where north korea is referred to as pak-hân '' north han '' ) and south korea as lâm-hân '' south han '' ) . the above usage pattern does not apply for korea-derived words . for example , korean ginseng is commonly called gāolì shēn . japan . in japan , north korea is called kita-chōsen ; '' north chosŏn '' ) and south korea kankoku '' hanguk '' ) . however , zainichi koreans claim the name kita-chōsen is derogatory , as it only refers to the northern part of korean peninsula , whereas the government claims sovereignty over its whole territory . shane green , treaty plan could end korean war , the age , november 6 , 2003 pro-north people such as chongryon use the name kyōwakoku ; '' the republic '' ) instead , but the ambiguous name is not popular among others . in 1972 , chongryon campaigned to get the japanese media to stop referring to north korea as kita-chōsen . this effort was not successful , but as a compromise most media companies agreed to refer to the nation with its full official title at least once in every article , thus they used the lengthy kita-chōsen ( chōsen minshu-shugi jinmin kyōwakoku ) '' north chosŏn ( the people 's democratic republic of chosŏn ) '' ) . by january 2003 , this policy started to be abandoned by most newspapers , starting with tokyo shimbun , which announced that it would no longer write out the full name , tokyo shimbun , december 31 , 2002 followed by asahi , mainichi , and nikkei . asahi , mainichi , and nikkei for korea as a whole , chōsen ; '' joseon '' ) is commonly used . the term chōsen , which has a longer usage history , continues to be used to refer to the korean peninsula , the korean ethnic group , and the korean language , which are use cases that would not cause confusion between korea and north korea . when referring to both north korean and south koreans , the transcription of gairaigo korean , korian ) may be used because a reference to a chōsen national may be interpreted as a north korean national instead . the korean language is most frequently referred to in japan as kankokugo or chōsengo . while academia mostly prefers chōsengo , kankokugo became more and more common in non-academic fields , thanks to the economic and cultural presence of south korea . the language is also referred to as various combined terms , such as kankoku-chōsen-go , chōsen-kankoku-go , '' kankokugo ( chōsengo ) '' , etc . some people refer to the language as koriago , using the european name for korea . this term is not used in ordinary japanese , but was selected as a compromise to placate both nations in a euphemistic process called kotobagari . likewise , when nhk broadcasts a language instruction program for korean , the language is referred to as hangurugo ; '' hangul language '' ) ; although it 's technically incorrect since hangul itself is a writing system , not a language . some argue that even hangurugo is not completely neutral , since north korea calls the letter chosŏn'gŭl , not hangul . urimaru , a direct transcription of uri mal , '' our language '' ) is sometimes used by korean residents in japan , as well as by kbs world radio . this term , however , may not be suitable to ethnic japanese whose '' our language '' is not necessarily korean . uri ( 우리 '' we/us/our '' ) is the first-person plural pronoun and it is commonly used as a prefix in korean terms to describe things that are korean , such as uri nara ( 우리 나라 , '' our country '' ) which is yet another name koreans give their country . in japan , those who moved to japan usually maintain their distinctive cultural heritages ( such as the baekje-towns or goguryeo-villages ) . ethnic koreans in japan have been collectively called zainichi chōsenjin '' joseon people in japan '' ) , regardless of nationality . however , for the same reason as above , the euphemism zainichi korian ; '' koreans in japan '' ) is increasingly used today . zainichi ; '' in japan '' ) itself is also often used colloquially . people with north korean nationality are called zainichi chōsenjin , while those with south korean nationality , sometimes including recent newcomers , are called zainichi kankokujin '' hanguk people in japan '' ) . mongolia . mongols have their own word for korea : солонгос ( solongos ) . in mongolian , solongo means '' rainbow . '' and another theory is probably means derived from evenks living in manchuria , a tribe culturally and ethnically related to the korean people . north and south korea are , accordingly , хойд солонгос ( hoid solongos ) and өмнөд солонгос ( ömnöd solongos ) . the name of either silla or its capital seora-beol was also widely used throughout northeast asia as the ethnonym for the people of silla , appearing . as solgo or solho in the language of the medieval jurchens and their later descendants , the manchus respectively . vietnamese-speaking areas . in vietnam , people call north korea ; '' chosŏn '' ) and south korea ; '' hanguk '' ) . prior to unification , north vietnam used ; bukchosŏn ) and ; namjoseon ) while south vietnam used ; bukhan ) and ; namhan ) for north and south korea , respectively . after unification , the northern vietnamese terminology persisted until the 1990s . when south korea reestablished diplomatic relations with vietnam in 1993 , it requested that vietnam use the name that it uses for itself , and gradually replaced in usage . in the vietnamese language used in the united states , bắc hàn and nam hàn are most common used . outside east asia . . english usage and spelling . both south and north korea use the name '' korea '' when referring to their countries in english . north korea is sometimes referred to as '' democratic people 's republic of korea '' ( dprk ) and south korea is sometimes referred to as the '' republic of korea '' ( rok ) . the official names of both entities are also used by organizations such as united nations , international olympic committee and media such as the associated press , china global television network , and several others . as with other european languages , english historically had a variety of names for korea . these included '' cauli '' ( marco polo 's rendering of goryeo ) , caule , core , cory , caoli , and corai as well as two spellings that survived into the 19th century , corea and korea . the modern spelling , '' korea '' , first appeared in the late 17th century in the travel writings of the dutch east india company 's hendrick hamel . the terms '' chosunese '' or '' chosonese '' were first used to refer to the people of joseon in the late 19th century but were eventually phased out . the korean repository , volume 1 both major english-speaking governments in the 19th and 20th centuries ( the united states and the united kingdom and its empire ) used both '' korea '' and '' corea '' until the early part of the korea under japanese rule . korea from around 1913 using the spelling '' corean '' english-language publications in the 19th century generally used the spelling corea , which was also used at the founding of the uk 's embassy in seoul in 1890 . barbara demick . '' breaking the occupation spell : some koreans see putdown in letter change in name . '' boston globe . 18 september 2003 . retrieved 5 july 2008 . however , at the turn of the century , the then u.s . minister and consul general to korea , horace newton allen , used '' korea '' in his works published on the country . h . n . allen , md korean tales : being a collection of stories translated from the korean folk lore . new york : g . p . putnam 's sons , 1889 . at the official korean exhibit at the world 's columbian exhibition in chicago in 1893 a sign was posted by the korean commissioner saying of his country 's name that '' 'korea ' and 'corea ' are both correct , but the former is preferred . '' '' korea in the white city : korea at the world 's columbian exhibition ( 1893 ) . '' transactions of the korea branch of the royal asiatic society 77 ( 2002 ) , 27 . this may have had something to do with allen 's influence , as he was heavily involved in the planning and participation of the korean exhibit at chicago . a shift can also be seen in korea itself , where postage stamps issued in 1884 used the name '' corean post '' in english , but those from 1885 and thereafter used '' korea '' or '' korean post '' . kss-korbase 's korean stamp issuance schedules file : korea 1884 stamp - 10 mun.jpg 1884 stamp reading '' corean post '' file : korea 1885 stamp - 25 poon ( bun ) . jpg 1885 stamp reading '' korea '' file : korea 1900 stamp - 2 ri.jpg 1900 stamp reading '' imperial korean post '' by the first two decades of the 20th century , '' korea '' began to be seen more frequently than '' corea '' – a change that coincided with japan 's consolidation of its grip over the peninsula . however , the spelling '' corea '' was occasionally used even under full colonial rule and both it and '' korea '' were largely eschewed in favor of the japanese-derived '' chosen '' , which itself was derived from '' joseon '' . a theory that grew in popularity in south korea in the early 2000s and especially during the 2002 joint world cup ( and endorsed by the north korean state ) was that japan as occupier had intentionally standardized the spelling on '' korea '' , allegedly so that '' japan '' would appear first alphabetically . barbara demick . '' a ' c ' change in spelling sought for the koreas '' . los angeles times . 15 september 2003 . retrieved 8 march 2020 . however , evidence of a deliberate name change orchestrated by japanese authorities is circumstantial , for example , a 1912 memoir by a japanese colonial official that complained of the koreans ' tendency '' to maintain they are an independent country by insisting on using a c to write their country 's name . '' . other languages . european languages use variations of the name '' korea '' for both north and south korea . in general , celtic and romance languages spell it '' corea '' ( or variations ) since '' c '' represents the sound in most romance and celtic orthographies . however , languages that have a general preference towards representing with '' k '' rather than '' c '' , such as most germanic or slavic languages , generally use variants of '' korea '' instead . in languages using other alphabets such as russian ( cyrillic ) , variations phonetically similar to '' korea '' are also used for example the russian name for korea is корея , romanization koreya . outside of europe , most languages also use variants of '' korea '' , often adopted to local orthographies . '' korea '' in the jurchen jin 's national language ( jurchen ) is '' sogo '' . '' korea '' in the conlang esperanto is '' koreio '' . '' korea '' in hmong is '' kauslim '' ( '' s '' and '' m '' represent tones , not consonants ) . koreans abroad . emigrants who moved to russia and central asia call themselves goryeoin or koryo-saram ; ; literally '' person or people of goryeo '' ) , or koreytsi in russian . many goryeoin are living in the cis , including an estimated 106,852 in russia , 22,000 in uzbekistan , 20,000 in kyrgyzstan , 17,460 in kazakhstan , 8,669 in ukraine , 2,000 in belarus , 350 in moldova , 250 in georgia , 100 in azerbaijan , and 30 in armenia . commonwealth of independent states report , 1996 . as of 2005 , there are also 1.9 million ethnic koreans living in china who hold chinese citizenship and a further 560,000 korean expatriates from both north and south living in china . south korean expatriates living in the u.s . may refer to themselves as korean american ; , , or '' gyopo '' for short . sobriquets of korea . in traditional korean culture , as well as in the cultural tradition of east asia , the land of korea has assumed a number of sobriquets over the centuries , including : gyerim , '' rooster forest '' , in reference to an early name for silla . gunjaji-guk , or '' land of scholarly gentlemen '' . geumsu gangsan , '' land of embroidered ( or splendid ) rivers and mountains '' . danguk , '' country of dangun '' . daedong , '' great east '' . dongguk , '' eastern country '' . dongbang , literally '' an eastern country '' referring to korea . dongbang yeuiji-guk , '' eastern country of courtesy '' . dongya , '' eastern plains '' . dongi , or '' eastern foreigners '' . gu-i , '' nine-i '' , refers to ancient tribes in the korean peninsula . dongto , '' eastern land '' . baeguiminjok , '' the white-clad race '' . three-thousand li , a reference to the length traditionally attributed to the country from its northern to southern tips plus eastern to western tips . sojunghwa , '' small china '' or '' little sinocentrism '' was used by the joseon court . it is nowadays considered degrading and is not used . asadal , apparently an old korean term for joseon . cheonggu , or '' azure hills '' . the color azure is associated with the east . paldo gangsan , '' rivers and mountains of the eight provinces '' , referring to the traditional eight provinces of korea . geunhwahyang , '' country of mugunghwa '' refer to silla kingdom . geunyeok , '' hibiscus territory '' , or land of hibiscus samhan , or '' three hans '' , refers to samhan confederacy that ruled southern korea . beginning in the 7th century , samhan became synonymous with the three kingdoms of korea . haedong , '' east of the sea '' ( here being the west sea separating from korea ) . haedong samguk , '' three kingdoms east of the sea '' refers to three kingdoms of korea haedong seongguk , literally '' flourishing eastern sea country '' , historically refers to balhae kingdom of north–south period . jinguk , '' shock country '' , old name of balhae kingdom . jinyeok , '' eastern domain '' . jindan , '' eastern country of dangun '' . jinguk , '' country of early morning '' , refer to the jin state of gojoseon period . ancient history of the manchuria by lee mosol , md , mph . see also . history of korea romanization of korean . notes . references . further reading .