The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour

history . the evolution of the comedy hour was unique to a medium that was fearful of change . the show debuted in the winter of 1967 as a slightly '' hip '' version of the typical comedy-variety show of its era . but within weeks it rapidly evolved into a program that extended the boundaries of what was considered permissible in television satire . dangerously funny : the uncensored story of the smothers brothers comedy hour , by david bianculli , touchstone , 2009 . fresh air with dave davies , nov . 30 , 2009 the roster of writers and performers included hal goldman and al gordon ( who had written for the jack benny program ) , jim stafford , steve martin , don novello , rob reiner , lorenzo music , perennial candidate pat paulsen , nell scovell , bob einstein ( '' officer judy '' ) , einstein 's brother albert brooks , and leigh french ( '' share a little tea with goldie '' ) . the show also introduced audiences to pop singer jennifer warnes ( originally billed as jennifer warren or simply '' jennifer '' ) , who was a regular on the series . the television premiere of mason williams ' hit record , classical gas , took place on the show , and williams himself received an emmy for his work as a staff writer ; during the show 's run , warnes provided vocals for several tracks of williams ' album , the mason williams ear show . musical guests . the series showcased new musical artists that other comedy-variety shows rarely gave airtime to , due to the nature of their music or their political affiliations . george harrison , joan baez , buffalo springfield , cass elliot , harry belafonte , cream , the who , donovan , the doors , janis ian , yank barry , jefferson airplane , peter , paul and mary , spanky and our gang , steppenwolf , simon and garfunkel , ray charles , hello people and pete seeger were showcased during the latter years of the show despite the advertiser-sensitive nature of their music . seeger 's appearance on the season two premiere which aired on september 10 , 1967 was his first on network commercial television in 17 years since being blacklisted in 1950 . his performance of '' waist deep in the big muddy '' was dropped from the broadcast after his refusal to comply with cbs 's request to remove the sixth verse . the song , its story related to the present by the controversial stanza , gent , george . '' seeger accuses c.b.s . over song ; act cut when he refused to drop verse , says seeger , '' the new york times , friday , september 15 , 1967 . was a metaphor for lyndon b . johnson and his vietnam war policy . the smothers brothers comedy hour & ndash ; the museum of broadcast communications . seeger was eventually allowed to reappear on the show to perform the song again on episode 24 later that season . in 1968 , the show broadcast several promotional films ( later known as '' music videos '' ) for the beatles ' songs '' hey jude '' and '' revolution '' and bee gees . before a rowdy crowd at the los angeles forum , jimi hendrix dedicated '' i do n't live today '' to the smothers brothers , as heard on the jimi hendrix box set . controversies and cancellation . the show became both popular and controversial for those same references to youth culture and the issues that both interested and affected this particular target audience . whereas most older and more conservative audiences were tuning into shows such as the western bonanza , the younger , more liberal generation & mdash ; ages 15 & ndash ; 25 & mdash ; were watching the smothers ' more socially relevant humor . the brothers soon found themselves in regular conflicts with cbs ' network censors . at the start of the 1968–69 season , the network ordered that the smothers deliver their shows finished and ready for air ten days before airdate so that the censors could edit the shows as necessary . in the season premiere , cbs deleted an entire segment featuring belafonte singing lord , do n't stop the carnival against a backdrop of the havoc during the 1968 democratic national convention , along with two lines from a satire of their main competitor , bonanza . as the year progressed , battles over content continued , including a david steinberg sermon about moses and the burning bush . with some local stations making their own deletions of controversial sketches or comments , the continuing problems over the show reached a boiling point after cbs showed a rerun on march 9 , 1969 . the network explained the decision by stating that because that week 's episode did not arrive in time to be previewed , it would not be shown . in that program , joan baez paid tribute to her then-husband david harris , who was entering jail after refusing military service , while comedian jackie mason made a joke about children '' playing doctor . '' when the show finally did air , three weeks later , the network allowed baez to state that her husband was in prison , but edited out the reason . despite the conflict , the show was picked up for the 1969–70 season on march 14 , seemingly ending the debate over the show 's status . an episode slated for an april 13 broadcast was refused by cbs because the brothers had brought back steinberg to perform another sermon routine ; the original sermon on october 27 , 1968 had been met with hundreds of angry viewer letters . however , the episode was aired in canada on ctv on a pre-release which was a common occurrence at that time . network ceo and president william s . paley abruptly canceled the show on april 4 , 1969 , citing the smothers ' failure to meet the contractual pre-air delivery dates required for local affiliate screening . another of the network 's presidents , robert wood , stated that it became evident that the brothers '' were unwilling to accept the criteria of taste established by cbs . '' cbs evening news , 4 april 1969 . '' cbs announced today that the smothers brothers comedy hour will not be returning to the cbs television network next season . network president robert wood said it became evident that the brothers 'were unwilling to accept the criteria of taste established by cbs . ' cbs news efforts to reach the brothers for comment have been unsuccessful . '' hee haw replaced the smothers brothers that summer . this cancellation led the brothers to file a breach of contract suit against the network . on april 6 , 1973 , after four years of litigation , a federal court ruled in favor of the smotherses and ordered cbs to pay them us 776,300 ( equivalent to 4,613,305 in 2020 ) , and in 1975 , the duo returned to television , hosting the tamer ( and unsuccessful ) the smothers brothers show . the show won the emmy award that year for outstanding writing for a comedy , variety or music . the story of its cancellation is the subject of a 2002 documentary film , smothered : the censorship struggles of the smothers brothers comedy hour . revival . the smothers brothers comedy hour was revived for the 1988–89 television season . the revival , which included the return of cast regular pat paulsen alongside new performers , lasted one season . the revived smothers brothers comedy hour began production during the 1988 writers guild of america strike , resulting in the brothers resorting to performing their own material . in 1993 , the series was repackaged for broadcast on the e ! network featuring introductions by the smothers brothers and new interview footage by participants in the original series . . home media . in celebration of the 50th anniversary of the smothers brothers , the smothers brothers comedy hour was first released on dvd by time life with '' the best of season 3 '' that features 11 episodes from the third and final season of the show , presented in its uncensored and uncut original broadcast form , including extra features that were never-before-released on dvd . time life released the show on dvd again on october 20 , 2009 in which it released '' the best of season 2 . '' previously , in 2002 , time life entertainment released bravo 's documentary special , smothered : the censorship struggles of the smothers brothers comedy hour on dvd . references . further reading . . external links . list of episodes on official smothers brothers site