Champion Jack Dupree

biography . dupree was a new orleans blues and boogie-woogie pianist , a juke joint '' professor '' . his father was from the belgian congo and his mother was part african american and cherokee . his birth date has been given as july 4 , july 10 , and july 23 , 1908 , 1909 , dahl , bill . '' champion jack dupree : biography '' . allmusic , retrieved 30 september 2016 . or 1910 ; the researchers bob eagle and eric leblanc give july 4 , 1910 . he was orphaned at the age of eight and was sent to the colored waifs home in new orleans , an institution for orphaned or delinquent boys ( about the same time , louis armstrong was also sent there as a child , after being arrested as a '' dangerous and suspicious character '' ) . dupree taught himself to play the piano there and later apprenticed with tuts washington and willie hall , lichtenstein , grace ; dankner , laura ( 1993 ) . musical gumbo : the music of new orleans . w . w . norton . , broven , john ( 1983 ) . rhythm and blues in new orleans . pelican publishing . whom he called his father and from whom he learned '' junker 's blues '' . he was also a '' spy boy '' for the yellow pocahontas tribe of the mardi gras indians . he soon began playing in barrelhouses and other drinking establishments . he began a life of travelling , living in chicago , where he worked with georgia tom , and in indianapolis , indiana , where he met scrapper blackwell and leroy carr . he also worked as a cook . in detroit , after joe louis encouraged him to become a boxer , he fought 107 bouts , winning golden gloves and other championships and picking up the nickname champion jack , which he used the rest of his life . he returned to chicago at the age of 30 and joined a circle of recording artists , including big bill broonzy and tampa red , who introduced him to the record producer lester melrose . many of dupree 's songs were later credited to melrose as composer , and melrose claimed publishing rights to them . dupree 's career was interrupted by military service in world war ii . he was a cook in the united states navy and was held by the japanese for two years as a prisoner of war . following franklin d . roosevelt 's death in office , dupree composed the '' f.d.r . blues '' . after the war , his biggest commercial success was '' walkin ' the blues '' , which he recorded as a duet with teddy mcrae . this led to several national tours and eventually a european tour . in 1959 , he played an unofficial ( and unpaid ) duo gig with alexis korner at the london school of economics . dupree moved to europe in 1960 , settling first in switzerland and then denmark ( in the anarchist-occupied freetown christiania in copenhagen ) , england , sweden and , finally , germany . on june 17 , 1971 , he played at the montreux jazz festival , in the casino kursaal , with king curtis , backed by cornell dupree on guitar , jerry jemmott on bass and oliver jackson on drums . the recording of the concert was released in 1973 as the album king curtis & champion jack dupree : blues at montreux on the atlantic label . in the 1970s and 1980s , he lived at ovenden in halifax , england , after marrying a halifax native , shirley ann harrison , whom he met in london . a piano he used was later discovered at calderdale college in halifax . he continued to record in europe with the kenn lending band , louisiana red and axel zwingenberger and made many live appearances . he also worked again as a cook , specializing in new orleans cuisine . he returned to the united states from time to time and performed at the new orleans jazz & heritage festival . he divorced shirley in 1976 and moved to copenhagen , where he lived in the freetown christiania . this period of his life was the subject of the 1975 film barrelhouse blues - feelings and situations by the artists laurie grundt and eva acking which includes several filmed performances , including one where dupree plays drum set . he later moved to zurich and finally settled in hanover , germany . he died of cancer on january 21 , 1992 , in hanover . . musical style and output . dupree 's playing was almost all straight blues and boogie-woogie . he was not a sophisticated musician or singer , but he had a wry and clever way with words : '' mama , move your false teeth , papa wan na scratch your gums . '' he sometimes sang as if he had a cleft palate and even recorded under the name harelip jack dupree . this was an artistic conceit , as he had clear articulation , particularly for a blues singer . he would occasionally indulge in a vocalese style of sung word play ( similar to slim gaillard 's '' vout '' ) , as in his '' mr . dupree blues '' , included on the album the complete blue horizon sessions . many of his songs were about jail , drinking and drug addiction , although he himself was a light drinker and did not use other drugs . his '' junker 's blues '' was transmuted by fats domino into '' the fat man '' , domino 's first hit record . some of dupree 's songs had gloomy topics , such as '' tb blues '' and '' angola blues '' ( about louisiana state penitentiary , the infamous louisiana prison farm ) , but he also sang about cheerful subjects , as in '' dupree shake dance '' : '' come on , mama , on your hands and knees , do that shake dance as you please '' . he was a noted raconteur and transformed many of his stories into songs , such as '' big leg emma 's '' , a rhymed tale of a police raid on a juke joint . the lyrics of jerry lee lewis 's version of '' whole lotta shakin ' goin ' on '' — '' you can shake it one time for me ! '' —echo dupree 's song '' shake baby shake '' . on his best-known album , blues from the gutter , released by atlantic records in 1958 , he was accompanied on guitar by larry dale , whose playing on that record inspired brian jones of the rolling stones . in later years dupree recorded with john mayall , mick taylor , eric clapton and the band . although best known as a singer and pianist in the new orleans style , dupree occasionally pursued more musically adventurous projects , including dupree ' n ' mcphee : the 1967 blue horizon session , a collaboration with the english guitarist tony mcphee , recorded for blue horizon ( record label ) . since his death , dupree has undergone a revival of interest on the british vintage dance scene . his recording of “ shakin ’ mother for you ” now features on the playlist of most dj ’ s on the uk lindy hop scene and it has become the de facto standard track for the ‘ cardiff stroll ’ . . discography . . studio albums . blues from the gutter ( atlantic , 1958 ) champion jack 's natural & soulful blues ( atlantic , 1959 ) champion of the blues ( atlantic , 1961 ) the women blues of champion jack dupree ( folkways , 1961 ) trouble , trouble ( storyville , 1962 ) the best of the blues ( storyville , 1963 ) champion jack dupree of new orleans ( storyville , 1965 ) from new orleans to chicago ( decca , 1966 ) when you feel the feeling you was feeling ( blue horizon , 1968 ) with paul kossoff , guitar ; duster bennett , harmonica ; simon kirke , drums scoobydoobydoo ( blue horizon , 1969 , uk ) , also released as blues masters , vol . 10 ( blue horizon , 1972 ) the heart of the blues is sound ( byg , 1969 ) the incredible champion jack dupree ( sonet , 1970 ) , 12 tracks recorded in copenhagen in 1960-63 . the hamburg session ( happy bird , 1974 ) champion jack dupree '' 1977 '' ( isadora , 1977 ) , also released as hamhark & limer beans back home in new orleans ( bullseye blues , 1990 ) forever and ever ( bullseye blues , 1991 ) one last time ( bullseye blues , 1993 ) . live albums . champion jack dupree ( festival , 1971 ) alive , '' live '' and well ( chrischaa , 1976 ) the blues jubilee album ( pinorrekk , 1984 ) live at burnley ( jsp , 1989 ) jivin ' with jack : live in manchester , may 1966 ( jasmine , 2002 ) bad luck blues : live with freeway 75 ( bad luck blues , 2003 ) . collaborations . champion jack dupree and his blues band featuring mickey baker ( decca , 1967 ) tricks , with mickey baker ( vogue , 1968 ) , also released as anthologie du blues , vol . 1 ( disques vogue , 1968 , france ) i 'm happy to be free , with mickey baker and hal singer ( vogue , 1971 ) blues at montreux , with king curtis ( atlantic , 1973 ) freedom , with the monty sunshine band ( pinorrekk , 1980 ) real combination , with henry ojutkangas ( dig it , 1980 ) i had that dream , with kenn lending ( pinorrekk , 1982 ) get you an ol ' man , with brenda bell and louisiana red ( paris , 1984 ) rockin ' the boogie , with kenn lending ( blue moon , 1988 ) sings blues classics , with axel zwingenberger ( vagabond , 1990 ) . references . external links . illustrated champion jack dupree discography ( lists 185 separate records , 1940–2010 ) barrelhouse blues : feelings and situations a 1975 film by jack dupree , eva acking and laurie grunt , dansk filmcentrum , at vimeo.com