King Edward VI Grammar School, Chelmsford

history of the school . kegs was one of many grammar schools founded by edward vi . its current form resulted from a royal charter dated 24 march 1551 , although evidence of this school exists from as far back as the 13th century , possibly earlier , as a chantry school in a different location in chelmsford . indeed , the school of 1551 was merely a '' rebranding '' of the chelmsford chantry school , a roman catholic institution which had been abolished along with the monasteries during the english reformation . the school was moved to its present site on broomfield road in 1892 . a history of king edward vi grammar school , chelmsford , 1551-2001 — anthony tuckwell once a boarding school , it was one of many grammar schools to join the state sector and abolish the nominal fees . the last boarding students left in the 1970s . in 1976 it admitted the first female pupil to the sixth form , to study classics . the school has been ranked in the top 50 schools in the country in national examination league tables . kegs was previously a foundation school and specialist science college and language college . the school converted to academy status in april 2011 , but continues to have science and languages as specialisms . it is also a leading edge school . in 1981 it was named by the sunday times as the most successful state school as measured by oxbridge open awards . in 1998 , it was rated by the financial times as the most successful state school at gce advanced level in the period 1993-1998 . in 2001 the school was named sunday times school of the year . the 2015 good schools guide names kegs as the top selective state school for a number of a-level subjects , as well as gcse history and fsmq additional mathematics . in november 2006 , it was judged to be '' outstanding '' by ofsted . . house system . in 1907 , headmaster frank rogers set up the system of '' houses '' king edward vi grammar school , chelmsford » house system — holland , named for philemon holland ; mildmay , for sir walter mildmay ; strutt , for joseph strutt ; and tindal , for nicholas conyngham tindal , dividing the school into four forms in each year . due to the expansion of the school roll over the last few years , this has not been the case . instead , there are five forms , which contain a mix of people from different houses . extracurricular activities . combined cadet force and corps of drums . the school maintains an army contingent of the combined cadet force ( ccf ) , which was also open to students of chelmsford county high school for girls until 2017 . military music is provided within the contingent by a corps of drums playing drums , flutes and bugles . the corps wears the full dress scarlet tunics of the essex regiment , incorporating the purple facings which gave the essex regiment its nickname 'the pompadours ' . it carries the drums of the 5th battalion ( territorial army ) corrected after reference to the band master mr worrall emblazoned with the regiment 's battle honours . king edward vi grammar school » ccf . kegs music . the school has many ensembles , of which the orchestras include members from other schools , though the majority are from kegs and chelmsford county high school for girls . the other ensembles are exclusive to those who attend kegs . king edward vi grammar school » music junior orchestra ( combined with kegs strings ) senior orchestra chamber ensemble choir wind band jazz ensemble . the fleur de lys society . the fleur de lys society ( fdl ) was a sixth-form debating society-cum-charity fundraising society . the fdl was believed to have been started by frank rogers , an influential headmaster . as well as holding debates on a variety of topical subjects , it was also an important charitable organisation within the school . however , due to the controversial nature and content of several debates , the society was suspended in 2007 . the kegs ambassador . the kegs ambassador is the school 's independent student newspaper . since its creation in january 2009 , it has featured numerous articles by alumni , staff and students . kegs medical society . the kegs medical society ( medsoc ) is where topical medical issues are discussed . the kegs economics journal . the kegs economics journal is another of the school 's student-led newspapers . they feature articles on a wide variety of national and international economic and political affairs . notable former pupils . of the chelmsford chantry school ( before the royal charter of 1551 ) . john dee , mathematician , astronomer , astrologer , geographer , occultist , and consultant to queen elizabeth i ; responsible for the english translation of euclid 's work . pre 1900 . john hilton ( surgeon ) , professor of human anatomy and surgery at the royal college of surgeons , president of the hunterian society philemon holland , classical scholar thomas plume , archdeacon of rochester and educational benefactor , founded the chair of plumian professor of astronomy and experimental philosophy at the university of cambridge joseph strutt , author of '' sports and pastimes of the people of england '' nicholas conyngham tindal , lord chief justice of the court of common pleas . 1900-1960 . claude colleer abbott , poet and academic h . h . abbott , poet and headmaster professor sir john baker , downing professor of the laws of england at the university of cambridge and leading legal historian j . a . baker , author of the peregrine and the hill of summer peter baldwin cbe , chief executive of the radio authority from 1991-5 norman fowler , current lord speaker ; conservative politician ; former cabinet minister peter joslin , qpm , chief constable of warwickshire police ( 1983–1998 ) tony oliver ( referee ) , english football league referee brian parkyn , labour mp for bedford from 1966–70 peter seabrook mbe , gardener john g . taylor , professor of mathematics at king 's college london from 1971–96 , and president of the european neural network society from 1993-4 paul white , baron hanningfield denis wick , trombone clive young , former bishop of dunwich . post 1960 . nick alston , essex 's first police and crime commissioner nick bourne , former conservative leader ( 2000-2011 ) and leader of the opposition ( 2007-2011 ) and am for mid and west wales ( 1999-2011 ) , peer ( 2013-date ) and government minister ( 2014-date ) lewis brindley , managing director and senior content producer at the yogscast neil cole , comedian , television presenter and radio broadcaster mervyn day , former fa cup winning professional footballer and former assistant manager of west ham united football club simon dolan , businessman and entrepreneur paul dorrington , guitarist in the wedding present alex dowsett , british cyclist guthrie govan , guitar virtuoso jason hazeley , comedy writer simon heffer , british journalist and writer , the daily telegraph and the daily mail squarepusher , prominent electronic and jazz musician , also known as squarepusher jonathan lewis , former essex and durham cricketer anthony marwood , concert violinist james maynard , mathematician working on prime gaps andrew mcgarry , former essex cricketer tim mead , countertenor tony milton cb obe , commandant general royal marines and commander uk amphibious forces from 2002-4 ivan moody , composer joel morris , comedy writer martin outram , english viola soloist and violist of the maggini quartet grayson perry , 2003 turner prize winner mike smith , touring car driver and television presenter joe thomas , actor , writer and comedian john tipler , international motoring journalist rajeeb dey , mbe , british entrepreneur jonathan clayden , professor of organic chemistry . fictional . dr . watson , character in the 2010 bbc series of sherlock . john watson 's cv is visible in episode two , where kegs is cited under education qualifications ( with 6 a ) .