Chinook Jargon

name . most books written in english still use the term chinook jargon , but some linguists working with the preservation of a creolized form of the language used in grand ronde , oregon prefer the term chinuk wawa ( with the spelling 'chinuk ' instead of 'chinook ' ) . historical speakers did not use the name chinook wawa , however , but rather '' the wawa '' or '' lelang '' ( from fr . la langue , the language , or tongue ) . wawa also means speech or words & ndash ; '' have a wawa '' means '' hold a parley '' even in idiomatic english today , and lelang also means the physical bodypart , the tongue . the name for the jargon varied throughout the territory in which it was used . for example : skokum hiyu in the boston bar-lytton area of the fraser canyon , or in many areas simply just '' the old trade language '' or '' the hudson bay language '' . history . the jargon was originally constructed from a great variety of amerindian words of the pacific northwest , arising as an intra-indigenous contact language in a region marked by divisive geography and intense linguistic diversity . the participating peoples came from a number of very distinct language family , speaking dozens of individual languages . holton , jim . 1999 . chinook jargon : the hidden language of the pacific northwest . by 1840 , it had creolized into a native language for some speakers . it peaked in usage from approximately 1858 to 1900 , and declined as a result of the spanish flu , world war i and residential schools . after european contact , the jargon also acquired english and french loans , as well as words brought by other european , asian , and polynesian groups . some individuals from all these groups soon adopted the jargon as a highly efficient and accessible form of communication . this use continued in some business sectors well into the 20th century early vancouver , maj . j.s . '' skit '' matthews , city of vancouver , 1936 . and some of its words continue to feature in company and organization names as well as in the regional toponymy . in the diocese of kamloops , british columbia , hundreds of speakers also learned to read and write the jargon using duployan shorthand via the publication kamloops wawa . as a result , the jargon also had the beginnings of its own literature , mostly translated bible and classics , and some local and episcopal news , community gossip and events , and diaries . novelist and early native american activist marah ellis ryan ( c . 1860-1934 ) used chinook words and phrases in her writing . squaw elouise , chicago ; new york : rand , mcnally , 1892 ; told in the hills , chicago ; new york : rand , mcnally , 1891 , 1905 . in oregon , chinook jargon was widely used by natives , trappers , traders , employees of the hudson 's bay company , missionaries , and pioneers who came across the oregon trail from the 1830s-1870s . in portland 's first half century ( 1840s-1890s ) there were frequent trade interactions between pioneers and native americans . after about 1900 , when such daily interactions were less frequent , jargon was spoken among pioneer families to prove how early they arrived out west . many oregonians used jargon in casual conversation—to add humor , whimsy or emphasis and to exhibit deep knowledge of oregon 's history . though traditions of speaking jargon faded away among the non-native population , some of oregon 's tribal groups continued speaking chinook jargon , though usage was diminished . according to nard jones , chinook jargon was still in use in seattle until roughly the eve of world war ii , especially among the members of the arctic club , making seattle the last city where the language was widely used . writing in 1972 , he remarked that at that later date '' only a few can speak it fully , men of ninety or a hundred years old , like henry broderick , the realtor , and joshua green , the banker . '' . quotation is from p . 97 . jones estimates that in pioneer times in the 1860s there were about 100,000 speakers of chinook jargon . jones , op . cit . , p . 97 . the language was being used , even entire paragraphs , without translations in local newspapers from at least oregon and washington states . it was also used by teachers to teach natives at school , by shopkeepers to sell things , by courts as an interview tool or to judge if a person was a citizen or not , by priests to teach religion , and between children playing on the street . in the 20th century , chinook jargon entered a slow decline . as late as the 1940s , native speakers were still being born in tiller , oregon , but by 1962 the summer institute of linguistics ( sil ) estimated that only 100 speakers were left . in the 2000s , lane community college in eugene , oregon started a three-semester university program teaching chinook jargon pacific northwest historians are well acquainted with the chinook jargon , in name if not in the ability to understand it . mentions of and phrases of chinook jargon were found in nearly every piece of historical source material before 1900 . chinook jargon is relatively unknown to the rest of the population , perhaps due to the great influx of newcomers into the influential urban areas . however , the memory of this language is not likely to fade entirely . many words are still used and enjoyed throughout oregon , washington , british columbia , the yukon , and alaska . old-timers still dimly remember it , although in their youth , speaking this language was discouraged as slang . nonetheless , it was the working language in many towns and workplaces , notably in ranching country and in canneries on the british columbia coast where it was necessary in the strongly multi-ethnic workforce . place names throughout this region bear jargon names ( see list of chinook jargon placenames ) and words are preserved in various rural industries such as logging and fishing . the chinook jargon was multicultural and functional . thomas , edward harper . chinook : a history and dictionary . portland , ore . bin fords & mort . 1935 . to those familiar with it , chinook jargon is often considered a wonderful cultural inheritance . for this reason , and because jargon has not quite died , enthusiasts actively promote the revival of the language in everyday western speech . the confederated tribes of the grand ronde community of oregon is taking steps to preserve chinook jargon use through a full immersion head start/preschool which is conducted in chinuk wawa , in hopes of fostering fluency in the language . mccowan , karen . '' grand ronde tribe saves a dying language , one child at a time '' , the register-guard , 2003-07-20 . retrieved on 2009-12-02 . the confederated tribes also offer chinuk wawa lessons at their offices in eugene and portland , oregon . confederated tribes of the grande ronde community of oregon . p . 15 '' cultural resources slates classes '' , smoke signals , 2009-07-15 . retrieved on 2009-12-02 . in addition , lane community college offers two years of chinuk wawa language study that satisfy second-language graduation requirements of oregon public universities . in march 2012 , the tribe published a chinuk wawa dictionary through university of washington press . at her swearing-in as lieutenant governor in 2001 , iona campagnolo concluded her speech in chinook , observing that '' konoway tillicums klatawa kunamokst klaska mamook okoke huloima chee illahie '' - chinook for '' everyone was thrown together to make this strange new country ( british columbia ) . '' an art installation featuring chinook jargon , '' welcome to the land of light '' by henry tsang , can be viewed on the seawall along false creek in downtown vancouver , british columbia between davie and drake streets . translation into chinook jargon was done by duane pasco . a short film using chinook jargon , '' small pleasures '' by karin lee explores intercultural dialogue between three women of different cultural and linguistic backgrounds in 1890s barkerville in northern british columbia . . revival of the language . chinuk wawa was classified as extinct until the 2000s when it was revived , notably in 2014 with the release of chinuk wawa—as our elders teach us to speak it by the confederated tribes of the grand ronde community of oregon . in 2018 a textbook for chinook jargon in esperanto , the chinook bridge-language using esperanto ) was published by sequoia edwards . in 2019 '' chinuk wawa '' became available as a language option on the fanfiction website archive of our own . in 2020 chinook jargon was added to tatoeba , a website that collects and crowd-translates sentences in various languages . during termination of aboriginal peoples by the united states government , speaking of the language was forbidden , and as a result , developed a decline of speakers . after the conclusion of the termination era with the restoration of tribes in the pacific northwest area , revival of chinuk wawa began . to date , there are fluent speakers of chinuk wawa , primarily in the confederated tribes of grand ronde . influence on english . british columbian english and pacific northwest english have several words still in current use which are loanwords from the chinook jargon , which was widely spoken throughout the pacific northwest by all ethnicities well into the middle of the 20th century . these words tend to be shared with , but are not as common in , the states of oregon , washington , alaska and , to a lesser degree , idaho and western montana . chinook jargon words used by english-language speakers . cheechako & mdash ; newcomer ; the word is formed from chee ( '' new '' ) + chako ( '' come '' ) and was used to refer to non-native people . chuck & mdash ; water ; and thus saltchuck '' salt water '' . cultus & mdash ; means bad , worthless , useless , ordinary , evil or taboo . cultus iktus means '' worthless stuff '' . hiyu & mdash ; less common nowadays , but still heard in some places to mean a party or gathering . from the chinook for '' many '' or '' several '' or '' lots of '' . the big hiyu ( also known as '' the july '' ) was a week-long joint celebration of dominion day and the glorious fourth in the fraser canyon town of lillooet , featuring horse races , gambling , a rodeo and other festivities . a tenas hiyu ( small gathering ) was on a much smaller scale . the community of west seattle has celebrated the month of july for more than 75 & nbsp ; years with the hiyu summer festival . iktus & mdash ; '' stuff '' in chinook jargon , also pronounced '' itkus '' with 't ' and ' k ' reversed . klootchman or klootch & mdash ; in the jargon meaning simply '' a woman '' or the female of something & ndash ; klootchman kiuatan ( mare ) , klootchman lecosho ( sow ) , tenas klootchman or klootchman tenas ( girl , female child ) . still in use in english in some areas and with people of an older background to mean a first nations woman , or to refer to the wives/women attached to a certain group in a joking way e.g . '' we sent all the klootchman to the kitchen while we played cards '' . unlike its male equivalent siwash , klootchman does not generally have a derisive tone nowadays ( when used ) . masi & mdash ; in northern bc and the yukon , and used in broadcast english in those areas , the chinook jargon adaption of the french remains common , i.e . mahsi or masi , with the accent on the first syllable ( unlike in french ) . it is possible that the slang term moolah , meaning money in american slang , comes from the word 'moolah ' meaning 'mill ' in chinook . mucky muck or muckamuck & mdash ; in the jargon means '' plenty of food '' and came to connotate one who lived well , thus in colloquial english an important or officious person . related to this is high mucky muck , or chinook hiyu muckamuck . potlatch & mdash ; in chinook jargon is a ceremony among certain tribes involving food and exchange of gifts , nowadays sometimes used to refer to a potluck dinner or sometimes the giving away of personal items to friends . quiggly & mdash ; refers to the remains of an old indian pit-house , or underground house , from kickwillie or kekuli , which in the jargon means '' down '' or '' underneath '' or '' beneath '' . siwash & mdash ; properly a first nations man , but sometimes used for women as well . nowadays considered extremely derogatory but still in use , typically with the connotation of '' drunken no-good indian '' . historically it did not necessarily have this connotation and was the generic term for natives to the point where some writers thought there was a '' siwash tribe '' in the region . the origin of the word is from the french . when pronounced , with the rhythm of the original french , it is used by modern speakers of the chinook jargon in grand ronde , oregon , with the context of meaning a native american , or as an adjective connoting connection to same ( the pronunciation is considered offensive in grand ronde ) . skookum & mdash ; the most versatile is skookum , which was used in the jargon either as a verb auxiliary for to be able or an adjective for able , strong , big , genuine , reliable & ndash ; which sums up its use in bc english , although there are a wide range of possible usages : a skookum house is a jail or prison ( house in the jargon could mean anything from a building to a room ) . '' he 's a skookum guy '' means that the person is solid and reliable while '' we need somebody who 's skookum '' means that a strong and large person is needed . a carpenter , after banging a stud into place , might check it and decide , '' yeah , that 's skookum '' . asking for affirmation , someone might say '' is that skookum '' or '' is that skookum with you ? '' skookum can also be translated simply as '' o.k . '' but it means something a bit more emphatic . tenas & mdash ; means '' small '' . tillicum & mdash ; means '' people/person '' , '' family '' , and '' people '' . tolo & mdash ; used in western washington to mean a semi-formal dance , analogous to the homecoming ball , to which girls ask boys . from the chinook for '' to win '' . tyee & mdash ; leader , chief , boss . also big tyee in the context of '' boss '' or well-known person . in campbell river and in the sport-fishing business , a really big chinook salmon is a tyee . in the jargon tyee meant chief , and could also be an adjective denoting '' big '' , as with tyee salmon or tyee lamel ( boss mule ) . a hyas tyee means '' important/big ruler/leader '' , i.e . & ndash ; king , big boss , important ruler , and is also sometimes used in english in the same way as big tyee . e.g . '' he was the undisputed hyas tyee of all the country between the johnstone strait and comox '' this was also the common title used for the famous chiefs of the early era , such as maquinna , for whom it was applied by captain vancouver and others in the context of '' king '' . the hyas klootchman tyee & ndash ; '' great woman ruler '' , roughly '' her majesty '' , was the historical term for queen victoria . the word tyee was commonly used and still occurs in some local english usages meaning '' boss '' or someone in charge . business and local political and community figures of a certain stature from some areas are sometimes referred to in the british columbia papers and histories by the old chiefly name worn by maquinna , comcomly and nicola . a man called hyas tyee would have been a senator , a longtime mp or mla , or a business magnate with a strong local powerbase , long-time connections , and wealth from and because of the area . there is a popular bc news site named the tyee . beginning in 1900 , tyee was also the title of the university of washington yearbook . university of washington yearbooks and documents . notable non-natives known to speak chinook jargon . francis jones barnard francis stillman barnard matthew baillie begbie franz boas sir james douglas joshua green phoebe judson jean-marie-raphaël le jeune richard mcbride john mcloughlin morley roberts robert william service sam sullivan theodore winthrop . see also . list of chinook jargon placenames american indian pidgin english haida jargon maritime fur trade medny aleut language nootka jargon tlingit noun wobbly lingo . references . external links . note : the incubator link at right will take you to the chinuk wawa test-wikipedia , which is written in a variation of the standardized orthography of the confederated tribes of grand ronde which differs significantly from the orthographies used by early linguists and diarists recording other versions of the jargon : portland state university chinook jargon collection—dictionaries , books , & journal articles documenting the etymology , grammar , history , origins , and use of the chinook jargon trade language collected by donald w . bushaw . selected references for students and scholars—including study guides and four dictionaries british columbia time temple archive excellent resource compiling public domain texts written about and in the chinook wawa kamloops wawa page , chinook jargon information superhighway site chinook texts by franz boas ntsayka ikanum ( our story ) confederated tribes of grand ronde culture website - great resource for written and spoken examples of elder wawa from grand ronde as well as history of the tribe and language . archives . thomas wickham prosch papers . 1775–1915 . 1 linear foot ( 3 boxes ) . includes dictionary of chinook jargon . at the university of washington libraries , special collections . free e-books . charles montgomery tate . chinook as spoken by the indians of washington territory , british columbia and alaska for the use of traders , tourists and others who have business intercourse with the indians : chinook-english , english-chinook . m.w . waitt , victoria , b.c . 1889 ? . dictionaries online . directory to on-line jargon dictionaries abridged chinook dictionary chinook jargon history , dictionary and phrasebook—includes annotated version of shaw 's dictionary , augmented by content from other word lists . . news and newsletters . tenas wawa—archive of early 1990s newsletter about chinook jargon , also includes audio of a song in the jargon . can we still speak chinook ? from b.c . 's the tyee , january 2006 . other links . first people 's language map : chinuk wawa first people 's language map : chinuk wawa resources resources