Duchy of Anhalt

history . anhalt 's origins lie in the principality of anhalt , a state of the holy roman empire . dukes of anhalt . during the 9th century , most of anhalt was part of the duchy of saxony . in the 12th century , it came under the rule of albert the bear , margrave of brandenburg . albert was descended from albert , count of ballenstedt , whose son esico ( died 1059 or 1060 ) appears to have been the first to bear the title of count of anhalt . esico 's grandson , otto the rich , count of ballenstedt , was the father of albert the bear , who united anhalt with the margraviate of brandenburg ( march of brandenburg ) . when albert died in 1170 , his son bernard , who received the title of duke of saxony in 1180 , became count of anhalt . bernard died in 1212 , and anhalt , separated from saxony , passed to his son henry i , who in 1218 took the title of prince and was the real founder of the house of anhalt . princes of anhalt . on henry 's death in 1252 , his three sons divided the principality and founded the respective lines of aschersleben , bernburg and zerbst . the family ruling in aschersleben became extinct in 1315 , and this district was subsequently incorporated with the neighbouring bishopric of halberstadt . the last prince of the line of anhalt-bernburg died in 1468 and his lands were inherited by the princes of the sole remaining line , that of anhalt-zerbst . the territory belonging to this branch of the family had been divided in 1396 , and after the acquisition of bernburg prince george i made a further partition of zerbst ( zerbst and dessau ) . early in the 16th century , however , owing to the death or abdication of several princes , the family had become narrowed down to the two branches of anhalt-köthen and anhalt-dessau ( both issued from anhalt-dessau in 1471 . wolfgang , who became prince of anhalt-köthen in 1508 , was a staunch supporter of the reformation , and after the battle of mühlberg in 1547 was placed under imperial ban and deprived of his lands by charles v , holy roman emperor . after the peace of passau in 1552 , prince wolfgang bought back his principality , but as he was childless he surrendered it in 1562 to his kinsmen , the princes of anhalt-dessau . ernest i ( died 1516 ) left three sons , john v , george iii , and joachim i , who ruled their lands together for many years , and who , like prince wolfgang , favoured the reformed doctrines , which thus became dominant in anhalt . around 1546 , the three brothers divided their principality and founded the lines of zerbst , plötzkau and dessau . this division , however , was only temporary , as the acquisition of köthen , and a series of deaths among the ruling princes , enabled joachim ernest , a son of john ii , to unite the whole of anhalt under his rule in 1570 . the first united principality of anhalt was short-lived , and in 1603 , it was split up into the mini-states of anhalt-dessau , anhalt-bernburg , anhalt-köthen , anhalt-zerbst and anhalt-plötzkau . joachim ernest died in 1586 and his five sons ruled the land in common until 1603 , when anhalt was again divided , and the lines of dessau , bernburg , plötzkau , zerbst and köthen were re-founded . the principality was ravaged during the thirty years ' war , and in the earlier part of this struggle christian i of anhalt-bernburg took an important part . in 1635 , an arrangement was made by the various princes of anhalt , which gave a certain authority to the eldest member of the family , who was thus able to represent the principality as a whole . this proceeding was probably due to the necessity of maintaining an appearance of unity in view of the disturbed state of european politics . in 1665 , the branch of anhalt-köthen became extinct , and according to a family compact this district was inherited by lebrecht of anhalt-plötzkau , who surrendered plötzkau to bernburg , and took the title of prince of anhalt-köthen . in the same year the princes of anhalt decided that , if any branch of the family became extinct , its lands should be equally divided between the remaining branches . this arrangement was carried out after the death of frederick augustus , prince of anhalt-zerbst in 1793 , and zerbst was divided between the three remaining princes . during these years the policy of the different princes was marked , perhaps intentionally , by considerable uniformity . once or twice , calvinism was favoured by a prince , but in general the house was loyal to the doctrines of martin luther . the growth of prussia provided anhalt with a formidable neighbour , and the establishment and practice of primogeniture by all branches of the family prevented further divisions of the principality . 19th century duchies . in 1806 , napoleon elevated the remaining states of anhalt-bernburg , anhalt-dessau and anhalt-köthen to duchies ( anhalt-plötzkau and anhalt-zerbst had ceased to exist in the meantime ) . these duchies were united in 1863 to form a united anhalt again due to the extinction of the köthen and bernburg lines . the new duchy consisted of two large portions & nbsp ; – eastern and western anhalt , separated by the interposition of a part of the prussian province of saxony & nbsp ; – and of five enclaves surrounded by prussian territory : alsleben , muhlingen , dornburg , gödnitz and abberode . the eastern and larger portion of the duchy was enclosed by the prussian government district of potsdam ( in the prussian province of brandenburg ) , and magdeburg and merseburg ( belonging to the prussian province of saxony ) . the western or smaller portion ( the so-called upper duchy or ballenstedt ) was also enclosed by the two latter districts and by the duchy of brunswick-lüneburg . the capital of anhalt ( at the times when it was a united state ) was dessau . in 1918 , anhalt became a state within the weimar republic ( see free state of anhalt ) . after world war ii it was united with the prussian parts of saxony in order to form the new area of saxony-anhalt . having been dissolved in 1952 , the state was reestablished prior to the german reunification and is now part of the bundesland saxony-anhalt in germany . constitution . the duchy , by virtue of a fundamental law , proclaimed on september 17 , 1859 and subsequently modified by various decrees , was a constitutional monarchy . the duke , who was addressed as '' highness , '' wielded the executive power while sharing the legislation with the estates . the diet ( landtag ) was composed of thirty-six members , of whom two were appointed by the duke , eight were representatives of landowners paying the highest taxes , two of the highest assessed members of the commercial and manufacturing classes , fourteen of the other electors of the towns and ten of the rural districts . the representatives were chosen for six years by indirect vote and must have completed their twenty-fifth year . the duke governed through a minister of state , who was the praeses of all the departments—finance , home affairs , education , public worship and statistics . geography . in the west , the land is undulating and in the extreme southwest , where it forms part of the harz range , mountainous , the ramberg peak being the tallest at 1900 & nbsp ; ft ( 579 m ) . from the harz , the country gently slopes down to the saale ; between this river and the elbe is fertile country . east of the elbe , the land is mostly a flat sandy plain , with extensive pine forests , interspersed with bog-land and rich pastures . the elbe is the chief river , intersecting the eastern portion of the former duchy , from east to west , and at rosslau is met by the mulde . the navigable saale takes a northerly direction through the western portion of the eastern part of the territory and receives , on the right , the fuhne and , on the left , the wipper and the bode . the climate is generally mild , less so in the higher regions to the south-west . the area of the former duchy is . the population was 203,354 in 1871 and 328,007 in 1905 . the country was divided into the districts of dessau , köthen , zerbst , bernburg and ballenstedt with bernburg being the most , and ballenstedt the least . populated . four towns , namely dessau , bernburg , cöthen and zerbst , had populations exceeding 20,000 . the inhabitants of the former duchy , who were primarily upper saxons , belonged , with the exception of about 12,000 roman catholics and 1700 jews , to the evangelical church . the supreme ecclesiastical authority was the consistory in dessau ; while a synod of 39 members , elected for six years , assembled at periods to deliberate on internal matters touching the organization of church of anhalt . the roman catholics were under the bishop of paderborn . rulers of anhalt , middle ages . esico ? –1059/1060 , first count of anhalt . otto the rich , count of ballenstedt . albert the bear ? –1170 . bernard ? –1212 . henry i 1212–1252 . dukes of anhalt , 1863–1918 . leopold iv 1863–1871 . friedrich i 1871–1904 . friedrich ii 1904–1918 . eduard 1918 . joachim ernst 1918 . heads of the house of anhalt since 1918 . joachim ernst 1918–1947 prince friedrich 1947–1963 prince eduard 1963–present , brother of princess julia katharina , hereditary princess of anhalt - heir apparent . see also . former countries in europe after 1815 . notes . references . attribution : . external links . — map of saxony and anhalt in 1789