Oatmeal

industrial preparation and varieties . the oat grains are dehusked by impact , and are then heated and cooled to stabilize the oat groats – the seed inside the husk . the process of heating produces a nutty flavour in the oats . these oat groats may be milled to produce fine , medium or coarse oatmeal . steel-cut oats may be small and contain broken groats from the dehusking process ( these bits may be steamed and flattened to produce smaller rolled oats ) . rolled oats are steamed and flattened whole oat groats . old-fashioned oats can be thick and take a while to boil to make porridge . quick-cooking rolled oats ( quick oats ) are cut into small pieces before being steamed and rolled . instant oatmeal is cooked and dried , often with a sweetener , such as sugar , and flavourings added . trowbridge filippone , f . ( 2007 ) '' oatmeal recipes and cooking tips '' about.com . food uses . both types of rolled oats may be eaten uncooked , as in muesli , or may be cooked with water or milk to make porridge . in some countries , rolled oats are eaten raw or toasted with milk and sugar , sometimes with raisins added , like a basic muesli . the term '' oatmeal '' sometimes refers to a porridge made from the bran or fibrous husk as well as the oat kernel or groat . prewett 's ( manufacturer of oatmeal ) rolled oats are often used as a key ingredient in granola breakfast cereals ( in which toasted oats are blended with sugar and/or nuts and raisins ) and granola bars . rolled oats are also used as an ingredient in oatmeal cookie , oatcakes , british flapjack bars , and baked oatmeal dessert dishes such as apple brown betty and apple crisp . oats may also be added to foods as an accent , as in the topping on many oat bran breads and as the coating on caboc cheese . oatmeal is also used as a thickening agent in thick , savoury arabic or egyptian meat-and-vegetable soups , and sometimes as a way of adding relatively low-cost fibre and nutritional content to meatloaf . nutrition . unenriched oatmeal , cooked by boiling or microwave , is 84 % water , and contains 12 % carbohydrates , including 2 % dietary fiber , and 2 % each of protein and fat ( table ) . in a 100 gram amount , cooked oatmeal provides 71 calories and contains 29 % of the daily value ( dv ) for manganese and moderate content of phosphorus and zinc ( 11 % dv each ) , with no other micronutrients in significant content ( see table on right ) . health benefits . oatmeal and other oat products were the subject of a 1997 ruling by the food and drug administration that consuming oat bran or whole rolled oats can lower the risk of heart disease when combined with a low-fat diet via the effect of oat beta-glucan to reduce levels of blood cholesterol . a similar conclusion was reached in 2010 by the european food safety authority . . regional variations . united states . in the united states oatmeal is often served as a porridge encyclopedia of american food and drink , p . 777 with milk or cream and a sweetener , such as brown sugar or honey . it may include additional ingredients such as peanut butter , cinnamon , or various types of fruits . . scotland . oatmeal has a long history in scottish culinary tradition because oats are better suited than wheat to the country 's low temperatures and high humidity . as a result , oats became the staple grain of scotland . the ancient universities of scotland had a holiday called meal monday to permit students to return to their farms and collect more oats for food . samuel johnson referred , disparagingly , to this in his dictionary definition for oats : '' a grain , which in england is generally given to horses , but in scotland supports the people . '' his biographer , james boswell , noted that lord elibank was said by sir walter scott to have retorted , '' yes , and where else will you see such horses and such men ? '' the life of samuel johnson , ll.d . : including a journal of his tour to the hebrides . volume 3 by james boswell . new york : derby & jackson , 1858 . page 11 . a common method of cooking oatmeal in scotland is to soak it overnight in salted water and cook on a low heat in the morning for a few minutes until the mixture thickens . in scotland , oatmeal is created by grinding oats into a coarse powder . it may be ground fine , medium , or coarse , or rolled , or the groats may be chopped in two or three pieces to make what is described as pinhead oatmeal . ground oatmeal , rolled oats , and pinhead oatmeal , are all used ( throughout britain ) ; one scots manufacturer describes varieties as '' scottish porridge oats '' ( rolled ) , '' scottish oatmeal '' ( medium ground ) , and '' pinhead oatmeal '' . the main uses are : traditional porridge brose : a thick mixture made with uncooked oatmeal ( or medium oatmeal that has been dry toasted by stirring it around in a dry pot over heat until it turns a slightly darker shade and emits a sweet , nutty fragrance ) and then adding butter or cream . brose is eaten like porridge but is much more filling . quick-cooking rolled oats ( distinct from '' instant '' variations ) are often used for this purpose nowadays , because they are quicker to prepare . gruel , made by mixing oatmeal with cold water that is strained and heated for the benefit of infants and people recovering from illness . as an ingredient in baking in the manufacture of bannocks or oatcakes as a stuffing for poultry as a coating for caboc as the main ingredient of the scotland dish skirlie , or its chip-shop counterpart , the deep-fried thickly-battered white pudding mixed with sheep 's blood , salt , and pepper to make highland black pudding ( marag dubh ) . mixed with fat , water , onions and seasoning , and boiled in a sheep 's intestine to make marag geal , outer hebridean white pudding , served sliced with fried eggs at breakfast . a sweeter version with dried fruit is also known . as a major component of haggis . in sowans , not strictly made from the meal but as a porridge-like dish made from the fermented inner husks of oats mcneill , f . marian ( 1929 ) . the scots kitchen . paperback : 259 pages , edinburgh : mercat press ; new edition ( 25 oct 2004 ) , p202 . staffordshire . staffordshire oatcakes are a local component of the full english breakfast . it is a plate-sized pancake , made with equal parts medium oatmeal and wheatmeal ( flour ) , along with frothing yeast . once the mixture has risen to produce something like a yorkshire pudding batter , it is ladled onto a griddle or bakestone , and dried through . staffordshire oatcakes are commonly paired with bacon , sausages , mushrooms , kidney , and baked beans , among others . a related oatcake is sometimes found in neighbouring derbyshire . nordic countries , the baltics and russia . throughout the nordic , baltic regions and russia , oatmeal porridge made from rolled oats and water or milk is a traditional breakfast staple . known under various local names meaning '' oat porridge '' , '' oat flake porridge '' or '' oatmeal porridge '' , it is normally made either savoury or sweet by adding salt or sugar , and it is often eaten with added nuts , raisins or dried fruits as well as spices , most commonly cinnamon . local names for the porridge include swedish havregrynsgröt , danish havregrød , norwegian havregrøt or havregraut , icelandic hafragrautur , finnish kaurapuuro , estonian kaerahelbepuder , latvian auzu pārslu ( putra ) , lithuanian avižinių dribsnių košė , polish owsianka and russian '' овсянка '' ( ovsyanka ) . oatmeal porridge has a long tradition in these regions , but during the middle ages porridge made from rye or barley was even more common in at least some parts of the area . ohlmarks , åke ( 1995 ) . fornnordiskt lexikon . tiden . p . 115 . see also . list of porridges finnish bread brenntar ( oat porridge ) oatmeal raisin cookie . references . external links .