Esslingen am Neckar

history . prehistoric times . there is archaeological evidence that what is now the city of esslingen was settled since the neolithic period . traces of human settlement found at the site of the city church date back to around 1000 b.c . roman times . in the 1st century ad the esslingen region became part of the roman empire . during this period a roman warehouse was located in the area of oberesslingen . the nearest major roman settlements and garrisons were at cannstatt and köngen . migration and merovingian period . there are so far no findings from the early alemanni period , which do exist on the filder ( uplands ) nearby . there are findings in rüdern which suggest a rich grave with eastern influence , including , for example , a set of three-winged spear heads . the ending '' -ingen '' indicates a group of people wherein a man named azzilo , hezzilo or hetsilo was landlord and family patriarch played an influential role . this means the city 's name originally meant : '' the peoples of azzilo '' . this name , for the first time documented in 856 as ezlinga and 866 as hetsilinga ended up becoming today 's esslingen . in the 6th century , the alemanni were subjugated by the merovingians under king clovis i . but they still took over administrative tasks and formed a duchy in francia . in the 8th century they tried to become sovereign again . but the attempt failed near cannstatt . the end of the alemannian duchy was marked with the council of cannstatt . in an excavation by günter fehring , the remains of the vitalis-cella under the church st . dionysius were uncovered . proof of settlement dates back to the late merovingian period . even older are the single row graves in oberesslingen and sirnau . middle ages . esslingen was first mentioned in 777 as ezelinga in the last will of saint fulrad from saint-denis ( near paris ) , the chaplain of pippin and charlemagne . he bequeathed the church sixth cell upon the river neckar to his monastery , saint-denis . he also brought the bones of saint vitalis to esslingen , which made it a destination for pilgrims and led to its growth . around 800 esslingen became a market town , its market rights being certified in 866 . in 949–953 it was a possession of liudolf , duke of swabia . esslingen received city rights in 1229 under emperor frederick ii . during the same period the still-extant neckar bridge was built , making esslingen a major center for trade on the route between italy , switzerland , and northern germany . taxes provided by the bridge and market led to further growth of the town , as did the export of the highly regarded wines from the region . the period between the 13th century and 16th century saw many conflicts between the free imperial city and the counts of württemberg ( later duchy of württemberg ) . about half the population lost their lives in the thirty years war between 1618 and 1648 through famine or epidemics . esslingen lost its independence as an imperial city during the napoleonic era in 1802–1803 , becoming part of the duchy of württemberg . 19th century to present . the beginning of the 19th century was characterized by industrialization . glove manufacturing , food processing , textiles , and metal working were early industries in esslingen . on 20 november 1845 the first train ran from cannstatt to esslingen station . esslingen was occupied by u.s . soldiers starting in april 1945 , at the very end of world war ii . during the war the city suffered very little damage , and it was peaceably surrendered to the approaching allied forces , thus the medieval character of its city center has been mostly preserved . after the second world war about 47,000 people moved to esslingen , mostly refugees and displaced persons from east germany . housing developments in oberesslingen and zollberg were created to overcome the shortage of housing . in 1973 nürtingen district was merged with esslingen am neckar , making esslingen the seat of a much enlarged district . transport . air transport stuttgart airport , the largest airport in baden-württemberg , is located in the esslingen district , roughly ten kilometers south of the town , on the border with the town of leinfelden-echterdingen . a plane owned by lufthansa has been named after the town . the junction on the bundesautobahn 8 karlsruhe-munich which serves esslingen is just after the airport when traveling towards munich . road transport esslingen is directly on the b10 state highway which runs as a dual carriageway from stuttgart to süßen , and continues onward to ulm . the exit for esslingen , just after the b10 passes under the ancient pliensau bridge , is particularly unusual , because in the direction of ulm there are two entry and exit points to the dual carriageway . this makes it is possible to reach the center of esslingen directly from stuttgart , and to drive from central esslingen directly onto the dual carriageway in the direction of ulm without having to pass traffic lights . despite the six to eight lanes on the new pliensau bridge and the surrounding roads , the infrastructure around pliensauvorstadt and the route to zollberg still suffers from frequent congestion . esslingen is also on the german timber-frame road . long distance rail transport . esslingen ( neckar ) station is on the fils valley railway and is served by line s 1 of the stuttgart s-bahn and regional services . the town is on the main rail line between stuttgart and ulm , operated by deutsche bahn , the main german rail operator . in 2009 , the company named a high speed 'intercity-express ' train '' esslingen-am-neckar '' s-bahn the stuttgart s-bahn line s1 which operates between kirchheim-unter-teck and herrenberg via stuttgart centre , serves the stations of mettingen , esslingen ( neckar ) , oberesslingen and esslingen ( zell ) . under the planned rebuilding of the railways in central stuttgart under the stuttgart 21 scheme , the s1 will be shortened to operate from kirchheim unter teck as far as stuttgart schwabstraße station . direct bus connection to stuttgart airport . to avoid the long s-bahn route to the airport via stuttgart , the bus 122 , operated by the end company , now runs directly from the central bus and rail interchange to the airport via ostfildern scharnhausen . urban tramway the esslingen urban tram system was opened in may 1912 and closed on 7 july 1944 after 32 years of operation . it was replaced by trolley buses . the operating company , the esslinger städtische straßenbahn ( ess , translated esslingen town tramway ) changed its name in 1944 to the städtischer verkehrsbetrieb esslingen ( sve , or '' esslingen transport company '' ) . former interurban tram on 18 december 1926 the esslingen-nellingen-denkendorf ( end ) interurban tram began operating . this was the last tram system to be built in germany before the wave of closures later in the century : after this date permission from the authorities was only given for extensions to existing systems . the tram had to negotiate a five kilometer gradient out of the neckar valley to reach the towns and villages of the eastern filder region . in total , the system transported 153 million passengers from denkendorf and later from neuhausen to esslingen , and took delivery of two new open trams in 1958 . the line was discontinued in february 1978 . trolley bus and diesel bus esslingen , along with solingen and eberswalde , is one of the last three german towns which still use trolleybuses . the sve currently operates two lines using electric power : 101 : oberesslingen lerchenacker endstation – esslingen railway station- - stuttgart obertürkheim railway station . 118 : esslingen railway station – zollberg . apart from this around 50 taxis operate in the town . car-sharing in 1994 a car-sharing company opened a station in esslingen . rebuilding of bus/rail interchange . an ambitious redevelopment project has been in progress since 2004 in the area near the railway station . the current phase of this project is a large redevelopment of the station forecourt costing about 7.4 million euros . the baden-württemberg state environment and transport ministry helped fund this with a grant of 4.9 million euros . during 2009 the neckarstraße was diverted along unused land on the railway station and lengthened to the west of the site . the next phase , completed in november 2014 , was a large-scale redevelopment of the station forecourt to create a bus and rail interchange . translated from wikipedia germany . hochschule esslingen . the city is home to the esslingen university of applied sciences . it is known for its mechanical engineering and automotive engineering courses , and also for its three international master 's programs ( mba in international industrial management , meng in automotive systems , meng in design and development in automotive and mechanical engineering ) , which are organised by the esslingen graduate school and taught completely in english . twin towns – sister cities . esslingen am neckar is twinned with : coimbatore , india eger , hungary maladzyechna , belarus neath port talbot , wales , united kingdom norrköping , sweden piotrków trybunalski , poland schiedam , netherlands sheboygan , united states udine , italy velenje , slovenia vienne , france . notable people . richard baum ( 1902–2000 ) , musicologist and music historian thommie bayer ( born 1953 ) , writer , musician and painter otto borst ( 1924–2001 ) , german historian karl deffner ( 1817–1877 ) , manufacturer , member of parliament cristian fiél ( born 1980 ) , spanish-german football player isabelle faust ( born 1972 ) , violinist volker hauff ( born 1940 ) , german politician , former member of bundestag , former lord mayor of frankfurt am main ( spd ) wolfgang fritz haug ( born 1936 ) , philosopher otto hauser ( born 1952 ) , german politician ( cdu ) , former member of bundestag and retired parliamentarian secretary of state walter hirrlinger ( born 1926 ) , german politician ( spd ) , member of landtag , minister of economy , 1990–2008 president of sozialverband vdk deutschland , 1953 to 1968 member of local council in esslingen wilhelm christian hochstetter ( 1825–1881 ) , botanist , university gardener and inspector of the botanical garden in tübingen ferdinand von hochstetter ( 1829–1884 ) , geographer , geologist and natural scientist johann eberhard ihle ( 1727–1814 ) , painter emil von kessler ( 1813–1867 ) , founder of the maschinenfabrik esslingen ( locomotive factory ) emil von keßler jun . ( 1841–1895 ) , german entrepreneur and politician , director of maschinenfabrik esslingen , son of emil von keßler georg christian von kessler ( 1787–1842 ) , founder of the still existing sparkling wine cellar kessler sekt hermann kurz ( 1813–1873 ) , poet , author and translator , father of isolde kurz alfred leikam ( 1915–1992 ) , notary , politician and mayor , righteous among the nations karl mayer ( 1819–1889 ) , politician , member of parliament and parliamentary deputy otto merz ( 1889–1933 ) , race car driver julius motteler ( 1838–1907 ) , leading member of the early german workers ' movement , reichstag deputy wilhelm murr ( 1888–1945 ) , german politician ( nsdap ) , gauleiter georg restle ( born 1965 ) , journalist paula rueß ( 1902–1980 ) , german resistance fighter ( french resistance ) and feminist thomas ruf ( 1911–1996 ) , german politician ( cdu ) , member of bundestag district esslingen max sailer ( 1882–1964 ) , car racing driver and engineer heinrich schickhardt ( 1558–1635 ) , builder louis schlegel ( 1858–1929 ) , german politician ( spd ) , member of reichstag and landtag ronja schmitt ( born 1989 ) , german politician ( cdu ) , member of bundestag jakob ferdinand schreiber ( 1809–1868 ) , founder of j.f.schreiber , a publisher known for its children books