Udon

origin . there are many stories explaining the origin of udon . one story says that in ad 1241 , enni , a rinzai monk , introduced flour milling technology from song china to japan . floured crops were then made into noodles such as udon , soba , and pancakes in japan which were eaten by locals . milling techniques were spread around the country . another story states that during the nara period , a japanese envoy was introduced to 14 kinds of confection while being in china during the tang dynasty . one of them was called , which was listed as in , a dictionary which was published in the heian era . the muginawa is believed to be an origin for many kinds of japanese noodles . however , the muginawa in shinsen jikyō was made with wheat and rice flour . another story for udon claims that the original name of the noodle was konton , which was made with wheat flour and sweet fillings . yet another story says that a buddhist priest called kukai introduced udon noodles to shikoku during the heian era . kūkai , the buddhist priest , traveled to tang china around the beginning of the 9th century to study . sanuki province claimed to have been the first to adopt udon noodles from kūkai . hakata claimed to have produced udon noodles based on enni 's recipe . dishes . udon noodles are boiled in a pot of hot water . depending on the type of udon , the way it is served is different as well . udon noodles are usually served chilled in the summer and hot in the winter . in the edo period , the thicker wheat noodle was generally called udon , and served with a hot broth called . the chilled variety was called . cold udon , or udon salad , is usually mixed with egg omelette slices , shredded chicken and fresh vegetables , such as cucumber and radish . toppings of udon soup are chosen to reflect the seasons . most toppings are added without much cooking , although there are also deep-fried tempura . many of these dishes may also be prepared with soba . hot . chikara udon ( '' power udon '' ) : topped with toasted mochi rice cakes . haikara udon ( '' modern udon '' ) : see tanuki udon . from : wiktionary : ハイカラ kake udon ( in kantō ) or su udon ( in kansai ) : hot udon in broth topped with thinly sliced scallion , and perhaps a slice of kamaboko . kamaage udon : served in a communal hot-pot with hot water , and accompanied by a hot dipping sauce of dashi sukiyaki . karē nanban or karē udon ( '' curry udon '' ) : modern udon served in a spicy japanese curry broth , which may also include meat or vegetables . the term nanban is a reference to the nanban trade which had influenced japanese culture for a century before being banned in 1639 by the edo shogunate . biei , hokkaido is famous for a unique curry udon . kitsune udon ( '' fox udon '' ) : topped with aburaage ( sweet , deep-fried tofu pouches ) . the dish is called '' fox '' because of its association with aburaage . originated in osaka . kitsune udon is often mistaken for tanuki udon . nabeyaki udon : a sort of udon hot-pot , with seafood and vegetables cooked in a nabe , or metal pot . the most common ingredients are tempura shrimp with mushrooms and an egg cracked on top . oyako udon : chicken and egg , with sliced onion in a sweetened dashi soup over udon . it has a sweet savory flavor . su udon : see kake udon sutamina udon ( '' stamina udon '' ) : udon with various hearty ingredients , usually including meat , a raw egg , and vegetables . tanuki udon ( in kantō ) or haikara udon ( in kansai ) : topped with tenkasu . tanuki udon is often mistaken for kitsune udon . tempura udon : topped with tempura , especially prawn , or kakiage , a type of mixed tempura fritter . tsukimi udon ( '' moon-viewing udon '' ) : topped with raw egg , which poaches in the hot soup . wakame udon : topped with wakame , a dark green seaweed . yaki udon : stir-fried udon in soy-based sauce , prepared in a similar manner to yakisoba . originated in kitakyushu , fukuoka prefecture . note that while yaki udon is made with udon , yakisoba is made with steamed chinese-style ramen , not buckwheat soba . cold . bukkake udon : cold udon served with thick dashi broth . hadaka udon ( 裸うどん , '' naked udon '' ) : cold udon served on its own . kijōyu udon : served in a cold soup of raw ( unpasteurized ) soy sauce and sudachi ( a type of citrus ) juice , sometimes with a bit of grated daikon . zaru udon : chilled udon noodles topped with shredded nori and served on a zaru ( 笊 or ざる ) , a sieve-like bamboo tray . accompanied by a chilled dipping sauce , usually a strong mixture of dashi , mirin , and shoyu . eaten with wasabi or grated ginger . regional varieties . japan . there are wide variations in both thickness and shape for udon noodles . : similar to the hohtoh , from ōita prefecture . nominally a '' dumpling soup '' , it resembles very thick , flat udon . : a slightly translucent , chewy type from kutchan , hokkaido . literally '' heavy snow udon '' , made from the starch of potatoes . the texture is different from normal udon which is made from flour . at the foot of mount yōtei , hokkaido , the biggest producing area of potatoes , '' potato starch udon '' was eaten as a home food for farmers from long ago . the ratio of potato starch and wheat flour was improved to make it delicious even after a long time . the origin of the name '' heavy snow udon '' is the foot of mount yōtei , a heavy snowfall area , and the appearance of the noodles which is slightly translucent like snow . : a thick and soft type from the fukuoka . : an extreme flat and wide type from kiryū , gunma . hōtō ( rarely , commonly : a type of miso soup with a flat and wide type udon and vegetables , particularly kabocha . one of the significant differences between usual udon and hōtō udon is salt . when hōtō udon is made , salt is not added to the noodle dough . from yamanashi prefecture . : a thin type from akita prefecture . : a soft type , usually eaten with sweet soy sauce , from ise , mie . in kansai region , a soft and medium thickness type is popular . kishimen , or more commonly : a flat type from nagoya . : a lucky preserved food in kuzu , tochigi . it looks similar to ears . miso-nikomi udon : a local dish of nagoya , a hard udon simmered in red miso soup . the soup generally contains chicken , a floating cracked raw egg that is stirred in by the eater , kamaboko , vegetables and tubers . the noodles are extremely firm in order to stand up to the prolonged simmering in the soup ; additionally , the noodles do not contain salt , so as to avoid over-salting from the salt in the miso . saitama prefecture has several varieties of udon . : produced in kazo , saitama , a place of active wheat production . its very orthodox hand-kneading process characterizes kazo udon noodles . : a type of hotoh from fukaya , saitama . boiled noodles using plenty of fukaya green onions characterize fuyaya niboto udon . : originated of kōnosu , saitama in 2009 . it is characterized by its width that is as wide as eight centimeters . : originated of niiza , saitama in 2002 . the noodles are kneaded with carrot and are characterized by their vivid orange color . : a thick and rather stiff type from kagawa prefecture . : a specialty of nagasaki prefecture . literally '' plate udon , '' consisting of thinner udon that are deep fried and served with any of a number of toppings . korea . in korea , authentic japanese udon dishes are served in numerous japanese restaurants , while the korean-style udon noodle soups are served in bunsikjip ( snack bars ) and pojangmacha ( street stalls ) . both types are called udong , which is the transliteration of the japanese word udon . in korea , the word udong refers to noodle dishes ( typically noodle soup ) , while the noodles themselves are called udong-myeon ; '' udong noodles '' ) and considered a type of garak-guksu ; '' thick noodles '' ) . common ingredients for udong noodle soup include crowndaisy greens and eomuk ( fish cakes ) , neither of which are very common in japanese udon dishes . palau . there is also a dish called udon in palau , because of the former japanese administration . the broth is soy sauce–based like japanese udon . however , as there were many immigrants from okinawa , it uses less broth like okinawa soba . most notably , the noodle is that of spaghetti , as it is easier to acquire there . tourism and udon . kagawa prefecture is well-known throughout japan for its sanuki udon ( 讃岐うどん ) . it is promoted to other regions of japan through means such as mascots , udon-related souvenirs , as well as movies featuring udon as the main theme . . gallery . see also . bánh canh , similar vietnam noodle made from tapioca bigoli , similar italian noodle from veneto bucatini , similar italian noodle from lazio cu mian , similar chinese noodle japanese noodles hiyamugi soba sōmen okinawa soba kal-guksu , similar korean noodle pici , similar italian noodle from tuscany . references . tsuji , shizuo . ( 1980 ) . japanese cooking : a simple art . kodansha international/usa , new york .