Saadia Gaon

biography . early life . saadia was born in dilâẓ , in the district of fayyum , upper egypt , in 892 ( variant 882 ) ce . he immigrated to palestine in 915 , at the age of 23 , where he studied in tiberias under the scholar abu kathir yaḥya al-katib , a jewish theologian ( mutakallim ) mentioned also by ibn hazm . in 926 , saadia settled permanently in babylonia , where he became a member of the academy of sura . saadia , in '' sefer ha-galui '' , stresses his jewish lineage , claiming to belong to the noble family of shelah , son of judah , and counting among his ancestors hanina ben dosa , the famous ascetic of the first century . expression was given to this claim by saadia in calling his son dosa ( this son , dosa ben saadia later served as gaon of sura from 1012–1018 ) . regarding joseph , saadia 's father , a statement of aaron ben meir has been preserved saying that he was compelled to leave egypt and died in jaffa , probably during saadia 's prolonged residence in the holy land . the usual epithet of '' al-fayyumi '' refers to saadia 's native place , the fayyum in upper egypt ; in hebrew it is often given as '' pitomi , '' derived from a contemporary identification of fayum with the biblical pithom ( an identification found in saadia 's own works ) . at a young age of 20 saadia began composing his first great work , the hebrew dictionary which he entitled agron . abraham firkovich , hebrew newspaper hamelitz - 1868 , issue 26–27 at 23 he composed a polemic against the followers of anan ben david , particularly solomon ben yeruham , thus beginning the activity which was to prove important in opposition to karaism , in defense of rabbinic judaism . in the same year he left egypt , and moved to the land of israel . later , one of saadia 's chief disputants was the karaite by the name of abu al-surri ben zuṭa , who is referred to by abraham ibn ezra , in his commentary on the pentateuch ( exo . 21:24 , and lev . 23:15 ibn ezra 's second edition ) . herzog college ben zuta , herzog college ( in hebrew ) in the year 928 , at the age of thirty-six ( variant : forty-six ) , david ben zakkai , the exilarch of babylonian jewry , petitioned saadia to assume the honorary title of gaon , where he was appointed that same year the gaon of the academy of sura at mata mehasya , a position which he held for 14 years , until his death . after only two years of teaching , r . saadia recused himself from teaching , because of a dispute that had fallen out between him and the exilarch . during saadia 's absence , his post was occupied by r . yosef , the son of r . yaakov , the son of r . natronai . at length , r . saadia was reconciled with the exilarch and returned to serve in his former position , although r . yosef b . yaakov also remained serving in his capacity as gaon . dispute with ben meir . in 922 , six years before saadia was appointed gaon of babylonia , a controversy arose concerning the hebrew calendar , that threatened the entire jewish community . since hillel ii ( around 359 ce ) , the calendar had been based on a series of rules ( described more fully in maimonides ' code laws of the sanctification of the moon , chs . 6-10 , written c . 1170 . ) rather than on observation of the moon 's phases . one of these rules required the date of rosh hashanah to be postponed if the calculated lunar conjunction occurred at noon or later . rabbi aaron ben meir , the gaon of the leading yeshiva in israel ( then located in ramle ) , claimed a tradition according to which the cutoff point was 642/1080 of an hour ( approximately 35 minutes ) after noon . various suggestions have been made as to where ben meir got this figure . a contemporary author , remy landau , suggests that he wanted to optimize the rule and thereby reduce the frequency of this postponement ( the meir-saadia calendar controversy ) . in that particular year , this change would result in a two-day schism with the major jewish communities in babylonia : according to ben meir the first day of passover would be on a sunday , while according to the generally accepted rule it would be on tuesday . saadia was in aleppo , on his way from the east , when he learned of ben meir 's regulation of the jewish calendar . saadia addressed a warning to him , and in babylon he placed his knowledge and pen at the disposal of the exilarch david ben zakkai and the scholars of the academy , adding his own letters to those sent by them to the communities of the diaspora ( 922 ) . in babylonia he wrote his '' sefer ha-mo'adim , '' or '' book of festivals , '' in which he refuted the assertions of ben meir regarding the calendar , and helped to avert from the jewish community the perils of schism . appointment as gaon . his dispute with ben meir was an important factor in the call to sura which he received in 928 . the exilarch david ben zakkai insisted on appointing him as gaon ( head of the academy ) , despite the weight of precedent ( no foreigner had ever served as gaon before ) , and against the advice of the aged nissim nahrwani , a resh kallah at sura , who feared a confrontation between the two strong-willed personalities , david and saadia . ( nissim declared , however , that if david was determined to see saadia in the position , then he would be ready to become the first of saadia 's followers . yuchasin , section 3 , account by nathan the babylonian . ) under his leadership , the ancient academy , founded by rav , entered upon a new period of brilliancy . letter of sherira gaon . this renaissance was cut short , though , by a clash between saadia and david , much as nissim had predicted . in a probate case saadia refused to sign a verdict of the exilarch which he thought unjust , although the gaon of pumbedita had subscribed to it . when the son of the exilarch threatened saadia with violence to secure his compliance , and was roughly handled by saadia 's servant , open war broke out between the exilarch and the gaon . each excommunicated the other , declaring that he deposed his opponent from office ; and david b . zakkai appointed joseph ben jacob as gaon of sura , while saadia conferred the exilarchate on david 's brother hassan ( josiah ; 930 ) . hassan was forced to flee , and died in exile in khorasan ; but the strife which divided babylonian judaism continued . saadia was attacked by the exilarch and by his chief adherent , the young but learned aaron ibn sargado ( later gaon of pumbedita , 943-960 ) , in hebrew pamphlets , fragments of which show a hatred on the part of the exilarch and his partisans that did not shrink from scandal . saadia did not fail to reply . influence . saadia 's influence upon the jews of yemen has been exceptionally great , as many of saadia 's extant works were preserved by the community and used extensively by them . the basis for the yemenite siddur ( tiklāl ) is founded upon the prayer format edited originally by saadia . the yemenite jewish community also adopted thirteen penitential verse written by saadia for yom kippur , as well as the hosh'anah liturgical poems composed by him for the seventh day of sukkot . saadia 's judeo-arabic translation of the pentateuch ( tafsir ) was copied by them in nearly all their handwritten codices , and they originally studied saadia 's major work of philosophy , beliefs and opinions , in its original judeo-arabic , although by the early 20th-century , only fragments had survived . . method of translation . as much as saadia 's judeo-arabic translation of the torah ( tafsīr ) has brought relief and succor to jews living in arabic-speaking countries , his identification of places , fauna and flora , and the stones of the breastplate , has found him at variance with some scholars . abraham ibn ezra , in his own commentary of the pentateuch , wrote scathing remarks on saadia 's commentary , abraham ibn ezra 's commentary of the pentateuch , on genesis 2:11–12 and on exodus 28:30 , as well as in his critique on rsg 's identification of the bird , ʿozniah ( the steppe eagle ) , in leviticus 11:13 . saying : '' he does n't have an oral tradition … perhaps he has a vision in a dream , while he has already erred with respect to certain places … ; therefore , we will not rely on his dreams . '' however , saadia assures his readers elsewhere that when he rendered translations for the twenty odd unclean fowl that are mentioned in the hebrew bible ( leviticus 11:13 & ndash ; 19 ; deuteronomy 14:12 & ndash ; 18 ) , his translation was based on an oral tradition received by him . zohar amar , flora of the bible , rubin mass ltd . : jerusalem , p . 58 ( hebrew ) ; yosef qafih , rabbi saadia gaon 's commentaries on the pentateuch , mossad harav kook : jerusalem 1984 , p . 125 ( note 7 ) ( hebrew ) in fact , saadia 's method of conveying names for the fowls based on what he had received by way of an oral tradition , prompted him to add in his defense : '' every detail about them , had one of them merely come unto us for identification , we would not have been able to identify it for certain , much less recognize their related kinds . '' zohar amar , flora of the bible , rubin mass ltd . : jerusalem , p . 59 ( hebrew ) ; yosef qafih , rabbi saadia gaon 's commentaries on the pentateuch , mossad harav kook : jerusalem 1984 , p . 125 ( note 7 ) ( hebrew ) the question often asked by scholars now is whether saadia applied this principle in his other translations . re'em ( heb . , as in deut . 33:17 , improperly translated as '' unicorn '' in some english translations , is a word that is now used in modern hebrew to represent the '' oryx , '' although saadia understood the same word to mean '' rhinoceros '' , and writes there the judeo-arabic word אלכרכדאן for the creature . he interprets the zamer ( heb . in deuteronomy 14:5 as meaning the giraffe . saadia 's approach to biblical exegesis and midrashic literature was ambivalent . although he adopted them in his liturgies , he did not recoil from denouncing them in his commentary on the bible whenever he thought that they broke-away from the plain and ordinary meaning of the text . ; saadia adopts in principle the method of the sages that even the episodic-like parts of the bible ( e.g . story of abraham and sarah , the selling of joseph , etc . ) that do not contain commandments have a moral lesson to tell . in some instances , saadia 's biblical translations reflect his own rationale of difficult hebrew words based on their lexical root , and he will , at times , reject the earlier aramaic targum for his own understanding . for example , in psalm 16:4 , saadia retracts from the aramaic ( translated ) : '' they will multiply their goddesses english translation '' goddesses '' follows the aramaic targum of psalm 16:4 , where the word צלמניהון is used for עצבות , the plural feminine form of עצבים ( images ; idols ) found in psalm 115:4 , psalm 135:15 , among other places . ; they have hastened after some other thing ; i shall not pour out their libations of blood , neither shall i take-up their names upon my lips , '' writing instead : '' they will multiply their revenues ( judeo-arabic : אכסאבהם ) ; they have hastened after some other thing ; i shall not choose their choice offerings by their measure ( judeo-arabic : מקדארהם ) , neither shall i take-up their names upon my lips . '' even where a certain explanation is given in the babylonian talmud , such as the hebrew words in exo . 30:34 ( explained in taanit 7a as meaning '' each spice pounded separately '' ) , saadia sometimes deviates from the rabbinic tradition in his judeo-arabic translation of the pentateuch , in this case explaining its sense as '' having them made of equal portions . '' . later years . he wrote both in hebrew and in arabic a work , now known only from a few fragments , entitled '' sefer ha-galui '' ( arabic title , '' kitab al-ṭarid '' ) , in which he emphasized with great but justifiable pride the services which he had rendered , especially in his opposition to heresy . the fourteen years which saadia spent in babylonia did not interrupt his literary activity . his principal philosophical work was completed in 933 ; and four years later , through ibn sargado 's father-in-law , bishr ben aaron , the two enemies were reconciled . saadia was reinstated in his office ; but he held it for only five more years . david b . zakkai died before him ( c . 940 ) , being followed a few months later by the exilarch 's son judah , while david 's young grandson was nobly protected by saadia as by a father . according to a statement made by abraham ibn daud and doubtless derived from saadia 's son dosa , saadia himself died in babylonia at sura in 942 , at the age of sixty , of '' black gall '' ( melancholia ) , repeated illnesses having undermined his health . mention in sefer hasidim . an anecdote is reported in sefer hasidim about saadia ben yosef '' the sage , '' in which he ends a dispute between a servant who claims to be the heir of his deceased master and the man 's true son and heir by having them both draw blood into separate vessels . he then took a bone from the deceased man and placed it into each of the cups . the bone in the cup of the true heir absorbed the blood , while the servant 's blood was not absorbed in the bone . using this as genetic proof of the son 's true inheritance , saadia had the servant return the man 's property to his son . . works . exegesis . saadia translated the torah and some of the other books of the hebrew bible into judeo-arabic , adding a judeo-arabic commentary . torah isaiah translated into hebrew by professor yehuda ratzaby ( machon moshe 2003 catalog list , . megillot hebrew translation along with original judeo-arabic by rabbi yosef qafih ( available online at but missing pages רמד-רמה pages ק-קא were scanned twice ) . tehillim ( judeo-arabic translation and commentary , which he called kitāb al-tasbiḥ '' the book of praise '' ) hebrew translation along with original judeo-arabic by rabbi yosef qafih ( first 40 pages viewable for free ) . iyyov ( book of job ) hebrew translation along with the original judeo-arabic by rabbi yosef qafih ( first 40 pages viewable for free ) . ( translated to english by dr . goodman ) , published in the yale judaica series as the book of theodicy ( 1988 ) . goodman writes that his edition '' would have been impossible without the careful arabic edition of saadiah 's translation and commentary that we owe to the indefatigable industry of ḳāfiḥ , whose notes and glosses are frequently acknowledged in my own '' ( p . xiv ) . and mishlei hebrew translation along with the original judeo-arabic by rabbi yosef qafih ( first 40 pages viewable for free ) . daniel hebrew translation along with the original judeo-arabic by rabbi yosef qafih ( first 40 pages viewable for free ) . saadia translated megillat antiochus into judeo-arabic and wrote an introduction . extant portion of introduction published with english translation by s . atlas and m . perlmann in proceedings of the american academy for jewish research , vol . 14 ( 1944 ) : saadia on the scroll of the hasmonaeans . hebrew translation thereof as well as saadya gaon 's judeo-arabic translation by rabbi yosef qafih , appended to kafih 's edition of daniel . . hebrew linguistics . agron kutub al-lughah , also known as kitāb faṣīḥ lughat al- ‘ ibrāniyyīn , “ the book of eloquent language of the hebrews ” aron dotan , or rišon beḥokhmat ha-lašon , jerusalem 1997 . '' tafsir al-sab'ina lafẓah , '' a list of seventy ( properly ninety ) hebrew ( and aramaic ) words which occur in the hebrew bible only once or very rarely , and which may be explained from traditional literature , especially from the neo-hebraisms of the mishnah . this small work has been frequently reprinted . halakhic writings . short monographs in which problems of jewish law are systematically presented . of these arabic treatises , little but the titles and extracts is known , and it is only in the '' kitab al-mawarith '' that fragments of any length have survived . a commentary on the thirteen rules of rabbi ishmael , preserved only in a hebrew translation by nahum ma'arabi . an arabic methodology of the talmud is also mentioned , by azulai , as a work of saadia under the title '' kelale ha-talmud '' . responsa . with few exceptions these exist only in hebrew , some of them having been probably written in that language . the siddur of saadia gaon ( kitāb jāmiʿ al-ṣalawāt wal-tasābīḥ ) , containing the texts of the prayers , commentary in arabic and original synagogal poetry . of this synagogal poetry the most noteworthy portions are the '' azharot '' on the 613 commandments , which give the author 's name as '' sa'id b . joseph '' , followed by the title '' alluf , '' thus showing that the poems were written before he became gaon . philosophy of religion . emunoth ve-deoth ( kitāb al-amānāt wa-al-iʿatiqādāt ) , the book of beliefs and opinions : this ( כתאב אלאמאנאת ואלאעתקאדאת judeo-arabic ) was the name of saadia 's first edition , later emended by saadia to אלמכ'תאר פי אלאמאנאת ואלאעתקאדאת ( hebrew : הנבחר באמונות ובדעות ) as described by kafih on pages 8-9 of his edition ( this work , first compiled in 933 ce , of which several revisions were made until its final redaction , is considered to be the first systematic attempt to synthesize the jewish tradition with philosophical teachings . prior to saadia , the only other jew to attempt any such fusion was philo . saadia 's objective here was to show the parallelism between the truths delivered to the people of israel by divine revelation , on the one side , and the necessary conclusions that can also be reached by way of rational observation , on the other . the effect of these ideas expressed in his philosophical books are clearly reflected in saadia 's story of creation , especially when he comes to deal with the theological problems , such as in the verse of deuteronomy 4:24 : “ for the lord your god is a devouring fire , ” which constitutes an example of a verse that can not be understood in its plain context , but should rather be understood in such a way as not to contradict one 's definite knowledge that god does not change , nor can anything corporeal be associated with him . ayelet cohen , linguistic comments in saadia 's biblical commentary ( abstract ) , haifa university 2017 tafsīr kitāb al-mabādī , saadia gaon 's version of the text itself along with his judeo-arabic commentary with facing hebrew translation by rabbi yosef qafih ( first 40 pages viewable for free ) . an arabic translation of and commentary on the sefer yetzirah , written while its author was still residing in egypt ( or israel ) , and intended to explain in a scientific manner how the universe came into existence . sefer yetzirah hashalem ( with rabbi saadia gaon 's commentary ) , yosef qafih ( editor ) , jerusalem 1972 , p . 46 ( hebrew / judeo-arabic ) on the linguistic aspect , saadia combines a debate on the letters and on their attributes ( e.g . phonemes ) , as well as a debate on related linguistic matters . polemical writings . refutations of karaite authors , always designated by the name '' kitab al-radd , '' or '' book of refutation . '' these three works are known only from scanty references to them in other works ; that the third was written after 933 is proved by one of the citations . '' kitab al-tamyiz '' ( in hebrew , '' sefer ha-hakkarah '' ) , or '' book of distinction , '' composed in 926 , and saadia 's most extensive polemical work . it was still cited in the twelfth century ; and a number of passages from it are given in a biblical commentary of japheth ha-levi . there was perhaps a special polemic of saadia against ben zuta , though the data regarding this controversy between is known only from the gaon 's gloss on the torah . a refutation directed against the rationalistic biblical critic hiwi al-balkhi , whose views were rejected by the karaites themselves ; '' kitab al-shara ' i ' , '' or '' book of the commandments of religion . '' '' kitab al-'ibbur , '' or '' book of the calendar , '' likewise apparently containing polemics against karaite jews ; '' sefer ha-mo'adim , '' or '' book of festivals , '' the hebrew polemic against ben meir which has been mentioned above . '' sefer ha-galui , '' also composed in hebrew and in the same flowery biblical style as the '' sefer ha-mo'adim , '' being an autobiographical and apologetic work directed against the exilarch ( rosh galuth ) , david b . zakkai , and his chief patron , aharon ibn sargado , in which he proved his own uprightness and equity in the matter of controversy between them . significance . saadia gaon was a pioneer in the fields in which he toiled . the foremost object of his work was the bible ; his importance is due primarily to his establishment of a new school of biblical exegesis characterized by a rational investigation of the contents of the bible and a scientific knowledge of the language of the holy text . saadia 's arabic translation of the torah is of importance for the history of civilization ; itself a product of the arabization of a large portion of judaism , it served for centuries as a potent factor in the impregnation of the jewish spirit with arabic culture , so that , in this respect , it may take its place beside the greek bible-translation of antiquity and the german translation of the pentateuch by moses mendelssohn . as a means of popular religious enlightenment , saadia 's translation presented the scriptures even to the unlearned in a rational form which aimed at the greatest possible degree of clarity and consistency . his system of hermeneutics was not limited to the exegesis of individual passages , but treated also each book of the bible as a whole , and showed the connection of its various portions with one another . the commentary contained , as is stated in the author 's own introduction to his translation of the pentateuch , not only an exact interpretation of the text , but also a refutation of the cavils which the heretics raised against it . further , it set forth the bases of the commandments of reason and the characterization of the commandments of revelation ; in the case of the former the author appealed to philosophical speculation ; of the latter , naturally , to tradition . the position assigned to saadia in the oldest list of hebrew grammarians , which is contained in the introduction to abraham ibn ezra 's '' moznayim , '' has not been challenged even by the latest historical investigations . here , too , he was the first ; his grammatical work , now lost , gave an inspiration to further studies , which attained their most brilliant and lasting results in spain , and he created in part the categories and rules along whose lines was developed the grammatical study of the hebrew language . his dictionary , primitive and merely practical as it was , became the foundation of hebrew lexicography ; and the name '' agron '' ( literally , '' collection '' ) , which he chose and doubtless created , was long used as a designation for hebrew lexicons , especially by the karaites . the very categories of rhetoric , as they were found among the arabs , were first applied by saadia to the style of the bible . he was likewise one of the founders of comparative philology , not only through his brief '' book of seventy words , '' already mentioned , but especially through his explanation of the hebrew vocabulary by the arabic , particularly in the case of the favorite translation of biblical words by arabic terms having the same sound . saadia 's works were the inspiration and basis for later jewish writers , such as berachyah in his encyclopedic philosophical work sefer hahibbur ( the book of compilation ) . saadia likewise identifies the definitive trait of '' fighting cock '' within proverbs 30:31 ( douay–rheims bible ) as '' the honesty of their behavior and their success '' , proverbs 10-31 , volume 18 - michael v . fox - yale university press 2009 - 704 pages rather than the aesthetic interpretations of so many others , thus identifying a spiritual purpose of a religious vessel within that religious and spiritual instilling schema of purpose and use . relations to mysticism . in his commentary on the '' sefer yetzirah '' , saadia sought to render lucid and intelligible the content of this esoteric work by the light of philosophy and scientific knowledge , especially by a system of hebrew phonology which he himself had founded . he did not permit himself in this commentary to be influenced by the theological speculations of the kalam , which are so important in his main works . in introducing '' sefer yetzirah '' 's theory of creation he makes a distinction between the biblical account of creation ex nihilo , in which no process of creation is described , and the process described in '' sefer yetzirah '' ( matter formed by speech ) . the cosmogony of '' sefer yetzirah '' is even omitted from the discussion of creation in his magnum opus '' kitab al-amanat wal-i'tiḳadat . '' concerning the supposed attribution of the book to the patriarch abraham , he allows that the ideas it contains might be ancient . nonetheless , he clearly considered the work worthy of deep study and echoes of '' sefer yetzirah '' 's cosmogony do appear in '' kitab al-amanat wal-i'tiḳadat '' when saadia discusses his theory of prophecy . see also . yosef qafih published works ( hebrew translations of a number of saadia gaon 's works ) jewish philosophy . notes . references . saadya gaon , the book of doctrines and beliefs , hackett , 2002 salo w . baron , '' saadia 's communal activities '' , saadia anniversary volume ( 1943 ) 9-74 . m . friedländer , '' life and works of saadia '' , the jewish quarterly review 5 ( 1893 ) 177-199 . gyongyi hegedeus , saadya gaon . the double path of the mystic and rationalist , brill , 2013 robert brody , sa'adiyah gaon , ( litman library of jewish civilization , 2013 ) . . henry malter , saadia gaon : his life and works ( morris loeb series , philadelphia : jewish publication society of america , 1921 , several later reprints ) . . external links . lecture on saadia gaon by dr . henry abramson saadia b . joseph ( sa'id al-fayyumi ) , jewishencyclopedia.com ; article resources > medieval jewish history > geonica the jewish history resource center - project of the dinur center for research in jewish history , the hebrew university of jerusalem stanford encyclopedia of philosophy entry torah- original commentary in arabic by rabbi saadia gaon , project saadia gaon tafsir rasag at sefaria