Boranes

history . the development of the chemistry of boranes presented a number of challenges . first , new laboratory techniques had to be developed to handle these often pyrophoric compounds . alfred stock created the glass vacuum line , now known as a schlenk line , for synthesis and handling . the very reactive nature of the lower boranes meant that crystal structure determination was impossible before william lipscomb developed the requisite techniques . lastly , once the structures were known it became clear that new theories of chemical bonding were needed to explain them . lipscomb was awarded the nobel prize in chemistry in 1976 for his achievements in this field . the correct structure of diborane was predicted by h . christopher longuet-higgins 5 years before its determination . polyhedral skeletal electron pair theory ( wade 's rules ) can be used to predict the structures of boranes . interest in boranes increased during world war ii due to the potential of uranium borohydride for enrichment of the uranium isotopes . in the us , a team led by schlesinger developed the basic chemistry of the boron hydrides and the related aluminium hydrides . although uranium borohydride was not utilized for isotopic separations , schlesinger 's work laid the foundation for a host of boron hydride reagents for organic synthesis , most of which were developed by his student herbert c . brown . borane-based reagents are now widely used in organic synthesis . brown was awarded the nobel prize in chemistry in 1979 for this work . brown , h . c . organic syntheses via boranes john wiley & sons , inc . new york : 1975 . . chemical formula and naming conventions . borane clusters are classified as follows , where n is the number of boron atoms in a single cluster : pp 151-195 the iupac nomenclature of chemistry for systematic naming is based on a prefix denoting a class of compound , followed by the number of boron atoms and finally the number of hydrogen atoms in parentheses . various details can be omitted if there is no ambiguity about the meaning , for example , if only one structural type is possible . some examples of the structures are shown below . image : borane-3d-balls.png borane bh 3 image : diborane-3d-balls-a.png diborane b 2 h 6 image : tetraborane-3d-balls.png tetraborane b 4 h 10 image : pentaborane ( 9 ) -from-xtal-view-1-mercury-3d-bs.png pentaborane ( 9 ) b 5 h 9 image : decaborane ( 14 ) -from-xtal-view-1-tilt-3d-bs-17.png decaborane b 10 h 14 image : dodecaborate ( 12 ) -dianion-from-xtal-3d-bs-17.png dodecaborate b 12 h 12 2− image : b18h22 from xray coordinates.tif b 18 h 22 image : iso-b18h22 from xray coordinates.tif iso-b 18 h 22 the naming of anions is illustrated by : octahydridopentaborate , b 5 h 8 & minus ; the hydrogen count is specified first followed by the boron count . the -ate suffix is applied with anions . the ionic charge value is included in the chemical formula but not as part of the systematic name . bonding in boranes . boranes are nonclassically–bonded compounds , that is , there are not enough electrons to form 2-centre , 2-electron bonds between all pairs of adjacent atoms in the molecule . a description of the bonding in the larger boranes was formulated by william lipscomb . it involved : 3-center 2-electron b-h-b hydrogen bridges 3-center 2-electron b-b-b bonds 2-center 2-electron bonds ( in b-b , b-h and bh 2 ) lipscomb 's methodology has largely been superseded by a molecular orbital approach . this allows the concept of multi-centre bonding to be extended . for example , in the icosahedral ion b 12 h 12 2- , the totally symmetric ( a g symmetry ) molecular orbital is equally distributed among all 12 boron atoms . wade 's rules provide a powerful method that can be used to rationalize the structures in terms of the number of atoms and the connectivity between them . there are continuing efforts by theoretical chemists to improve the treatment of the bonding in boranes—an example is stone 's tensor surface harmonic treatment of cluster bonding . a recent development is four-center two-electron bond . reactivity of boranes . the lowest borane , bh 3 , is a very strong lewis acid . the molecule itself exists only transiently , dimerizing instantly to form diborane , b 2 h 6 , but its adducts bh 3 ·thf and bh 3 ·dmso are stable enough to be used in hydroboration reactions . other boranes are electrophilic and react vigorously with reagents that can supply electron pairs . with an alkali metal hydride , for example , : b 2 h 6 + 2 h − → 2 bh 4 − further demonstrating that they are not in general '' electron-deficient '' ( see above ) , boranes can also function as electron donors owing to the relative basic character of the low-polarity b-h terminal groups , as in reactions with halogens to form haloboranes . the reaction of some lower boranes with air is strongly exothermic ; those of b 2 h 6 and b 5 h 9 , for example , occur explosively except in very low concentration . this does not result from any inherent instability in the boranes . rather , it is a consequence of the fact that a combustion product , boron trioxide , is a solid . for example : b 2 h 6 ( g ) + 3 o 2 ( g ) → b 2 o 3 ( s ) + 3 h 2 o ( g ) the formation of the solid releases additional energy to what is released by the oxidation reaction . by contrast , many closo-borane anions , such as b 12 h 12 2− , do not react with air ; salts of these anions are metastable because the closo- structure creates a very high activation energy barrier to oxidation . the higher boranes can be deprotonated when treated with a very strong base . for example , : b 5 h 9 + nah → na ( b 5 h 8 ) + h 2 they can also act as weak acids . for example , pentaborane ( 9 ) reacts with trimethylphosphine : b 5 h 9 + 2 pme 3 → b 5 h 9 ( pme 3 ) 2 producing what can be regarded as a derivative of the unknown hypho-borane b 5 h 13 . acidity increases with the size of the borane . p . 171 b 10 h 14 has a pk value of 2.7 temperature not stated . : b 5 h 9 6 h 10 10 h 14 16 h 20 18 h 22 reaction of a borane with the transient bh 3 , produced by dissociation of b 2 h 6 , can lead to the formation of a conjuncto-borane species in which two small borane sub-units are joined by the sharing of boron atoms . p . 162 : b 6 h 10 + ( bh 3 ) → b 7 h 11 + h 2 : b 7 h 11 + b 6 h 10 → b 13 h 19 + h 2 other conjuncto-boranes , where the sub-units are joined by a b-b bond , can be made by ultra violet irradiation of nido-boranes . some b-b coupled conjuncto-boranes can be produced using ptbr 2 as catalyst . reaction of a borane with an alkyne can produce a carborane ; the icosahedral closo-carboranes c 2 b 10 h 12 , are particularly stable . boranes can function as ligands in coordination compounds . p . 177 , '' the concept of boranes as ligands '' , hapticity of η 1 to η 6 have been found , with electron donation involving bridging h atoms or donation from b-b bonds . for example , nido-b 6 h 10 can replace ethene in zeise 's salt to produce fe ( η 2 -b 6 h 10 ) ( co ) 4 . applications . the main chemical application of boranes is the hydroboration reaction . commercially available adducts such as borane–tetrahydrofuran or borane–dimethylsulfide are often used in this context as they have comparable effectiveness but without the hazard of handling highly reactive bh 3 itself . neutron capture therapy of cancer is a promising development . the compound used is the hs – ( bisulfide ) derivative na 2 b 12 h 11 ( sh ) . it makes use of the fact that 10 b has a very high neutron-capture cross section , so neutron irradiation is highly selective for the region where the compound resides . : 10 b + 1 n → ( 11 b ) → 4 he + 7 li + γ ( 2.4 mev ) boranes have a high specific energy of combustion compared to hydrocarbons , making them potentially attractive as fuels . intense research was carried out in the 1950s into their use as zip fuel , but the effort did not lead to practicable results .