Binding of Isaac

biblical narrative . according to the hebrew bible , god commands abraham to offer his son isaac as a sacrifice . after isaac is bound to an altar , a angel of the lord stops abraham before the sacrifice finishes , saying '' now i know you fear god . '' abraham looks up and sees a ram and sacrifices it instead of isaac . the passage states that the event occurred at '' the mount of the '' in '' the land of moriah . '' 2 chronicles refers to '' mount moriah '' as the site of solomon 's temple , while psalms ; isaiah & ; and zechariah use the term '' the mount of the lord '' to refer to the site of solomon 's temple in jerusalem , the location believed to be the temple mount in jerusalem . jewish views . in the binding of isaac , religious murders & kabbalah , lippman bodoff argues that abraham never intended to actually sacrifice his son , and that he had faith that god had no intention that he do so . rabbi ari kahn ( on the orthodox union website ) elaborates this view as follows : isaac 's death was never a possibility — not as far as abraham was concerned , and not as far as god was concerned . god 's commandment to abraham was very specific , and abraham understood it very precisely : isaac was to be '' raised up as an offering '' , and god would use the opportunity to teach humankind , once and for all , that human sacrifice , child sacrifice , is not acceptable . this is precisely how the sages of the talmud ( taanit 4a ) understood the akedah . citing the prophet jeremiah 's exhortation against child sacrifice ( chapter 19 ) , they state unequivocally that such behavior '' never crossed god ’ s mind '' , referring specifically to the sacrificial slaughter of isaac . though readers of this parashah throughout the generations have been disturbed , even horrified , by the akedah , there was no miscommunication between god and abraham . the thought of actually killing isaac never crossed their minds . rabbi ari kahn . '' it never crossed my mind '' . the jewish publication society suggests abraham 's apparent complicity with the sacrifice was actually his way of testing god . abraham had previously argued with god to save lives in sodom and gomorrah . by silently complying with god 's instructions to kill isaac , abraham was putting pressure on god to act in a moral way to preserve life . more evidence that abraham thought that he would not actually sacrifice isaac comes from genesis 22:5 , where abraham said to his servants , '' you stay here with the ass . the boy and i will go up there ; we will worship and we will return to you . '' by saying we ( as opposed to i ) , he meant that both he and isaac would return . thus , he did not believe that isaac would be sacrificed in the end . hebrew-english tanakh . , page 39 , the jewish publication society , 1999 in the guide for the perplexed , maimonides argues that the story of the binding of isaac contains two '' great notions '' . first , abraham 's willingness to sacrifice isaac demonstrates the limit of humanity 's capability to both love and fear god . second , because abraham acted on a prophetic vision of what god had asked him to do , the story exemplifies how prophetic revelation has the same truth value as philosophical argument and thus carries equal certainty , notwithstanding the fact that it comes in a dream or vision . maimonides . the guide of the perplexed , vol . 2 , book iii , ch . 24 . english translation by shlomo pines . chicago : university of chicago press , 1963 . in glory and agony : isaac 's sacrifice and national narrative , yael s . feldman argues that the story of isaac 's binding , in both its biblical and post-biblical versions ( the new testament included ) has had a great impact on the ethos of altruism heroism and self-sacrifice in modern hebrew national culture . as her study demonstrates , over the last century the '' binding of isaac '' has morphed into the '' sacrifice of isaac '' , connoting both the glory and agony of heroic death on the battlefield . in legends of the jews , rabbi louis ginzberg argues that the binding of isaac is a way for god to test isaac 's claim to ishmael , and to silence satan 's protest about abraham who had not brought up any offering to god after isaac was born , also to show a proof to the world that abraham is the true god-fearing man who is ready to fulfill any of god 's commands , even to sacrifice his own son : the book of genesis does not tell the age of isaac at the time . some talmudic sages teach that isaac was an adult aged thirty seven , likely based on the next biblical story , which is of sarah 's death at 127 years , being 90 when isaac was born . jon d . levenson , lecture oct 13 , 2016 : '' genesis 22 : the binding of isaac and the crucifixion of jesus , starting at about 1:05:10 isaac 's reaction to the binding is unstated in the biblical narrative . some commentators have argued that he was traumatized and angry , often citing the fact that he and abraham are never seen to speak to each other again ; however , jon d . levenson notes that they never speak before the binding , either . . christian views . the binding of isaac is mentioned in the new testament epistle to the hebrews among many acts of faith recorded in the old testament : '' by faith abraham , when he was tested , offered up isaac , and he who had received the promises offered up his only begotten son , of whom it was said , 'in isaac your seed shall be called , ' concluding that god was able to raise him up , even from the dead , from which he also received him in a figurative sense . '' ( hebrews 11:17–19 , nkjv ) abraham 's faith in god is such that he felt god would be able to resurrect the slain isaac , in order that his prophecy ( genesis 21:12 ) might be fulfilled . early christian preaching sometimes accepted jewish interpretations of the binding of isaac without elaborating . for example , hippolytus of rome says in his commentary on the song of songs , '' the blessed isaac became desirous of the anointing and he wished to sacrifice himself for the sake of the world '' ( on the song 2:15 ) . see yancy smith , '' hippolytus ' commentary on the song of songs in social and critical context '' ( unpublished phd dissertation ; brite divinity school , 2008 ) , 312 . other christians from the period saw isaac as a type of the '' word of god '' who prefigured christ . origen , homilies on genesis 11–13 this interpretation can be supported by symbolism and context such as abraham sacrificing his son on the third day of the journey ( genesis 22:4 ) , or abraham taking the wood and putting it on his son isaac 's shoulder ( genesis 22:6 ) . another thing to note is how god reemphasizes isaac being abraham 's one and only son whom he loves ( genesis 22:2,12,16 ) . as further support that the binding of isaac foretells the gospel of jesus christ , when the two went up there , isaac asked abraham '' where is the lamb for the burnt offering '' to which abraham responded '' god himself will provide the lamb for the burnt offering , my son . '' ( genesis 22:7-8 ) . however , it was a ram ( not a lamb ) that was ultimately sacrificed in isaac 's place , and the ram was caught in a thicket ( i.e . thornbush ) . ( genesis 22:13 ) . in the new testament , john the baptist saw jesus coming toward him and said '' look , the lamb of god , who takes away the sins of the world ! '' ( john 1:29 ) . thus , the binding is compared to the crucifixion and the last-minute stay of sacrifice is a type of the resurrection . muslim views . the version in the quran differs from that in genesis in two aspects : the identity of the sacrificed son and the son 's reaction towards the requested sacrifice . in islamic sources , when abraham tells his son about the vision , his son agreed to be sacrificed for the fulfillment of god 's command , and no binding to the altar occurred . the quran states that when abraham asked for a righteous son , god granted him a son possessing forbearance . when the son was able to walk and work with him , abraham saw a vision about sacrificing his son , ishmael . when he told his son about it , his son agreed to fulfill the command of god in the vision . when they both had submitted their will to god and were ready for the sacrifice , god told abraham he had fulfilled the vision , and provided him with a ram to sacrifice instead . god promised to reward abraham . quran 37:100 the next two verses state god also granted abraham the righteous son isaac and promised more rewards . quran 37:112-113 among early muslim scholars , there was a dispute over the identity of the son . one side of the argument believed it was isaac rather than ishmael ( notably ibn qutaybah and al-tabari ) interpreting the verse '' god 's perfecting his mercy on abraham and isaac '' as referring to his making abraham his closest one , and to his rescuing isaac . the other side , by far a vast majority , held that the promise to sarah was of a son , isaac , and a grandson , jacob ( quran 11:71-74 ) excluded the possibility of a premature death of isaac . regardless , most muslims believe that it is actually ishmael rather than isaac despite the dispute . encyclopaedia of islam , ishaq . the submission of abraham and his son is celebrated and commemorated by muslims on the days of eid al-adha . during the festival , those who can afford and the ones in the pilgrimage sacrifice a ram , cow , sheep or a camel . part of the sacrifice meat is eaten by the household and remaining is distributed to the neighbors and the needy . the festival marks the end of the hajj pilgrimage to mecca . in islam , the site of marwa near the kaaba which rhymes with the moriah mentioned in the book of genesis . modern research . the binding also figures prominently in the writings of several of the more important modern theology , such as søren kierkegaard in fear and trembling and shalom spiegel in the last trial . jewish communities regularly review this literature , for instance the recent mock trial held by more than 600 & nbsp ; members of the university synagogue of orange county , california . derrida also looks at the story of the sacrifice as well as kierkegaard 's reading in the gift of death . in mimesis : the representation of reality in western literature , the literary critic erich auerbach considers the hebrew narrative of the binding of isaac , along with homer 's description of odysseus 's scar , as the two paradigmatic models for the representation of reality in literature . auerbach contrasts homer 's attention to detail and foregrounding of the spatial , historical , as well as personal contexts for events to the bible 's sparse account , in which virtually all context is kept in the background or left outside of the narrative . as auerbach observes , this narrative strategy virtually compels readers to add their own interpretations to the text . redactors and narrative purpose . historical criticism operating under the framework of the documentary hypothesis have ascribed the binding 's narrative to the biblical source e , on the grounds that it generally uses the specific term elohim and parallels characteristic e compositions . on that view , the second angelic appearance to abraham ( v . & nbsp ; 14–18 ) , praising his obedience and blessing his offspring , is in fact a later jahwist interpolation to e 's original account ( v . & nbsp ; 1 & ndash ; 13 , 19 ) . this is supported by the style and composition of these verses , as well as by the use of the name yahweh for the deity . g . j . wenham . ( 1994 ) . genesis & nbsp ; 16-50 . dallas , tx : word biblical commentary . more recent studies question the analysis of e and j as strictly separate . coats argues that abraham 's obedience to god 's command in fact necessitates praise and blessing , which he only receives in the second angelic speech . coats , g.w . ( 1973 ) . abraham 's sacrifice of faith : a form critical study of genesis & nbsp ; 22 . interpretation , 27 , pp . & nbsp ; 389–400 . that speech , therefore , could not have been simply inserted into e 's original account . this has suggested to many that the author responsible for the interpolation of the second angelic appearance has left his mark also on the original account ( v . & nbsp ; 1 & ndash ; 13 , 19 ) . more recently it has been suggested that these traces are in fact the first angelic appearance ( v . & nbsp ; 11–12 ) , in which the angel of yhwh stops abraham before he kills isaac . boehm , o . ( 2002 ) . the binding of isaac : an inner biblical polemic on the question of disobeying a manifestly illegal order . vetus testamentum , 52 & nbsp ; ( 1 ) pp . & nbsp ; 1–12 . the style and composition of these verses resemble that of the second angelic speech , and yhwh is used for the deity rather than god . on that reading , in the original e version of the binding abraham disobeys god 's command , sacrificing the ram '' instead of his son '' ( v . & nbsp ; 13 ) on his own responsibility and without being stopped by an angel : '' and abraham stretched forth his hand , and took the knife to slay his son ; but abraham lifted up his eyes and looked and beheld , behind him was a ram , caught in a thicket by his horns ; and abraham went , and took the ram , and offered it up as a burnt offering instead of his son '' ( v . & nbsp ; 10 , 13 ) . by interpolating the first appearance of the angel , a later redactor shifted responsibility for halting the test from abraham to the angel ( v . & nbsp ; 11–12 ) . the second angelic appearance , in which abraham is rewarded for his obedience ( v . & nbsp ; 14–18 ) , became necessary due to that shift of responsibility . this analysis of the story sheds light on the connection between the binding and the story of sodom , in which abraham protests against god 's unethical plan to destroy the city , without distinguishing between the righteous and the wicked : '' far be it from you to do such a thing : shall not the judge of all the earth do what is just ? '' abraham 's ethical rebellion against god in the destruction of sodom culminates in his disobedience to god , refusing to sacrifice isaac . o . boehm , o . ( 2007 ) . the binding of isaac : a religious model of disobedience , new york , ny : t & t clark . . possible child sacrifice . francesca stavrakopoulou has speculated that it is possible that the story '' contains traces of a tradition in which abraham does sacrifice isaac '' . it may be that the biblical story contains traces of a tradition in which abraham does sacrifice isaac , for in genesis & nbsp ; 22:19 abraham appears to return from the mountain without isaac . stavrakopoulou , f . ( 2004 ) . king manasseh and child sacrifice : biblical distortions of historical realities , pp . & nbsp ; 193 & ndash ; 194 . r.e . friedman argued that in the original e story , abraham may have carried out the sacrifice of isaac , but that later repugnance at the idea of a human sacrifice led the redactor of je to add the lines in which a ram is substituted for isaac . friedman , r.e . ( 2003 ) . the bible with sources revealed , p . & nbsp ; 65 . likewise , terence fretheim wrote that the text bears no specific mark of being a polemic against child sacrifice . terence e fretheim in the child in the bible edited by marcia bunge , terence e . fretheim , beverly roberts gaventa , pg . & nbsp ; 20 some scholars also point at the genealogical snippet ( verses & nbsp ; 20 & ndash ; 24 ) as containing a hint to the question whether abraham sacrificed isaac or not . first of all , the description of a rash of newborns placed right after the main story suggests the existence of some direct cause-effect connection between the two . from the perspective of a sacrificial economy , such a numerous progeny could not have been conceived without the preceding payment in an appropriate ‘ currency ’ . secondly , the said passage is problematic due to its onomastic content . the verses & nbsp ; 20 & ndash ; 23 list the progeny of nahor and milkah while v . & nbsp ; 24 adds the offspring conceived with re ’ umah , said to be his concubine . however , whereas verses & nbsp ; 20 & ndash ; 23 have some significant links with other parts of the hebrew bible as well as with the historical and cultural entourage of the ancient near east , such connections are absent in v . & nbsp ; 24 . the very name of nahor 's concubine appears here exclusively and in no other place in the hebrew bible is re ’ umah mentioned . the same applies to her children 's names with the exception of ma ‘ akah which is sometimes utilized in the historical books . the extreme rarity of these appellations demands some alternative interpretation with regards to its purpose . contradictory , the hebrew name list of the children born after the sacrifice , may contain some '' coded '' explanation refuting any possible child sacrifice : re ’ umah ( ראומה ) – '' see what '' tevah ( טבח ) – '' slaughtering of animal '' or '' slaughtered animal '' gaham ( גחם ) – '' flame '' or '' burning '' tahash ( תחש ) – '' animal skin '' ma ‘ akah ( מעכה ) – '' blown '' or '' crushed '' in other words , v . & nbsp ; 24 begins with an interpretational invitation and continues with the names which seem to explain the cause of the rash of newborns present at the conclusion of the pericope : an animal had been blown , slaughtered , put on the tabernacle , and burned . . rite of passage . it has been suggested that genesis 22 contains an intrusion of the liturgy of a rite of passage , including mock sacrifice , as commonly found in early and preliterate societies , marking the passage from youth to adulthood . t . mcelwain ( 2005 ) the beloved and i : new jubilees version of sacred scripture with verse commentaries pages 57–58 . . music . marc-antoine charpentier , sacrificium abrahae , h.402 , oratorio for soloists , chorus , doubling instruments , and continuo ( 1680–81 ) gilad hochman , akeda for solo viola ( 2006 )