Bhajan

etymology . the sanskrit word bhajan or bhajana is derived from the root , which means '' divide , share , partake , participate , to belong to '' . the word also connotes '' attachment , devotion to , fondness for , homage , faith or love , worship , piety to something as a spiritual , religious principle or means of salvation '' . . hinduism . historical roots . in hinduism , bhajan and its bhakti analog kirtan , have roots in the ancient metric and musical traditions of the vedic era , particularly the samaveda . the samaveda samhita is not meant to be read as a text , it is like a musical score sheet that must be heard . frits staal ( 2009 ) , discovering the vedas : origins , mantras , rituals , insights , penguin , , pages 107-112 other late vedic texts mention the two scholars shilalin ( iast : śilālin ) and krishashva ( kṛśaśva ) , credited to be pioneers in the studies of ancient drama , singing and dance . the art schools of shilalin and krishashva may have been associated with the performance of vedic rituals , which involved story telling with embedded ethical values . the vedic traditions integrated rituals with performance arts , such as a dramatic play , where not only praises to gods were recited or sung , but the dialogues were part of a dramatic representation and discussion of spiritual themes . ml varadpande ( 1990 ) , history of indian theatre , volume 1 , abhinav , , pages 45–47 the vedas and upanishads celebrate nada-brahman , where certain sounds are considered elemental , triggering emotional feelings without necessarily having a literal meaning , and this is deemed sacred , liminal experience of the primeval ultimate reality and supreme truth . this supreme truth is , states guy beck , considered as full of bliss and rasa ( emotional taste ) in the hindu thought , and melodic sound considered a part of human spiritual experience . devotional music genre such as bhajan are part of a tradition that emerged from these roots . . hindu bhajans . a bhajan in hindu traditions is an informal , loosely structured devotional song with music in a regional language . they are found all over india and nepal , but are particularly popular among the vaishnavism sub-traditions such as those driven by devotion to avatars of vishnu such as krishna , rama , vitthal and narayana ( often with their consorts ) . in southern india , bhajanais follow a tradition ( sampradaya ) called the dakshina bharatha sampradaya bhajanai . this involves a tradition that has been followed for the last several centuries and includes songs/krithis/lyrics from great composers all over india encompassing many indian languages . a bhajan may be sung individually , or more commonly together as a choral event wherein the lyrics include religious or spiritual themes in the local language . the themes are loving devotion to a deity , legends from the epics or the puranas , compositions of bhakti movement saints , or spiritual themes from hindu scriptures . the bhajans in many hindu traditions are a form of congregational singing and bonding , that gives the individual an opportunity to share in the music-driven spiritual and liturgical experience as well as the community a shared sense of identity , wherein people share food , meet and reconnect . the bhajans have played a significant role in community organization in 19th and 20th century colonial era , when indian workers were brought to distant lands such as trinidad , fiji and south africa as cheap labor on plantations . some bhajan songs are centuries old , popular on a pan-regional basis , passed down as a community tradition , while others newly composed . everyone in hindu tradition is free to compose a bhajan with whatever ideas or in praise of any deity of their wish , but since they are sung , they typically follow meters of classical indian music , the raga and the tala to go with the musical instruments . they are sung in open air , inside temples such as those of swaminarayan movement , in vaishnava monasteries , during festivals or special events , and at pilgrimage centers . . bhajan versus kirtan in the hindu traditions . a bhajan is closely related to kirtan , with both sharing common aims , subjects , musical themes and being devotional performance arts . a bhajan is more free in form , and can be singular melody that is performed by a single singer with or without one and more musical instruments . kirtan , in contrast , differs in being a more structured team performance , typically with a call and response musical structure , similar to an intimate conversation or gentle sharing of ideas , and it includes two or more musical instruments , with roots in the prosody principles of the vedic era . many kirtan are structured for more audience participation , where the singer calls a spiritual chant , a hymn , a mantra or a theme , the audience then responds back by repeating the chant or by chanting back a reply of their shared beliefs . sara brown ( 2012 ) , every word is a song , every step is a dance , phd thesis , florida state university ( advisor : michael bakan ) , pages 25-26 , 87-88 , 277 a bhajan , in contrast , is either experienced in silence or a '' sing along '' . . jainism . stavan is a form of popular and historically pervasive genre of devotional music in jainism . the subject of a stavan varies , ranging from praise of jina , jain religious ideas and its philosophy , in a manner similar to bhakti bhajans . jainism rejects any creator god , but accepts protector deities and rebirth of souls as heavenly beings , and its devotional singing traditions integrate these beliefs . stavan may include dancing and worship rituals . known as bhajan in north and west indian regional languages , a stavan is typically sung as folk melodies by groups of jain women , and are formal part of ceremonies and celebrations within jainism . nowadays many old and new jain stavans are being sung and recorded by jain singers . sikhism . the sikh tradition places major emphasis on devotional worship to one formless god , and bhajans are a part of this worship . a more common form of community singing is called shabad kirtan in sikhism . a shabad kirtan is performed by professional religious musicians , wherein bani ( word , hymns ) from the sikh scripture are sung to a certain raga and tala . . modern composers and singers of bhajans . a modern bhajan has no fixed form : it may be as simple as a mantra or kirtan or as sophisticated as the dhrupad , thumri or kriti with music based on classical ragas and talas . david courtney : v . d . paluskar and v . n . bhatkhande have combined indian classical music with bhajan . pandit kumar gandharva made famous the nirguni bhajans of sant kabir and malwa region . the dancer mallika sarabhai has produced performances based on bhajans . abhinaya chakravathi sri js eswara prasad rao of hyderabad , who is the disciple of al krishnamurthy bhagavathar , pudukkottai system , has produced performances based on sampradaya bhajans under the title '' nitrya sankeerthnam '' . bhajans of vaishnavism , shaivism , shaktism traditions , vedic mantras and yoga chants have been composed , published in western musical sheet format or recorded by western singers such as krishna das , deva premal , miten , and by various west indies singers influenced by east indian heritage . the stavan compositions and literature of the jainism tradition are extensive , with a historic overview provided by sri sudhara stavan sangrah , traditionally preserved in '' puja box '' by jain families . it is vectored text with jain lyrics and is canonically inspired . kripalu maharaj is one of the modern era bhakti leaders and bhajan-kirtan composers . hutton , f . 2008 . rose lore : essays in cultural history and semiotics . lexington books . he has composed eleven thousand one hundred and eleven doha ( couplets ) on the leela of radha krishn and the bhakti philosophy called radha govind geet ; 1008 pad ( songs ) called prem ras madira ; hundreds of kirtan in the form of yugal shatak and yugal ras and twelve pad which fully describe the beauty and the decorations of krishn , and thirteen pad which describe the beauty and the decorations of radha rani called shree krishn dwadashi and shree radha trayodashi . saraswati , s . 2001 . the true history and the relfigion of india : a concise encyclopedia of authentic hinduism . motilal banarsidass renditions of shree maharajji 's bhajans and kirtans have been recorded by well-known singers in india such as manna dey , kinnear , m . 1985 . a discography of hindustani and karnatic music . greenwood press . ajnish , anuradha paudwal and anup jalota . rang de with anup jalota at radha madhav dham , austin . 20 oct 2011 . indo-american news . retrieved 15 december 2011 . sampradaya bhajanai , birmingham , uk . 14 jul 2017 . how to perform dakshina bharatha sampradaya bhajanai with english lyrics . in olden days , saints such as mirabai , soordas , marsinh mehta composed several bhajans that are universally sung even today . a modern age saint , shri devendra ghia ( kaka ) has composed about 10,000 hymns ( a phenomenal task . ) these hymns are related to bhakti , knowledge , devotion , faith , introspection and honesty . . see also . filmi devotional songs gurunath salabega stotras kirtan raga . references . bibliography . . external links . radha krishna bhajan mp3 free download 320kbps