Cannock Chase

geology . with the exception of the southeastern area , the chase is almost wholly underlain by sandstones and conglomerates of the chester formation dating from the triassic period . formerly known as the cannock chase formation , these form a part of the sherwood sandstone group . overlying these rocks in the rugeley area are the , often pebbly , sandstones of the helsby sandstone formation , formerly referred to in this area as the bromsgrove sandstone . older literature will often refer to the bunter sandstone , a name which geologists no longer apply to the new red sandstone of britain . southeast of rugeley road the bedrock is provided by the mudstones , siltstones and sandstones of the pennine middle coal measures formation , a succession dating from the end of the carboniferous period , and which is separated from the overlying new red sandstone rocks by an unconformity . the hednesford hills are formed by the chester formation sandstones . a ‘ humped profile ’ dry valley running west-east , and followed by the bridleway between brocton and beggar ’ s hill is interpreted as a meltwater channel , operative during the ice age . an expanse of glacial till underlies haywood warren with smaller patches mapped elsewhere . sand and gravel have been quarried in different parts of the chase over the years , as at wolseley today . . landscape , flora and fauna . the chase is located between hednesford , huntington , lichfield , rugeley , brocton , milford and stafford . it comprises a mixture of natural deciduous woodland , coniferous plantations , open heathland , small lakes and the remains of early industry , such as coal mining . the chase was designated as an area of outstanding natural beauty ( aonb ) on 16 september 1958 and is the smallest area so designated in mainland britain , covering . much of the area is also designated as a site of special scientific interest ( sssi ) . despite being relatively small in area , the chase provides a remarkable range of landscape and wildlife , including a herd of around 800 fallow deer and a number of rare and endangered birds , including migrant nightjars . efforts are underway to increase the amount of heathland on the chase , reintroducing shrubs such as calluna in some areas where bracken and birch forest have crowded out most other plants . the local flora also includes several species of vaccinium , including the eponymous cannock chase berry ( vaccinium × intermedium ruthe ) . in january 2009 , an outbreak of the plant pathogen phytophthora ramorum was discovered on the chase , at brocton coppice . various restrictions were put in place in an attempt to prevent its spread . . visitor sites and landmarks . there are a number of visitor centres , museums and waymarked paths , including the heart of england way and the staffordshire way . there are also accessible trails to enable people to experience the health benefits of the chase , such as the route to health . the route to health additionally , there are many unmarked public paths . on the chase 's north-eastern edge can be found shugborough hall , ancestral home of the earl of lichfield . at its southern edge are the remains of castle ring , an iron age hill fort , which at 242 m / 794 & nbsp ; ft is the highest point on the chase . several glacial erratic boulders are also found on the chase , remnants of glaciation . one is mounted on a plinth . the chase has several war memorials , including german and commonwealth war cemeteries . a memorial to the victims of the katyn massacre was unveiled by stefan staniszewski , whose father hillary zygmunt staniszewski ( a high court judge ) died in the massacre . preserved below the memorial are phials of soil from both warsaw and the katyn forest . freda , the harlequin great dane mascot of the new zealand rifle brigade ( earl of liverpool 's own ) is also buried on the chase marked with a memorial marble headstone . mountain biking . the chase is popular with cross-country mountain bike users . the purpose-built xc 'follow the dog ' trail is an technically-challenging route , opened in 2005 , starting and finishing at the birches valley visitors/cycle centre . it is open to all ; however , it is not recommended for beginners . a new section of xc trail was opened in april 2010 . the 'monkey trail ' is a more technical trail that splits from 'follow the dog ' at about the halfway point , then rejoins slightly further on . there are several features mountain bikers can look out for when riding on the chase , such as kitbag hill , rabbit hill , quagmire bridge , roots hall and brocton shorts . increasing popularity of the mtb trails led national rail to install a cycle bridge in 2013 at moors gorse to replace the previous pedestrian level crossing where multiple near misses indicated a high risk to cyclists . . entertainment . since 2006 , the forest has been used as an open-air music venue as part of the forestry commission nationwide forest tour , with acts such as the zutons , the feeling , status quo and jools holland playing in a forest clearing . cannock chase murders . the area gained notoriety in the late 1960s when the cannock chase murders made national headlines ; the remains of three young girls were found on the chase after going missing from areas along the a34 road between there and birmingham . raymond leslie morris , a motor engineer from walsall , was found guilty at stafford assizes of one of the murders in 1968 and was sentenced to life imprisonment . he died in prison in march 2014 , aged 84 , after serving 45 years . . model ww i battlefield . in september 2013 staffordshire county council allowed a team of local archaeologists and volunteers to excavate the world war i model battlefield near brocton , the archaeology of the camps which had been constructed by german prisoners of war held in a camp on nearby cannock chase and guarded by soldiers of the new zealand rifle brigade . the new zealand rifle brigade the model of the village and surrounding area of mesen in belgium , which included replica trenches and dugouts , railway lines , roads , and accurate contours of the surrounding terrain , was open to public view for a few weeks before being buried again to ensure its preservation . brocton wwi model battlefield excavation to begin , bbc news , 2 september 2013 kurt bayer , archaeologists uncover practice ww1 battlefield , new zealand herald , 3 september 2013 the excavation revealed many new details of the well-preserved 40 metre square battlefield . battlefield emerges from under cannock chase bushes , express & star , 11 september 2013 staffordshire county council used laser-scanning technology to recreate the site as a 3d interactive model that can be explored online . michael bradley , 'brocton 's lost army 'tribute ' excavated after a century , ' bbc news , 11 september 2013 . the chase through time . the chase through time project ( 2016–18 ) explored two thousand years of the history of the landscape of cannock chase aonb . it was a partnership between staffordshire county council , historic england and the heritage lottery fund . an archaeological survey using lidar which enabled researchers to see beneath trees coverage , and map usually unseen archaeological features in combination with historic aerial photographs , which illustrated changes to the landscape over the last 70 years . the project mapped archaeology from prehistoric burnt mounds , medieval and later coal mining , post medieval land division showing the early land management of the chase , and aspects of the landscape 's use in the world war i . 565 archaeological sites were mapped , with 436 of these sites new to the record . . in popular culture . since the nineteenth century , sightings of black dogs , werewolf , british big cats , ufos , and even bigfoot have appeared in the local press . however no conclusive evidence has ever been produced verifying these claims , and they may best be thought of as forming part of local folklore . the 1972 labi siffre album crying laughing loving lying features a track , written on cannock chase , and named after it . . see also . beaudesert cannock chase german military cemetery castle ring chase line valley coal mine . references . external links . cannock chase website staffordshire county council page on cannock chase chase trails mountain biking chase skills mountain bike coaching at cannock chase cannock chase horse trekking ramblers ' association page on cannock chase article with photo of katyn memorial at cannock chase church street conservation area , cannock chase heritage trail , cannockchasedc.gov.uk protected planet page for cannock chase