Jan Swammerdam

education . swammerdam was baptized on 15 february 1637 in the oude kerk amsterdam . his father was an apothecary , and an amateur collector of minerals , coins , fossils , and insects from around the world . his mother baertje jans corvers died in 1661 . as a youngster swammerdam had helped his father to take care of his curiosity collection . despite his father 's wish that he should study theology swammerdam started to study medicine in 1661 at the university of leiden . he studied under the guidance of johannes van horne and franciscus sylvius . among his fellow students were frederik ruysch , reinier de graaf and niels stensen . while studying medicine swammerdam started his own collection of insects . in 1663 swammerdam moved to france to continue his studies . he studied one year at the protestant university of saumur , under the guidance of tanaquil faber . subsequently , he studied in paris at the scientific academy of melchisédech thévenot . 1665 he returned to the dutch republic and joined a group of physicians who performed dissections and published their findings . between 1666 and 1667 swammerdam concluded his study of medicine at the university of leiden . together with van horne he researched the anatomy of the uterus . he used waxen injection techniques and a single-lens microscope made by johannes hudde . the result of this research was published under the title miraculum naturae sive uteri muliebris fabrica in 1672 . swammerdam received his doctorate in medicine in 1667 under van horne for his dissertation on the mechanism of respiration , published under the title de respiratione usuque pulmonum . . research into insects . while studying medicine swammerdam had started to dissect insects and after qualifying as a doctor , swammerdam focused on insects . his father pressured him to earn a living , but swammerdam persevered and in late 1669 published historia insectorum generalis ofte algemeene verhandeling van de bloedeloose dierkens ( the general history of insects , or general treatise on little bloodless animals ) . the treatise summarised his study of insects he had collected in france and around amsterdam . he countered the prevailing aristotelian notion that insects were imperfect animals that lacked internal anatomy . following the publication his father withdrew all financial support . as a result , swammerdam was forced , at least occasionally , to practice medicine in order to finance his own research . he obtained leave at amsterdam to dissect the bodies of those who died in the hospital . at university swammerdam engaged deeply in the religious and philosophical ideas of his time . he categorically opposed the ideas behind spontaneous generation , which held that god had created some creatures , but not insects . swammerdam argued that this would blasphemously imply that parts of the universe were excluded from god 's will . in his scientific study swammerdam tried to prove that god 's creation happened time after time , and that it was uniform and stable . swammerdam was much influenced by rené descartes , whose natural philosophy had been widely adopted by dutch intellectuals . in discours de la methode descartes had argued that nature was orderly and obeyed fixed laws , thus nature could be explained rationally . swammerdam was convinced that the creation , or generation , of all creatures obeyed the same laws . having studied the reproductive organs of men and women at university he set out to study the generation of insects . he had devoted himself to studying insects after discovering that the king bee was indeed a queen bee . swammerdam knew this because he had found eggs inside the creature . but he did not publish this finding . in 1669 swammerdam was visited by cosimo ii de ' medici and showed him another revolutionary discovery . inside a caterpillar the limbs and wings of the butterfly could be seen ( now called the imaginal discs ) . when swammerdam published the general history of insects , or general treatise on little bloodless animals later that year he not only did away with the idea that insects lacked internal anatomy , but also attacked the christian notion that insects originated from spontaneous generation and that their life cycle was a metamorphosis . swammerdam maintained that all insects originated from eggs and their limbs grew and developed slowly . thus there was no distinction between insects and so called higher animals . swammerdam declared war on '' vulgar errors '' and the symbolic interpretation of insects was , in his mind , incompatible with the power of god , the almighty architect . swammerdam therefore dispelled the seventeenth-century notion of metamorphosis —the idea that different life stages of an insect ( e.g . caterpillar and butterfly ) represent different individuals '' . whereas modern biologists speak of the grub , the pupa and the adult as stages in the life cycle of one individual butterfly , harvey and his contemporaries always regarded the grub as one individual and the butterfly as another . '' page 30 or a sudden change from one type of animal to another . . spirituality . swammerdam suffered a crisis of conscience . having believed that his scientific research was a tribute to the creator , he started to fear that he may be worshipping the idol of curiosities . in 1673 swammerdam briefly fell under the influence of the flemish mystic antoinette bourignon . his 1675 treatise on the mayfly , entitled ephemeri vita , included devout poetry and documented his religious experiences . swammerdam found comfort in the arms of bourignon 's sect in schleswig holstein , but was back in amsterdam in early 1676 . in a letter to henry oldenburg he explained '' i was never at any time busier than in these days , and the chief of all architects has blessed my endeavors '' . . bybel der natuure . his religious crisis only interrupted his scientific research briefly and until his premature death aged 43 he worked on what was to become his main work . it remained unpublished when he died in 1680 and was published as bybel der natuure posthumously in 1737 by the leiden university professor herman boerhaave . swammerdam , jan . 1737-1758 . bybel der natuure . amsteldammer . of historie der insecten convinced that all insects were worth studying , swammerdam had compiled an epic treatise on as many insects as he could , using the microscope and dissection . inspired by marcello malpighi , in de bombyce swammerdam described the anatomy of silkworms , mayflies , ants , stag beetles , cheese mites , bees and many other insects . his scientific observations were infused by the presence of god , the almighty creator . swammerdam 's praise of the louse went on to become a classic : '' herewith i offer you the omnipotent finger of god in the anatomy of a louse : wherein you will find miracle heaped on miracle and see the wisdom of god clearly manifested in a minute point . '' . research on bees . in biblia naturae the first visual proof was published that his contemporaries had mistakenly identified the queen bee as male . swammerdam also provided evidence that the queen bee is the sole mother of the colony . swammerdam had engaged in five intense years of beekeeping . he had found that drones were masculine , and had no stinger . swammerdam identified the worker bees as '' natural eunuchs '' because he was unable to detect ovaries in them , but described them as nearer to the nature of the female . swammerdam had produced a drawing of the queen bee 's reproductive organs , as observed through the microscope . since ancient times it had been asserted that the queen bee was male , and ruled the hive . in 1586 luis mendez de torres had first published the finding that the hive was ruled by a female , but torres had maintained that she produced all other bees in the colony through a '' seed '' . in 1609 charles butler had recorded the sex of drones as male , but he wrongly believed that they mated with worker bees . the drawing swammerdam produced of the internal anatomy of the queen bee was only published 1737 . his drawing of the honeycomb geometry was first published in biblia naturae , but had been referenced by giacomo filippo maraldi in his 1712 book . details of swammerdam 's research on bees had already been published elsewhere because he had shared his findings with other scientists in correspondence . among others swammerdam 's research had been referenced by nicolas malebranche in 1688 . . research on muscles . thumb in biblia naturae swammerdam 's research on muscles was published . swammerdam played a key role in the debunking of the balloonist theory , the idea that 'moving spirits ' are responsible for muscle contractions . the idea , supported by the greek physician galen , held that nerves were hollow and the movement of spirits through them propelled muscle motion . rené descartes furthered the idea by basing it on a model of hydraulics , suggesting that the spirits were analogous to fluids or gasses and calling them 'animal spirits' . in the model , which descartes used to explain reflexes , the spirits would flow from the brain ventricle , through the nerves , and to the muscles to animate the latter . according to this hypothesis , muscles would grow larger when they contract because of the animal spirits flowing into them . to test this idea , swammerdam placed severed frog thigh muscle in an airtight syringe with a small amount of water in the tip . he could thus determine whether there was a change in the volume of the muscle when it contracted by observing a change in the level of the water ( image at right ) . when swammerdam caused the muscle to contract by irritating the nerve , the water level did not rise but rather was lowered by a minute amount ; this showed that no air or fluid could be flowing into the muscle . the idea that nerve stimulation led to movement had important implications for neuroscience by putting forward the idea that behaviour is based on stimuli . swammerdam 's research had been referenced before its publication by nicolas steno , who had visited swammerdam in amsterdam . swammerdam 's research concluded after steno had published the second edition of elements of myology in 1669 , which is referenced in biblia naturae . a letter from steno to malpighi from 1675 suggests that swammerdam 's findings on muscle contraction had caused his crisis of consciousness . steno sent malpighi the drawings swammerdam had done of the experiments , saying '' when he had written a treatise on this matter he destroyed it and he has only preserved these figures . he is seeking god , but not yet in the church of god . '' . legacy . swammerdam 's historia insectorum generalis was widely known and applauded before he died . two years after his death in 1680 it was translated into french and in 1685 it was translated into latin . john ray , author of the 1705 historia insectorum , praised swammerdam ' methods , they were '' the best of all '' . though swammerdam 's work on insects and anatomy was significant , many current histories remember him as much for his methods and skill with microscopes as for his discoveries . he developed new techniques for examining , preserving , and dissecting specimens , including wax injection to make viewing blood vessels easier . a method he invented for the preparation of hollow human organs was later much employed in anatomy . he had corresponded with contemporaries across europe and his friends gottfried wilhelm leibniz and nicolas malebranche used his microscopic research to substantiate their own natural and moral philosophy . but swammerdam has also been credited with heralding the natural theology of the 18th century , were god 's grand design was detected in the mechanics of the solar system , the seasons , snowflakes and the anatomy of the human eye . an english translation of his entomological works by t . floyd was published in 1758 . no authentic portrait of jan swammerdam is extant nowadays . the portrait shown in the header is derived from the painting the anatomy lesson of dr tulp by rembrandt and represents the leading amsterdam physician hartman hartmanzoon ( 1591–1659 ) . notes . references . cobb m . 2002 . exorcizing the animal spirits : john swammerdam on nerve function . nature reviews , volume 3 , pages 395–400 . winsor , mary p . '' swammerdam , jan . '' dictionary of scientific biography . 1976 cobb , matthew . '' reading and writing the book of nature : jan swammerdam ( 1637–1680 ) . '' endeavour . vol . 24 ( 3 ) . 2000 . o'connell , sanjida . '' a silk road to biology . '' the times . may 27 , 2002 . hall , rupert a . from galileo to newton 1630–1720r . & r . clark , ltd . , edinburgh : 1963 . ; attribution . further reading . jorink , eric . '' 'outside god there is nothing ' : swammerdam , spinoza , and the janus-face of the early dutch enlightenment . '' the early enlightenment in the dutch republic , 1650–1750 : selected papers of a conference , held at the herzog august bibliothek wolfenbüttel , 22–23 march 2001 . ed . wiep van bunge . leiden , the netherlands : brill academic publishers , 2003 . 81–108 . fearing , franklin . '' jan swammerdam : a study in the history of comparative and physiological psychology of the 17th century . '' the american journal of psychology 41.3 ( 1929 ) : 442–455 ruestow , edward g . the microscope in the dutch republic : the shaping of discovery . new york : cambridge university press , 1996 . ruestow , edward g . '' piety and the defense of natural order : swammerdam on generation . '' religion science and worldview : essays in honor of richard s . westfall . eds . margaret osler and paul lawrence farber . new york : cambridge university press , 1985 . 217–241 . external links . site devoted to swammerdam short biography from a website that chronicles the '' rocky road to modern paleontology and biology '' biography written by matthew cobb , a professor at laboratoire d'ecologie in paris an english edition of swammerdam 's '' the book of nature , or , the history of insects '' from the history of science digital collection : utah state university the correspondence of jan swammerdam in emlo