Silk Stalkings

synopsis . chris and rita . from 1991 to 1995 , the lead characters were played by rob estes and mitzi kapture , as detectives christopher lorenzo and rita lee lance , respectively . the story lines were told in a partially first-person perspective focusing on lance , who would speak in voiceovers throughout the episodes . early in the series , ben vereen played rita 's boss , captain hutchinson ( '' hutch '' ) . vereen was compelled to retire from the show during the second season due to an off-screen accident , but he returned for a few guest appearances . his successor was lt . hudson , played by robert gossett , who stayed on until the third season . chris and rita 's new boss , who would stay with the show for its duration , was charlie brill as captain harry lipschitz . brill went on to appear in the most episodes of any actor , 129 , ahead of kapture 's 101 and estes ' 100 . he was promoted to the opening credits starting with season six . brill 's real-life wife mitzi mccall played lipschitz 's free-spirited wife frannie on the series , and the two provided some occasional comic relief amid the dramatic tension of the storylines . they also appeared in the second season playing completely different characters . working prominently with lorenzo and lance was assistant district attorney george donovan ( william anton ) . various recurring characters came and went , notably dennis paladino as mob boss donnie '' dogs '' dibarto ( dibelco in his first appearance ) ; john byner as cotton dunn , a cunning but likable con artist ; scott atkins as officer perry , a rookie cop ; kim morgan greene as melissa cassidy , a late-night radio talk-show host , sex therapy , and old flame of chris 's ; danny gans as roger , a coroner who frequently ( and unsuccessfully ) tried to get rita to go out with him ; marie marshall as solange , a local photographer with a faux french accent who crossed paths with chris and rita in the second season ; and lucy lin , who played forensic expert dr . noriko weinstein . actress freda foh shen took over lin 's role in later episodes . in the first season , rita was shown to suffer from occasionally intense headaches , which were caused by a blood bubble in her brain . rita opted not to have surgery to fix this because it was deemed too high-risk . however , as the series went on , this condition was gradually phased out of the plot and was never mentioned again . in the second episode of the first season , going to babylon , it was revealed that rita 's real name is rita lee fontana . her father , donald was a wealthy businessman who lost his fortune in a series of bad business dealings involving a corrupt fellow businessman when she was six years old . donald fell into a state of severe depression and alcoholism which eventually culminated in him committing suicide . rita was adopted by don and sue lance and she took their name in gratitude for the kindness and love they showed her growing up . rita and chris would go on to arrest the man responsible for her father 's bankruptcy in that same episode . estes and kapture were equal co-stars . the opening credits alternated , one week showing estes first and then kapture , the following week showing kapture first and then estes . the opening montage of quick cuts had '' teasers '' that suggested the sexy and violent subject matter of the show , but were not taken from any of the show 's actual episodes . according to stephen cannell , in a dvd extra , they were developed initially as a promotion , filmed and assembled by ralph hemecker in a single day of filming , and featuring a leggy blonde actress/model whom cannell said was named avalon jones . in the first two episodes of the series , kapture was shown first , and then estes ; they alternated after that , except for kapture 's final episode , in which she ( and not estes ) appeared in the opening montage , followed by the two new co-stars . two off-screen events in the summer of 1995 were pivotal to the show and were worked into the storyline . both actors were ready to leave the series , estes to pursue other acting opportunities and kapture to take time off for her first child . estes had first flirted with departure at the end of the third season ( spring of 1994 ) . the season ended in a cliffhanger episode , '' dark heart '' , with chris being shot by an obsessed woman , played by crystal chappell . chris was rushed to the hospital in an ambulance as the closing credits rolled . after negotiations , estes decided to renew his contract , and the fourth season ( fall 1994 ) began with chris ' recovery from his near-fatal wounds in a two-part episode , '' natural selection '' , that was later released on vhs as a two-hour film . in the fifth season ( fall 1995 ) , chris and rita 's mutual attraction finally moved from friendship to love in a two-part episode in november , called '' partners '' . nick kokotakis , as detective michael price , was introduced during that episode . rita , who was promoted to lieutenant , was soon confirmed to be pregnant ( as was kapture in real life ) , and chris and rita were married in an early december episode titled '' till death do us part '' . the next week 's episode , '' the last kiss goodnight '' , ended with chris being shot and killed in the line of duty . kapture appeared in one more episode , '' dead asleep '' . this episode 's credits featured kapture but not estes ( for the only time in the series ) , as well as kokotakis and tyler layton , who was introduced in the previous episode as chris 's new partner , detective holly rawlins . most of the episode , which began with rita , harry and frannie lipschitz , price , rawlins , and donovan at chris ' burial , was spent focusing on michael and holly 's first case . at the end of the show , the grief-stricken rita spends one final scene talking to chris at his gravesite and saying goodbye to lipschitz , and leaves the force for parts unknown . tom and cassy . with estes and kapture gone from the show , kokotakis and layton took over the lead roles . fans of the show did not embrace the new characters , and they were replaced after that half-season by chris potter and janet gunn . gunn , who starred in the crimetime after primetime series dark justice as kelly cochrane in 1992 and '93 , previously played a secretary arrested for murder in season 3 . unlike the transition that was played out between chris and rita and michael and holly , no on-screen explanation was given for michael and holly 's departure , and fans of the series sometimes refer to them as the '' lost cast '' . ada george donovan was also written out of the series at the end of season five , leaving harry and frannie lipschitz as the lone holdovers from the lance and lorenzo episodes . the detectives moved into an upgraded precinct in season seven . the romantic chemistry between potter and gunn 's characters , tom ryan and cassandra st . john , respectively ( who , according to the story line , had been married to and divorced from one another before their arrival on the series ) , revived interest in the show and it rebounded in the ratings . after three additional seasons , usa cancelled the series in 1999 . the final episode of the final season , in spring 1999 , placing tom 's career and relationship with cassy on the rocks , was a cliffhanger with no resolution . cast . mitzi kapture as sgt./lt . rita lee lance ( née fontana ) ( 1991–1995 ) rob estes as sgt . chris lorenzo ( 1991–1995 ) william anton as assistant d.a . george donovan ( 1991–1996 ) ben vereen as capt . ben hutchinson ( 1991–1993 ) robert gossett as lt . hudson ( 1992–1994 ) charlie brill as capt . harry lipschitz ( 1993–1999 ) nick kokotakis as det . michael price ( 1996 ) tyler layton as det . holly rawlins ( 1996 ) chris potter as det . sgt . tom ryan ( 1996–1999 ) janet gunn as det . sgt . cassandra '' cassy '' st . john ( 1996–1999 ) jamie rose as jasmine/catherine hayworth/patricia von barrow/jacqueline '' jackie '' webster dennis paladino as donnie '' dogs '' dibarto ( 1992–1994 ) john byner as cotton dunn ( 1992–1994 ) raye birk as atticus dunn ( 1994–1995 ) mitzi mccall as frannie lipschitz ( 1994–1999 ) . home media . anchor bay entertainment released the first five seasons of silk stalkings on dvd in region 1 between 2004 and 2006 . , these releases have been discontinued and are out of print . on october 14 , 2009 , it was announced that mill creek entertainment had acquired the rights to several stephen j . cannell series including silk stalkings . mill creek gets dvd rights to 14 more classic stephen j . cannell tv programs ! season 1 was re-released on dvd on march 9 , 2010 . silk stalkings dvd news : early box art for silk stalkings - season 1 & 124 ; tvshowsondvd.com on october 22 , 2013 , mill creek entertainment released seasons six , seven , and eight together in one collection entitled : silk stalkings - seasons 6 , 7 and 8 : the ryan and st . john cases . . references . external links .