High frequency

propagation characteristics . the dominant means of long-distance communication in this band is skywave ( '' skip '' ) propagation , in which radio waves directed at an angle into the sky refract back to earth from layers of ionized atoms in the ionosphere . by this method hf radio waves can travel beyond the horizon , around the curve of the earth , and can be received at intercontinental distances . however , suitability of this portion of the spectrum for such communication varies greatly with a complex combination of factors : sunlight/darkness at site of transmission and reception transmitter/receiver proximity to solar terminator season solar cycle sunspot aurora at any point in time , for a given '' skip '' communication path between two points , the frequencies at which communication is possible are specified by these parameters maximum usable frequency ( muf ) lowest usable high frequency ( luf ) and a frequency of optimum transmission ( fot ) the maximum usable frequency regularly drops below 10 & nbsp ; mhz in darkness during the winter months , while in summer during daylight it can easily surpass 30 & nbsp ; mhz . it depends on the angle of incidence of the waves ; it is lowest when the waves are directed straight upwards , and is higher with less acute angles . this means that at longer distances , where the waves graze the ionosphere at a very blunt angle , the muf may be much higher . the lowest usable frequency depends on the absorption in the lower layer of the ionosphere ( the d-layer ) . this absorption is stronger at low frequencies and is also stronger with increased solar activity ( for example in daylight ) ; total absorption often occurs at frequencies below 5 & nbsp ; mhz during the daytime . the result of these two factors is that the usable spectrum shifts towards the lower frequencies and into the medium frequency ( mf ) range during winter nights , while on a day in full summer the higher frequencies tend to be more usable , often into the lower vhf range . when all factors are at their optimum , worldwide communication is possible on hf . at many other times it is possible to make contact across and between continents or oceans . at worst , when a band is '' dead '' , no communication beyond the limited groundwave paths is possible no matter what powers , antennas or other technologies are brought to bear . when a transcontinental or worldwide path is open on a particular frequency , digital , ssb and morse code communication is possible using surprisingly low transmission powers , often of the order of milliwatts , provided suitable antennas are in use at both ends and that there is little or no man-made or natural interference . on such an open band , interference originating over a wide area affects many potential users . these issues are significant to military , safety and amateur radio users of the hf bands . uses . the main users of the high frequency spectrum are : military and governmental communication systems aviation air-to-ground communications amateur radio shortwave international and regional broadcasting maritime sea-to-shore and ship-to-ship services over-the-horizon radar systems global maritime distress and safety system ( gmdss ) communication citizen 's band radio services worldwide ( generally 26-28 & nbsp ; mhz , the higher portion of the hf band , that behaves more like low-vhf ) the high frequency band is very popular with amateur radio operators , who can take advantage of direct , long-distance ( often inter-continental ) communications and the '' thrill factor '' resulting from making contacts in variable conditions . international shortwave broadcasting utilizes this set of frequencies , as well as a seemingly declining number of '' utility '' users ( marine , aviation , military , and diplomatic interests ) , who have , in recent years , been swayed over to less volatile means of communication ( for example , via satellites ) , but may maintain hf stations after switch-over for back-up purposes . however , the development of automatic link establishment technology based on mil-std-188-141 for automated connectivity and frequency selection , along with the high costs of satellite usage , have led to a renaissance in hf usage in government networks . the development of higher speed modems such as those conforming to mil-std-188-110c which support data rates up to 120 kilobit/s has also increased the usability of hf for data communications and video transmission . other standards development such as stanag 5066 provides for error free data communications through the use of arq protocols . some modes of communication , such as continuous wave morse code transmissions ( especially by amateur radio operators ) and single sideband voice transmissions are more common in the hf range than on other frequencies , because of their bandwidth-conserving nature , but broadband modes , such as tv transmissions , are generally prohibited by hf 's relatively small chunk of electromagnetic spectrum space . noise , especially man-made interference from electronic devices , tends to have a great effect on the hf bands . in recent years , concerns have risen among certain users of the hf spectrum over '' broadband over power lines '' ( bpl ) internet access , which has an almost destructive effect on hf communications . this is due to the frequencies on which bpl operates ( typically corresponding with the hf band ) and the tendency for the bpl signal to leak from power lines . some bpl providers have installed notch filters to block out certain portions of the spectrum ( namely the amateur radio bands ) , but a great amount of controversy over the deployment of this access method remains . other electronic devices including plasma televisions can also have a detrimental effect on the hf spectrum . in aviation , hf communication systems are required for all trans-oceanic flights . these systems incorporate frequencies down to 2 & nbsp ; mhz to include the 2182 khz international distress and calling channel . the upper section of hf ( 26.5-30 & nbsp ; mhz ) shares many characteristics with the lower part of vhf . the parts of this section not allocated to amateur radio are used for local communications . these include cb radios around 27 & nbsp ; mhz , studio-to-transmitter ( stl ) radio links , radio control devices for models and radio paging transmitters . some radio frequency identification ( rfid ) tags utilize hf . these tags are commonly known as hfid 's or highfid 's ( high-frequency identification ) . antennas . the most common antennas in this band are wire antennas such as wire dipoles and the rhombic antenna ; in the upper frequencies , multielement dipole antennas such as the yagi , quad , and log-periodic antennas . powerful shortwave broadcasting stations often use large wire curtain arrays . antennas for transmitting skywaves are typically made from horizontal dipoles or bottom-fed loops , both of which emit horizontally polarized waves . the preference for horizontally polarized transmission is because ( approximately ) only half of the signal power transmitted by an antenna travels directly into the sky ; about half travels downward towards the ground and must '' bounce '' into the sky . for frequencies in the upper hf band , the ground is a better reflector of horizontally polarized waves , and better absorber of power from vertically polarized waves . the effect diminishes for longer wavelengths . for receiving , random wire antennas are often used . alternatively , the same directional antennas used for transmitting are helpful for receiving , since most noise comes from all directions , but the desired signal comes from only one direction . long-distance ( skywave ) receiving antennas can generally be oriented either vertically or horizontally since refraction through the ionosphere usually scrambles signal polarization , and signals are received directly from the sky to the antenna . see also . high frequency active auroral research program high frequency internet protocol radio propagation space weather critical frequency . references . . further reading . maslin , n.m . '' hf communications - a systems approach '' . , taylor & francis ltd , 1987 johnson , e.e . , et al . , '' advanced high-frequency radio communications '' . , artech house , 1997 . external links . tomislav stimac , '' definition of frequency bands ( vlf , elf . etc . ) '' . ik1qfk home page ( vlf.it ) . douglas c . smith , high frequency measurements web page ; index and technical tidbits . d . c . smith consultants , los gatos , ca . high frequency propagation models , its.bldrdoc.gov . high frequency wave propagation , cscamm.umd.edu . '' high frequency noise '' ( pdf ) '' advantages of hf radio '' codan solar conditions for hf-radio