Benjamin Thompson

early years . thompson was born in rural woburn , massachusetts , on march 26 , 1753 ; his birthplace is preserved as a museum . he was educated mainly at the village school , although he sometimes walked almost ten miles to cambridge with the older loammi baldwin to attend lectures by professor john winthrop of harvard college . at the age of 13 he was apprenticed to john appleton , a merchant of nearby salem . thompson excelled at his trade , and coming in contact with refined and well educated people for the first time , adopted many of their characteristics including an interest in science . while recuperating in woburn in 1769 from an injury , thompson conducted experiments concerning the nature of heat and began to correspond with loammi baldwin and others about them . later that year he worked for a few months for a boston shopkeeper and then apprenticed himself briefly , and unsuccessfully , to a doctor in woburn . thompson 's prospects were dim in 1772 but in that year they changed abruptly . he met , charmed and married a rich and well-connected heiress named sarah rolfe ( née walker ) . her father was a minister , and her late husband left her property at concord , new hampshire , then called rumford . they moved to portsmouth , new hampshire , and through his wife 's influence with the governor , he was appointed a major in the new hampshire militia . their first child ( also named sarah ) was born in 1774 . gribbin , john . the scientists : a history of science told through the lives of its greatest inventors . new york , random house , 2002 . p . 301 . image : count rumford.jpg right thumb painting by thomas gainsborough 1783 . american revolutionary war . when the american revolutionary war began thompson was a man of property and standing in new england and was opposed to the uprising . he was active in recruiting loyalists to fight the rebels . this earned him the enmity of the popular party , and a mob attacked thompson 's house . he fled to the british lines , abandoning his wife , as it turned out , permanently . thompson was welcomed by the british to whom he gave valuable information about the american forces , and became an advisor to both thomas gage and lord george germain . while working with the british armies in america he conducted experiments to measure the force of gunpowder , the results of which were widely acclaimed when published in 1781 in the philosophical transactions of the royal society . on the strength of this he arrived in london at the end of the war with a reputation as a scientist . bavarian maturity . image : englischer garten fg02.jpg thumb the beer garden '' am chinesischen turm '' in the englischer garten in munich in 1785 , he moved to bavaria where he became an aide-de-camp to the prince-elector charles theodore . he spent eleven years in bavaria , reorganizing the army and establishing workhouses for the poor . he also invented rumford 's soup , a soup for the poor , and established the cultivation of the potato in bavaria . he studied methods of cooking , heating , and lighting , including the relative costs and efficiencies of wax candles , tallow candles , and oil lamps . on prince charles ' behalf he created the englischer garten in munich in 1789 ; it remains today and is known as one of the largest urban public parks in the world . he was elected a foreign honorary member of the american academy of arts and sciences in 1789 . for his efforts , in 1791 thompson was made a count of the holy roman empire ; he took the name '' rumford '' for rumford , new hampshire , which was an older name for the town of concord where he had been married , becoming reichsgraf von rumford ( english : imperial count rumford ) . . experiments on heat . his experiments on gunnery and explosives led to an interest in heat . he devised a method for measuring the specific heat of a solid substance but was disappointed when johan wilcke published his parallel discovery first . thompson next investigated the thermal insulation , including fur , wool and feathers . he correctly appreciated that the insulating properties of these natural materials arise from the fact that they inhibit the convection of air . he then made the somewhat reckless , and incorrect , inference that air and , in fact , all gases , were perfect non-conductors of heat . rumford ( 1786 ) '' new experiments upon heat '' philosophical transactions p.273 rumford ( 1792 ) '' experiments upon heat '' philosophical transactions of the royal society p.48-80 he further saw this as evidence of the argument from design , contending that divine providence had arranged for fur on animals in such a way as to guarantee their comfort . in 1797 , he extended his claim about non-conductivity to liquids . rumford ( 1797 ) '' on the propagation of heat in fluids '' nicholson 's journal 1 pp298-341 the idea raised considerable objections from the scientific establishment , john dalton cardwell ( 1971 ) p.99 and john leslie making particularly forthright attacks . instrumentation far exceeding anything available in terms of accuracy and precision would have been needed to verify thompson 's claim . again , he seems to have been influenced by his theological beliefs rumford ( 1804 ) '' an enquiry concerning the nature of heat and the mode of its communication '' philosophical transactions of the royal society p.77 and it is likely that he wished to grant water a privileged and providential status in the regulation of human life . cardwell ( 1971 ) p.102 he is considered the founder of the sous-vide food preparation method owing to his experiment with a mutton shoulder . he described this method in one of his essays . . mechanical equivalent of heat . rumford 's most important scientific work took place in munich , and centred on the nature of heat , which he contended in '' an experimental enquiry concerning the source of the heat which is excited by friction '' ( 1798 ) was not the caloric of then-current scientific thinking but a form of motion . rumford had observed the frictional heat generated by boring cannon at the arsenal in munich . rumford immersed a cannon barrel in water and arranged for a specially blunted boring tool . he showed that the water could be boiled within roughly two and a half hours and that the supply of frictional heat was seemingly inexhaustible . rumford confirmed that no physical change had taken place in the material of the cannon by comparing the specific heats of the material machined away and that remaining . rumford argued that the seemingly indefinite generation of heat was incompatible with the caloric theory . he contended that the only thing communicated to the barrel was motion . rumford made no attempt to further quantify the heat generated or to measure the mechanical equivalent of heat . though this work met with a hostile reception , it was subsequently important in establishing the laws of conservation of energy later in the 19th century . rumford 's calorific and frigorific radiation . he explained marc-auguste pictet , which demonstrates the reflection of cold , by supposing that all bodies emit invisible rays , undulations in the ethereal fluid . he did experiments to support his theories of calorific and frigorific radiation and said the communication of heat was the net effect of calorific ( hot ) rays and frigorific ( cold ) rays and the rays emitted by the object . when an object absorbs radiation from a warmer object ( calorific rays ) its temperature rises , and when it absorbs radiation from a colder object ( frigorific rays ) its temperature falls . see note 8 , '' an enquiry concerning the nature of heat and the mode of its communication '' philosophical transactions of the royal society , starting at page 112 . inventions and design improvements . left thompson was an active and prolific inventor , developing improvements for chimneys , fireplaces and industrial furnaces , as well as inventing the double boiler , a kitchen range , and a drip coffeepot . he invented a percolating coffee pot following his pioneering work with the bavarian army , where he improved the diet of the soldiers as well as their clothes . the rumford fireplace created a sensation in london when he introduced the idea of restricting the chimney opening to increase the updraught , which was a much more efficient way to heat a room than earlier fireplaces . he and his workers modified fireplaces by inserting bricks into the hearth to make the side walls angled , and added a choke to the chimney to increase the speed of air going up the flue . the effect was to produce a streamlined air flow , so all the smoke would go up into the chimney rather than lingering , entering the room , and often choking the residents . it also had the effect of increasing the efficiency of the fire , and gave extra control of the rate of combustion of the fuel , whether wood or coal . many fashionable london houses were modified to his instructions , and became smoke-free . thompson became a celebrity when news of his success spread . his work was also very profitable , and much imitated when he published his analysis of the way chimneys worked . in many ways , he was similar to benjamin franklin , who also invented a new kind of heating stove . the retention of heat was a recurring theme in his work , as he is also credited with the invention of thermal underwear . prof . michael fowler of the university of virginia , lecture notes , and have i got news for you , first transmitted december 16 , 2005 , bbc1 . . industrial furnaces . thompson also significantly improved the design of kilns used to produce quicklime , and rumford furnaces were soon being constructed throughout europe . the key innovation involved separating the burning fuel from the limestone , so that the lime produced by the heat of the furnace was not contaminated by ash from the fire . light and photometry . rumford worked in photometry , the measurement of light . he made a photometer and introduced the candela history , the predecessor of the candela , as a unit of luminous intensity . his standard candle was made from the oil of a sperm whale , to rigid specifications . he also published studies of '' illusory '' or subjective complementary colours , induced by the shadows created by two lights , one white and one coloured ; these observations were cited and generalized by michel-eugène chevreul as his '' law of simultaneous colour contrast '' in 1839 . . later life . image : royal institution - humphry davy.jpg thumb right satirical cartoon by james gillray showing a royal institution lecture on pneumatics with davy holding the bellows and count rumford looking on at extreme right . dr garnett is the lecturer holding the victim 's nose . after 1799 , he divided his time between france and england . with sir joseph banks , he established the royal institution of great britain in 1799 . the pair chose humphry davy as the first lecturer . the institution flourished and became world-famous as a result of davy 's pioneering research . his assistant , michael faraday , established the institution as a premier research laboratory , and also justly famous for its series of public lectures popularizing science . that tradition continues to the present , and the royal institution christmas lectures attract large audiences through their tv broadcasts . thompson endowed the rumford medals of the royal society and the american academy of arts and sciences , and endowed a professorship at harvard university . in 1803 , he was elected a foreign member of the royal swedish academy of sciences . in 1804 , he married marie-anne lavoisier , the widow of the great france chemist antoine lavoisier , his american wife—the one he abandoned in america upon the outbreak of the american revolution—having died since his emigration . thompson separated from his second wife after 3 years , but he settled in paris and continued his scientific work until his death on august 21 , 1814 . thompson is buried in the small cemetery of auteuil in paris , just across from adrien-marie legendre . upon his death , his daughter from his first marriage , sarah thompson , inherited his title as countess rumford . honours . colonel , king 's american dragoons . knighted , 1784 . count of the holy roman empire , 1791 . the crater rumford on the moon is named after him . rumford baking powder ( patented 1859 ) is named after him , having been invented by a former rumford professor at harvard university , eben norton horsford ( 1818–1893 ) , cofounder of the rumford chemical works of east providence , ri . rumford kitchen at the world 's fair in chicago , 1893 . a street in the inner city of munich is named after him . rumford street ( and the nearby rumford place ) in liverpool , england , are so named due to a soup kitchen established to count rumford 's plan which formerly stood on land adjacent to rumford street . : order of the white eagle ( 1789 ) . bibliography . collected works of count rumford , volume i , the nature of heat , ( 1968 ) . collected works of count rumford , volume ii , practical applications of heat , ( 1969 ) . collected works of count rumford , volume iii , devices and techniques , ( 1969 ) . collected works of count rumford , volume iv , light and armament , ( 1970 ) . collected works of count rumford , volume v , public institutions , ( 1970 ) .