1929 in literature

events . january 10 – the adventures of tintin begin with the first appearance of hergé 's belgian comic book hero in tintin in the land of the soviets ( les aventures de tintin , reporter . , au pays des soviets ) , serialized in the children 's newspaper supplement le petit vingtième . february–august – voltaire 's candide ( 1759 ) is held to be obscene by the united states customs service in boston . february – the first of margery allingham 's crime novels to feature albert campion , the crime at black dudley ( u.s . title : the black dudley murder ) , appears in england . march – norah c . james 's first novel , sleeveless errand , is held to be obscene on publication in london , for its portrayal of the city 's bohemian life . an edition appears later in paris from jack kahane 's obelisk press . april 1 – the faber and faber publishing company is founded in london by geoffrey faber , with t . s . eliot as its literary editor . may – hugo gernsback first uses the term '' science fiction '' in its modern sense , for his pulp magazine amazing stories . c . june – the first of gladys mitchell 's crime novels appears in the uk . entitled speedy death , it introduces a psychologist detective character , mrs bradley . july – british publisher william collins , sons launches its detective story club imprint with edgar wallace 's novelization of the terror . july 5 – scotland yard seizes 13 paintings of male and female nudes by d . h . lawrence from a mayfair , london , gallery on grounds of indecency , citing the vagrancy act 1838 . august – the censorship of publications act sets up the censorship of publications board in the irish free state . august 15 – the first ellery queen mystery novel , the roman hat mystery , is published in new york city . mid year – serialization begins of one of the first thai novels – the first by a woman , m . l . bubpha kunjara nimmanhemin writing as dokmai sot – entitled sattru khǫng čhaolon ( her enemy ) . soon after comes the semi-autobiographical lakhǫn haeng chiwit ( the circus of life ) of prince arkartdam-keung rapheephat , writing as m . c . akat . several thai writers join kulap saipradit in the suphapburut literary group . october – jean-paul sartre and simone de beauvoir become a couple , having met while he studied at the école normale supérieure in paris . twenty-one-year-old de beauvoir becomes the youngest person ever to obtain an agrégation in philosophy , and comes second in the final examination , beaten only by sartre . october 11 – seán o'casey 's play the silver tassie , set in world war i , receives its première at the apollo theatre , london , directed by raymond massey . it stars charles laughton and barry fitzgerald , and has a set design by augustus john . the times , 3 october 1929 . rejected the year before by w . b . yeats for the abbey theatre in dublin , it will not open in ireland until 1935 . october 5 – the new york society for the suppression of vice confiscates copies of samuel roth 's pirated edition of james joyce 's 1922 novel ulysses – the first complete edition printed in the u.s . he serves two prison terms for publishing an obscene work . october 29 – released in the u.s . is the first sound film adaptation of a shakespeare play : the taming of the shrew , starring mary pickford and her husband douglas fairbanks . december – george orwell returns to england after a period living in paris . unknown dates father ronald knox codifies the '' rules '' for the golden age of detective fiction in a '' decalogue '' introducing the best detective stories of 1928–1929 . the adventures of sherlock holmes is banned in the soviet union due to the interest its author , sir arthur conan doyle , shows in the occult . foyles bookshop in london moves to larger premises in the foyles building , charing cross road . monotype introduces stanley morison 's revival of the bembo typeface for book printing . new books . fiction . richard aldington – death of a hero paul alverdes – die pfeiferstube ( the whistler 's room ) roberto arlt – los siete locos ( the seven madmen ) marcel aymé – the hollow field bibhutibhushan bandyopadhyay – pather panchali ( song of the road , book publication ) hamilton basso – relics and angels vicki baum – menschen im hotel ( people at a hotel , translated as grand hotel ) anthony berkeley the piccadilly murder the poisoned chocolates case georges bernanos – joy algernon blackwood – dudley & gilderoy : a nonsense mary borden – the forbidden zone elizabeth bowen – the last september mateiu caragiale – craii de curtea-veche agatha christie the seven dials mystery partners in crime ( short stories ) jean cocteau – les enfants terribles colette – sido miloš crnjanski – сеобе ( seobe , migrations ) aleister crowley – the stratagem and other stories mazo de la roche – whiteoaks of jalna antoine de saint-exupéry – courrier sud ( southern mail ) alfred döblin – berlin alexanderplatz lloyd c . douglas – magnificent obsession arthur conan doyle – the maracot deep pierre drieu la rochelle – hotel acropolis ( une femme à sa fenêtre ) m . barnard eldershaw – a house is built susan ertz – the milky way william faulkner – the sound and the fury jessie redmon fauset – plum bun edna ferber – cimarron c . s . forester – brown on resolution zona gale – borgia rómulo gallegos – doña bárbara gaito gazdanov – вечер у клэр ( vecher u kler , an evening with claire ) floyd gibbons – the red napoleon jean giono colline lovers are never losers joseph goebbels – michael ( novel ) ( michael : ein deutsches schicksal in tagebuchblättern ) henry green – living julien green – the dark journey graham greene – the man within dashiell hammett the dain curse red harvest ernest hemingway – a farewell to arms richard hughes – a high wind in jamaica masuji ibuse ( 井伏 鱒二 ) – salamander and other stories frigyes karinthy – minden másképpen van ( everything is different , short stories ) anna kavan – a charmed circle takiji kobayashi ( 小林 多喜二 ) – kanikōsen ( the cannery boat ) kwee tek hoay – drama dari krakatau ( drama of krakatoa ; serialization ) oliver la farge – laughing boy nella larsen – passing sinclair lewis – dodsworth eric linklater – poet 's pub claude mckay – banjo frederic manning ( anonymously ) – the middle parts of fortune : somme & ancre , 1916 ( subscription edition ) alberto moravia – gli indifferenti ( time of indifference ) w . f . morris – bretherton : khaki or field grey ? leopold myers – the near and the far irène némirovsky – david golder peadar o'donnell – adrigool katherine anne porter – flowering judas katharine susannah prichard - coonardoo j . b . priestley – the good companions ellery queen – the roman hat mystery erich maria remarque – all quiet on the western front ( im westen nichts neues ; book publication and first english translation ) henry handel richardson ( et florence robertson ) – ultima thule ( final part of the fortunes of richard mahony ) ole edvart rølvaag – peder victorious ( peder seier ) agnes smedley – daughter of earth john steinbeck – cup of gold : a life of sir henry morgan , buccaneer , with occasional reference to history jun'ichirō tanizaki ( 谷崎 潤一郎 ) – some prefer nettles ( 蓼喰う蟲 ) wallace thurman – the blacker the berry sigrid undset – in the wilderness s . s . van dine – the scarab murder case edgar wallace four square jane the green ribbon the india-rubber men lynd ward – gods ' man ( wordless '' novel in woodcuts '' ) thomas wolfe – look homeward , angel s . fowler wright dawn the world below francis brett young – black roses . children and young people . edgar rice burroughs – tarzan and the lost empire catherine christian – the luck of the scallop shell josephine elder – evelyn finds herself erich kästner – emil and the detectives ( emil und die detektive ) eric p . kelly – the trumpeter of krakow william maxwell reed – the earth for sam ; the story of mountains , rivers , dinosaurs and men ( non-fiction ) ruth plumly thompson – jack pumpkinhead of oz ( 23rd in the oz series overall and the ninth written by her ) alison uttley – the squirrel , the hare and the little grey rabbit ( introducing little grey rabbit ) . drama . jacinto benavente – vidas cruzadas ( short cuts ) henri bernstein – mélo bertolt brecht – the baden-baden lesson on consent ( badener lehrstück vom einverständnis ) ferdinand bruckner – krankheit der jugend ( illness of youth ) st . john ervine – the first mrs . fraser jean giraudoux – amphitryon 38 walter c . hackett – sorry you 've been troubled patrick hamilton – rope denis johnston – the old lady says '' no ! '' agha hashar kashmiri – rustom o sohrab frederick lonsdale – canaries sometimes sing kaj munk – i brændingen eugene o'neill – dynamo marcel pagnol – marius stanisława przybyszewska – the danton case ( sprawa dantona ) elmer rice – street scene george bernard shaw – the apple cart ahmed shawqi – masraa ' kliyubatra ( the death of cleopatra ) john van druten – after all ödön von horváth – rund um den kongreß edgar wallace the calendar persons unknown . poetry . robinson jeffers – dear judas and other poems w . b . yeats – the winding stair . non-fiction . ada boni – il talismano della felicità ( the talisman of happiness ) g . k . chesterton – the everlasting man aleister crowley – magick in theory and practice mahatma gandhi – the story of my experiments with truth robert graves – goodbye to all that walter lippmann – a preface to morals a . a . milne – those were the days tomas o'crohan – ( the islandman ) charles kay ogden – basic english walter f . otto – the homeric gods ( the homeric gods ) alice prin – kiki 's memoirs i . a . richards – practical criticism various authors – our exagmination round his factification for incamination of work in progress : essays in support of james joyce a . e . waite – the holy kabbalah e . b . white and james thurber – is sex necessary ? alfred north whitehead – process and reality virginia woolf – a room of one 's own . births . january 9 brian friel , irish dramatist ( died 2015 ) heiner müller , german dramatist ( died 1995 ) january 26 – jules feiffer , american cartoonist and writer february 6 – keith waterhouse , english journalist and novelist ( died 2009 ) february 16 – peter porter , australian-born english poet and educator ( died 2010 ) february 17 – chaim potok , american author ( died 2002 ) february 18 – len deighton , english novelist march 1 – thuppettan , malayalam-language keralan playwright ( died 2019 ) march 7 – dan jacobson , south african novelist ( died 2014 ) march 19 – miquel martí i pol , catalan poet ( died 2003 ) april 1 – milan kundera , czech-french novelist april 9 – paule marshall , born valenza pauline burke , american novelist ( died 2019 ) april 23 – george steiner , french-born literary critic and philosopher ( died 2020 ) may 14 – george selden , american author ( died 1989 ) may 16 – adrienne rich , american poet and essayist ( died 2012 ) june 2 – norton juster , american children 's writer and academic june 11 – george garrett , american poet and novelist ( died 2008 ) june 12 brigid brophy , english novelist and critic ( died 1995 ) anne frank ( annelies marie frank ) , german-born dutch child diarist ( died 1945 ) june 18 – grigorijus kanovičius , jewish lithuanian writer june 20 – anne weale , english writer ( died 2007 ) june 25 – eric carle , american children 's writer and illustrator july 8 shirley ann grau , american short story writer a . t . q . stewart , northern irish historian and academic ( died 2010 ) july 22 – u . a . fanthorpe , english poet ( died 2009 ) july 31 – lynne reid banks , english novelist august 5 – al alvarez , english writer and poetry editor ( died 2019 ) august 14 – thomas meehan , american screenwriter ( died 2017 ) august 18 – anatoly kuznetsov , russian dissident novelist ( died 1979 ) august 21 – x . j . kennedy , american poet and translator august 27 – ira levin , american novelist and playwright ( died 2007 ) august 29 – thom gunn , anglo-american poet ( died 2004 ) october 7 – robert westall , english novelist and children 's writer ( died 1993 ) october 15 – milorad pavić , serbian novelist ( died 2009 ) october 21 – ursula k . le guin , american science fiction and fantasy author ( died 2018 ) october 23 – shamsur rahman , bengali poet ( died 2006 ) november 7 – steve carter , american playwright november 13 – theo aronson , south african-born british biographer ( died 2003 ) december 12 – john osborne , english playwright and screenwriter ( died 1994 ) december 16 – james moore , english author ( died 2017 ) december 17 – william safire , born safir , american columnist ( died 2009 ) december 19 – howard sackler , american dramatist and screenwriter ( died 1982 ) december 23 – monique watteau ( monique dubois ) , belgian fantasy novelist and artist december 31 – robert b . silvers , american literary editor ( died 2017 ) . deaths . january 15 – leonard cline , american novelist , poet and journalist ( heart failure , born 1893 ) douglas a . anderson introduction to cold spring press edition of the dark chamber . january 29 – hans prutz , german historian ( born 1843 ) february 6 – charlotte carmichael stopes , scottish writer and women 's rights activist ( born 1840 ) march 7 – auguste groner , austrian detective fiction writer ( born 1850 ) march 15 – grace rhys , irish novelist and poet ( born 1865 ) march 26 – katharine lee bates , american lyricist ( born 1859 ) march 31 – santeri nuorteva , soviet journalist and politician ( born 1881 ) april 12 – flora annie steel , english writer ( born 1847 ) april 16 – sir john morris-jones , welsh grammarian and poet ( born 1864 ) april 21 – lucy clifford ( mrs . w . k . clifford ) , english novelist , dramatist and screenwriter ( born 1846 ) may 19 – mary e . mann , english novelist and short story writer ( born 1848 ) june 8 – bliss carman , canadian poet ( born 1861 ) june 18 – vedam venkataraya sastry , sanskrit and telugu poet , critic and dramatist ( born 1853 ) june 22 alfred brunswig , german philosopher ( born 1877 ) ellen thorneycroft fowler , english writer of romances and children 's books ( born 1860 ) june 25 – georges courteline , french dramatist and novelist ( born 1858 ) june 28 – edward carpenter , english socialist poet and philosopher ( born 1844 ) july 15 – hugo von hofmannsthal , austrian novelist and poet ( born 1874 ) july 31 – josé de castro , portuguese journalist ( born 1868 ) august – mary maclane , canadian feminist writer ( born 1881 ) september 12 – rainis , latvian poet and playwright ( born 1865 ) september 19 – francis darwin , english botanist and academic ( born 1848 ) october – arno holz , german naturalist poet and dramatist ( born 1863 ) october 8 – max lehmann , german historian ( born 1845 ) october 19 – alexandru davila , romanian dramatist and diplomat ( born 1862 ) november 3 – olav aukrust , norwegian poet and teacher ( born 1883 ) november 29 – dallas lore sharp , american nature writer ( born 1870 ) december 10 – harry crosby , american publisher and poet ( suicide ; born 1898 ) unknown date – evelyn whitaker , english children 's writer ( born 1844 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : j . b . priestley , the good companions james tait black memorial prize for biography : lord david cecil , the stricken deer : or the life of cowper newbery medal for children 's literature : eric p . kelly , the trumpeter of krakow newdigate prize : phyllis hartnoll nobel prize in literature : thomas mann o . henry award : dorothy parker , '' big blonde '' ( short story ) pulitzer prize for drama : elmer l . rice , street scene pulitzer prize for poetry : stephen vincent benét , john brown 's body pulitzer prize for the novel : julia peterkin , scarlet sister mary . references .