Jacob Frank

historical background . there were numerous jewish secret societies of sabbateans ( followers of sabbatai zevi ) , known as dönmeh , in kresy ( now ukraine ) , map of kresy at : file : polish-lithuanian commonwealth 1635.png particularly in podolia and galicia , at the end of the seventeenth century . in expectation of the great messianic revolution , the members of these societies violated halakha . the mystical cult of the sabbateans is believed to have included both asceticism and sensuality : some did penance for their sins , subjected themselves to self-inflicted pain , and '' mourned for zion '' ; others disregarded the strict tzniut required by judaism , and at times were accused of being licentious . the polish rabbis attempted to ban the '' sabbatean heresy '' at the assembly at lwów ( now lviv in ukraine ) in 1722 . still , they could not fully succeed , as it was widely popular among the nascent jewish middle class . early life . jacob frank is believed to have been born as jakub lejbowicz to a polish-jewish family in korołówka , in podolia of eastern poland ( now in ukraine ) , in about 1726 . the polish historian gaudenty pikulski affirmed that frank was born in buchach pikulski , gaudenty , zlosc zydowska przeciwko bogu y blizniemu prawdzie y sumnieniu na obiasnienie talmudystow na dowod ich zaslepienia y religii dalekiey od prawa boskiego przez moyzesza danego , rodzielona na trzy czesci . , lwow , 1760 , p . 317 and agnon even showed the house where he was born was located on korołówka street in buchach . shmuel yosef agnon , ir umeloah , ” a city in its fullness '' , hebrew , עיר ומלואה , shoken 1973 , p . 221 his father was a sabbatean , and moved to chernivtsi , in the carpathian region of bukovina in 1730 , where the sabbatean influence at the time was strong . as a travelling merchant in textile and precious stones he often visited ottoman territories , where he earned the nickname '' frank '' , a name generally given in the east to europeans , and lived in the centers of contemporary sabbateanism , salonica and smyrna . in the early 1750s , frank became intimate with the leaders of the sabbateans . two followers of the sabbatian leader osman baba ( b . 1720 ) were witnesses at his wedding in 1752 . in 1755 he reappeared in podolia , gathered a group of local adherents , and began to preach the '' revelations '' which were communicated to him by the dönmeh in salonica . one of these gatherings in landskron ended in a scandal , and the rabbis ' attention was drawn to the new teachings . frank was forced to leave podolia , while his followers were hounded and denounced to the local authorities by the rabbis ( 1756 ) . at the rabbinical court held in the village of satanów ( today sataniv in ukraine ) the sabbateans were accused of having broken fundamental jewish laws of morality and modesty . the anti-talmudists . consequent to these disclosures the congress of rabbis in brody proclaimed a universal herem ( excommunication ) against all '' impenitent heretics '' , and made it obligatory upon every pious jew to seek them out and expose them . the sabbateans informed mikołaj dembowski , the catholic bishop of kamieniec podolski , poland , that they rejected the talmud and recognized only the sacred book of kabbalah , the zohar , which did not contradict the christian doctrine of the trinity . they stated that they regarded the messiah-deliverer as one of the embodiments of the three divinities . the bishop took frank and his followers ( the '' anti-talmudists '' , or '' zoharistic jews '' ) under his protection and in 1757 arranged a religious disputation between them and the rabbis of the traditionalist community . the anti-talmudists presented their theses , which began the intense dispute . the bishop sided in favour of the frankists and also ordered the burning of all copies of the talmud in poland . 10,000 volumes were destroyed , which was a tremendous loss for the jewish libraries of that era . after the death of the bishop , the sabbateans were subjected to severe persecution by the rabbis , although they succeeded in obtaining an edict from augustus iii of poland guaranteeing them safety . declaration of being a successor to sabbatai zevi . at this critical moment jacob frank came to iwania , proclaimed himself as a direct successor to sabbatai zevi and osman baba , and assured his adherents that he had received revelations from heaven . these revelations called for the conversion of frank and his followers to the christian religion , which was to be a visible transition stage to the future '' das '' or religion to be revealed by frank . in 1759 negotiations looking toward the conversion of the frankists to roman catholicism were being actively carried on with the higher representatives of the polish church ; at the same time the frankists tried to secure another discussion with the rabbis . the polish primate łubieński and the papal nuncio nicholas serra were suspicious of the aspirations of the frankists , but at the insistence of the administrator of the bishopric of lviv , the canon mikulski , the discussion was arranged . it was held in lwów and was presided over by mikulski . protestant missionaries also tried to detour the frankists to protestantism , and a handful did join the moravian church . baptism of the frankists . at the discussion in 1759 , the rabbis energetically repulsed their opponents . after the discussion the frankists were requested to demonstrate in practice their adherence to christianity ; jacob frank , who had then arrived in lwów , encouraged his followers to take the decisive step . the baptism of the frankists was celebrated with great solemnity in the churches of lwów , with members of the polish szlachta ( nobility ) acting as god-parents . the neophytes adopted the names of their godfathers and godmothers , and ultimately joined their ranks . frank himself was baptized in lwów ( september 17 , 1759 ) and again in warsaw the next day , with king augustus iii as his godfather . frank 's baptismal name was '' joseph '' ( józef ) . in the course of one year more than 500 individuals were converted to christianity at lwów , and nearly a thousand in the following year . by 1790 , 26,000 jews were recorded baptised in poland . mieses however , the frankists continued to be viewed with suspicion due to their strange doctrines . frank was arrested in warsaw on february 6 , 1760 and delivered to the church 's tribunal on the charge of heresy . he was convicted of teaching heresy , and imprisoned in the monastery of częstochowa . . prison and later days . frank 's imprisonment lasted thirteen years , yet it only increased his influence with the sect by surrounding him with the aura of martyrdom . many frankists established themselves near częstochowa , and kept up constant communication with their '' holy master '' . frank inspired his followers through mystical speeches and epistles , in which he stated that salvation could be gained only by first adopting the '' religion of edom '' and later adopting a future religion which frank called daas ( daat , or knowledge in hebrew ) . after the first partition of poland , frank was released by the russian general bibikov , who had occupied częstochowa , in august 1772 . dengel , ignatz philipp , nuntius joseph garampi in preussich schlesien . im jahre 1776 , rome , 1903 , p . 239 frank lived in the moravian town of brno until 1786 , surrounded by a retinue of adherents and pilgrims who came from poland . his daughter eve began to play an important role in the sect at this time . frank kept a force of armed men at his '' court '' . the future czar paul i of russia visited him together with joseph ii of austria . kraushar , aleksander , frank i frankiści polscy , 1726-1816 , krakow 1895 , ii , p . 36 accompanied by his daughter , frank repeatedly traveled to vienna , and succeeded in gaining the favor of the court . maria theresa regarded him as a disseminator of christianity among the jews , and it is even said that joseph ii was favorably inclined to the young eve frank . ultimately frank was deemed unmanageable and he was obliged to leave austria . he moved with his daughter and his retinue to offenbach , in germany , where he assumed the title of '' baron of offenbach , '' and lived as a wealthy nobleman , receiving financial support from his polish and moravian followers , who made frequent pilgrimages to offenbach . on the death of frank in 1791 , eve became the '' holy mistress '' and leader of the sect . her fortunes dwindled in the aftermath of the napoleonic wars , and she died in offenbach in 1816 . some frankists were active during the french revolution , such as moses dobruška , a son of frank 's sabbatian cousin in offenbach shendl dobruska . many of the frankists saw napoleon bonaparte as a potential messiah . the frankists scattered in poland and bohemia eventually intermarried into the gentry and middle class . maria szymanowska , a piano virtuoso , came from a frankist family . wanda grabowska , the mother of tadeusz boy-żeleński , also descended from frankists . ( polish ) między dwiema trumnami , rzeczpospolita , 9 january 1999 in 1883 , a russian magazine русская старина ( russian old times ) issued memoirs of an influential official of the russian ministry of the interior , the privy councillor and staunch anti-semite o . a . pzhetslavsky . he promulgated the allegations that the mothers of '' three of the greatest men of poland '' ( frédéric chopin , adam mickiewicz and juliusz słowacki ) were converted jews from the frankist sect . similar assertions were put forth by mieses and balaban . adam mickiewicz , poet , patriot and prophet , regina grol , info poland classroom balaban , meir , the history of the frank movement , 2 vols . , 1934-1935 , pp . 254-259 . majer bałaban , '' linkle-toldot ha-tenuʻah ha-franḳit '' . tel aviv : devir , 694-695 1934/1935 magdalena opalski & israel bartal , poles and jews : a failed brotherhood p . 119–21 '' mickiewicz 's mother , descended from a converted frankist family '' : encyclopaedia judaica , art . mickiewicz , adam . '' mickiewicz 's frankist origins were well-known to the warsaw jewish community as early as 1838 ( according to evidence in the azdj of that year , p . 362 ) . the parents of the poet 's wife also came from frankist families . '' encyclopaedia judaica , art . '' frank , jacob , and the frankists '' . . notable sabbatian teachers of jakob frank . rabbi issohar , one of frank 's principal teachers . a disciple of hayim malakh , frank studied with him in izmir in 1750–52 . rabbi mordechai ben elias margalit of prague ( mardocheusz in polish ) , another of frank 's principal teachers . he helped introduce frank to the practices of the karakashi sect of the donmeh in the turkish empire , which worshipped beruchiah russo ( also known as osman baba ) . the collection of the words of the lord , translated , edited and annotated by harris lenowitz . frank traveled with him to salonika in november 1753 . he left bohemia and moved to the ottoman empire after jakob frank 's uncle moses meir kamenker was caught smuggling sabbatian literature into germany in 1725 . mordechai allegedly engaged in adultery and other antinomian conduct . maciejko , pawel ( 2011 ) . the mixed multitude : jacob frank and the frankist movement . philadelphia , pa : university of pennsylvania press . , pg . 15 leib , a jewish sabbatian teacher of frank 's during the latter 's childhood in wallachia and moldavia . he was also a wonderworker who attempted to dispel demons . . jacob frank 's writings . the collection of the words of the lord , available online in english . translated , edited and annotated by harris lenowitz , with an introduction by lenowitz . cultural references . jacob frank is the subject of andrzej żuławski 's book moliwda ( 1994 ) . the personality of frank has inspired the polish historical movie daas of 2011 directed by adrian panek . frank is played by olgierd łukaszewicz . ( pol . ) jacob frank is the central character in the novel by nobel prize winning polish writer olga tokarczuk the books of jacob ( pol . księgi jakubowe ) published in october 2014 by wydawnictwo literackie . see also . apostasy in judaism christianity and judaism criticism of the talmud harris lenowitz , a professor at the university of utah who has extensively studied frank 's writings list of messiah claimants schisms among the jews . references . bibliography . lenowitz , harris , “ the charlatan at the gottes haus in offenbach , ” in goldish , matt , and richard h . popkin , eds . , jewish messianism in the early modern world , dordrecth , kluwer academic , 2001 , pp . 189-202 . maciejko , pawel ( 2005 ) . '' 'baruch yavan and the frankist movement : intercession in an age of upheaval '' , jahrbuch des simon-dubnow-instituts 4 ( 2005 ) pp . & nbsp ; 333–354 . maciejko , pawel ( 2006 ) . '' 'christian elements in early frankist doctrine '' , gal-ed 20 ( 2006 ) pp . & nbsp ; 13–41 .