Thermal radiation

overview . thermal radiation is the emission of electromagnetic waves from all matter that has a temperature greater than absolute zero . thermal radiation reflects the conversion of thermal energy into electromagnetic energy . thermal energy is the kinetic energy of random movements of atoms and molecules in matter . all matter with a nonzero temperature is composed of particles with kinetic energy . these atoms and molecules are composed of charged particles , i.e . , protons and electrons . the kinetic interactions among matter particles result in charge acceleration and dipole oscillation . this results in the electrodynamic generation of coupled electric and magnetic fields , resulting in the emission of photons , radiating energy away from the body . electromagnetic radiation , including visible light , will propagate indefinitely in vacuum . the characteristics of thermal radiation depend on various properties of the surface from which it is emanating , including its temperature , its spectral emissivity , as expressed by kirchhoff 's law . the radiation is not monochromatic , i.e . , it does not consist of only a single frequency , but comprises a continuous spectrum of photon energies , its characteristic spectrum . if the radiating body and its surface are in thermodynamic equilibrium and the surface has perfect absorptivity at all wavelengths , it is characterized as a black body . a black body is also a perfect emitter . the radiation of such perfect emitters is called black-body radiation . the ratio of any body 's emission relative to that of a black body is the body 's emissivity , so that a black body has an emissivity of unity ( i.e . , one ) . absorptivity , reflectivity , and emissivity of all bodies are dependent on the wavelength of the radiation . due to reciprocity , absorptivity and emissivity for any particular wavelength are equal – a good absorber is necessarily a good emitter , and a poor absorber is a poor emitter . the temperature determines the wavelength distribution of the electromagnetic radiation . for example , the white paint in the diagram to the right is highly reflective to visible light ( reflectivity about 0.80 ) , and so appears white to the human eye due to reflecting sunlight , which has a peak wavelength of about 0.5 micrometers . however , its emissivity at a temperature of about , peak wavelength of about 12 micrometers , is 0.95 . thus , to thermal radiation it appears black . the distribution of power that a black body emits with varying frequency is described by planck 's law . at any given temperature , there is a frequency f max at which the power emitted is a maximum . wien 's displacement law , and the fact that the frequency is inversely proportional to the wavelength , indicates that the peak frequency f max is proportional to the absolute temperature t of the black body . the photosphere of the sun , at a temperature of approximately 6000 & nbsp ; k , emits radiation principally in the ( human- ) visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum . earth 's atmosphere is partly transparent to visible light , and the light reaching the surface is absorbed or reflected . earth 's surface emits the absorbed radiation , approximating the behavior of a black body at 300 & nbsp ; k with spectral peak at f max . at these lower frequencies , the atmosphere is largely opaque and radiation from earth 's surface is absorbed or scattered by the atmosphere . though about 10 % of this radiation escapes into space , most is absorbed and then re-emitted by atmospheric gases . it is this spectral selectivity of the atmosphere that is responsible for the planetary greenhouse effect , contributing to global warming and climate change in general ( but also critically contributing to climate stability when the composition and properties of the atmosphere are not changing ) . the incandescent light bulb has a spectrum overlapping the black body spectra of the sun and the earth . some of the photons emitted by a tungsten light bulb filament at 3000 & nbsp ; k are in the visible spectrum . most of the energy is associated with photons of longer wavelengths ; these do not help a person see , but still transfer heat to the environment , as can be deduced empirically by observing an incandescent light bulb . whenever em radiation is emitted and then absorbed , heat is transferred . this principle is used in microwave ovens , laser cutting , and rf hair removal . unlike conductive and convective forms of heat transfer , thermal radiation can be concentrated in a tiny spot by using reflecting mirrors , which concentrating solar power takes advantage of . instead of mirrors , fresnel lenses can also be used to concentrate radiant energy . ( in principle , any kind of lens can be used , but only the fresnel lens design is practical for very large lenses . ) either method can be used to quickly vaporize water into steam using sunlight . for example , the sunlight reflected from mirrors heats the ps10 solar power plant , and during the day it can heat water to . surface effects . lighter colors and also whites and metallic substances absorb less of the illuminating light , and as a result heat up less ; but otherwise color makes little difference as regards heat transfer between an object at everyday temperatures and its surroundings , since the dominant emitted wavelengths are nowhere near the visible spectrum , but rather in the far infrared . emissivities at those wavelengths are largely unrelated to visual emissivities ( visible colors ) ; in the far infra-red , most objects have high emissivities . thus , except in sunlight , the color of clothing makes little difference as regards warmth ; likewise , paint color of houses makes little difference to warmth except when the painted part is sunlit . the main exception to this is shiny metal surfaces , which have low emissivities both in the visible wavelengths and in the far infrared . such surfaces can be used to reduce heat transfer in both directions ; an example of this is the multi-layer insulation used to insulate spacecraft . low-emissivity windows in houses are a more complicated technology , since they must have low emissivity at thermal wavelengths while remaining transparent to visible light . nanostructures with spectrally selective thermal emittance properties offer numerous technological applications for energy generation and efficiency , e.g . , for cooling photovoltaic cells and buildings . these applications require high emittance in the frequency range corresponding to the atmospheric transparency window in 8 to 13 micron wavelength range . a selective emitter radiating strongly in this range is thus exposed to the clear sky , enabling the use of the outer space as a very low temperature heat sink . personalized cooling technology is another example of an application where optical spectral selectivity can be beneficial . conventional personal cooling is typically achieved through heat conduction and convection . however , the human body is a very efficient emitter of infrared radiation , which provides an additional cooling mechanism . most conventional fabrics are opaque to infrared radiation and block thermal emission from the body to the environment . fabrics for personalized cooling applications have been proposed that enable infrared transmission to directly pass through clothing , while being opaque at visible wavelengths , allowing the wearer to remain cooler . properties . there are 4 main properties that characterize thermal radiation ( in the limit of the far field ) : thermal radiation emitted by a body at any temperature consists of a wide range of frequencies . the frequency distribution is given by planck 's law of black-body radiation for an idealized emitter as shown in the diagram at top . the dominant frequency ( or color ) range of the emitted radiation shifts to higher frequencies as the temperature of the emitter increases . for example , a red hot object radiates mainly in the long wavelengths ( red and orange ) of the visible band . if it is heated further , it also begins to emit discernible amounts of green and blue light , and the spread of frequencies in the entire visible range cause it to appear white to the human eye ; it is white hot . even at a white-hot temperature of 2000 k , 99 % of the energy of the radiation is still in the infrared . this is determined by wien 's displacement law . in the diagram the peak value for each curve moves to the left as the temperature increases . the total amount of radiation of all frequency increases steeply as the temperature rises ; it grows as t 4 , where t is the absolute temperature of the body . an object at the temperature of a kitchen oven , about twice the room temperature on the absolute temperature scale ( 600 k vs . 300 k ) radiates 16 times as much power per unit area . an object at the temperature of the filament in an incandescent light bulb—roughly 3000 k , or 10 times room temperature—radiates 10,000 times as much energy per unit area . the total radiative intensity of a black body rises as the fourth power of the absolute temperature , as expressed by the stefan–boltzmann law . in the plot , the area under each curve grows rapidly as the temperature increases . the rate of electromagnetic radiation emitted at a given frequency is proportional to the amount of absorption that it would experience by the source , a property known as reciprocity . thus , a surface that absorbs more red light thermally radiates more red light . this principle applies to all properties of the wave , including wavelength ( color ) , direction , polarization , and even coherence , so that it is quite possible to have thermal radiation which is polarized , coherent , and directional , though polarized and coherent forms are fairly rare in nature far from sources ( in terms of wavelength ) . see section below for more on this qualification . as for photon statistics thermal light obeys super-poissonian statistics . near-field and far-field . the general properties of thermal radiation as described by the planck 's law apply if the linear dimension of all parts considered , as well as radii of curvature of all surfaces are large compared with the wavelength of the ray considered ' ( typically from 8-25 micrometres for the emitter at 300 k ) . indeed , thermal radiation as discussed above takes only radiating waves ( far-field , or electromagnetic radiation ) into account . a more sophisticated framework involving electromagnetic theory must be used for smaller distances from the thermal source or surface ( near-field thermal radiation ) . for example , although far-field thermal radiation at distances from surfaces of more than one wavelength is generally not coherent to any extent , near-field thermal radiation ( i.e . , radiation at distances of a fraction of various radiation wavelengths ) may exhibit a degree of both temporal and spatial coherence . planck 's law of thermal radiation has been challenged in recent decades by predictions and successful demonstrations of the radiative heat transfer between objects separated by nanoscale gaps that deviate significantly from the law predictions . this deviation is especially strong ( up to several orders in magnitude ) when the emitter and absorber support surface polariton modes that can couple through the gap separating cold and hot objects . however , to take advantage of the surface-polariton-mediated near-field radiative heat transfer , the two objects need to be separated by ultra-narrow gaps on the order of microns or even nanometers . this limitation significantly complicates practical device designs . another way to modify the object thermal emission spectrum is by reducing the dimensionality of the emitter itself . this approach builds upon the concept of confining electrons in quantum wells , wires and dots , and tailors thermal emission by engineering confined photon states in two- and three-dimensional potential traps , including wells , wires , and dots . such spatial confinement concentrates photon states and enhances thermal emission at select frequencies . to achieve the required level of photon confinement , the dimensions of the radiating objects should be on the order of or below the thermal wavelength predicted by planck 's law . most importantly , the emission spectrum of thermal wells , wires and dots deviates from planck 's law predictions not only in the near field , but also in the far field , which significantly expands the range of their applications . subjective color to the eye of a black body thermal radiator . where \epsilon_1 and \epsilon_2 are the emissivities of the surfaces . formulas for radiative heat transfer can be derived for more particular or more elaborate physical arrangements , such as between parallel plates , concentric spheres and the internal surfaces of a cylinder . . see also . incandescence infrared photography interior radiation control coating heat transfer planck radiation radiant cooling sakuma–hattori equation thermal dose unit view factor . references . further reading . e.m . sparrow and r.d . cess . radiation heat transfer . hemisphere publishing corporation , 1978 . thermal infrared remote sensing : kuenzer , c . and s . dech ( 2013 ) : thermal infrared remote sensing : sensors , methods , applications ( remote sensing and digital image processing 17 ) . dordrecht : springer . external links . black body emission calculator heat transfer atmospheric radiation infrared temperature calibration 101