Profit maximization

basic definitions . any costs incurred by a firm may be classed into two groups : fixed costs and variable costs . fixed costs , which occur only in the short run , are incurred by the business at any level of output , including zero output . these may include equipment maintenance , rent , wages of employees whose numbers can not be increased or decreased in the short run , and general upkeep . variable costs change with the level of output , increasing as more product is generated . materials consumed during production often have the largest impact on this category , which also includes the wages of employees who can be hired and laid off in the short-run span of time under consideration . fixed cost and variable cost , combined , equal total cost . revenue is the amount of money that a company receives from its normal business activities , usually from the sale of goods and services ( as opposed to monies from security sales such as equity shares or debt issuances ) . the five ways formula is to increase leads , conversation rates , average dollar sale , average number of sales and average product profit . profits can be increased by up to 1000 percent , this is important for sole traders and small businesses let alone big businesses but none the less all profit maximization is a matter of each business stage and greater returns for profit sharing thus higher wages and motivation . entrepreneur.com marginal cost and marginal revenue , depending on whether the calculus approach is taken or not , are defined as either the change in cost or revenue as each additional unit is produced , or the derivative of cost or revenue with respect to the quantity of output . for instance , taking the first definition , if it costs a firm 400 to produce 5 units and 480 to produce 6 , the marginal cost of the sixth unit is 80 dollars . total revenue–total cost perspective . right to obtain the profit maximizing output quantity , we start by recognizing that profit is equal to total revenue ( tr ) minus total cost ( tc ) . given a table of costs and revenues at each quantity , we can either compute equations or plot the data directly on a graph . the profit-maximizing output is the one at which this difference reaches its maximum . in the accompanying diagram , the linear total revenue curve represents the case in which the firm is a perfect competitor in the goods market , and thus can not set its own selling price . the profit-maximizing output level is represented as the one at which total revenue is the height of c and total cost is the height of b ; the maximal profit is measured as the length of the segment cb . this output level is also the one at which the total profit curve is at its maximum . if , contrary to what is assumed in the graph , the firm is not a perfect competitor in the output market , the price to sell the product at can be read off the demand curve at the firm 's optimal mechanism . this optimal quantity of output is the quantity at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost . marginal revenue–marginal cost perspective . right an equivalent perspective relies on the relationship that , for each unit sold , marginal profit ( mπ ) equals marginal revenue ( mr ) minus marginal cost ( mc ) . then , if marginal revenue is greater than marginal cost at some level of output , marginal profit is positive and thus a greater quantity should be produced , and if marginal revenue is less than marginal cost , marginal profit is negative and a lesser quantity should be produced . at the output level at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost , marginal profit is zero and this quantity is the one that maximizes profit . since total profit increases when marginal profit is positive and total profit decreases when marginal profit is negative , it must reach a maximum where marginal profit is zero—where marginal cost equals marginal revenue—and where lower or higher output levels give lower profit levels . lipsey ( 1975 ) . pp . 245–47 . in calculus terms , the requirement that the optimal output have higher profit than adjacent output levels is that : : \frac , where and refer to the midpoints between the old and new values of price and quantity respectively . the marginal revenue from an incremental unit of output has two parts : first , the revenue the firm gains from selling the additional units or , giving the term p∆q . the additional units are called the marginal units . besanko , d . and beautigam , r , ( 2001 ) p . 408 . producing one extra unit and selling it at price p brings in revenue of p . moreover , one must consider '' the revenue the firm loses on the units it could have sold at the higher price '' —that is , if the price of all units had not been pulled down by the effort to sell more units . these units that have lost revenue are called the infra-marginal units . that is , selling the extra unit results in a small drop in price which reduces the revenue for all units sold by the amount q ( ∆p/∆q ) . thus mr p + q ( ∆p/∆q ) p +p ( q/p ) ( ∆p/∆q ) p + p/ ( ped ) , where ped is the price elasticity of demand characterizing the demand curve of the firms ' customers , which is negative . then setting mc mr gives mc p + p/ped so ( p − mc ) /p −1/ped and p mc/1 + ( 1/ped ) . thus the optimal markup rule is : : ( p − mc ) /p 1/ ( −ped ) : or equivalently : p ped/ ( 1 + ped ) × mc . samuelson , w and marks , s ( 2003 ) . p . 103–05 . pindyck , r and rubinfeld , d ( 2001 ) p . 341 . in other words , the rule is that the size of the markup of price over the marginal cost is inversely related to the absolute value of the price elasticity of demand for the good . the optimal markup rule also implies that a non-competitive firm will produce on the elastic region of its market demand curve . marginal cost is positive . the term ped/ ( 1+ped ) would be positive so p > 0 only if ped is between −1 and −∞ ( that is , if demand is elastic at that level of output ) . besanko and braeutigam ( 2005 ) p . 419 . the intuition behind this result is that , if demand is inelastic at some value q 1 then a decrease in q would increase p more than proportionately , thereby increasing revenue pq ; since lower q would also lead to lower total cost , profit would go up due to the combination of increased revenue and decreased cost . thus q 1 does not give the highest possible profit . marginal product of labor , marginal revenue product of labor , and profit maximization . the general rule is that the firm maximizes profit by producing that quantity of output where marginal revenue equals marginal cost . the profit maximization issue can also be approached from the input side . that is , what is the profit maximizing usage of the variable input ? samuelson , w and marks , s ( 2003 ) . p . 230 . to maximize profit the firm should increase usage of the input '' up to the point where the input 's marginal revenue product equals its marginal costs '' . samuelson , w and marks , s ( 2003 ) . p . 23 . so mathematically the profit maximizing rule is mrp l mc l , where the subscript l refers to the commonly assumed variable input , labor . the marginal revenue product is the change in total revenue per unit change in the variable input . that is mrp l ∆tr/∆l . mrp l is the product of marginal revenue and the marginal product of labor or mrp l mr x mp l . sub-optimal profit maximization . oftentimes , businesses will attempt to maximize their profits even though their optimization strategy typically leads to a sub-optimal quantity of goods produced for the consumers . when deciding a given quantity to produce , a firm will often try to maximize its own producer surplus , at the expense of decreasing the overall social surplus . as a result of this decrease in social surplus , consumer surplus is also minimized , as compared to if the firm did not elect to maximize their own producer surplus . government regulation . in an attempt to prevent businesses from abusing their power to maximize their own profits , governments often intervene to stop them in their tracks . a major example of this is through anti-trust which effectively outlaws most industry monopoly . through this regulation , consumers enjoy a better relationship with the companies that serve them , even though the company itself may suffer , financially speaking .