Dialogue

etymology . the term dialogue stems from the greek διάλογος ( dialogos , conversation ) ; its roots are διά ( dia : through ) and λόγος ( logos : speech , reason ) . the first extant author who uses the term is plato , in whose works it is closely associated with the art of dialectic . latin took over the word as dialogus . '' dialogue '' , oxford english dictionary , 2nd edition . as genre . antiquity and the middle ages . dialogue as a genre in the middle east and asia dates back to ancient works , such as sumerian disputations preserved in copies from the late third millennium bc , g . j . , and h . l . j . vanstiphout . 1991 . dispute poems and dialogues in the ancient and mediaeval near east : forms and types of literary debates in semitic and related literatures . leuven : department oriëntalistiek . rigvedic dialogue hymns and the mahabharata . in the east , in 13th century japan , dialogue was used in important philosophical works . in the 1200s , nichiren daishonin wrote some of his important writings in dialogue form , describing a meeting between two characters in order to present his argument and theory , such as in '' conversation between a sage and an unenlightened man '' ( the writings of nichiren daishonin 1 : pp.99-140 , dated around 1256 ) , and '' on establishing the correct teaching for the peace of the land '' ( ibid . , pp.6-30 ; dated 1260 ) , while in other writings he used a question and answer format , without the narrative scenario , such as in '' questions and answers about embracing the lotus sutra '' ( ibid . , pp.55-67 , possibly from 1263 ) . the sage or person answering the questions was understood as the author . in the west , plato ( c . 437 bc – c . 347 bc ) has commonly been credited with the systematic use of dialogue as an independent literary form . ancient sources indicate , however , that the platonic dialogue had its foundations in the mime , which the sicily poets sophron and epicharmus had cultivated half a century earlier . these works , admired and imitated by plato , have not survived and we have only the vaguest idea of how they may have been performed . the mimes of herodas , which were found in a papyrus in 1891 , give some idea of their character . plato further simplified the form and reduced it to pure argumentative conversation , while leaving intact the amusing element of character-drawing . by about 400 bc he had perfected the socratic dialogue . all his extant writings , except the apology and epistles , use this form . following plato , the dialogue became a major literary genre in antiquity , and several important works both in latin and in greek were written . soon after plato , xenophon wrote his own symposium ; also , aristotle is said to have written several philosophical dialogues in plato 's style ( of which only fragments survive ) . . modern period to the present . two french writers of eminence borrowed the title of lucian 's most famous collection ; both fontenelle ( 1683 ) and fénelon ( 1712 ) prepared dialogues des morts ( '' dialogues of the dead '' ) . contemporaneously , in 1688 , the french philosopher nicolas malebranche published his dialogues on metaphysics and religion , thus contributing to the genre 's revival in philosophic circles . in english non-dramatic literature the dialogue did not see extensive use until berkeley employed it , in 1713 , for his treatise , three dialogues between hylas and philonous . his contemporary , the scottish philosopher david hume wrote dialogues concerning natural religion . a prominent 19th-century example of literary dialogue was landor 's imaginary conversations ( 1821–1828 ) . in germany , wieland adopted this form for several important satirical works published between 1780 and 1799 . in spanish literature , the dialogues of valdés ( 1528 ) and those on painting ( 1633 ) by vincenzo carducci are celebrated . italian writers of collections of dialogues , following plato 's model , include torquato tasso ( 1586 ) , galileo ( 1632 ) , galiani ( 1770 ) , leopardi ( 1825 ) , and a host of others . in the 19th century , the french returned to the original application of dialogue . the inventions of '' gyp '' , of henri lavedan , and of others , which tell a mundane anecdote wittily and maliciously in conversation , would probably present a close analogy to the lost mimes of the early sicilian poets . english writers including f . anstey also adopted the form , but these dialogues seem to have found less of a popular following among the english than their counterparts written by french authors . the platonic dialogue , as a distinct genre which features socrates as a speaker and one or more interlocutors discussing some philosophical question , experienced something of a rebirth in the 20th century . authors who have recently employed it include george santayana , in his eminent dialogues in limbo ( 1926 , 2nd ed . 1948 ; this work also includes such historical figures as alcibiades , aristippus , avicenna , democritus , and dionysius the younger as speakers ) . also edith stein and iris murdoch used the dialogue form . stein imagined a dialogue between edmund husserl ( phenomenologist ) and thomas aquinas ( metaphysical realist ) . murdoch included not only socrates and alcibiades as interlocutors in her work acastos : two platonic dialogues ( 1986 ) , but featured a young plato himself as well . more recently timothy williamson wrote tetralogue , a philosophical exchange on a train between four people with radically different epistemology views . in the 20th century , philosophical treatments of dialogue emerged from thinkers including mikhail bakhtin , paulo freire , martin buber , and david bohm . although diverging in many details , these thinkers have proposed a holistic concept of dialogue . educators such as freire and ramón flecha have also developed a body of theory and techniques for using egalitarian dialogue as a pedagogical tool . . as topic . martin buber assigns dialogue a pivotal position in his theology . his most influential work is titled i and thou . buber cherishes and promotes dialogue not as some purposive attempt to reach conclusions or express mere points of view , but as the very prerequisite of authentic relationship between man and man , and between man and god . buber 's thought centers on '' true dialogue '' , which is characterized by openness , honesty , and mutual commitment . the second vatican council placed a major emphasis on dialogue with the world . most of the council 's documents involve some kind of dialogue : dialogue with other religions ( nostra aetate ) , dialogue with other christians ( unitatis redintegratio ) , dialogue with modern society ( gaudium et spes ) and dialogue with political authorities ( dignitatis humanae ) . however , in the english translations of these texts , '' dialogue '' was used to translate two latin words with distinct meanings , colloquium ( '' discussion '' ) and dialogus ( '' dialogue '' ) . the choice of terminology appears to have been strongly influenced by buber 's thought . the physicist david bohm originated a related form of dialogue where a group of people talk together in order to explore their assumptions of thinking , meaning , communication , and social effects . this group consists of ten to thirty people who meet for a few hours regularly or a few continuous days . in a bohm dialogue , dialoguers agree to leave behind debate tactics that attempt to convince and , instead , talk from their own experience on subjects that are improvised on the spot . in his influential works , russian philosopher mikhail bakhtin provided an extralinguistic methodology for analysing the nature and meaning of dialogue : maranhão 1990 , p.51 dialogic relations have a specific nature : they can be reduced neither to the purely logical ( even if dialectical ) nor to the purely linguistic ( compositional-syntax ) they are possible only between complete utterances of various speaking subjects . where there is no word and no language , there can be no dialogic relations ; they can not exist among objects or logical quantities ( concepts , judgments , and so forth ) . dialogic relations presuppose a language , but they do not reside within the system of language . they are impossible among elements of a language . bakhtin 1986 , p.117 the brazilian educationalist paulo freire , known for developing popular education , advanced dialogue as a type of pedagogy . freire held that dialogued communication allowed students and teachers to learn from one another in an environment characterized by respect and equality . a great advocate for oppressed peoples , freire was concerned with praxis—action that is informed and linked to people 's values . dialogued pedagogy was not only about deepening understanding ; it was also about making positive changes in the world : to make it better . . as practice . dialogue is used as a practice in a variety of settings , from education to business . influential theorists of dialogal education include paulo freire and ramon flecha . in the united states , an early form of dialogic learning emerged in the great books movement of the early to mid-20th century , which emphasized egalitarian dialogues in small classes as a way of understanding the foundational texts of the western canon . institutions that continue to follow a version of this model include the great books foundation , shimer college in chicago , and st . john 's college in annapolis and santa fe . . egalitarian dialogue . egalitarian dialogue is a concept in dialogic learning . it may be defined as a dialogue in which contributions are considered according to the validity of their reasoning , instead of according to the status or position of power of those who make them . . structured dialogue . structured dialogue represents a class of dialogue practices developed as a means of orienting the dialogic discourse toward problem understanding and consensus action . whereas most traditional dialogue practices are unstructured or semi-structured , such conversational modes have been observed as insufficient for the coordination of multiple perspectives in a problem area . a disciplined form of dialogue , where participants agree to follow a dialogue framework or a facilitator , enables groups to address complex shared problems . aleco christakis ( who created structured dialogue design ) and john n . warfield ( who created science of generic design ) were two of the leading developers of this school of dialogue . the rationale for engaging structured dialogue follows the observation that a rigorous bottom-up democratic form of dialogue must be structured to ensure that a sufficient variety of stakeholders represents the problem system of concern , and that their voices and contributions are equally balanced in the dialogic process . structured dialogue is employed for complex problems including peacemaking ( e.g . , civil society dialogue project in cyprus ) and indigenous community development . , as well as government and social policy formulation . in one deployment , structured dialogue is ( according to a european union definition ) '' a means of mutual communication between governments and administrations including eu institutions and young people . the aim is to get young people 's contribution towards the formulation of policies relevant to young peoples lives . '' definition of structured dialogue focused on youth matters the application of structured dialogue requires one to differentiate the meanings of discussion and deliberation . groups such as worldwide marriage encounter and retrouvaille use dialogue as a communication tool for married couples . both groups teach a dialogue method that helps couples learn more about each other in non-threatening postures , which helps to foster growth in the married relationship . . dialogical leadership . the german philosopher and classicist karl-martin dietz emphasizes the original meaning of dialogue ( from greek dia-logos , i.e . 'two words ' ) , which goes back to heraclitus : '' the logos . answers to the question of the world as a whole and how everything in it is connected . logos is the one principle at work , that gives order to the manifold in the world . '' karl-martin dietz : acting independently for the good of the whole . from dialogical leadership to a dialogical corporate culture . heidelberg : menon 2013 . p . 10 . for dietz , dialogue means '' a kind of thinking , acting and speaking , which the logos '' passes through '' '' dietz : acting independently for the good of the whole . p . 10 . therefore , talking to each other is merely one part of '' dialogue '' . acting dialogically means directing someone 's attention to another one and to reality at the same time . karl-martin dietz : dialog die kunst der zusammenarbeit . 4 . auflage . heidelberg 2014 . p . 7 . against this background and together with thomas kracht , karl-martin dietz developed what he termed '' dialogical leadership '' as a form of organizational management . karl-martin dietz , thomas kracht : dialogische führung . grundlagen - praxis fallbeispiel : dm-drogerie markt . 3 . auflage . frankfurt am main : campus 2011 . in several german enterprises and organisations it replaced the traditional human resource management , e.g . in the german drugstore chain dm-drogerie markt . separately , and earlier to thomas kracht and karl-martin dietz , rens van loon published multiple works on the concept of dialogical leadership , starting with a chapter in the 2003 book the organization as story . . moral dialogues . moral dialogues are social processes which allow societies or communities to form new shared moral understandings . moral dialogues have the capacity to modify the moral positions of a sufficient number of people to generate widespread approval for actions and policies that previously had little support or were considered morally inappropriate by many . communitarian philosopher amitai etzioni has developed an analytical framework which—modeling historical examples—outlines the reoccurring components of moral dialogues . elements of moral dialogues include : establishing a moral baseline ; sociological dialogue starters which initiate the process of developing new shared moral understandings ; the linking of multiple groups ' discussions in the form of “ megalogues ” ; distinguishing the distinct attributes of the moral dialogue ( apart from rational deliberations or culture wars ) ; dramatization to call widespread attention to the issue at hand ; and , closure through the establishment of a new shared moral understanding . moral dialogues allow people of a given community to determine what is morally acceptable to a majority of people within the community . see also . argumentation theory collaborative leadership deliberation dialogical self dialogue among civilizations dialogue ( bakhtin ) dialogue mapping intercultural dialogue interfaith dialogue intergroup dialogue rogerian argument speech . notes . bibliography . bakhtin , m . m . ( 1986 ) speech genres and other late essays . trans . by vern w . mcgee . austin , tx : university of texas press . maranhão , tullio ( 1990 ) the interpretation of dialogue university of chicago press e . di nuoscio , '' epistemologia del dialogo . una difesa filosofica del confronto pacifico tra culture '' , carocci , roma , 2011 . external links .