1900 in sports

athletics . usa outdoor track and field championships . american football . college championship college football national championship – yale bulldogs professional championships western pennsylvania championship – homestead library & athletic club . association football . brazil club athletico paulistano was established in cerqueira cesar area , sao paulo . england the football league – aston villa 50 points , sheffield united 48 , sunderland 41 , wolves 39 , newcastle united 36 , derby county 36 fa cup final – bury 4–0 southampton at crystal palace , london . germany german football association ( i.e . , the deutscher fußball-bund or dfb ) founded in leipzig by representatives of 86 clubs ( 28 january ) . fc bayern munich founded on 27 february as schwabinger bayern at a meeting in munich 's gisela restaurant by dissident players from a club called mtv 1879 . the name was later changed to bayern roten ( reds ) . italy s.s . lazio officially founded on january 9 . olympic games football at the 1900 summer olympics : upton park fc ( great britain ) club française ( france ) université de bruxelles ( belgium ) scotland scottish football league – rangers scottish cup final – celtic 4–3 queen 's park at ibrox park uruguay formation of the uruguayan football association ( asociación uruguaya de fútbol or auf ) . athletics . jack caffery wins the fourth running of the boston marathon . australian rules football . vfl premiership melbourne football club wins the 4th vfl premiership : melbourne 4.10 ( 34 ) d fitzroy 3.12 ( 30 ) at east melbourne . baseball . national championship national league championship – brooklyn superbas events the national league contracts from twelve to eight clubs in a circuit of eight cities that will persist through 1952 . the western league takes the name '' american league '' and moves teams into chicago and cleveland . the chicago white sox win the pennant in this one season under the new name and the old minor league status . boxing . lineal world champions world heavyweight championship – james j . jeffries world middleweight championship – tommy ryan world welterweight championship – '' mysterious '' billy smith → william '' matty '' matthews → eddie connolly → james '' rube '' ferns → william '' matty '' matthews world lightweight championship – frank erne world featherweight championship – george dixon → terry mcgovern ( boxer ) world bantamweight championship – title vacant . cricket . image : victor trumper.jpg thumb 250px right victor trumper led the australian batting averages events cricket is suspended in south africa for the next three seasons on account of the boer war . yorkshire completes the county championship season unbeaten , the first time this has happened since the start of the official championship in 1890 . the minor counties championship ends in a three-way tie between three future first-class clubs . england county championship – yorkshire minor counties championship – durham , glamorgan and northamptonshire share the title most runs – k s ranjitsinhji 3065 87.57 ( hs 275 ) most wickets – wilfred rhodes 261 13.81 ( bb 8–23 ) wisden cricketers of the year – r . e . foster , schofield haigh , george herbert hirst , tom taylor , john tunnicliffe australia sheffield shield – new south wales most runs – victor trumper 721 72.10 ( hs 208 ) most wickets – monty noble 37 20.64 ( bb 6–91 ) india bombay presidency – europeans shared with parsees south africa currie cup – not contested west indies inter-colonial tournament – barbados . figure skating . world figure skating championships world men 's champion – gustav hügel ( austria ) . golf . image : harryvardon.jpg thumb 175px right harry vardon won his only us open title in 1900 major tournaments british open – john henry taylor u.s . open – harry vardon other tournaments british amateur – harold hilton british ladies amateur golf championship – rhona adair us amateur – walter travis us women 's amateur – frances c . griscom canadian amateur championship – george lyon olympic games ( men ) – charles sands olympic games ( women ) – margaret ives abbott . horse racing . image : diamond jubilee.jpg thumb 350px right diamond jubilee won the triple crown in england england grand national – ambush ii 1,000 guineas stakes – winifreda 2,000 guineas stakes – diamond jubilee the derby – diamond jubilee the oaks – la roche st . leger stakes – diamond jubilee australia melbourne cup – clean sweep canada queen 's plate – dalmoor ireland irish grand national – mavis of meath irish derby stakes – gallinaria usa kentucky derby – lieut . gibson preakness stakes – jean bereaud belmont stakes – ildrim . ice hockey . stanley cup 12–16 february — montreal shamrocks successfully defends the stanley cup , defeating winnipeg victorias in a best–of–three series 2–1 . 5–7 march — montreal shamrocks defeats halifax crescents in a cup challenge best–of–three series 2–0 . other events 10 march — montreal shamrocks wins the canadian amateur hockey league ( cahl ) championship for the second successive season with a regular season record of 7–1 . motor racing . gordon bennett cup james gordon bennett , jr . , owner of the new york herald newspaper and the international herald tribune , establishes the gordon bennett cup . he hopes that the creation of an international event will drive automobile manufacturers to improve their cars . each country is allowed to enter up to three cars , which must be fully built in the country that they represent and entered by that country 's automotive governing body . international racing colours are first established in this event . the trophy is awarded annually until 1905 , after which the automobile club de france ( acf ) holds the first grand prix motor racing event on the circuit de la sarthe at le mans the inaugural gordon bennett cup ( paris to lyon ) is won by fernand charron ( france ) driving a panhard paris-toulouse-paris trail the paris-toulouse-paris trail is run on 25–28 july over 1347 & nbsp ; km and won by alfred velghe ( france ) driving a mors in a time of 20:50:09 . the race is in retrospect sometimes referred to as the v grand prix de l'acf . 1900 grand prix and paris races . retrieved on 7 september 2009 . . olympic games . 1900 summer olympics the 1900 summer olympics takes place in paris but the olympic status of the games is underplayed and many competitors do not realise that they have participated in the modern olympics . women take part in the modern olympics for the first time . the first sportswomen to compete in the games are mme . brohy and mlle . ohnier of france in croquet . the first female champion is charlotte cooper of great britain in tennis . france wins the most medals ( 100 ) , and the most gold medals ( 25 ) . rowing . the boat race 31 march — cambridge wins the 57th the boat race 1900 . rugby league . england championship – not contested challenge cup final – swinton 16–8 salford at fallowfield stadium , manchester rugby league county leagues – runcorn rugby league county leagues – bradford fc . rugby union . home nations championship 18th home nations championship series is won by wales . speed skating . speed skating world championships men 's all-round champion – edvard engelsaas ( norway ) . tennis . events 9 february — davis cup competition is established , the inaugural competition being called the international lawn tennis challenge and involving only great britain and the usa . england the championships , wimbledon – reginald doherty ( gb ) defeats sydney smith ( gb ) 6–8 6–3 6–1 6–2 the championships , wimbledon – blanche bingley hillyard ( gb ) defeats charlotte cooper-sterry ( gb ) 4–6 6–4 6–4 france french men 's singles championship – paul aymé defeats andré prévost : details unknown french women 's singles championship – hélène prévost wins : details unknown usa us open ( tennis ) – malcolm whitman defeats william larned 6–4 1–6 6–2 6–2 us open ( tennis ) – myrtle mcateer defeats edith parker 6–2 6–2 6–0 davis cup 1900 international lawn tennis challenge – 3–0 at longwood cricket club ( grass ) boston , united states . references .