Black legend

origins . the term was first used by in 1893 : historian manuel fernández álvarez defined a black legend as : according to historian elvira roca barea , the formation of a black legend and its assimilation by the nation that suffers it is a phenomenon observed in all multicultural empires , not just in the spanish empire . the black legend of empires would be the result of the following combined factors : the combined propaganda attacks and efforts of most smaller powers of the time , as well as defeated rivals . the propaganda created by the many rival power factions within the empire itself against each other as part of their struggle to win more power . the self-criticism of the intellectual elite , which tends to be larger in larger empires . the need of the new powers consolidated during the empire 's life or after its dissolution to justify their new prevalence and the new order . the said black legend tends to fade once the next great power is established or once enough time has gone by . common elements of black legends . the defining feature of a black legend is that it has been fabricated and propagated intentionally . black legends also tend to share certain additional elements : permanent decadence . black legends tend to portray their subjects as being in a permanent estate of degeneration . degenerated or polluted version of something else . the subject is portrayed as a degenerated form of another , usually another civilization , nation , religion , race or person , who represents the true , pure and noble form of whatever the subject of the black legend should have been , and that tends to coincide with whoever is building the legend . accidentality of merit . black legends tend to minimize the merits they can not fully erase or hide , by either portraying them as '' mere luck '' , opportunism or , at best , as isolated qualities . obligatory moral actions . when a noble action by the subject can not be denied , it is somehow presented as done out of self-interest or out of necessity . natural moral inferiority and irredeemable character . the black legend has a final tone in which no hope of improvement is given , for the defects have been there from the beginning and can not be overcome due to , usually , moral weakness . it is usually shown by tales with : narrations of black legends tend to include : strong pathos , combined with a narrative that is easy to follow and emotionally loaded , created by : detailed , gruesome and morbid descriptions of torture and violence , which in many cases does not seem to serve any practical purpose . sexual elements , either extreme sexual depravity or repression or more often a combination of both . ignorance . lack of intellectual refinement or independence . greed , materialism , accusations of disrespect for sacred , or very important institutions or moral rules . a theme , usually greed , cruelty , sadism or bigoty , that constructs a consistent character and remains stable through the legend , even if the specific '' proofs '' to support it may change or even become opposite to the initial ones . simplicity of elements , often repetition of the same anecdotes or scenarios with different variations . motivations for actions are often offered , but they are either one single motivation or two , negative , clear cut , and constant . black legends . the russian black legend . there is an argument to be made about russia suffering from a black legend of its own . forgeries such as the will of peter the great would be part . lydia black describes in her work '' russians in alaska '' what she considers part of the development of a russian black legend . the roman black legend . growing bodies of evidence have shown that many of what was '' known '' about rome 's late days , regarding reports of moral decadence , sexual depravity , and excess – the stories about romans making themselves vomit in order to keep eating – had little to no ground in reality . these elements all fit the model of a black legend and can be the surviving remains of one who affected the roman empire during its life and the fall of the western roman empire , and was reverted by medieval authorities who needed the legacy of rome to legitimize their power . anti-americanism . jean-françois revel , in his book l'obsession anti-americaine describes the treatment of the us in the press of various nations in terms that remember those of a black legend , even though he does not use the term . the existence of an anti-american black legend is very contested but is a notion being discussed in some circles nevertheless . the spanish black legend . factors that would set the spanish black legend apart from others might include its abnormal permeation and outreach across nations , its racialized component , and its abnormal persistence through time . the causes of this have been suggested as : the overlap of the period of splendour of the spanish empire with the introduction of the printing press in england and germany , which allowed the propaganda of such colonial and religious rivals to spread faster and wider than ever before and persist in time long after the disappearance of the empire . there is a belief that the spanish , once known for their savagery , became successful in catholic conversions because the natives found the idols similar to their own religion . permanence after the dissolution of the empire due to religious factors . the dismantling and substitution of the spanish intellectual class by another more favorable to former rival france following the war of the spanish succession , which established the french narrative in the country . the unique characteristics of the colonial wars of the early contemporary period and the need of new colonial powers to legitimize claims in now independent spanish colonies , as well as the unique and new characteristics of the british empire that succeeded it . marías , julián ( 2006 ; primera edición 1985 ) . españa inteligible . razón histórica de las españas . alianza editorial . the hypothesis of a spanish black legend assimilating anti-hispanic propaganda from the 16th and 17th centuries has a high level of acceptance among specialists , but the extent of its reach and the data it affected , and what may have actually occurred instead , is still debated , especially regarding the spanish colonization of the americas , where few written sources have been proven reliable . historians are now exploring genetic as well as new scientific and statistical investigative techniques . john l . robinson , « the anti-hispanic bias in british historiography » , hispania sacra , 1992 , xliv there is also debate regarding whether the spanish black legend is still in effect today . while some authors like powell believe that the black legend continues to influence modern-day policies and international relationships , other authors , like henry kamen , believe it has been left behind . some have attributed many of the problems between the episcopal church and the latin community to the black legend .