Wilson Barrett

biography . 1880s . barrett was born into a farming family in essex . he is remembered as an actor of handsome appearance ( despite his small stature ) and with a powerful voice . he made his first appearance on the stage at halifax in 1864 , and then played in the provinces alone and with his wife , caroline heath , in east lynne . they married in 1866 , having two sons , frank and alfred , and three daughters , ellen , katherine and dorothea ( dollie ) . barrett capitalized on his early success as an actor to start a career as a producer . theatre study on victorian theatre , from the university of glasgow after managerial experience at the grand theatre leeds and elsewhere , in 1879 he took over the management of the old court theatre , where in the following year he introduced madame helena modjeska to london in an adaptation of maria stuart ( by schiller ) , together with productions of adrienne lecouvreur , la dame aux camélias and other plays . in 1881 , wilson barrett took over the recently refurbished princess 's theatre , where his melodramatic productions enjoyed great success ( if not quite as much as before ) , with attendance being the highest ever for this theatre . there barrett presented the lights o ' london , and then the silver king , regarded as the most successful melodrama of the 19th century in england . it debuted on 16 november 1882 , with barrett as wilfred denver . he played this part for three hundred nights without a break , and repeated its success in w . g . wills 's claudian . in 1885 he and henry arthur jones produced hoodman blind and in 1886 co-operated with clement scott in sister mary . in 1886 barrett left the princess 's theatre , and in this same year he made a visit to america , repeated in later years . in 1884 barrett had appeared in hamlet , only to promptly return to melodrama . he was not to find much success in any shakespearian role , except in the role of mercutio in romeo and juliet . though barrett had occasional seasons in london he acted chiefly in the provinces , with his company being one of the most successful of the decade , receiving a £2,000 average yearly profit just from the grand theatre leeds . his brother and his nephew were part of the company , and his grandson would join them eventually . his productions were not immune to accident . his melodrama romany rye was scheduled to open at the theatre royal , exeter on 5 september 1887 . in the middle of the performance , gas lighting ignited some gauze , fire broke out backstage , and then the curtain collapsed . anderson , david ( 2002 ) . the exeter theatre fire . entertainment technology press . according to jacob adler , wilson barrett was the most famous actor on the london stage of the 1880s . 1890s : the sign of the cross . by the 1890s , the london stage was already coming under new influences , and wilson barrett 's vogue in melodrama had waned , leaving him in financial difficulties . from 1894 he toured the united states , including the american and knickerbocker theatres of broadway . still there in 1895 , barrett found fortune again with a production which would effectively become his most successful , the historical tragedy the sign of the cross—which was originally produced in the united states at the grand opera house , st . louis on 28 march 1895 ; wilson barrett ’ s new play , kansas city daily journal , ( friday , 29 march 1895 ) , p.2 . in the united kingdom , at the grand theatre , leeds , on 26 august 1895 ; '' the sign of the cross '' , the era , ( 31 august 1895 ) , p.11 . in london , at the lyric theatre , london on 4 january 1896 ; lyric theatre : '' the sign of the cross '' , the ( london ) sunday times , ( sunday , 4 january 1896 ) , p.5 . and in australia , at her majesty 's theatre , sydney on 8 may 1897 before the curtain , the ( sydney ) sunday times , ( sunday , 9 may 1897 ) , p.2 . —in which barrett played marcus superbus , an old roman patrician of the years of nero , who falls in love with a young woman , mercia ( originally played by maud jeffries ) and converts to christianity for her , both sacrificing their lives in the arena to the lions . the plot in some ways strongly resembles the contemporary novel quo vadis , and it may have been an unofficial adaptation of it , though barrett never acknowledged this . the theatre was crowded with audiences largely composed of people outside the ordinary circle of playgoers , shepherded by enthusiastic local clergymen . barrett tried to repeat this success with more plays of a religious type , though not with equal effect , and several of his later attempts were failures . at the turn of the century he co-founded the company which became waddingtons , originally as a theatre-focused printing firm . david thornton , leeds : a historical dictionary of people , places and events ( huddersfield : northern heritage publications , 2013 ) , s.v . waddingtons . . death . wilson barrett died at liverpool , on 22 july 1904 . thanks largely to the success of the sign of the cross , he left £57,000 , even after periods of relative failure , mainly during his later years managing the old court theatre . london 's lost theatres , at google books his grandson , also named wilson barrett , became an actor director with the brandon-thomas company before starting his own repertory in 1939 , the wilson barrett company , which based itself in edinburgh 's lyceum , glasgow at the alhambra theatre glasgow and for a time in aberdeen . it also performed on television , at the edinburgh international festival and , by invitation , in south africa.the company was retired in 1954 . archives . barrett 's descendants placed the majority of wilson barrett 's papers at the harry ransom center at the university of texas at austin . over thirty boxes of materials include manuscript works by barrett , business and personal correspondence , extensive financial records and legal agreements , as well as photographs , playbills and programs relating to barrett 's productions , and barrett and heath family papers . additional wilson barrett materials at the ransom center include letters by barrett located in the literary manuscript collections of richard le gallienne , john ruskin , william winter , and robert lee wolff . the b . j . simmons co . costume design records include the company 's renderings for the sign of the cross . a marked script of barrett 's the manxman can be found in the playscripts and promptbooks collection . the british library , the folger shakespeare library , and the university of leeds special collections library each have a substantial number of letters by wilson barrett . the victoria & albert museum theatre and performance archives holds designs by edward william godwin for barrett 's productions of juana , claudian , hamlet , junius , and clito . the papers of wilson barrett the younger ( 1900-1981 ) , a grandson of wilson barrett who was also an actor-manager and toured with his own wilson barrett company , are located in the scottish theatre archive at the university of glasgow . works . theatre management . grand theatre leeds , 1878-1895 old court theatre , 1879 princess 's theatre , 1881–1886 olympic theatre ( london ) , 1890-1891 . . playwright . sister mary ( 1880s ) hoodman blind ( 1885 ) , with henry arthur jones good old times ( 1889 ) , with sir hall caine ben-my-chree ( 1889 ) , an adaptation of the deemster , with sir hall caine clito , with sydney grundy the manxman romany rye the sign of the cross ( 1895 ) lucky durham . later adaptations . in 1932 , cecil b . demille produced and directed a highly successful film version of the sign of the cross , starring fredric march as centurion marcus superbus , claudette colbert as poppea , charles laughton as nero , and elissa landi as mercia , the christian woman with whom marcus falls in love . acting . the silver king ( 1882 ) hamlet , romeo and juliet , othello the sign of the cross ( 1895 ) claudian , ben-my-chree , virginius , the manxman ( 1898 ) . notes . references . wilson barrett 's arrival : proposed new productions : story of a famous play , the sydney morning herald , ( monday , 6 december 1897 ) , pp.5-6 . r.w.b . , '' stage prejudice broken : wilson barrett 's 'sign of the cross ' '' , the age literary section , ( saturday , 24 january 1948 ) , p.6 . barrett , w . the sign of the cross , j.b . lippincott company , ( philadelphia ) , 1896 : barrett 's novelized version of his play . barrett , w . , the wilson barrett birthday book : illustrated , w . & d . downey , ( london ) , 1899 . mr . wilson barrett 's farewell to melbourne ( souvenir theatre programme ) , princess theatre , melbourne , 21 may 1898 . disher , m.w . , '' sex and salvation : the sign of the cross '' , pp.115-124 in disher , m.w . , melodrama : plots that thrilled , the macmillan company , ( new york ) , 1954 . shaw , g.b . , '' mainly about shakespeare '' , the saturday review , vol.83 , no.2170 , ( 29 may 1897 ) , pp.603-605 . thomas , j . , '' wilson barrett 's new school 'othello ' '' , the library chronicle of the university of texas at austin , new series no.22 , ( 1983 ) , pp.66-87 . thomas , j.m . , the art of the actor-manager : wilson barrett and the victorian theatre , umi research press , ( ann arbor ) , 1984 . external links . wilson barrett papers at the harry ransom center biography , at encyclopedia.com picture collection , at the national portrait gallery