Michael Grade

early life . grade was born into a jewish show business family originally called winogradsky ; his father was the theatrical agent leslie grade and his uncles were the impresarios lew grade and bernard delfont . when he was three years old his mother left the family to conduct a relationship with wrestling commentator kent walton . grade was brought up by his grandmother , and only saw his non-jewish mother once more as an adult . michael freedland '' interview : michael grade '' , the jewish chronicle , 10 march 2011 he was educated at stowe school in buckinghamshire and st dunstan 's college in london . career . grade joined the daily mirror in 1960 , and was a sports columnist from 1964 to 1966 . by his own account ( as related on channel 4 chat show the late clive james ) , the job had been organised by his father . when leslie grade suffered a serious stroke in 1966 , the 23-year-old michael moved into his theatrical business . in 1969 , he moved to london management & representation . among the artists whom grade represented were morecambe and wise ( he successfully negotiated the duo 's defection from atv to bbc2 in 1968 ) and larry grayson . lwt . grade entered the television industry in 1973 when he joined london weekend television ( lwt ) as deputy controller of programmes ( entertainment ) . steve bryant '' grade , michael ( 1943– ) '' in horace newcomb ( ed . ) encyclopedia of television ] , chicago : fitzroy dearborn , 2004 , pp . 1020–21 during this time he bought the scripts of an african-american sitcom good times which had an all-black cast . howard malchow special relations : the americanization of britain ? , stanford , ca : stanford university press , 2011 , p.189 adapted as the fosters ( 1976–77 ) , it became the first british sitcom to have an entirely black cast . at lwt , grade worked with both john birt and greg dyke . after he became director of programmes in 1977 , grade commissioned the series mind your language , but later cancelled it . at an event at the edinburgh television festival in 1985 , he agreed that the series was racist , and said that '' it was really irresponsible of us to put it out '' . sarita malik representing black britain : black and asian images on television , thousand oaks , california : sage , 2002 , p.97 in what was termed 'snatch of the day ' by the press in 1978 , grade attempted the acquisition of exclusive screening rights to football league matches . previously the bbc had held the more desirable rights , but the office of fair trading intervened , and grade 's purchase was revoked . the package of recorded highlights on saturday evenings now alternates each season between itv and the bbc . tim bradford when saturday comes , london : penguin , 2005 , pp . 882–83 also in 1978 , grade managed to place under contract the entertainer bruce forsyth who had helped the bbc to dominate the saturday evening television ratings through the decade via the generation game series . his new vehicle was titled bruce forsyth 's big night and was intended to feature all his talents in one programme lasting two hours . the budget was £2million for a fourteen-week run . jules stenson brucie : the biography of sir bruce forsyth , london : john blake publishing , p.88 the new series was considered a disaster , with the press turning against the host , but did achieve an initial audience of 14 million . bruce forsyth bruce : the autobiography , london : pan , 2001 , p.198 the generation game , with new host larry grayson , managed to achieve a larger audience . joe moran armchair nation : an intimate history of britain in front of the tv , london : profile books , 2013 , p.195 lwt 's big night was not recommissioned . grade announced at a press conference in may 1979 that lwt had secured a contract with a production company formed by television dramatist dennis potter and his producer kenith trodd . john r . cook dennis potter : a life on screen , manchester : manchester university press , 1998 , pp . 102–3 the corporate association proved short-lived , with both sides having insufficient experience for budgeting drama shot on film , and was terminated by grade in the summer of 1980 . cook dennis potter , pp . 194–97 only three of what had been projected as six filmed plays by potter were shot and screened . humphrey carpenter dennis potter , london : faber , 1999 1998 , p.394 grade though , was directly involved with some of the playwright 's later commissions . grade approved production of the professionals and initiated the long-running arts ' programme the south bank show . rowena mason '' michael grade at itv : it seemed like a good idea at the time '' , daily telegraph , 23 april 2009 in 1981 , grade left lwt to begin a two-year period as the president of embassy television in the united states . in the times he was quoted as stating , '' it is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity ; it is , if you like , a gamble i want to take '' . his pay rose from £32,000 to 250,000 per annum . janine gibson and maggie brown '' amid the suits , a man who stands out '' , the guardian , 3 april 2004 during this time he was largely involved in developing and selling sitcoms in this period : '' when you read 30 or 40 comedy scripts a week , you get a bit barking . '' grade produced for the only time in his career his only series , a nine-part adaptation of kane and abel , the novel by jeffrey archer . in a jewish chronicle interview with michael freedland in 2011 , grade said he had '' missed public service broadcasting , real drama , news , current affairs '' . . bbc . grade joined bbc television in early summer 1984 , becoming controller of bbc 1 on 1 september 1984 , top job for grade at bbc 1 : the times ( london , england ) , thursday , 31 may 1984 early-evening ratings war likely if bbc replaces 'sixty minutes . hewson , david the times ( london , england ) , wednesday , 6 june 1984 , p.3 . taking , as he told michael freedland , '' the biggest pay cut in history '' ; his salary went down from 500,000 , excluding large bonuses , to £37,000 a year . later he became director of programmes in 1986 , and managing director designate in 1987 , before leaving the bbc at the end of 1987 . his three-year tenure as a bbc controller was controversial . grade cancelled the rights to screen dallas while fighting thames television for the rights to the series ( although this decision was subsequently reversed ) . he cut short the expensive serialisation of the tripods trilogy , written by samuel youd , because he was dissatisfied with the ratings it had achieved after two seasons . he also considered cancelling the sitcom blackadder , judging the first series to be unfunny . in exchange for renewing blackadder , he required that it become a wholly studio-based production on a lower budget . mark lewisohn , bbc guide to comedy ( c.2003 ) via the wayback machine grade agreed to commission dennis potter 's serial the singing detective ( 1986 ) after a brief meeting with jonathan powell , then the bbc 's head of drama . neil midgley . '' michael grade : ' i think the bbc has become too bureaucratic ' '' . radio times . 2 april 2012 it was a highlight of this period , but came under criticism from mary whitehouse and the tabloid press for its content . carpenetr dennis potter , pp . 455–56 referring to the depiction of an illicit sexual encounter in episode three , grade said : '' there are very few people in television drama that you are prepared to trust with scenes like this . but dennis potter is one of them '' . cited in cook dennis potter : a life on screen , p.242 during his time as controller , grade was also responsible for purchasing the australian soap opera neighbours for bbc1 's new daytime schedule ; it debuted on british television on 27 october 1986 . he was also responsible for repeating neighbours , at first exclusively an afternoon programme , in a later timeslot ( on the advice of his daughter , alison , who was annoyed that she could not watch it due to her being at school ) . this proved to be a successful scheduling decision , with audiences in excess of 18 & nbsp ; million for the new 5.35 & nbsp ; pm broadcasts . other successes during grade 's tenure included the debut of soap operas eastenders and howards ' way in 1985 and the hospital drama casualty in 1986 . he was also praised by bob geldof for agreeing to broadcast the charity rock concert live aid for 24 hours . in november 1984 he decided to end screening beauty pageants , stating , '' i believe these contests no longer merit national air time . they are an anachronism in this day and age of equality and verging on the offensive . '' . doctor who controversy . grade announced on 27 february 1985 that season 23 of doctor who , which was scheduled to be transmitted from january to march 1986 , would be postponed as he had decided that the programme 's budget would be better spent on other drama productions . stephen cook '' doctor who fans upset as bbc postpones new series '' , the guardian , 28 february 1985 ( website reprint : 28 february 2012 ) what became an 18-month hiatus for doctor who ( the series did not resume transmission until september 1986 ) prompted a strong reaction from viewers . grade was also noted for his strong dislike of the series , such as in an interview in 2004 , where he said : '' i thought it was horrible , awful . i thought it was so outdated . it was just a little show for a few pointy head doctor who fans . it was also very violent and it had lost its magic '' . in an appearance on the bbc 's room 101 in 2002 , grade chose the series as one of his hates , criticised its production values and said that he had little interest in , or sympathy for , science fiction . eric saward , the script editor of doctor who at the time of its suspension , responded to grade 's criticism a few years later . during the audio commentary of the 2008 dvd of the doctor who serial warriors of the deep . in his view , grade 's comments were unfair because he was in the position to allocate more resources to the programme and thus improve its quality . however , actress katy manning , who had portrayed jo grant of jon pertwee 's doctor , praised grade 's treatment of the series on the dvd commentary for the mind of evil ( 1971 ) . in her view , grade '' was actually doing the right thing '' , and she credited the long break prior to 2005 with rejuvenating the series . voice-over commentary on the bbc dvd '' the mind of evil '' ( 1971 , 2013 ) in the autumn of 1986 , grade decided that season 24 of doctor who could only happen on the condition that colin baker was removed from the title role . years later grade stated that he thought baker 's portrayal of the doctor was '' utterly unlikeable ; absolutely god-awful in fact '' . however , his immediate predecessor in the role , peter davison , argued in 2018 that the decision to dismiss baker was more to do with the executives wanting to get rid of the series ' producer , john nathan-turner , saying : '' i was upset about what happened , really – because , first of all , it was n't to do with colin , i know that . it was to do with other issues . the power structure in the bbc had changed and they did n't want john nathan-turner around is the truth of it . '' following the end of the first series of the revived doctor who in 2005 , he wrote a letter to mark thompson , the bbc director general , congratulating all involved in the production on its success , signing-off with '' ps never dreamed i would ever write this . must be going soft ! '' in an interview for radio times in 2012 , grade commented : '' from clunky daleks that could n't go up and down stairs to the filmic qualities today of doctor who , it 's a transformation . the show still leaves me cold , but i admire it , which i never did before . '' . channel 4 . grade accepted the post of chief executive of channel 4 , succeeding jeremy isaacs , and taking up his post at the beginning of 1988 . it was a decision which led isaacs to criticise the appointment and to threaten to '' throttle '' grade if the nature of the channel was altered . howell raines '' london : will mrs . thatcher squeeze the beeb ? will british tv be americanized ? stay tuned . '' , the new york times , 20 december 1987 he phased out some of its more high-brow programming , for which he was accused of '' dumbing down '' ; grade stated that in the same week that he moved to channel 4 , it had shown a repeat of the 1984 adaptation of the far pavilions , featuring american actress amy irving '' blackface '' as an indian princess . during this period , he was also criticised by the conservative press : daily mail columnist paul johnson dubbed him britain 's '' pornography-in-chief '' . in addition to securing talent from the bbc , he recognised the improving quality of us television output , making series such as friends and er the mainstays of the channel 's schedule . grade became involved in a dispute with chris morris regarding the satire brass eye after repeatedly intervening in the production to order edits to various episodes , and rescheduling some instalments for sensitivity . morris responded by inserting a frame stating '' grade is a cunt '' into the final episode of the first run . '' in pictures : michael grade 's highs and lows '' , the guardian , 23 april 2009 in 1997 , grade left channel 4 to head first leisure corporation but departed two years later following a substantial internal re-structuring . his next job was as the chairman of the new pinewood and shepperton film studios company . return to the bbc . grade was on the board of the poorly received millennium dome project , and has served as chairman of octopus publishing , the camelot group , and hemscott ( a position that he intends to relinquish ) . he had ambitions to become chairman of the bbc board of governors in 2001 , but was beaten to the post by gavyn davies . following davies ' resignation in the aftermath of the hutton inquiry report , it was announced on 2 april 2004 that grade had been appointed bbc chairman ; his only demand was that he would not have to give up his job as a director of charlton athletic f.c . he took up his post on 17 may . on 19 september 2006 , grade became non-executive chairman of online food delivery company ocado . he resigned from the role on 23 january 2013 , after which he was replaced by sir stuart rose . . itv . on 28 november 2006 , grade and the bbc confirmed that he was to resign from his position within the corporation to replace sir peter burt as chairman , and charles allen as chief executive , of one of the companies forming part of its commercial rival , itv . he became executive chairman of itv plc on 8 january 2007 . during grade 's tenure , itv has struggled with falling advertising revenue and viewing figures . upon appointment , grade announced that his first priority would be to work as a senior partner at itv network limited to improve itv programming , as well as strengthen its digital channels , itv2 , itv3 , itv4 and citv . on 12 september 2007 , grade announced a controversial five-year re-structuring plan for itv plc-owned regions , selecting entertainment as the top priority . a major overhaul of itv plc 's regional structure was also proposed . the plans would result in the consolidation of the itv regional news programmes in england , with regions now broadcasting a single service per region rather than multiple , specialised , local services ( for example , itv yorkshire would no longer broadcast in separate northern and southern regions ) . they would also merge fully itv border with itv tyne tees , and itv west with itv westcountry , effectively ending two regions ' tenure as independent players within itv ; the proposals have been criticised by bectu and the national union of journalists . any such changes would be subject to approval by ofcom . in march 2009 , grade initiated libel action against another television executive , greg dyke , and the times newspaper over allegations of improper conduct made by dyke about grade , relating to his move from the bbc to itv in 2006 . the newspaper subsequently withdrew the allegations and published an apology , admitting that the allegations had no justification . on 23 april 2009 , grade announced he would be stepping down as chief executive to become non-executive chairman at the conclusion of regulatory reviews into advertising contract rights and digital tv , at some point before the end of 2009 . . personal life . grade was appointed a cbe in 1998 . that same year , he published his autobiography , it seemed like a good idea at the time , and married his third wife , francesca leahy ; they have a son , samuel . he was previously married to penelope jane levinson ( 1967–81 ; she is now the wife of writer and historian sir max hastings ) , by whom he has two children , and sarah lawson ( 1982–91 ) , a film producer . grade is a fan of charlton athletic f.c . grade revealed his membership of the conservative party for the first time in may 2010 . on 25 january 2011 , he was created a life peer , as baron grade of yarmouth , of yarmouth in the county of isle of wight . he was introduced in the house of lords on 27 january and sits as a conservative . references . external links . michael grade interviewbritish library sound recording bbc news online : michael grade profile bbc news online : '' grade goes commercial again '' daily telegraph : '' grade defects to itv '' bbc news online : '' michael grade is new bbc chairman '' financial times : grade 's letter to staff and bbc response bbc online : bbc press release