Reverberation

reverberation time is a measure of the time required for the sound to '' fade away '' in an enclosed area after the source of the sound has stopped . when it comes to accurately measuring reverberation time with a meter , the term t 60 ( an abbreviation for reverberation time 60 & nbsp ; db ) is used . t 60 provides an objective reverberation time measurement . it is defined as the time it takes for the sound pressure level to reduce by 60 & nbsp ; db , measured after the generated test signal is abruptly ended . reverberation time is frequently stated as a single value if measured as a wideband signal ( 20 & nbsp ; hz to 20 & nbsp ; khz ) . however , being frequency dependent , it can be more precisely described in terms of frequency bands ( one octave , 1/3 octave , 1/6 octave , etc . ) . being frequency dependent , the reverberation time measured in narrow bands will differ depending on the frequency band being measured . for precision , it is important to know what ranges of frequencies are being described by a reverberation time measurement . in the late 19th century , wallace clement sabine started experiments at harvard university to investigate the impact of absorption on the reverberation time . using a portable wind chest and organ pipes as a sound source , a stopwatch and his ears , he measured the time from interruption of the source to inaudibility ( a difference of roughly 60 & nbsp ; db ) . he found that the reverberation time is proportional to room dimensions and inversely proportional to the amount of absorption present . the optimum reverberation time for a space in which music is played depends on the type of music that is to be played in the space . rooms used for speech typically need a shorter reverberation time so that speech can be understood more clearly . if the reflected sound from one syllable is still heard when the next syllable is spoken , it may be difficult to understand what was said . '' cat '' , '' cab '' , and '' cap '' may all sound very similar . if on the other hand the reverberation time is too short , tonal balance and loudness may suffer . reverberation effects are often used in studios to add depth to sounds . reverberation changes the perceived spectral structure of a sound but does not alter the pitch . basic factors that affect a room 's reverberation time include the size and shape of the enclosure as well as the materials used in the construction of the room . every object placed within the enclosure can also affect this reverberation time , including people and their belongings . measurement of reverberation time . historically , reverberation time could only be measured using a level recorder ( a plotting device which graphs the noise level against time on a ribbon of moving paper ) . a loud noise is produced , and as the sound dies away the trace on the level recorder will show a distinct slope . analysis of this slope reveals the measured reverberation time . some modern digital sound level meters can carry out this analysis automatically . several methods exist for measuring reverb time . an impulse can be measured by creating a sufficiently loud noise ( which must have a defined cut-off point ) . impulse noise sources such as a blank pistol shot or balloon burst may be used to measure the impulse response of a room . alternatively , a colors of noise such as pink noise or white noise may be generated through a loudspeaker , and then turned off . this is known as the interrupted method , and the measured result is known as the interrupted response . a two-port measurement system can also be used to measure noise introduced into a space and compare it to what is subsequently measured in the space . consider sound reproduced by a loudspeaker into a room . a recording of the sound in the room can be made and compared to what was sent to the loudspeaker . the two signals can be compared mathematically . this two port measurement system utilizes a fourier transform to mathematically derive the impulse response of the room . from the impulse response , the reverberation time can be calculated . using a two-port system allows reverberation time to be measured with signals other than loud impulses . music or recordings of other sounds can be used . this allows measurements to be taken in a room after the audience is present . under some restrictions , even simple sound sources like handclaps can be used for measurement of reverberation reverberation time is usually stated as a decay time and is measured in seconds . there may or may not be any statement of the frequency band used in the measurement . decay time is the time it takes the signal to diminish 60 & nbsp ; db below the original sound . it is often difficult to inject enough sound into the room to measure a decay of 60 & nbsp ; db , particularly at lower frequencies . if the decay is linear , it is sufficient to measure a drop of 20 & nbsp ; db and multiply the time by 3 , or a drop of 30 & nbsp ; db and multiply the time by 2 . these are the so-called t20 and t30 measurement methods . the rt 60 reverberation time measurement is defined in the iso 3382-1 standard for performance spaces , the iso 3382-2 standard for ordinary rooms , and the iso 3382-3 for open-plan offices , as well as the astm e2235 standard . the concept of reverberation time implicitly supposes that the decay rate of the sound is exponential , so that the sound level diminishes regularly , at a rate of so many db per second . it is not often the case in real rooms , depending on the disposition of reflective , dispersive and absorbing surfaces . moreover , successive measurement of the sound level often yields very different results , as differences in phase in the exciting sound build up in notably different sound waves . in 1965 , manfred r . schroeder published '' a new method of measuring reverberation time '' in the journal of the acoustical society of america . he proposed to measure , not the power of the sound , but the energy , by integrating it . this made it possible to show the variation in the rate of decay and to free acousticians from the necessity of averaging many measurements . sabine equation . sabine 's reverberation equation was developed in the late 1890s in an empirical fashion . he established a relationship between the t 60 of a room , its volume , and its total absorption ( in sabins ) . this is given by the equation : : t_ where critical distance d_c is measured in meters , volume v is measured in m³ , and reverberation time rt 60 is measured in seconds . absorption coefficient . the absorption coefficient of a material is a number between 0 and 1 which indicates the proportion of sound which is absorbed by the surface compared to the proportion which is reflected back to the room . a large , fully open window would offer no reflection as any sound reaching it would pass straight out and no sound would be reflected . this would have an absorption coefficient of 1 . conversely , a thick , smooth painted concrete ceiling would be the acoustic equivalent of a mirror and have an absorption coefficient very close to 0 . reverberation in music composition and performance . several composers employ the reverberation effect as a main sound resource , having a comparable relevance as the solo instrument . for example , pauline oliveros , henrique machado machado , henrique . o lado oculto da lua , composition for solo contrabassoon and reverbarating chamber , 2019 and many others . in order to employ the reverberant properties of the room , the composers are supposed to investigate and probe the sound response of that particular ambient , that will affect and inspire the creation of the musical work . creating reverberation effects . a performer or a producer of live or recorded music often induces reverberation in a work . several systems have been developed to produce or to simulate reverberation . chamber reverberators . the first reverb effects created for recordings used a real physical space as a natural echo chamber . a loudspeaker would play the sound , and then a microphone would pick it up again , including the effects of reverb . although this is still a common technique , it requires a dedicated soundproofed room , and varying the reverb time is difficult . plate reverberators . a plate reverb system uses an electromechanical transducer , similar to the driver in a loudspeaker , to create vibrations in a large plate of sheet metal . the plate 's motion is picked up by one or more contact microphones whose output is an audio signal which may be added to the original '' dry '' signal . in the late 1950s , elektro-mess-technik ( emt ) introduced the emt 140 . popular in recording studios , this system contributed to many hit records such as beatles and pink floyd albums recorded at abbey road studios in the 1960s , and others recorded by bill porter in nashville 's rca studio b . early units had one pickup for mono output , and later models featured two pickups for stereo use . the reverb time can be adjusted by a damping pad , made from framed acoustic tiles . the closer the damping pad , the shorter the reverb time . however , the pad never touches the plate . some units also featured a remote control . the emt 140 weighs 400 pounds ( 180 & nbsp ; kg ) , 600 pounds ( 270 & nbsp ; kg ) in manufacturers shipping crate . spring reverberators . a spring reverb system uses a transducer at one end of a spring and a pickup at the other , similar to those used in plate reverbs , to create and capture vibrations within a metal spring . laurens hammond was granted a patent on a spring-based mechanical reverberation system in 1939 . laurens hammond , electrical musical instrument , u.s . patent 2,230,836 , granted feb . 4 , 1941 . the hammond organ included a built-in spring reverberator . spring reverberators were once widely used in semi-professional recording and are frequently incorporated into guitar amplifiers due to their modest cost and small size . one advantage over more sophisticated alternatives is that they lend themselves to the creation of special effects ; for example rocking them back and forth creates a thundering , crashing sound caused by the springs colliding with each other . digital reverberators . digital reverberators use various signal processing algorithms in order to create the reverb effect . since reverberation is essentially caused by a very large number of echoes , simple reverberation algorithms use several feedback delay circuits to create a large , decaying series of echoes . more advanced digital reverb generators can simulate the time and frequency domain response of a specific room ( using room dimensions , absorption , and other properties ) . in a music hall , the direct sound always arrives at the listener 's ear first because it follows the shortest path . shortly after the direct sound , the reverberant sound arrives . the time between the two is called the '' pre-delay . '' reverberation , or informally , '' reverb '' or '' verb '' , is one of the most universally used effects unit and is often found in guitar pedals , synthesizers , effects units , digital audio workstations ( daws ) and vst plug-ins . convolution reverb . convolution reverb is a process used for digitally simulating reverberation . it uses the mathematical convolution operation , a pre-recorded audio sample of the impulse response of the space being modeled , and the sound to be echoed , to produce the effect . the impulse-response recording is first stored in a digital signal processor system . this is then convolved with the incoming audio signal to be processed .