Philip III of Macedon

biography . even though arrhidaeus and alexander were about the same age , arrhidaeus appears never to have been a danger as an alternative choice for alexander 's succession to philip ii ; nevertheless , when the persian satrap of caria , pixodarus , proposed his daughter in marriage to philip , the king declined , offering his son arrhidaeus as husband instead , and alexander thought it prudent to block the dynastic union ( which might have produced a possible future heir to philip 's domain before alexander himself did ) , resulting in considerable irritation on the part of his father ( 337 bc ) . arrhidaeus ' whereabouts during the reign of his brother alexander are unclear from the extant sources ; what is certain is that no civil or military command was given to him in those thirteen years ( 336–323 bc ) . he was in babylon at the time of alexander 's death on 10 june 323 bc . a succession crisis ensued . arrhidaeus was the most obvious candidate , but he was mentally disabled and thus unfit to rule . a conflict then arose between perdiccas , leader of the cavalry , and meleager , who commanded the phalanx : the first wanted to wait to see if roxana , alexander 's pregnant wife , would deliver a male baby , while the second objected that arrhidaeus was the closest living relative and so should be chosen king . meleager was killed , and a compromise was engineered : arrhidaeus would become king , with the name of philip , and he would be joined by roxana 's yet-unborn child as co-sovereign should that child prove a male . this eventuality did indeed arise and resulted in roxana 's son , alexander , becoming with his uncle phillip iii co-sovereign on the throne of macedon . it was immediately decided that philip arrhidaeus would reign , but not rule : this was to be the prerogative of the new regent , perdiccas . when news arrived in macedonia that arrhidaeus had been chosen as king , cynane , a daughter of philip ii , developed a plan to travel to asia and offer the new king her daughter eurydice for wife . this move was an obvious affront to the regent , whom cynane had completely bypassed , and to prevent the marriage , perdiccas sent his brother , alcetas , to kill cynane . the reaction among the troops generated by this murder was such that the regent had to give up his opposition to the proposed match and accept the marriage . from that moment on , philip arrhidaeus was to be under the sway of his bride , a proud and determined woman bent on substantiating her husband 's power . eurydice 's chance to increase her husband 's power came when the first war of the diadochi sealed the fate of perdiccas , making a new settlement necessary . an agreement was made at triparadisus in syria in 321 bc . eurydice moved deftly enough to achieve the removal of the first two designated regents , peithon and arrhidaeus ( a namesake of her husband ) , but was powerless to block the aspirations of antipater , whose position proved too powerful , and the latter was made the new regent ; philip arrhidaeus and eurydice were forced to follow antipater back to macedonia . the regent died of natural causes the following year , nominating as his successor not his son cassander , but his friend and lieutenant , polyperchon . cassander 's refusal to accept his father 's decision sparked the second war of the diadochi , in which eurydice saw once again a chance to free philip from the control of the regent . an opportunity presented itself in 317 bc when cassander expelled polyperchon from macedonia . eurydice immediately allied herself with cassander and persuaded her husband to nominate him as the new regent . cassander reciprocated by leaving her in full control of the country when he left to campaign in greece . but individual circumstances and events at this time were subject to rapid change . that same year , polyperchon and olympias allied with her cousin , aeacides , king of epirus , and invaded macedonia . the macedonian troops refused to fight olympias , the mother of alexander . philip and eurydice had no choice but to escape , only to be captured at amphipolis and thrown into prison . it soon became clear that philip was too dangerous to be left alive , as olympias ' many enemies saw him as a useful tool against her , and so on 25 december 317 bc , she had him executed , while his wife was forced to commit suicide . tomb . in 1977 , important excavations were made near vergina leading to the discovery of a two-chambered royal tomb , with an almost perfectly preserved male skeleton . manolis andronikos , the chief archaeologist at the site , along with a number of other archaeologists , decided it was the skeleton of philip ii , but others have disputed this attribution and instead proposed it to be the remains of philip arrhidaeus . arrhidaeus in fiction . he appears as one of the main characters in the novel funeral games by mary renault . in renault 's version , the villainous cassander slows down his advance on macedonia to give olympias enough time to kill arrhidaeus and eurydice . arrhidaeus is also a main character in annabel lyon 's novel the golden mean . in it , the young arrhidaeus is tutored by aristotle while he also mentors his younger half-brother , the future alexander the great . alexander , who is initially disgusted with his brother 's inferior intellect , learns to love him before he sets out to conquer the world . in the japanese fiction manga historie , he was shown as an intellectually disabled young child , who became happy when eumenes made him a toy chariot and became sad when alexander the great destroyed his toy . eumenes later replaced it with a new one , telling him to bury the chariot . arrhideaus is also portrayed in the indian historical drama series porus . phillip is a prominent character in the eric flint novel the alexander inheritance and its sequel the macedonian hazard . phillip is portrayed as having an affectionate relationship with eurydice that is marred by his inability to stand being touched . the appearance of a cruise ship of time travelers a few months after alexander 's death changes history , and prevents phillip and eurydice 's deaths , although they spend a time as prisoners of antigonus i monophthalamus . he is portrayed as having a spectrum disorder , but a photographic memory and a talent for mental arithmetic . his condition improves after sessions from a therapist among the time travelers , along with medical marijuana and other drugs , and fathers a child with eurydice in the second book . references . smith , william ( editor ) ; dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology , '' arrhidaeus ( 1 ) '' , '' eurydice ( 3 ) '' , boston , ( 1867 ) . external links . wiki classical dictionary : arrhidaeus page about coinage during his reign an archaeological report about his grave and remains a national geographic article about the group of tombs , one of which is now said to be his ( april 2008 )