Rocksteady

characteristics . thumb the jamaican musicians and producers who created the rocksteady sound out of ska were well-versed in jazz and readily influenced by other genres , most notably rhythm and blues ( r & b ) , but also cuban and other caribbean sounds plus african drumming . when considering the differences between ska and rocksteady it is worth remembering that the musicians and producers were essentially the same ( many continuing into reggae ) . perhaps rocksteady ’ s most easily recognizable element , and that which could be considered reggae music 's gift to the world , as in ska , is an offbeat rhythm : staccato chords played by a guitar and piano on the offbeats of the measure . the perceived tempo became slower with the development of rocksteady than it had been in ska . the guitar and piano players began to experiment with occasional accents around the basic offbeat pattern . this can be heard throughout jamaican recordings in subsequent years . rocksteady , even more so the early reggae that followed , was built around the '' one drop '' drum beat , characterized by a heavy accent on the third beat of every bar . this differs markedly from the drumming styles in r & b and rock and roll , which put the emphasis on the second and fourth beats . the slowing that occurred with rocksteady allowed bass players to explore more broken , syncopated figures , playing a counterpoint to the repetitive rhythm of the guitar and keyboards and this new style eventually largely replaced the walking patterns that had been so characteristic of many ska recordings . the slower tempo and smaller band sizes in turn led to a much larger focus on the bass line in general , which eventually became one of the most recognizable characteristics of jamaican music . in rocksteady , the lead guitar often doubles the bass line , in the muted picking style created by lynn taitt ( as on '' run for cover '' by lee '' scratch '' perry ) . smaller band sizes and slower tempos also led to a number of changes in the way horn parts were written and arranged . whereas , in ska , the horn section had often spent much of the song playing the offbeats with the guitar and piano , in rocksteady they favored repeated rhythmic patterns or simply sitting out all together until the lead line . lyrics . due in part to the heavy borrowing from us soul songs , many rocksteady songs are love songs ; e.g . '' sharing you '' by prince buster , which is a cover of a soul singer mitty collier 's original , and '' queen majesty '' by the techniques , which is a cover of '' minstrel and queen '' by the impressions . there are rocksteady songs about religion and the rastafari movement , though not to the same extent as in reggae . rocksteady coincided with the rise of rude boys and some rocksteady songs reflect this ( usually negatively ) such as '' rude boy gone a jail '' by the clarendonians and , most famously , “ judge dread ” by prince buster . crying was a theme in some rocksteady songs , such as alton and the flames ' '' cry tough '' , which urged jamaicans in the ghettos to stay tough through the hard times . history . as a popular musical style , rocksteady was short-lived ; its heyday only lasted about two years , from around summer 1966 until spring 1968 . also , in the middle to later part of the decade , as ska began to fade in popularity and the optimism that accompanied independence in 1962 dwindled , young people from the jamaican countryside were flooding into the urban ghettos of kingston—in neighborhoods such as riverton city , greenwich town and trenchtown . many of them became delinquents who exuded a certain coolness and style . these unruly youths became known as rude boys . alton ellis is sometimes said to be the father of rocksteady for his hit '' rocksteady '' , but other candidates for the first rocksteady single include '' take it easy '' by hopeton lewis , '' tougher than tough '' by derrick morgan and '' hold them '' by roy shirley . in a jamaican radio interview , pianist gladstone anderson said that bandleader lynn taitt made a suggestion to slow the music down whilst recording '' take it easy '' . taitt backed this up in a 2002 interview , stating : '' i told 'gladdy to slow the tempo and that 's how take it easy and rocksteady came about . rocksteady is really slow ska . '' campbell , howard ( 2012 ) , '' gladstone anderson : key player in rocksteady ’ s genesis '' , jamaica observer , 1 june 2012 . the record producer duke reid released alton ellis ' '' girl i 've got a date '' on his treasure isle label , as well as recordings by the techniques , the silvertones , the jamaicans and the paragons . reid 's work with these groups helped establish the vocal sound of rocksteady . some would consider the rocksteady years to be treasure isle 's best . rocksteady 's dominance meant that all record labels of the time released music in the genre ; studio one , bunny lee and prince buster were predominant , with reid . notable solo artists include delroy wilson , ken boothe and phyllis dillon ( known as the '' queen of rocksteady '' ) . other musicians who were crucial in creating rocksteady included keyboard player jackie mittoo , drummers joe isaacs and winston grennan , bassist jackie jackson and saxophonist tommy mccook . when ska band the skatalites disbanded ( 64/65—accounts vary ) mccook went to work at the treasure isle label and jackie mittoo went to the studio one label—these two artists/arrangers became instrumental in the way these two labels became dominant and helped to form the sound of rocksteady . despite its short lifespan , rocksteady 's influence is great . many reggae artists began in rocksteady ( and/or ska ) —most commonly reggae singers grew out of rocksteady groups , e.g . , junior byles came from the versatiles , john holt was in the paragons , both pat kelly and slim smith sang with the techniques ( pat kelly sings lead on '' you do n't care '' ) and ronnie davis was in the tennors while winston jarrett was in the righteous flames . the wailing wailers were similarly a vocal harmony trio ( modelled on the impressions ) who came from ska , through rocksteady and became a reggae band with just the one main vocalist . derrick harriott reflectively noted , '' ask any jamaican musician and they 'll tell you the rocksteady days were the best days of jamaican music . '' . transformation into reggae . several factors contributed to the evolution of rocksteady into reggae in the late 1960s . the emigration to canada of key musical arrangers jackie mittoo and lynn taitt—and the upgrading of jamaican studio technology—had a marked effect on the sound and style of the recordings . bass patterns became more complex and increasingly dominated the arrangements , and the piano gave way to the electric organ . other developments included horns fading farther into the background ; the introduction of a scratchier , more percussive rhythm guitar ; the addition of african-style hand drumming , and a more precise , intricate and aggressive drumming style . also around this time ( 1969–70 ) the use of a vocal-free or lead instrument-free dub or b-side '' version '' became popular in jamaica ; at the beginning this involved the use of rocksteady tracks , most notably with u-roy deejaying over treasure isle rhythms ( made by a young osbourne ruddock , later known as king tubby , beginning with '' wake the town '' ) . indeed , this collaboration provided rocksteady with an afterlife as u-roy rocksteady-based songs rode high in the charts ( 1970–71 ) even as reggae began to establish itself as the new sound . by the late 1960s , the rastafari movement became more popular in jamaica and rocksteady became less popular . many reggae songs became focused less on romance and more on black consciousness , politics and protest . the release of the 1972 film the harder they come and the rise of jamaican superstar bob marley brought reggae to an international level that rocksteady never reached . although rocksteady was a short-lived phase of jamaican popular music , its influence on what came after : reggae , dub and dancehall is huge . this is hard to over-state . many bass lines originally created for rocksteady songs continue to be used in contemporary jamaican music . such as the rhythm from '' never let go '' by slim smith ( sometimes known as the answer rhythm ) and “ real rock ” both from the studio one label ; “ my conversation ” also sung by slim smith , produced by bunny lee ; “ queen majesty ” sung by the techniques and “ lonely street ” by the conquerors , both for treasure isle label . see also . list of rocksteady musicians rock steady ( aretha franklin song ) . references . external links . rocksteady : the roots of reggae ( 2009 documentary film ) the history of jamaican music : rock steady , reggaetrain.com the history of jamaican music 1959-1973