Dagaaba people

geographic spread . although sometimes divided into northern and southern dagaare speakers , their combined population was estimated in 2003 at over one million spread across the northwest corner of ghana and sud-ouest region in southwestern burkina faso . dagara , northern in gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , 2005 . ethnologue : languages of the world , fifteenth edition . dallas , tex . : sil international . online version : retrieved 2009-02-12 . the southern dagaare are a people of around 700,000 living in the western part of upper west region . the northern dagaare speakers , with an estimated population of 388,000 ( in 2001 ) live primarily in ioba province , but also in poni , bougouriba , sissili , and mouhoun provinces . in ghana , several waves of internal migration , beginning with the start of colonial rule in the late 19th century ( but possibly having been begun sooner ) and spiking in the 1980s , have brought a sizable dagaaba population to towns in the southern part of the nation , notably brong ahafo region . gariba b . abdul-korah . ‘ where is not home ? ’ : dagaaba migrants in the brong ahafo region , 1980 to the present . african affairs 2007 106 ( 422 ) :71-94 . in modern ghana , the dagaaba homeland of the upper west region includes the districts and towns of nandom , lawra , jirapa , kaleo , papu , nadowli , daffiama , wechiau and hamile . large communities are also found in the towns of wa , bogda , babile , tuna , han and nyoli . a . b . bodomo . introduction , in a dagaare-cantonese-english lexicon for lexicographical field research training ( afrikawissenschaftliche lehrbücher vol . 14 ) . rüdiger köppe verlag , cologne ( 2004 ) . . history . the source of dagaaba communities in the pre-colonial era remain a point of debate . the evidence of oral tradition is that the dagaaba are an outgrowth of the mole-dagbani group which migrated to the semi-arid sahel region in the fourteenth century ce . they are believed to have further migrated to the lower northern part of the region in the seventeenth century . from well before the appearance of europeans , the dagaaba lived in small scale agricultural communities , not centralised into any large state-like structure . ethnological studies point to oral literature which tells that the dagaaba periodically , and ultimately successfully , resisted attempts at conquest by states in the south of modern ghana , as well as the kingdoms of dagbon , mamprugu and gonja in the north . one thesis based on oral evidence is that the dagaaba formed as a break away faction of dagbon under na nyanse . benjamin kunbuor . '' customary law of the dagara '' of northern ghana : indigenous rules or a social construction , journal of dagaare studies , vol 2 ( 2002 ) . on early history , he cites : tuurey , g . ( 1982 ) an introduction to the mole-speaking community . catholic press : wa . ; lentz , c . ( 1994 ) '' a dagara rebellion against dagomba rule ? : contested stories of origin in north-western ghana '' , in journal of african law vol . 35 : 457-492 the colonial borders , demarcated during the scramble for africa , placed them in northwestern ghana and southern burkina faso , as well as small populations in ivory coast . extra-community relations . dagaaba communities have occasionally come into conflict with neighbouring groups , especially over land rights , as recently as the 1980s with the sisala people carola lentz . contested boundaries : decentralisation and land conflicts in northwestern ghana . le bulletin de l'apad , n° 22 , gouvernance foncière au quotidien en afrique , 15 december 2005 . retrieved 13 february 2009 . and at earlier times with the wala people . the latter , in alliance with the wassoulou empire of diola samory toure , conquered much of dagawie in the late 1890s , under the generalship of sarankye mori . ivor wilks ( 2002 ) pp . 120-128 . some of the southernmost dagaaba villages were in the early 1890s under the authority of the kingdom of wala but then rebelled in 1894 and asserted their independence . they were however restored to the domains of the wala native authority by the british in 1933 . ivor wilks , wa and the wala : islam and polity in northwestern ghana ( cambridge : cambridge university press , 1988 ) , p . 8 , 15 . society . within the dagawie homelands , the dagaaba have traditionally formed sedentary agricultural communities . modern dagaaba lineages consist of ten clans encompassing over one million people . traditional polities . traditional dagaaba communities are based on the '' yir '' subclan or household group , a series of which are clustered into the '' tengan '' , an earth deity shrine area . the tengan system , a constellation of roles usually inherited within the same household group , is called the tendaalun . the head of these shrine area systems , the tengan sob ( sometimes tindana ) fulfilled the role of community elder and priest , along with the tengan dem , the ritual custodian and maintainer of the ritual center . other priestly/elder roles within the tendaalun include the suo sob who performs ritual animal slaughter to the earth deity , the zongmogre who performs rituals at the sacred market centres , and the gara dana or wie sob who is ritual leader among hunting societies . these remain living forms of community in much of dagaaba society , and influence , among other things , the community perception of land as held in spiritual custodianship , and different community resources falling under the custodianship of different authorities , lineages , and/or spiritual forces . benjamin kunbuor ( 2002 ) , pp.9 , 10 . includes citing lentz , c . ( 1994 ) on p . 9 . until the latter part of the nineteenth century when institutional chieftaincy evolved ( and was later imposed by colonial administration ) , benjamin kunbuor ( 2002 ) , passim broader dagaaba communities functioned under a system of councils of elders . some dagaaba communities maintain traditional ceremonial chieftainships , sometimes contesting . as recently as 2006 , the '' council of elders '' of the dagaaba community of ghana attempted to unite various factions with the appointment of naa franklin suantah , principal librarian of the saint louis training college of kumasi as chief of the dagaaba community in ghana . avoid intra-tribal & ethnic conflicts . ghana news agency . 12-09-2006 . culture . dagaaba communities historically have practiced traditional religions , as well as islam and christianity . the ghanaian dagaaba have traditionally had a cousinage/joking relationship with the frafra ( gurunsi ) people . wegru joseph yelepuo the frafra-dagaaba dog head jokes . electronic journal of folklore , volume 14 , 2000 . retrieved 2009-02-12 . the dagaaba , before the influence of the colonialist , were self-reliant in iron production and were very successful in mixed crops farming . they also developed sophisticated musical instruments including gyle ( xylophones ) . economics . communities in dagaaba homelands remain primarily small scale agricultural , with family farming plots tilled by the family themselves . in the modern era , off-farm wage income is often used to supplement trade income and subsistence from farming . fishing communities of dagaaba persist along the black volta , a de facto boundary of dagaaba lands . because the communities are found along historic coast-to-sahel trade routes , trade has long been an important occupation , but largely in local goods . markets in larger towns are on sundays , with others on a six-day cycle . emmanuel yiridoe . economic and sociocultural aspects of cowrie currency of the dagaaba of northwestern ghana . nordic journal of african studies 4 ( 2 ) : 17-32 ( 1995 ) some contemporary dagaaba communities of northern ghana are notable as the last west african communities to still use cowrie shells as currency , alongside the modern ghanaian cedi . yiridoe ( 1995 ) , pp . 1 , passim . cowrie are used not only for traditional ornamental and ceremonial purposes ( as other west african communities do ) , but also as an inflation proof form of internal savings and as a safe medium to trade across national ( and currency ) boundaries which may divide dagaaba communities . . oral literature . oral literature has a long tradition with dagaaba communities , and remains a living vehicle of education and acculturation in dagaaba society . there are two main types of literature in dagaaba society . they can broadly be categorised as secular literature consisting of stories , tales , proverbs and other oral genre and the sacred literature produced during ritual and religious services . the most important of these are bagr mythical narratives recitations and orations produced during initiation rituals and other religious services dannabang kuwabong . naa konga : a collection of dagaaba folktales . accra : woeli pub . services ( 1992 ) . gervase t angsotinge . thou shalt not reveal thy secrets : the value of reticence in speech in dagaaba folklore . institute of african studies : research review 2005 , vol . 21 ( 1 ) : 19-27 goody jack , the myth of the bagre , 1972 , oxford : clarendon press tengan alexis , mythical narratives in ritual : dagara black bgar , 2006 , brussels : peter lang . religion . . references . constancio nakuma . an introduction to the dagaare language . on dagaarelinguists ' homepage , update as of 25 may 2003 , retrieved 2009-02-12 . panafrican l10n wiki page on dagaare . anna craven . the pottery of northern ghana . interpreting ceramics . issue 10 , 2008 . retrieved 2009-02-13 . external links . bibliography of dagaare studies , compiled by dr . adams b . bodomo , retrieved 2009-02-12 . journal of dagaare studies , university of hong kong , issn 1608-0661 . abstracts of 6 issues in 6 volumes , 2001–2006 , retrieved 2009-02-12 .