Totalitarian democracy

j . l . talmon . j . l . talmon 's 1952 book the origins of totalitarian democracy discusses the transformation of a state in which traditional values and articles of faith shape the role of government into one in which social utility takes absolute precedence . his work is a criticism of the ideas of jean-jacques rousseau , whose political philosophy greatly influenced the french revolution , the growth of the enlightenment across europe , as well the overall development of modern political and educational thought . in the social contract , rousseau contends that the interests of the individual and the state are one and the same , and it is the state 's responsibility to implement the '' general will '' . the political neologism messianic democracy ) j . l . talmon , political messianism – the romantic phase , 1960 . also derives from talmon 's introduction to this work : : indeed , from the vantage point of the mid twentieth century the history of the last hundred and fifty years looks like a systematic preparation for the headlong collision between empirical and liberal democracy on the one hand , and totalitarian messianic democracy on the other , in which the world crisis of to-day consists . — rousseaustudies.free.fr . differences in democratic philosophy . the philosophy of totalitarian democracy , according to talmon , is based on a top-down view of society , which sees an absolute and perfect political truth to which all reasonable humans are driven . it is contended that not only is it beyond the individual to arrive at this truth independently , it is his duty and responsibility to aid his compatriots in realizing it . moreover , any public or private activities that do not forward this goal have no useful purpose , sap time , money and energy from those that do , and must be eliminated . thus economic and social endeavors , which tend to strengthen the collective , are seen as valuable , whereas education and religion , which tend to strengthen the individual , are seen as counterproductive . '' you can not be a citizen and a christian at the same time , '' says talmon , referring to rousseau 's arguments , '' for the loyalties clash . '' in his paper advances in chinese social sciences ( 2001 ) , mao shoulong , a professor of public policy at renmin university of china , takes a different position . he posits that totalitarian democracy , or what he terms '' equality-oriented democracy , '' is founded on the idea that it is possible , and necessary , that the complete rights and freedoms of people ought not be held hostage to traditions and social arrangements . mao recognizes that the term '' totalitarian '' has a connotation attached to it , used as it was by giovanni gentile to apply to the italian fascism government led by benito mussolini . he sees the proponents of liberal democracy ( or '' western '' democracy ) as holding a negative attitude to the word and believing that force is not an appropriate way to achieve a goal no matter the value of that goal . he prefers the term '' freedom-oriented democracy '' to describe such a political entity . fundamental requirements . a totalitarian democracy , says talmon , accepts '' exclusive territorial sovereignty '' as its right . it retains full power of expropriation and full power of imposition , i.e . , the right of control over everything and everyone . maintenance of such power , in the absence of full support of the citizenry , requires the forceful suppression of any dissenting element except what the government purposely permits or organizes . liberal democrats , who see political strength as growing from the bottom up ( cf : '' grass roots '' ) , reject in principle the idea of coercion in shaping political will , but the totalitarian democratic state holds it as an ongoing imperative . a totalitarian democratic state is said to maximize its control over the lives of its citizens by using the dual rationale of general will ( i.e . , '' public good '' ) and majority rule . an argument can be made that in some circumstances it is actually the politics , economic , and military elite who interpret the general will to suit their own interests . again , however , it is the imperative of achieving the overarching goal of a political nirvana that shapes the vision of the process , and the citizen is expected to contribute to the best of his abilities ; the general is not asked to guide the plow , nor is the farmer asked to lead the troops . it can approach the condition of totalitarianism ; totalitarian states can also approach the condition of democracy , or at least majoritarianism . citizens of a totalitarian democratic state , even when aware of their true powerlessness , may support their government . when germany started world war ii , the nazi government had the support of the majority of germans and it was not until much later , after germany 's losses began to mount , that support for hitler began to fade . joseph stalin was practically worshipped by hundreds of millions of soviet citizens , many of whom have not changed their opinion even today , and his status ensured his economic and political reforms would be carried out . the term has also more recently been applied to south africa under the rule of the african national congress . . cold war and socio-economic illustrations . the period of the cold war following wwii saw great ideology polarization between the so-called '' free world '' and the communist states . in the east , religious and intellectual repression was met with increasing resistance , and the hungarian revolt of 1956 and alexander dubček 's prague spring in 1968 are two well-known acts of defiance where thousands were murdered in cold blood by their governments . the tienanmen square massacre was a similar example of repressive violence leading to hundreds of deaths . in the united states , alleged communists and communist sympathizers were investigated by senator joseph mccarthy in what later generations would recall as a '' witch hunt '' ; many accused communists were forced out of their jobs or their reputations were scandalized . shortly after the time of talmon 's book , the vietnam war brought active hostility between elements in the u.s . government and political factions within the american people . one faction insisted that the u.s . government did not represent them in levying war in southeast asia , protesting the war , as well as undemocratic or oligarchical power-structures within u.s . society ; this faction occasionally saw repression from the government , such as through '' dirty tricks '' aimed at '' subversives '' by the fbi in cointelpro . this conflict within u.s . society rose to violence during the protests and riots at the democratic national convention of 1968 in chicago , illinois , and in the kent state massacre , where 4 anti-war protesters were shot dead by u.s . national guard forces . one concept fundamental to both '' liberal '' and '' totalitarian '' democracy is that of liberty . according to talmon , totalitarian democracy sees freedom as something achieved only in the long term , and only through collective effort ; the political goal of ultimate order and ultimate harmony brings ultimate freedom . in addressing every aspect of the lives of its citizens , the totalitarian democratic state has the power to ensure that all material needs are met from cradle to grave , and all that is required of the citizen is to carry out his role , whatever it may be , to the best of his ability . liberal democracy , on the other hand , posits freedom as something that can and should be achieved by the individual in the short term , even at the expense of things such as material well-being , and sees as an element of this freedom a '' freedom from government '' wherein the individual is able to exercise '' freedom '' in his own terms to the extent that they do not contravene the law . proponents of both kinds of democracy argue that their particular approach is the best one for the citizens of their respective countries . it is mao shoulong 's contention that '' equality-oriented democracy recognises the value of freedom but holds that it ca n't be attained by individual efforts , '' but rather , by collective efforts . he argues that while equality-oriented democracy stresses the value of equality over individual freedoms , the reverse is true for freedom-oriented democracy , and in each case , the state will move either to ensure equality by limiting individual freedom , or to ensure individual freedom by giving up equality . some critics of this view may argue that equality and individual freedoms are inseparable , and that one can not exist ( or be sustained ) without the other . social anarchism other critics argue that equality can only be ensured by continuous coercion , while ensuring individual freedom only requires force against coercive individuals and external states . shoulong also holds that a law is not valid if it does not have the approval of the public . laws passed by the state do not require approval by the citizen on a case-by-case basis , and it can be easily argued that some laws currently in place in some countries purporting to be liberal democracies do not have the approval of the majority of citizens . for one , rousseau argued in '' the social contract '' , that in the stereotypical liberal democracy , individuals are politically '' free '' once every parliamentary term , or every two to four years , when they vote for their representatives , in their general election or on election day . yet , rousseau fails to consider that the state is not a total institution within the liberal democracies , and that the freedom of the citizen in between the elections is the freedom of the citizen to live their life in pursuit of their own happiness , subject to the law made by their elected representatives , who are , in turn , subject to popular pressure , protest , petition , recall , referendum , initiative , and ultimately , electoral defeat if they fail to heed the views of those they represent . this is in contrast to a totalitarian democracy , with the state as a total institution , where the individual is truly not free without constant participation in their '' democratic '' government ; and thus , the individual in the totalitarian democracy must be '' forced to be free '' if the totalitarian democracy is not to become a totalitarian oligarchy . f . william engdahl and sheldon s . wolin . engdahl and wolin add some new dimensions to the analysis of totalitarianism . in full spectrum dominance : totalitarian democracy and the new world order , engdahl focuses on the american drive to achieve global hegemony through military and economic means . according to him , u.s state objectives have led to internal conditions that resemble totalitarianism : '' it is a power establishment that over the course of the cold war has spun out of control and now threatens not only the fundamental institutions of democracy , but even of life on the planet through the growing risk of nuclear war by miscalculation '' engdahl , full spectrum dominance , pg . viii . wolin , too , analyzes the symbiosis of business and public interests that emerged in the cold war to form the tendency of what he calls '' inverted totalitarianism '' : while exploiting the authority and resources of the state , inverted totalitarianism gains its dynamic by combining with other forms of power , such as evangelical religions , and most notably by encouraging a symbiotic relationship between traditional government and the system of '' private '' governance represented by the modern business corporation . the result is not a system of codetermination by equal partners who retain their respective identities but rather a system that represents the political coming-of-age of corporate power . wolin , democracy incorporated , pg . xxi . elsewhere , in an article entitled '' inverted totalitarianism '' wolin , sheldon s . '' inverted totalitarianism '' . the nation magazine , may 19th , 2003 . wolin cites phenomena such as the lack of involvement of citizens in a narrow political framework ( due to the influence of money ) , the privatization of social security , and massive increases in military spending and spending on surveillance as examples of the push away from public and towards private-controlled government . corporate influence is explicit through the media , and implicit through the privatization of the university . furthermore , many political think-tanks have abetted this process by spreading conservative ideology . wolin states : '' with the elements all in place.what is at stake , then , is nothing less than the attempted transformation of a tolerably free society into a variant of the extreme regimes of the past century '' wolin , 2003 . slavoj žižek comes to similar conclusions in his book welcome to the desert of the real . žižek , slavoj . welcome to the desert of the real , london and new york : verso , 2002 here he argues that the war on terror served as a justification for the suspension of civil liberties in the us , while the promise of democracy and freedom was spread abroad as the justification for invading iraq and afghanistan . since western democracies are always justifying state of exception , they are failing as sites of political agency .