Ovulation

in humans . in humans , ovulation occurs about midway through the menstrual cycle , after the follicular phase . the few days surrounding ovulation ( from approximately days 10 to 18 of a 28-day cycle ) , constitute the most fertile phase . the time from the beginning of the last menstrual period ( lmp ) until ovulation is , on average , 14.6 days , but with substantial variation among females and between cycles in any single female , with an overall 95 % prediction interval of 8.2 to 20.5 days . the process of ovulation is controlled by the hypothalamus of the brain and through the release of hormones secreted in the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland , luteinizing hormone ( lh ) and follicle-stimulating hormone ( fsh ) . in the preovulatory phase of the menstrual cycle , the ovarian follicle will undergo a series of transformations called cumulus expansion , which is stimulated by fsh . after this is done , a hole called the stigma will form in the follicle , and the secondary oocyte will leave the follicle through this hole . ovulation is triggered by a spike in the amount of fsh and lh released from the pituitary gland . during the luteal phase , the secondary oocyte will travel through the fallopian tubes toward the uterus . if fertilized by a sperm , the fertilized secondary oocyte or ovum may implant there 6–12 days later . . follicular phase . the follicular phase ( or proliferative phase ) is the phase of the menstrual cycle during which the ovarian follicles mature . the follicular phase lasts from the beginning of menstruation to the start of ovulation . for ovulation to be successful , the ovum must be supported by the corona radiata and cumulus oophorus granulosa cells . the latter undergo a period of proliferation and mucification known as cumulus expansion . mucification is the secretion of a hyaluronic acid-rich cocktail that disperses and gathers the cumulus cell network in a sticky matrix around the ovum . this network stays with the ovum after ovulation and has been shown to be necessary for fertilization . an increase in cumulus cell number causes a concomitant increase in antrum fluid volume that can swell the follicle to over 20 & nbsp ; mm in diameter . it forms a pronounced bulge at the surface of the ovary called the blister . ovulation . estrogen levels peak towards the end of the follicular phase , around 12 and 24 hours . this , by positive feedback , causes a surge in levels of luteinizing hormone ( lh ) and follicle-stimulating hormone ( fsh ) . this lasts from 24 to 36 hours , and results in the rupture of the ovarian follicles , causing the oocyte to be released from the ovary . through a signal transduction cascade initiated by lh , which activates the pro-inflammatory genes through ampc secondary messenger , peptidase are secreted by the follicle that degrade the follicular tissue at the site of the blister , forming a hole called the stigma . the secondary oocyte leaves the ruptured follicle and moves out into the peritoneal cavity through the stigma , where it is caught by the fimbriae at the end of the fallopian tube . after entering the fallopian tube , the oocyte is pushed along by cilia , beginning its journey toward the uterus . by this time , the oocyte has completed meiosis , yielding two cells : the larger ovum that contains all of the cytoplasmic material and a smaller , inactive first polar body . meiosis follows at once but will be arrested in the metaphase and will so remain until fertilization . the spindle apparatus of the second meiotic division appears at the time of ovulation . if no fertilization occurs , the oocyte will degenerate between 12 and 24 hours after ovulation . approximately 1-2 % of ovulations release more than one oocyte . this tendency increases with maternal age . fertilization of two different oocytes by two different spermatozoa results in fraternal twins . the mucous membrane of the uterus , termed the functionalis , has reached its maximum size , and so have the endometrial glands , although they are still non-secretion . luteal phase . the follicle proper has met the end of its lifespan . without the oocyte , the follicle folds inward on itself , transforming into the corpus luteum ( pl . corpora lutea ) , a steroidogenic cluster of cells that produces estrogen and progesterone . these hormones induce the endometrial glands to begin production of the endometrium and later into endometrium , the site of embryonic growth if implantation occurs . the action of progesterone increases basal body temperature by one-quarter to one-half degree celsius ( one-half to one degree fahrenheit ) . the corpus luteum continues this paracrine action for the remainder of the menstrual cycle , maintaining the endometrium , before disintegrating into scar tissue during menses . . clinical presentation . the start of ovulation can be detected by signs . because the signs are not readily discernible by people other than the female herself , humans are said to have a concealed ovulation . in many animal species there are distinctive signals indicating the period when the female is fertile . several explanations have been proposed to explain concealed ovulation in humans . females near ovulation experience changes in the cervical mucus , and in their basal body temperature . furthermore , many females experience secondary fertility signs including mittelschmerz ( pain associated with ovulation ) and a heightened sense of smell , and can sense the precise moment of ovulation . many females experience heightened sexual desire in the several days immediately before ovulation . one study concluded that females subtly improve their facial attractiveness during ovulation . symptoms related to the onset of ovulation , the moment of ovulation and the body 's process of beginning and ending the menstrual cycle vary in intensity with each female but are fundamentally the same . the charting of such symptoms & mdash ; primarily basal body temperature , mittelschmerz and cervical position & mdash ; is referred to as the sympto-thermal method of fertility awareness , which allow auto-diagnosis by a female of her state of ovulation . once training has been given by a suitable authority , fertility charts can be completed on a cycle-by-cycle basis to show ovulation . this gives the possibility of using the data to predict fertility for natural contraception and pregnancy planning . the moment of ovulation has been photographed . . disorders . disorders of ovulation are classified as menstrual disorders and include oligoovulation and anovulation : oligoovulation is infrequent or irregular ovulation ( usually defined as cycles of greater than 36 days or fewer than 8 cycles a year ) anovulation is absence of ovulation when it would be normally expected ( in a post-menarche , premenopausal female ) . anovulation usually manifests itself as irregularity of menstrual periods , that is , unpredictable variability of intervals , duration , or bleeding . anovulation can also cause cessation of periods ( secondary amenorrhea ) or excessive bleeding ( dysfunctional uterine bleeding ) . the world health organization ( who ) has developed the following classification of ovulatory disorders : page 54 in : who group i : hypothalamic–pituitary-gonadal axis failure who group ii : hypothalamic–pituitary-gonadal axis dysfunction . who group ii is the most common cause of ovulatory disorders , and the most common causative member is polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) . who group iii : ovarian failure who group iv : hyperprolactinemia . ovulation induction . ovulation induction is a promising assisted reproductive technology for patients with conditions such as polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) and oligomenorrhea . it is also used in in vitro fertilization to make the follicles mature before egg retrieval . usually , ovarian stimulation is used in conjunction with ovulation induction to stimulate the formation of multiple oocytes . some sources include ovulation induction in the definition of ovarian stimulation . a low dose of human chorionic gonadotropin ( hcg ) may be injected after completed ovarian stimulation . ovulation will occur between 24–36 hours after the hcg injection . ivf.com > ovulation induction retrieved on mars 7 , 2010 by contrast , induced ovulation in some animal species occurs naturally , ovulation can be stimulated by coitus . . ovulation suppression . combined hormonal contraceptives inhibit follicular phase and prevent ovulation as a primary mechanism of action . pp . 257–258 the ovulation-inhibiting dose ( oid ) of an estrogen or progestogen refers to the dose required to consistently inhibit ovulation in women . in assisted reproductive technology including in vitro fertilization , cycles where a transvaginal oocyte retrieval is planned generally necessitates ovulation suppression , because it is not practically feasible to collect oocytes after ovulation . for this purpose , ovulation can be suppressed by either a gnrh agonist or a gnrh antagonist , with different protocols depending on which substance is used .