Wasteland (video game)

gameplay . wastelands game mechanics are based on those used in the tabletop role-playing games , such as tunnels and trolls and mercenaries , spies and private eyes created by wasteland designers ken st . andre and michael stackpole . characters in wasteland have various statistics ( strength , intelligence , luck , speed , agility , dexterity , and charisma ) that allow the characters to use different skills and weapons . experience is gained through battle and skill usage . the game generally lets players advance using a variety of tactics : to get through a locked gate , the characters could use their picklock skill , their climb skill , or their strength attribute ; or they could force the gate with a crowbar or a law rocket . the player 's party begins with four characters . through the course of the game the party can hold as many as seven characters by recruiting certain citizens and wasteland creatures . unlike those of other computer rpgs of the time , these non-player character might at times refuse to follow the player 's commands , such as when the player orders the character to give up an item or perform an action . the game is noted for its high and unforgiving difficulty level . the prose appearing in the game 's combat screens , such as phrases saying an enemy is '' reduced to a thin red paste '' and '' explodes like a blood sausage '' , prompted an unofficial pg-13 sticker on the game packaging in the u.s . wasteland was one of the first games featuring a persistent world , where changes to the game world were stored and kept . returning to an area later in the game , the player would find it in the state the player left it in , rather than being reset , as was common for games of the time . since hard drives were still rare in home computers in 1988 , this meant the original game disk had to be copied first , as the manual instructed one to do . another feature of the game was the inclusion of a printed collection of paragraphs that the player would read at the appropriate times . these paragraphs described encounters and conversations , contained clues , and added to the overall texture of the game . because programming space was at a premium , it saved on resources to have most of the game 's story printed out in a separate manual rather than stored within the game 's code itself . the paragraph books also served as a rudimentary form of copy protection ; someone playing a copied version of the game would miss out on much of the story and clues necessary to progress . the paragraphs included an unrelated story line about a mission to mars intended to mislead those who read the paragraphs when not instructed to , and a false set of passwords that would trip up cheaters . plot . in 2087 ( one hundred years after the game 's development ) , generations after the devastation of a global nuclear war in 1998 , a distant remnant force of the u.s . army called the desert rangers is based in the southwestern united states , acting as peacekeepers to protect fellow survivors and their descendants . a team of desert rangers is assigned to investigate a series of disturbances in nearby areas . throughout the game , the rangers explore the remaining enclaves of human civilization , including a post-apocalyptic las vegas . as the group 's investigation deepens , the rangers discover evidence of a larger menace threatening to exterminate what is left of humankind . a pre-war artificial intelligence operating from a surviving military facility , base cochise , is constructing armies of killer machines and cybernetically modified humans to attack human settlements with the help of irwin finster , the deranged former commander of the base . finster has gone so far as to transform himself into a cyborg under the ai 's control . the ai 's ultimate goal is to complete '' project darwin '' ( which finster was in charge of ) and replace the world 's '' flawed '' population with genetically pure specimens . with help from a pre-war robot named max , the player recovers the necessary technology and weapons in order to confront the ai at base cochise and destroy it by making the base 's nuclear reactor melt down . development and release . brian fargo in an interview with hartley and patricia lesse for microtimes in 1987 said that interplay started work on the game about a year ago . fargo further stated that game was created on apple ii as it was equally important to him like the commodore 64 . he described the game as a hybrid of ultima games and the bard 's tale , while being post-apocalyptic and in a similar vein as the mad max films . he described the combat as being similar to the bard 's tale though also containing strategy , players being able to disband parties or split up party members for exploration , selecting the point-of-view of different members . it was stated in january 1987 that michael stackpole , who authored mercenaries , spies and private eyes and batman 's sourcebook for dc heroes , would be involved as the game 's writer . close to release , interplay insisted that it be labelled pg-13 . fargo in an interview with patrick hickey jr . has stated that the genesis of wasteland came after the bard 's tale was a hit , as they wanted to make another role-playing video game for electronic arts asides from a sequel to the bard 's tale . he added that due to his love for mad max 2 and post-apocalyptic fiction , he chose a post-apocalyptic setting for this new rpg . while searching for a gameplay system for their new game , they came across the system of mercenaries , spies and private eyes . ken st . andre described to hickey that they wanted to make a game-changing computer role-playing game that will be better than any other at the time , hating the limitations other crpgs put on gamers . according to him , the process of creating the story of the game took over a year , though it was mostly due to them feeding various possible scenarios into how the game should react at a given time . wasteland 's different story was mostly because of st . andre and stackpole who wanted something new . the original plot was supposed to be similar to red dawn , with russians occupying the united states and fighting against americans engaged in liberating their nation . st . andre eventually decided to change this and pitched a new story involving killer robots wanting to wipe out as well as replace humanity , which he called a sort of cross between the terminator and daffy duck , and brian accepted this new storyline . the location of the game was chosen due to st . andre living in the region and his familiarity with the area , while making sure the locations of real-world places were accurate in the game . alan pavlish had been chosen to be the lead developer of the video game , writing the game in apple ii machine language and programming the game to react to player choices . per st . andre , fargo 's pitch to him was of a post-nuclear holocaust game which took advantage of pavlish 's coding , which allowed for weapons capable of inflicting area effect damage to be used and the map be modified '' on the fly '' . the game was copyrighted in 1986 . said to be in development for five years , wasteland was originally released for the apple ii , commodore 64 , and ibm compatibles . the ibm version added an additional skill called '' combat shooting '' which could be bought only when a character was first created . wasteland was re-released as part of interplay 's 10 year anthology : classic collection in 1995 , and also included in the 1998 ultimate rpg archives through interplay 's dragonplay label . these later bundled releases were missing the original setup program , which allowed the game 's maps to be reset , while retaining the player 's original team of rangers . jeremy reaban wrote an unofficial ( and unsupported ) program that emulated this functionality . . reception . computer gaming world cited wastelands '' ease of play , richness of plot , problem solving requirements , skill and task system , and graphic display '' as elements of its excellence . the magazine 's scorpia favorably reviewed the game in 1991 and 1993 , calling it '' really the only decently-designed post-nuke game on the market '' . in 1992 the magazine stated that the game 's '' classic mix of combat and problem-solving '' was the favorite of its readers in 1988 , and that '' the way in which wastelands npcs related to the player characters , the questions of dealing with moral dillemas , and the treatment of skills set this game apart . '' in 1994 the magazine mentioned wasteland as an example of how '' older , less sophisticated engines can still play host to a great game '' . orson scott card gave wasteland a mixed review in compute ! , commending the science fiction elements and setting , but stating that '' mutant bunnies can get boring , too . this is still a kill-the-monster-and-get-the-treasure game , without the overarching story that makes each ultima series meaningful . '' another writer for compute ! praised the game , however , citing its non-linear design and multiple puzzle solutions , the vague nature of the goal , and customizable player stats . julia martin 's review for challenge favorably recommended the game for those into rpgs and adventure games , comparing it to twilight : 2000 , praising its combat system , choices and for differing from the usual sword-and-fantasy genre . she called the game well done and stated it offered hours of fun . she also criticized having to insert the primary '' a '' disk in order to play the game after copying it from four disks , the game 's save system and characters starting out with useless items . the game was a hit and at its time of release , it sold around 250,000 units . computer gaming world awarded wasteland the adventure game of the year award in 1988 . the game received the fourth-highest number of votes in a 1990 survey of the magazine 's readers ' '' all-time favorites '' . in 1993 computer gaming world added wasteland to its hall of fame , and in 1996 , rated it as the ninth best pc video game of all time for introducing the concept of the player 's party '' acting like the 'real ' people . '' in 2000 , wasteland was ranked as the 24th top pc game of all time by the staff of ign , who called it '' one of the best rpgs to ever grace the pc '' and '' a truly innovative rpg for its time . '' according to a retrospective review by richard cobbett of eurogamer in 2012 , '' even now , it offers a unique rpg world and experience . a whole fallen civilisation full of puzzles and characters and things to twiddle with , all magically crammed into less than a megabyte of space . '' in another retrospective article that same year , ign 's kristan reed wrote that '' time has not been kind to wasteland , but its core concepts stand firm . '' . legacy . sequels and spiritual successor . wasteland was followed in 1990 by a less-successful intended sequel , fountain of dreams , set in post-war florida . at the last moment , however , electronic arts decided to not advertise it as a sequel to wasteland . none of the creative cast from wasteland worked on fountain of dreams . interplay themselves worked on meantime , which was based on the wasteland game engine and its universe but was not a continuation of the story . coding of meantime was nearly finished and a beta version was produced , but the game was canceled when the 8-bit computer game market went into decline . interplay has described its 1997 game fallout as the spiritual successor to wasteland . according to ign , '' interplay 's inability to prise the wasteland brand name from ea 's gnarled fingers actually led to it creating fallout in the first place . '' there are wasteland homage elements in fallout and fallout 2 as well . why wasteland 2 is worth getting excited about , ign , march 16 , 2012 all games in the fallout series are set in the world described by its characters as '' wasteland '' ( for example , the '' midwest wasteland '' in fallout tactics : brotherhood of steel or the '' capital wasteland '' in fallout 3 ) . a recruitable character named tycho in fallout is described as a desert ranger who is a descendant of an original desert ranger , who had taught the previous survival skills . a major part of the fallout universe is the military organization brotherhood of steel , whose origins are similar to the desert rangers and the guardians of the old order of wasteland ; a group called the desert rangers actually appears in fallout : new vegas . wasteland 2 was developed by brian fargo 's inxile entertainment and published on september 19 , 2014 . the game 's production team included the original wasteland designers alan pavlish , michael a . stackpole , ken st . andre and liz danforth , and was crowdfunded through a highly successful kickstarter campaign . inxile entertainment announced on september 28 , 2016 , that it was crowdfunding on fig to develop another sequel , wasteland 3 . the game is expected to be released on windows , mac , linux , playstation 4 , and xbox one in 2020 . . re-release . in a kickstarter update for wasteland 2 on august 9 , 2013 , project lead chris keenan announced that they had reached an agreement with electronic arts to release the game for modern operating systems . he added that it will be given for free to backers of wasteland 2 on kickstarter , in addition to being made available for purchase on gog and steam . the re-released was designed to run on higher resolutions and added in a song by mark morgan , higher resolution portraits , the ability to use the original game 's manual in-game and paragraph book 's text as well as expanding the save-game functionality . on november 7 , he announced that the re-release titled wasteland 1 - the original classic had gone gold and had been submitted to gog and steam for approval . in response to the player feedback , inxile included the ability to turn off smoothing , including the manual in tooltips , swapping and tweaking portraits while making it work on mac os x and linux . those who backed planescape : torment and received wasteland 2 , also received the re-release for free . the original classic edition was released on november 8 , 2013 and was downloaded over 33,000 times before its general availability . on november 12 , the game was released on gog . the next day , the game was also released on steam for the windows , mac and linux . the game was released on march 11 , 2014 for desura . . remaster . inxile entertainment announced a remastered version in honor of the original 's 30th anniversary , adding it was being produced by krome studios . during e3 2019 , brian fargo announced it was coming to both windows and xbox one . he also released screenshots of the game . on 23 january 2020 , the release date was revealed as 25 february . it was released on gog , steam and microsoft store . the graphics and sound were completely overhauled and the game uses 3d models . in addition , it also features voiced lines and new portraits for characters . the '' remastered '' edition features cross-save support and xbox play anywhere support . . references . external links .