Demilitarized zone

current demilitarized zones . aegean islands & nbsp ; – the greek islands of chios , icaria , lesbos , and samos are partially demilitarized according to the july 1923 treaty of lausanne after the greco-turkish war . the treaty forbids all naval fortifications and bases and stipulates that military forces on the islands '' be limited to the normal contingent called up for military service . '' åland islands & nbsp ; – the åland convention , which was concluded following a decision of the league of nations in response to the åland crisis , mandates that the finland government maintain the territory as a demilitarized area . antarctica & nbsp ; – the antarctic treaty forbids military activity in antarctica , such as '' the establishment of military bases and fortifications , the carrying out of military manoeuvres , as well as the testing of any type of weapon '' . the treaty does however provide for the '' use of military personnel or equipment for scientific research or for any other peaceful purpose '' . ceuta border fence and melilla border fence & nbsp ; – a de facto demilitarized zone exists between the spanish territories of ceuta and melilla and morocco . perimeter fences around both cities have been constructed by spanish and moroccan authorities , creating a demilitarized zone between the spanish and moroccan fences . dniester valley security zone & nbsp ; – created by the cease-fire agreement ending the war of transnistria , the joint control commission peacekeeping mission monitors a demilitarized zone roughly outlining the dnister between moldova and transnistria . ground safety zone & nbsp ; – a demilitarized area between serbia and kosovo was created under the kumanovo agreement following the kosovo war . idlib demilitarization ( 2018–present ) & nbsp ; – a demilitarized zone , created by agreement between russian and turkey government , splitting the last major stronghold of the syrian rebels from the syria controlled area amidst the syrian civil war . korean demilitarized zone & nbsp ; – the korean armistice agreement created a 4 & nbsp ; km ( 2.5 & nbsp ; mi ) -wide demilitarized zone between north korea and south korea following the korean war . it is currently one of the most heavily militarized area in the world despite the name . kuwait–iraq barrier & nbsp ; – the united nations security council approved the creation of a demilitarized zone between iraq and kuwait in resolution 689 after the gulf war . although the demilitarized zone is no longer mandated by the council , it continues to exist . preah vihear temple & nbsp ; – the international court of justice had ordered the creation of a '' provisional demilitarized zone '' around the temple whose ownership is claimed by both cambodia and thailand . sinai peninsula & nbsp ; – the egypt–israel peace treaty sets a limit to the amount of forces egypt can place in the sinai peninsula . parts of the peninsula are demilitarized to various degrees , especially within of israel . israel also agreed to limit its forces within of the egyptian border . camp david accords & nbsp ; – israeli ministry of foreign affairs the areas are monitored by the multinational force and observers . 10 tactical air group : canadian contingent multinational force and observers handbook ( unclassified ) , page a-1 . dnd , ottawa , 1986 . because of the sinai insurgency all sides agreed and encouraged egypt to send large amounts of military forces into the area , including tanks and helicopters , to fight islamist groups . svalbard & nbsp ; – the svalbard treaty of 1920 , which recognized norway sovereignty over the territory , designated the area as demilitarized . original spitsbergen treaty sudan & nbsp ; – a demilitarized zone along the sudan – south sudan border . united nations buffer zone in cyprus & nbsp ; – the united nations security council created a buffer zone separating the self-proclaimed , internationally unrecognized turkish republic of northern cyprus from the cyprus . it was authorized by resolution 186 and is patrolled by the united nations peacekeeping force in cyprus . united nations disengagement observer force zone & nbsp ; – the united nations security council approved the creation of a demilitarized zone in a portion of the israeli-occupied territory of the golan heights in syria in resolution 350 after the yom kippur war . the zone is monitored by the united nations disengagement observer force . united nations interim force in lebanon & nbsp ; – created by the united nations with the adoption of security council resolution 425 and 426 , to confirm israeli withdrawal from lebanon which israel had invaded in 1978 , to restore international peace and security , and help the politics of lebanon restore its effective authority in the area . . former demilitarized zones . a neutral territory was established between the british overseas territory of gibraltar and spain after the end of the 1727 siege . a strip of land 600 toises ( about long , more than two cannon shots ' distance between the british and spanish guns , was called '' the neutral ground '' and shown as such on older maps . in 1908 , the british built a fence in a portion claimed to be the british half of the neutral territory . spain does not recognize british sovereignty over the isthmus ( including the border ) , asserting it is spanish soil . although both the united kingdom and spain used to be part of the european union ( before the united kingdom 's exit ) , the border was a de facto international frontier with customs and immigration checks ; spain does not formally recognize it as a '' frontier '' , referring to it as a '' fence '' . whatever its name , gibraltar opted out of the european union customs union and is not part of the schengen area ; the border is open 24 hours a day , with customs duties payable on designated goods entering spain or gibraltar . rhineland – the treaty of versailles designated the rhineland as a demilitarized zone after world war i , prohibiting the weimar republic from deploying its military there . it was re-occupied and re-militarized in 1936 by nazi germany in violation of international treaties . saudi–iraqi neutral zone – the uqair protocol established a demilitarized zone between the sultanate of nejd and the kingdom of iraq , which at the time was a league of nations mandate administered by the british empire . nejd was later incorporated into the saudi arabia . the zone was partitioned in 1981 but the treaty was not filed with the united nations . the zone was finally officially abolished during the gulf war , when iraq and saudi arabia cancelled all international agreements with each other . saudi–kuwaiti neutral zone – the uqair protocol established a neutral zone between the sultanate of nejd and the british protectorate of kuwait in 1922 . it was partitioned by mutual agreement in 1970 . israel and egypt : following the 1948 arab–israeli war , a dmz ( the el auja zone ) was created by the 1949 armistice agreements between israel and egypt . israel and jordan : the israeli enclave and jordanian area on mt . scopus was designated as a dmz . the area around the latrun salient . israel and syria : following the 1948 arab-israeli war , three dmzs were created by the 1949 armistice agreements between israel and syria . china – the imperial japanese army conquered manchuria between september 1931 and february 1932 , when they proclaimed the region the state of manchukuo . in may 1933 , the tanggu truce between china and japan was concluded , establishing a demilitarized zone between manchukuo and china . in 1937 japan violated this truce with an invasion of the remainder of china . in 1945 , after the fall of the japanese empire at the end of the pacific war of world war ii , manchuria was re-incorporated into china . vietnamese demilitarized zone – the demilitarized zone between north vietnam and south vietnam was established in july 1954 as a result of the geneva conference ending the war between the viet minh and france . the dmz in vietnam officially lay at the 17th parallel and ended in 1976 ; in reality , it extended about on either side of the bến hải river and west to east from the lao border to the south china sea . norway and sweden established a demilitarized zone of 1 & nbsp ; km ( 1,100 yards ) on each side of their border after the dissolution of the union between norway and sweden in 1905 . the zone was abolished by mutual agreement in 1993 . el caguán dmz – a demilitarized zone was established in southern colombia between 1999 and 2002 , during the failed peace process that involved the government of president andrés pastrana and the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) . northern syria buffer zone & nbsp ; – a demilitarized zone in northern syria straddling portions of the syria–turkey border . it was established between turkey and the united states , both nato allies , during the syrian civil war to prevent clashes between rojava and turkish forces . the dmz collapsed in october 2019 , after turkey dismissed the agreement and the united states ordered a withdrawal of us forces from northern syria , allowing the 2019 turkish offensive into north-eastern syria to go ahead . . see also . buffer zone demarcation line dmz ( computing ) green zone list of established military terms no-fly zone safe zone ( syria ) unikom united nations safe areas . references .