Joseph Glanvill

life . he was raised in a strict puritan household , and educated at oxford university , where he graduated b.a . from exeter college in 1655 , m.a . from lincoln college in 1658 . concise dictionary of national biography glanvill was made vicar of frome in 1662 , and was a fellow of the royal society in 1664 . he was rector of the bath abbey at bath from 1666 to 1680 , and prebendary of worcester in 1678 . . works and views . he was a latitudinarian thinker . latitudinarians generally respected the cambridge platonists , and glanvill was friendly with and much influenced by henry more , a leader in that group where glanvill was a follower . it was glanvill 's style to seek out a '' middle way '' on contemporary philosophical issues . his writings display a variety of beliefs that may appear contradictory . there is discussion of glanvill 's thought and method in basil willey 's seventeenth century background ( 1934 ) . rationality and plain talking . he was the author of the vanity of dogmatizing ( editions from 1661 ) , which attacked scholasticism and religious persecution . it was a plea for freedom of religion , the scientific method , and freedom of thought . it also contained a tale that became the material for matthew arnold 's victorian poem the scholar gipsy . glanvill was at first a cartesian , but shifted his ground a little , engaging with scepticism and proposing a modification in scepsis scientifica ( 1665 ) , a revision and expansion of the vanity of dogmatizing . it started with an explicit '' address to the royal society '' ; the society responded by electing him as fellow . he continued in a role of spokesman for his type of limited sceptical approach , and the society 's production of useful knowledge . richard h . popkin ( editor ) , the pimlico history of western philosophy ( 1999 ) , pp . 360–2 . as part of his programme , he argued for a plain use of language , undistorted as to definitions and reliance on metaphor . jonathan sawday , the body emblazoned : dissection and the human body in renaissance culture ( 1996 ) , p . 235 . he also advocated with essay concerning preaching ( 1678 ) simple speech , rather than bluntness , in preaching , as robert south did , with hits at nonconformist sermons ; he was quite aware that the term '' plain '' takes a great deal of unpacking . n . h . keeble , the literary culture of nonconformity in later seventeenth-century england ( 1987 ) , p . 244 and p . 246 . in essays on several important subjects in philosophy and religion ( 1676 ) he wrote a significant essay the agreement of reason and religion , aimed at least in part at nonconformism . reason , in glanvill 's view , was incompatible with being a dissenter . richard ashcraft , latitudinarianism and toleration , p . 157 in richard w . f . kroll , richard ashcraft , perez zagorin ( editors ) , philosophy , science , and religion in england , 1640–1700 ( 1991 ) . in antifanatickal religion and free philosophy , another essay from the volume , he attacked the whole tradition of imaginative illumination in religion , going back to william perkins , as founded on the denigration of reason . jeremy schmidt , melancholy and the care of the soul : religion , moral philosophy and madness in early modern england ( 2007 ) , p . 89 . this essay has the subtitle continuation of the new atlantis , and so connects with francis bacon 's utopia . in an allegory , glanvill placed the '' young academicians '' , standing for the cambridge platonists , in the midst of intellectual troubles matching the religious upheavals seen in britain . they coped by combining modern with ancient thought . westfall , p . 116 . glanvill thought , however , that the world can not be deduced from reason alone . even the supernatural can not be solved from first principles and must be investigated empirically . as a result , glanvill attempted to investigate supposed supernatural incidents through interviews and examination of the scene of the events . the supernatural . image : endor.jpg right thumb 250px the witch of endor : from the frontispiece to glanvill 's saducismus triumphatus he is known also for saducismus triumphatus ( 1681 ) , this enlargement of his blow at modern sadducism ( 1668 ) was published after glanvill 's death by henry more . the work decried scepticism about the existence and supernatural power of witchcraft and contained a collection of seventeenth-century folklore about witches , including one of the earliest descriptions of a witch bottle . joseph made known the existence of witchcraft . it developed as a compendium ( with multiple authorship ) from philosophical considerations touching the being of witches and witchcraft ( 1666 ) , addressed to robert hunt , a justice of the peace active from the 1650s against witches in somerset ( where glanvill had his living at frome ) ; the 1668 version a blow at modern sadducism promoted the view that the judicial procedures such as hunt 's court offered should be taken as adequate tests of evidence , because to argue otherwise was to undermine society at its legal roots . stuart clark , thinking with demons : the idea of witchcraft in early modern europe ( 1999 ) , p . 176 . his biographer ferris greenslet attributed glanvill 's interest in the topic to a house party in february 1665 at ragley hall , home of lady anne conway , where other guests were more , francis van helmont , and valentine greatrakes . ferris greenslet , joseph glanvill : a study in english thought and letters of the seventeenth century ( 1900 ) , p . 66 . in the matter of the drummer of tedworth , a report of poltergeist-type activity from 1662 to 1663 , more and glanvill had in fact already corresponded about it in 1663 . saducismus triumphatus deeply influenced cotton mather 's wonders of the invisible world ( 1693 ) , written to justify the salem witch trials in the following year . it was also taken as a target when francis hutchinson set down an historical essay concerning witchcraft ( 1718 ) ; both books made much of reports from sweden , and included by glanvill as editor , which had experienced a moral panic about witchcraft after 1668 . e . william monter , scandinavian witchcraft in perspective , pp . 432–3 , in bengt ankarloo and guctav henningsen , early modern witchcraft : centres and peripheries ( 1990 ) . jonathan israel writes : these and others ( richard baxter , meric casaubon , george sinclair ) believed that the tide of scepticism on witchcraft , setting in strongly by about 1670 , could be turned back by research and sifting of the evidence . keith thomas , religion and the decline of magic ( 1973 ) , p . 690 and p . 693 . like more , glanvill believed that the existence of spirits was well documented in the bible , and that the denial of spirits and demons was the first step towards atheism . atheism led to rebellion and social chaos and therefore had to be overcome by science and the activities of the learned . israel cites a letter from more to glanvill , from 1678 and included in saducismus triumphatus , in which he says that followers of thomas hobbes and baruch spinoza use scepticism about '' spirits and angels '' to undermine belief in the scripture mentioning them . saducismus triumphatus was also translated into german in 1701 . joseph glanvill , saducismus triumphatus , oder vollkommener und klarer beweiß von hexen und gespenstern oder geister-erscheinungen ( hamburg : liebernickel , 1701 ) . the german edition was used extensively by peter goldschmidt in his similar work verworffener hexen- und zauberer-advocat ( 1705 ) . this work brought the saducismus triumphatus to the attention of christian thomasius , a philosopher , legal professor and sceptic in halle . over the next 21 years , thomasius published translations of works by english sceptics : john webster and francis hutchinson , as well as john beaumont 's an historical , physiological and theological treatise of spirits , all of which were accompanied by vitriolic prefaces attacking glanvill , goldschmidt and their belief in witchcraft . julie davies ( 2016 ) '' german receptions of the works of joseph glanvill : philosophical transmissions from england to germany in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth century '' , intellectual history review , 26:1 , 81-90 , doi:10.1080/17496977.2015.1032120 . atheism , scepticism and aristotle . his views did not prevent glanvill himself being charged with atheism . this happened after he engaged in a controversy with robert crosse , over the continuing value of the work of aristotle , the classical exponent of the middle way . nicholas h . steneck ( 1981 ) , '' the ballad of robert crosse and joseph glanvill '' and the background to plus ultra , british journal for the history of science , 1981 , vol . 14 , no . 46 , pp . 59–74 . in defending himself and the royal society , in plus ultra , he attacked current teaching of medicine ( physick ) , and in return was attacked by henry stubbe , in the plus ultra reduced to a non plus ( 1670 ) . roger kenneth french , andrew wear ( editors ) , the medical revolution of the seventeenth century ( 1989 ) , pp . 151–2 . his views on aristotle also led to an attack by thomas white , the catholic priest known as blacklo . in a praefatory answer to mr . henry stubbe ( 1671 ) he defined the '' philosophy of the virtuosi '' cleanly : the '' plain objects of sense '' to be respected , as the locus of as much certainty as was available ; the '' suspension of assent '' absent adequate proof ; and the claim for the approach as '' equally an adversary to scepticism and credulity '' . to white he denied being a sceptic . stephen gaukroger , the emergence of a scientific culture : science and the shaping of modernity , 1210–1685 ( 2006 ) , p . 224 . stuart clark , vanities of the eye : vision in early modern european culture ( 2007 ) , p . 352 . a contemporary view is that his approach was a species of rational fideism . richard henry popkin , the history of scepticism : from savonarola to bayle ( 2003 edition ) , p . 213 . his philosophia pia ( 1671 ) was explicitly about the connection between the '' experimental philosophy '' of the royal society and religion . it was a reply to a letter of meric casaubon , one of the society 's critics , to peter du moulin . he used it to cast doubt on the roots of enthusiasm , one of his main targets amongst the nonconformists . michael heyd , be sober and reasonable : the critique of enthusiasm in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries ( 1995 ) , note p . 156 . it also dealt with criticisms of richard baxter , who was another accusing the society of an atheist tendency . jon parkin , science , religion and politics in restoration england : richard cumberland 's de legibus naturae ( 1999 ) , pp . 137–8 . . references . further reading . richard h . popkin , joseph glanvill : a precursor of david hume , journal of the history of ideas , vol . 14 , no . 2 ( apr . , 1953 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 292–303 jackson i . cope , joseph glanvill , anglican apologist : old ideas and new style in the restoration , pmla , vol . 69 , no . 1 ( mar . , 1954 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 223–250 richard h . popkin , the development of the philosophical reputation of joseph glanvill , journal of the history of ideas , vol . 15 , no . 2 ( apr . , 1954 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 305–311 dorothea krook , two baconians : robert boyle and joseph glanvill , huntington library quarterly 18 ( 1955 ) : 261–78 robert m . burns ( 1981 ) , the great debate on miracles : from joseph glanvill to david hume sascha talmor ( 1981 ) , glanvill : the uses and abuses of skepticism richard h . popkin ( 1992 ) , the third force in seventeenth-century thought , ch . 15 the scepticism of joseph glanvill ryan stark , rhetoric , science and magic in seventeenth-century england ( washington , dc : the catholic university of america press , 2009 ) , 30–46 . shirley jackson 's short story collection , the lottery & other stories , includes excerpts from glanvill 's sadducismus triumphatus . external links . scepsis scientifica at the ex-classics web site online galleries , history of science collections , university of oklahoma libraries high resolution images of works by and/or portraits of joseph glanvil . '' a sermon preached at the funeral of mr . jos . glanvil ''