Louis-Hippolyte Lafontaine

political career . during the 1840s , willson continued his association with the reform party ; he was , for example , the campaign manager in the area for both robert baldwin and louis lafontaine , the '' fathers of responsible government '' and first elected premiers of the province . it was the children of peace who ensured the election of montreal lawyer louis la fontaine as their representative in upper canada . willson argued that this was an opportunity , as he said , '' to show our impartial respect to the canadian people of the lower province . '' here , willson is expressing a clear canadian identity that overcame differences in the language and religion . it was a vision of canadian citizenship that was ultimately successful , as la fontaine was elected in the 4th riding of york . subsequently , they elected baldwin in their riding . the band of the children of peace was a familiar sight at baldwin 's campaign rallies . in 1844 , they held a campaign rally for baldwin concurrently with the illumination of the temple . over 3000 people attended , an event that helped end the reign of orange order electoral violence . in canada east , gerrymandering and orange order violence were used to prevent the election of lafontaine , leader of the canadien reformers in terrebonne , outside montreal . in order to ensure la fontaine a seat , baldwin proposed to david willson , leader of the children of peace , that they nominate la fontaine for the seat in 4th york . baldwin also insisted that sydenham include la fontaine in the reformed executive council , or he would resign as solicitor general . their alliance allowed la fontaine to have a seat in the assembly in 1841 and for baldwin to win the by-election in 1843 . on 3 september 1841 , the children of peace held a campaign rally for baldwin and la fontaine in their temple , where they rejoiced '' to say that we have it in our power to show our impartial respect to the canadian people of the lower province . '' despite threats of orange order violence , la fontaine was elected as representative of 4th york . however , before la fontaine could take up his seat , governor sydenham died . his replacement , sir charles bagot , was not able to form a mixed cabinet of reformers and tories , and so he was forced to include the '' canadien party '' under la fontaine . la fontaine refused to join the executive council unless baldwin was also included . bagot was finally forced to accede in september , 1842 , and when he became severely ill thereafter , baldwin and la fontaine became the first real premiers of the province of canada . however , in order to take office as ministers , the two had to run for re-election . while la fontaine was easily re-elected in 4th york , baldwin lost his seat in hastings as a result of orange order violence . it was now that the pact between the two men was completely solidified , as la fontaine arranged for baldwin to run in rimouski , canada east . this was the union of the canadas they sought , where la fontaine overcame linguistic prejudice to gain a seat in english canada , and baldwin obtained his seat in french canada . . family . he first married on july 9 , 1831 to adèle berthelot ( 1813–1859 ) . their union produced no children . his real family name is ménard . he is the son of antoine ménard . the hon . sir louis hypolite ménard , bart . , then chief justice of lower canada then married montreal , january 30 , 1861 , the widowed jane élisabeth geneviève morrison , ( 1822–1905 ) daughter of charles morrison , on january 30 , 1861 . julie had married in montreal , december 18 , 1848 , thomas kinton , of the royal engineers department . this second marriage produced two sons who died in infancy ; louis-hippolyte ( born july 11 , 1862 ) and charles françois hypolite lafontaine , born april 13 , 1864 who died the following year . the elder son succeeded to the baronetcy at eighteen months old in february , 1864 , but died in 1867 . the family residence was saint denis street , montreal . . memorials . the louis hippolyte ménard monument in la fontaine park montreal . the city authorities of montreal named louis-hippolyte la fontaine park as a tribute to chief justice lafontaine 's memory . the unveiling of the la fontaine monument in parc la fontaine montreal was a tremendous event to honour such a great man , who is considered the father of responsible government in canada . in a book published by le comité du monument lafontaine in 1930 titled hommage à lafontaine . fauteaux , m aegisdius . hommage a lafontaine . ( montreal : le comité du monument lafontaine , 1930 ) the book is a compilation of letters sent to various people about the unveiling of the monument in montreal . in these letters and speeches , people expressed their sentiments about the unveiling of the lafontaine monument and it is clear they saw him as a great man . mayor . c.houde explained how . fauteaux , m aegisdius . hommage à la fontaine . ( montreal : le comité du monument lafontaine , 1930 ) 21 . the crowd was extremely large at the unveiling and mayor . houde explained how the monument was erected . fauteaux , m aegisdius . hommage à la fontaine . ( montreal : le comité du monument la fontaine , 1930 ) 57 . the chief justice for sir wilfrid laurier was also present the day of the unveiling and he spoke very highly of the monument and lafontaine as he said '' it is a grateful joy to be allowed to laud and magnify lafontaine 's imperishable name . i would fain do it , excluding in a rise of canada from colonial inferiority to international equality , wherein la fontaine bore so great a part . fauteaux , m aegisdius . hommage à la fontaine . ( montreal : le comité du monument lafontaine , 1930 ) 58 . . the louis hippolyte ménard monument in boucherville . image : statue de louis-hippolyte lafontaine ( parc de la broquerie , boucherville ) . jpg thumb upright monument of louis-hippolyte lafontaine in boucherville la fontaine was born in boucherville and moved to montreal to begin his political career . a monument was unveiled in boucherville after his demise as well as a commemorative plaque , placed upon his birth home . evidence of this is given by dr . eudore dubeau a doctor of the town who explained , . he goes further to explain how on la fontaine 's birth home they placed a bronze plaque which . once again he is referenced as not only the father of responsible government , but also the defender of the french language . lafontaine refused to speak english in the assembly and fought to use his mother tongue . it was not that he was incapable of speaking english , he just believed people should be able to speak their mother tongue and supported the french canadians right to do so . . the louis-hippolyte-la fontaine bridge-tunnel . more about the louis-hippolyte lafontaine tunnel can be found here . in brief construction began in 1963 and they named it after lafontaine in order to preserve his memory for future generations . file : louis h lafontaine tunnel.jpg the lafontaine tunnel . louis-hippolyte ménard hospital . the louis-hippolyte-la fontaine hospital opened its doors in 1873 under the name '' d'hospice saint-jean-de-dieu.la congrégation des soeurs de la providence '' . hôpital louis-hippolyte lafontaine . historique . montreal , 2011 , it was and still is a psychiatric hospital , although it speculated that they also took care of orphans who they wrongly labeled as mentally ill to conduct medical experiments , they are called the duplessis orphans . the name was changed because of letters from patients , although the reason they chose la fontaine 's name over others is not documented . hôpital louis-hippolyte-la fontaine . historique . montreal : file : stjeandudieuhospice02.jpg the former home of louis-hippolyte lafontaine in montreal . the baldwin and la fontaine monument on parliament hill . image : baldwin-lafontaine.jpg thumb upright monument of robert baldwin and louis-hippolyte lafontaine in ottawa created by walter seymour allward who is best known for his design of the '' mammoth canadian battlefields memorial in vimy , france ( 1922-36 ) , that commemorated the important battle of vimy ridge . '' allward created the statue of la fontaine and baldwin which rests on parliament hill in ottawa . the '' la fontaine-baldwin administration throughout the years 1849 and 1850 remained in a position of exceptional power '' . under this regime la fontaine fought to see the seigneurial system '' abolished , but wished to find means to respect the interests of the seigniors by a proper compensation '' . baldwin and la fontaine fought hard to build unity in the government of canada and build a true responsible government . if you would like to learn more about baldwin and la fontaine a canadian historical minute has been made concerning their rise into leadership which can be viewed at baldwin and la fontaine historical minute . awaiting designations . the house louis-hippolyte la fontaine lived in as a politician in montreal is still standing today and is located on 1395 overdale , montreal , quebec . however , the city of montreal has not yet designated the building into a historical site . it was discovered in july 1987 by senator serge joyal that this home was once the former home of louis hippolyte la fontaine . michael fish , an architect who advocated for the building interview on february 4 , 2011 . during the rebellion losses bill in which parliament was burned this home was also the target of many rioters . since it was rediscovered in 1987 its facade has been left to be battered by the elements . heritage montreal has been lobbying for the sir louis-hippolyte lafontaine house for many years and they are hoping that the city comes forward to help . heritage montreal and other advocates hope this home can be renovated and built into something such as an interpretive museum exploring the development of responsible government in canada . heritage montreal , '' louis-hippolyte la fontaine mansion threatened '' ( accessed feb 2011 ) louis-hippolyte la fontaine mansion file : maison louis-hippolyte lafontaine 02.jpg the birth home of louis-hippolyte la fontaine in boucherville . writings . works . les deux girouettes , ou l'hypocrisie démasquée , montréal , 1834 ( online ) notes sur l'inamovibilité des curés dans le bas-canada , montréal , 1837 analyse de l'ordonnance du conseil spécial sur les bureaux d'hypothèques . , montréal , 1842 de l'esclavage en canada , montréal , 1859 with jacques viger ( online ) de la famille des lauson . vice-rois et lieutenants généraux des rois de france en amérique , 1859 ( online ) . other . the address to the electors of terrebonne , 1840 ( online ) . see also . canadian hereditary peers lafontaine-baldwin symposium louis-joseph papineau lower canada rebellion timeline of quebec history . notes . bibliography . in english . abbott nish , m . e . double majority : concept , practice and negotiations , 1840–1848 , master thesis , mcgill university , montréal , 1966 heritage montreal , '' louis-hippolyte lafontaine mansion '' , montreal , . in french . aubin , georges ( 2002–05 ) . louis-hippolyte la fontaine . correspondance générale tome 1 : les ficelles du pouvoir : correspondance entre louis-hippolyte la fontaine et robert baldwin , 1840–1854 tome 2 : au nom de la loi : lettres de louis-hippolyte la fontaine à divers correspondants , 1829–1847 tome 3 : mon cher amable : lettres de louis-hippolyte la fontaine à divers correspondants , 1848–1864 aubin , georges ( 1999 ) . louis-hippolyte la fontaine . journal de voyage en europe , 1837–1838 , sillery : septentrion , 153 p . & nbsp ; bertrand , réal ( 1993 ) . louis-hippolyte lafontaine , montréal : lidec , 60 p . & nbsp ; auclair , elie-joseph ( 1933 ) . figures canadiennes , montréal , vol . 2 , pp . & nbsp ; 9–19 ( online ) alfred duclos decelles , lafontaine et son temps , montréal : librairie beauchemin,192g . ( online ) laurent-olivier david ( 1872 ) . sir ls.-h . lafontaine , montréal : typographie geo . e . desbarats , 45 p . fauteaux , m aegidius . hommages à lafontaine . montreal '' le comité du monument lafontaine , 1931 . a propos . '' historique '' . hôpital louis-hippolye lafontaine , montreal : ( accessed feb 2011 ) . external links .