Philosopher's stone

history . antiquity . the earliest known written mention of the philosophers ' stone is in the cheirokmeta by zosimos of panopolis ( c . 300 ad ) . andrew ede , lesley cormack . a history of science in society : from philosophy to utility . university of toronto press . p . 66 alchemical writers assign a longer history . elias ashmole and the anonymous author of gloria mundi ( 1620 ) claim that its history goes back to adam , who acquired the knowledge of the stone directly from god . this knowledge was said to be passed down through biblical patriarchs , giving them their longevity . the legend of the stone was also compared to the biblical history of the temple of solomon and the rejected cornerstone described in psalm 118 . raphael patai . the jewish alchemists : a history and source book princeton university press , 1995 . p.19 the theoretical roots outlining the stone 's creation can be traced to greek philosophy . alchemists later used the classical elements , the concept of anima mundi , and creation stories presented in texts like plato 's timaeus as analogies for their process . stanton j . linden . the alchemy reader : from hermes trismegistus to isaac newton cambridge : cambridge university press . 2003 . p . 29 . according to plato , the four elements are derived from a common source or prima materia ( first matter ) , associated with chaos . prima materia is also the name alchemists assign to the starting ingredient for the creation of the philosophers ' stone . the importance of this philosophical first matter persisted throughout the history of alchemy . in the seventeenth century , thomas vaughan writes , '' the first matter of the stone is the very same with the first matter of all things '' . mark haeffner . dictionary of alchemy : from maria prophetessa to isaac newton . karnac books , 2004 . p.211 . middle ages . early medieval alchemists built upon the work of zosimos in the byzantine empire and the arab empires . byzantine and arab alchemists were fascinated by the concept of metal transmutation and attempted to carry out the process . the 8th-century muslim alchemist jabir ibn hayyan ( latinized as geber ) analyzed each classical element in terms of the four basic qualities . fire was both hot and dry , earth cold and dry , water cold and moist , and air hot and moist . he theorized that every metal was a combination of these four principles , two of them interior and two exterior . from this premise , it was reasoned that the transmutation of one metal into another could be affected by the rearrangement of its basic qualities . this change would be mediated by a substance , which came to be called xerion in greek and al-iksir in arabic ( from which the word elixir is derived ) . it was often considered to exist as a dry red powder ( also known as al-kibrit al-ahmar , red sulfur ) made from a legendary stone—the philosophers ' stone . the elixir powder came to be regarded as a crucial component of transmutation by later arab alchemists . in the 11th century , there was a debate among muslim world chemists on whether the transmutation of substances was possible . a leading opponent was the persian polymath avicenna ( ibn sina ) , who discredited the theory of transmutation of substances , stating , '' those of the chemical craft know well that no change can be effected in the different species of substances , though they can produce the appearance of such change . '' robert briffault ( 1938 ) . the making of humanity , p . 196-197 . according to legend , the 13th-century scientist and philosopher albertus magnus is said to have discovered the philosophers ' stone . magnus does not confirm he discovered the stone in his writings , but he did record that he witnessed the creation of gold by '' transmutation '' . julian franklyn and frederick e . budd . a survey of the occult . electric book company . 2001 . p . 28-30 . . renaissance to early modern period . the 16th-century swiss alchemist paracelsus ( philippus aureolus theophrastus bombastus von hohenheim ) believed in the existence of alkahest , which he thought to be an undiscovered element from which all other elements ( earth , fire , water , air ) were simply derivative forms . paracelsus believed that this element was , in fact , the philosopher 's stone . the english philosopher sir thomas browne in his spiritual testament religio medici ( 1643 ) identified the religious aspect of the quest for the philosopher 's stone when declaring : a mystical text published in the 17th century called the mutus liber appears to be a symbolic instruction manual for concocting a philosopher 's stone . called the '' wordless book '' , it was a collection of 15 illustrations . in buddhism and hinduism . the equivalent of the philosophers ' stone in buddhism and hinduism is the cintamani , also spelled as chintamani . rené guénon ( 2004 ) ( 1962 ) . symbols of sacred science . sophia perennis , usa . pp . 277 . it is also referred to dictionary.com as paras/parasmani ( sanskrit : पारसमणि , hindi : पारस ) or paris ( marathi : परिस ) . in mahayana buddhism , chintamani is held by the bodhisattvas , avalokiteshvara and ksitigarbha . it is also seen carried upon the back of the lung ta ( wind horse ) which is depicted on tibetan prayer flags . by reciting the dharani of chintamani , buddhist tradition maintains that one attains the wisdom of buddhas , is able to understand the truth of the buddhas , and turns afflictions into bodhi . it is said to allow one to see the holy retinue of amitabha and his assembly upon one 's deathbed . in tibetan buddhist tradition the chintamani is sometimes depicted as a luminous pearl and is in the possession of several of different forms of the buddha . r . a . donkin , beyond price : pearls and pearl-fishing : origins to the age of discoveries , p . 170 within hinduism it is connected with the gods vishnu and ganesha . in hindu tradition it is often depicted as a fabulous jewel in the possession of the nāga king or as on the forehead of the makara . the yoga vasistha , originally written in the 10th century ad , contains a story about the philosophers ' stone . a great hindu sage wrote about the spiritual accomplishment of gnosis using the metaphor of the philosophers ' stone . saint jnaneshwar ( 1275–1296 ) wrote a commentary with 17 references to the philosopher 's stone that explicitly transmutes base metal into gold . the seventh century siddhar tirumular in his classic tirumandhiram explains man 's path to immortal divinity . in verse 2709 he declares that the name of god , shiva is an alchemical vehicle that turns the body into immortal gold . properties . the most commonly mentioned properties are the ability to transmute base metals into gold or silver , and the ability to heal all forms of illness and prolong the life of any person who consumes a small part of the philosopher 's stone diluted in wine . theophrastus paracelsus . the book of the revelation of hermes . 16th century other mentioned properties include : creation of perpetually burning lamps , transmutation of common crystals into precious stones and diamonds , reviving of dead plants , creation of flexible or malleable glass , an unknown german sage . a very brief tract concerning the philosophical stone . ( unknown date , possibly 16th century ) or the creation of a clone or homunculus . theophrastus paracelsus . of the nature of things . 16th century . names . numerous synonyms were used to make oblique reference to the stone , such as '' white stone '' ( calculus albus , identified with the calculus candidus of revelation 2:17 which was taken as a symbol of the glory of heaven salomon glass , johann gottfried olearius , philologia sacra : qua totius vet . et novi testamenti scripturae tum stylus et litteratura , tum sensus et genuinae interpretationis ratio et doctrina libris v expenditur ac traditur ^ , imp . j . fred . gleditschius ( 1743 ) ) , vitriol ( as expressed in the backronym visita interiora terrae rectificando invenies occultum lapidem ) , also lapis noster , lapis occultus , in water at the box , and numerous oblique , mystical or mythological references such as adam , aer , animal , alkahest , antidotus , antimony , aqua benedicta , aqua volans per aeram , arcanum , atramentum , autumnus , basilicus , brutorum cor , bufo , capillus , capistrum auri , carbones , cerberus , chaos , cinis cineris , crocus , dominus philosophorum , divine quintessence , draco elixir , filius ignis , fimus , folium , frater , granum , granum frumenti , haematites , hepar , herba , herbalis , lac , melancholia , ovum philosophorum , panacea salutifera , pandora , phoenix , philosophic mercury , pyrites , radices arboris solares , regina , rex regum , sal metallorum , salvator terrenus , talcum , thesaurus , ventus hermetis . listed e.g . in w . schneider , lexikon alchemistisch-pharmazeutischer symbole , weinheim 1962 . many of the medieval allegories for a christ were adopted for the lapis , and the christ and the stone were indeed taken as identical in a mystical sense . the name of '' stone '' or lapis itself is informed by early christian allegory , such as priscillian ( 4th century ) , who stated , in some texts it is simply called 'stone ' , or our stone , or in the case of thomas norton 's ordinal , '' oure delycious stone '' . line 744 in thomas norton 's the ordinal of alchemy by john rediry . the early english text society no . 272 . the stone was frequently praised and referred to in such terms . it needs to be noted that philosophorum does not mean '' of the philosopher '' or '' the philosopher 's '' in the sense of a single philosopher . it means '' of the philosophers '' in the sense of a plurality of philosophers . appearance . descriptions of the philosophers ' stone are numerous and various . john read '' from alchemy to chemistry '' p.29 according to alchemical texts , the stone of the philosophers came in two varieties , prepared by an almost identical method : white ( for the purpose of making silver ) , and red ( for the purpose of making gold ) , the white stone being a less matured version of the red stone . a german sage . a tract of great price concerning the philosophical stone . 1423 . some ancient and medieval alchemical texts leave clues to the physical appearance of the stone of the philosophers , specifically the red stone . it is often said to be orange ( saffron colored ) or red when ground to powder . or in a solid form , an intermediate between red and purple , transparent and glass-like . john frederick helvetius . golden calf . 17th century . the weight is spoken of as being heavier than gold , anonymous . on the philosophers ' stone . ( unknown date , possibly 16th century ) and it is soluble in any liquid , yet incombustible in fire . eirenaeus philalethes . a brief guide to the celestial ruby . 1694 ce alchemical authors sometimes suggest that the stone 's descriptors are metaphorical . charles john samuel thompson . alchemy and alchemists . p.70 the appearance is expressed geometrically in michael maier 's atalanta fugiens . '' make of a man and woman a circle ; then a quadrangle ; out of this a triangle ; make again a circle , and you will have the stone of the wise . thus is made the stone , which thou canst not discover , unless you , through diligence , learn to understand this geometrical teaching . '' j.b . craven . '' count michael maier '' . p.90 rupescissa uses the imagery of the christian passion , telling us it ascends '' from the sepulcher of the most excellent king , shining and glorious , resuscitated from the dead and wearing a red diadem . '' . leah devun . prophecy , alchemy , and the end of time : john of rupescissa in the late middle ages . columbia university press , 2009 . p.118 . interpretations . the various names and attributes assigned to the philosophers ' stone has led to long-standing speculation on its composition and source . exoteric candidates have been found in metals , plants , rocks , chemical compounds , and bodily products such as hair , urine , and eggs . justus von liebig states that 'it was indispensable that every substance accessible . should be observed and examined' . john read . from alchemy to chemistry london : g . bell . 1957 . p . 29 . alchemists once thought a key component in the creation of the stone was a mythical element named carmot . burt , a.l . 1885 . the national standard encyclopedia : a dictionary of literature , the sciences and the arts , for popular use p . 150 . available online . anton sebastian . 1999 . a dictionary of the history of medicine . p . 179 . available online . esoteric hermetic alchemists may reject work on exoteric substances , instead directing their search for the philosopher 's stone inward . stanton j . linden . the alchemy reader : from hermes trismegistus to isaac newton cambridge university press . 2003 . p . 16 . though esoteric and exoteric approaches are sometimes mixed , it is clear that some authors '' are not concerned with material substances but are employing the language of exoteric alchemy for the sole purpose of expressing theological , philosophical , or mystical beliefs and aspirations '' . eric john holmyard . alchemy courier dover publications , 1990 . p . 16 . new interpretations continue to be developed around spagyric , chemical , and esoteric schools of thought . the transmutation mediated by the stone has also been interpreted as a psychological process . idries shah devotes a chapter of his book the sufis to providing a detailed analysis of the symbolic significance of alchemical work with the philosopher 's stone . his analysis is based in part on a linguistic interpretation through arabic equivalents of one of the terms for the stone ( azoth ) as well as for sulfur , salt and mercury . . creation . the philosophers ' stone is created by the alchemical method known as the magnum opus or the great work . often expressed as a series of color changes or chemical processes , the instructions for creating the philosopher 's stone are varied . when expressed in colors , the work may pass through phases of nigredo , albedo , citrinitas , and rubedo . when expressed as a series of chemical processes it often includes seven or twelve stages concluding in multiplication , and projection . art and entertainment . the philosophers ' stone has been an inspiration , plot feature , or subject of innumerable artistic works : animations , comics , films , musical compositions , novels , and video games . examples include harry potter and the philosopher 's stone and fullmetal alchemist . the philosopher 's stone is an important motif in gothic fiction , and originated in william godwin 's 1799 novel st . leon . . see also . angelicall stone azoth biological transmutation cintamani cupellation elixir of life filius philosophorum fullmetal alchemist homunculus harry potter and the philosopher 's stone midas nicolas flamel nuclear transmutation panacea ( medicine ) synthesis of precious metals the net ( substance ) unobtainium . references . further reading . encyclopædia britannica ( 2011 ) . '' philosophers ' stone '' and '' alchemy '' . guiley , rosemary ( 2006 ) . the encyclopedia of magic and alchemy . new york : facts on file . pp . & nbsp ; 250–252 . myers , richard ( 2003 ) . the basics of chemistry . westport , conn . : greenwood publishing group , usa . pp . & nbsp ; 11–12 . walter pagel ( 1982 ) . paracelsus : an introduction to philosophical medicine in the era of the renaissance . basel , switzerland : karger publishers . marlan , stanton ( 2014 ) . the philosophers ' stone : alchemical imagination and the soul 's logical life . doctoral dissertation . pittsburgh , penn . : duquesne university . thompson , c . j . s . ( 2002 ) 1932 . alchemy and alchemists . chapter ix : '' the philosopher 's stone and the elixir of life '' . mineola , ny : dover publications . pp . & nbsp ; 68–76 . external links . '' the stone of the philosophers '' by edward kelly mss 95 , item 18 lapis philosophorum at openn