Natural history

definitions . before 1900 . the meaning of the english term '' natural history '' ( a calque of the latin historia naturalis ) has narrowed progressively with time , while , by contrast , the meaning of the related term '' nature '' has widened ( see also history below ) . in antiquity , '' natural history '' covered essentially anything connected with nature , or used materials drawn from nature , such as pliny the elder 's natural history ( pliny ) , published circa 77 to 79 ad , which covers astronomy , geography , humans and their technology , medicine , and superstition , as well as animals and plants . medieval european academics considered knowledge to have two main divisions : the humanities ( primarily what is now known as classics ) and divinity , with science studied largely through texts rather than observation or experiment . the study of nature revived in the renaissance , and quickly became a third branch of academic knowledge , itself divided into descriptive natural history and natural philosophy , the analytical study of nature . in modern terms , natural philosophy roughly corresponded to modern physics and chemistry , while natural history included the biology and geology sciences . the two were strongly associated . during the heyday of the gentleman scientists , many people contributed to both fields , and early papers in both were commonly read at professional science society meetings such as the royal society and the french academy of sciences—both founded during the 17th century . natural history had been encouraged by practical motives , such as linnaeus ' aspiration to improve the economic condition of sweden . similarly , the industrial revolution prompted the development of geology to help find useful mineral deposits . barry barnes and steven shapin , '' natural order : historical studies of scientific culture '' , sage , 1979 . . since 1900 . modern definitions of natural history come from a variety of fields and sources , and many of the modern definitions emphasize a particular aspect of the field , creating a plurality of definitions with a number of common themes among them . for example , while natural history is most often defined as a type of observation and a subject of study , it can also be defined as a body of knowledge , and as a craft or a practice , in which the emphasis is placed more on the observer than on the observed . thomas lowe fleischner , the way of natural history , trinity university press , 2011 . definitions from biologists often focus on the scientific study of individual organisms in their environment , as seen in this definition by marston bates : '' natural history is the study of animals and plants—of organisms . i like to think , then , of natural history as the study of life at the level of the individual—of what plants and animals do , how they react to each other and their environment , how they are organized into larger groupings like populations and communities '' marston bates , the nature of natural history , scribners , 1954 . and this more recent definition by d.s . wilcove and t . eisner : '' the close observation of organisms—their origins , their evolution , their behavior , and their relationships with other species '' . d . s wilcove and t . eisner , '' the impending extinction of natural history , '' chronicle of higher education 15 ( 2000 ) : b24 this focus on organisms in their environment is also echoed by h.w . greene and j.b . losos : '' natural history focuses on where organisms are and what they do in their environment , including interactions with other organisms . it encompasses changes in internal states insofar as they pertain to what organisms do '' . h . w . greene and j . b . losos , '' systematics , natural-history , and conservation—field biologists must fight a public-image problem , '' bioscience 38 ( 1988 ) : 458–462 some definitions go further , focusing on direct observation of organisms in their environments , both past and present , such as this one by g.a . bartholomew : '' a student of natural history , or a naturalist , studies the world by observing plants and animals directly . because organisms are functionally inseparable from the environment in which they live and because their structure and function can not be adequately interpreted without knowing some of their evolutionary history , the study of natural history embraces the study of fossils as well as physiographic and other aspects of the physical environment '' . g . a . bartholomew , '' the role of natural history in contemporary biology '' , bioscience 36 ( 1986 ) : 324–329 a common thread in many definitions of natural history is the inclusion of a descriptive component , as seen in a recent definition by h.w . greene : '' descriptive ecology and ethology '' . h.w . greene , '' organisms in nature as a central focus for biology '' , trends in ecology & evolution 20 ( 2005 ) :23–27 several authors have argued for a more expansive view of natural history , including s . herman , who defines the field as '' the scientific study of plants and animals in their natural environments . it is concerned with levels of organization from the individual organism to the ecosystem , and stresses identification , life history , distribution , abundance , and inter-relationships . it often and appropriately includes an esthetic component '' , s . g herman , '' wildlife biology and natural history : time for a reunion '' , the journal of wildlife management 66 , no . 4 ( 2002 ) : 933–946 and t . fleischner , who defines the field even more broadly , as '' a practice of intentional , focused attentiveness and receptivity to the more-than-human world , guided by honesty and accuracy '' . t . l . fleischner , '' natural history and the spiral of offering '' , wild earth 11 , no . 3/4 ( 2002 ) : 10–13 these definitions explicitly include the arts in the field of natural history , and are aligned with the broad definition outlined by b . lopez , who defines the field as the '' patient interrogation of a landscape '' while referring to the natural history knowledge of the eskimo ( inuit ) . barry lopez , arctic dreams , vintage , 1986 . a slightly different framework for natural history , covering a similar range of themes , is also implied in the scope of work encompassed by many leading natural history museums , which often include elements of anthropology , geology , paleontology , and astronomy along with botany and zoology , american museum of natural history , mission statement field museum , mission statement or include both cultural and natural components of the world . the natural history museum , mission statement the plurality of definitions for this field has been recognized as both a weakness and a strength , and a range of definitions has recently been offered by practitioners in a recent collection of views on natural history . an accepted way of viewing art . history . ancient times . natural history begins with aristotle and other ancient philosophers who analyzed the diversity of the natural world . natural history was understood by pliny the elder to cover anything that could be found in the world , including living things , geology , astronomy , technology , art , and humanity . de materia medica was written between 50 and 70 ad by pedanius dioscorides , a roman physician of greek origin . it was widely read for more than 1,500 years until supplanted in the renaissance , making it one of the longest-lasting of all natural history books . from the ancient greeks until the work of carl linnaeus and other 18th-century naturalists , a major concept of natural history was the scala naturae or great chain of being , an arrangement of minerals , vegetables , more primitive forms of animals , and more complex life forms on a linear scale of supposedly increasing perfection , culminating in our species . . medieval . natural history was basically static through the middle ages in europe—although in the arabic and oriental world , it proceeded at a much brisker pace . from the 13th century , the work of aristotle was adapted rather rigidly into christian philosophy , particularly by thomas aquinas , forming the basis for natural theology . during the renaissance , scholars ( herbalists and humanists , particularly ) returned to direct observation of plants and animals for natural history , and many began to accumulate large collections of exotic specimens and unusual monsters . leonhart fuchs was one of the three founding fathers of botany , along with otto brunfels and hieronymus bock . other important contributors to the field were valerius cordus , konrad gesner ( historiae animalium ) , frederik ruysch , and gaspard bauhin . '' natural history timeline '' . historyofscience.com . the rapid increase in the number of known organisms prompted many attempts at classifying and organizing species into taxonomic groups , culminating in the system of the swedish naturalist carl linnaeus . the british historian of chinese science joseph needham calls li shizhen '' the 'uncrowned king ' of chinese naturalists '' , and his bencao gangmu '' undoubtedly the greatest scientific achievement of the ming '' . his works translated to many languages direct or influence many scholars and researchers . birth of scientific biology . a significant contribution to english natural history was made by parson-naturalists such as gilbert white , william kirby , john george wood , and john ray , who wrote about plants , animals , and other aspects of nature . many of these men wrote about nature to make the natural theology argument for the existence or goodness of god . since early modern times , however , a great number of women made contributions to natural history , particularly in the field of botany , be it as authors , collectors , or illustrators . women in botany in modern europe , professional disciplines such as botany , geology , mycology , palaeontology , physiology , and zoology were formed . natural history , formerly the main subject taught by college science professors , was increasingly scorned by scientists of a more specialized manner and relegated to an '' amateur '' activity , rather than a part of science proper . in victorian scotland , the study of natural history was believed to contribute to good mental health . particularly in britain and the united states , this grew into specialist hobbies such as the ornithology , butterflies , seashells ( malacology/conchology ) , beetles , and wildflowers ; meanwhile , scientists tried to define a unified discipline of biology ( though with only partial success , at least until the modern evolutionary synthesis ) . still , the traditions of natural history continue to play a part in the study of biology , especially ecology ( the study of natural systems involving living organisms and the inorganic components of the earth 's biosphere that support them ) , ethology ( the scientific study of animal behavior ) , and evolutionary biology ( the study of the relationships between life forms over very long periods of time ) , and re-emerges today as integrative organismal biology . amateur collectors and natural history entrepreneurs played an important role in building the world 's large natural history collections , such as the natural history museum , london , and the national museum of natural history in washington , dc . three of the greatest english naturalists of the 19th century , henry walter bates , charles darwin , and alfred russel wallace—who all knew each other—each made natural history travels that took years , collected thousands of specimens , many of them new to science , and by their writings both advanced knowledge of '' remote '' parts of the world—the amazon basin , the galápagos islands , and the malay archipelago , among others—and in so doing helped to transform biology from a descriptive to a theory-based science . the understanding of '' nature '' as '' an organism and not as a mechanism '' can be traced to the writings of alexander von humboldt ( prussia , 1769–1859 ) . humboldt 's copious writings and research were seminal influences for charles darwin , simón bolívar , henry david thoreau , ernst haeckel , and john muir . andrea wulf ( 2015 ) , the invention of nature , knopf . museums . natural history museums , which evolved from cabinet of curiosities , played an important role in the emergence of professional biological disciplines and research programs . particularly back in the 19th century , scientists began to use their natural history collections as teaching tools for advanced students and the basis for their own morphological research . societies . the term '' natural history '' alone , or sometimes together with archaeology , forms the name of many national , regional , and local natural history societies that maintain records for animals ( including birds ( ornithology ) , insects ( entomology ) and mammals ( mammalogy ) ) , fungi ( mycology ) , plants ( botany ) , and other organisms . they may also have geological and microscope sections . examples of these societies in britain include the natural history society of northumbria founded in 1829 , london natural history society ( 1858 ) , birmingham natural history society ( 1859 ) , british entomological and natural history society founded in 1872 , glasgow natural history society , manchester microscopical and natural history society established in 1880 , whitby naturalists ' club founded in 1913 , scarborough field naturalists ' society and the sorby natural history society , sheffield , founded in 1918 . the growth of natural history societies was also spurred due to the growth of british colonies in tropical regions with numerous new species to be discovered . many civil servants took an interest in their new surroundings , sending specimens back to museums in the uk . ( see also : indian natural history ) societies in other countries include the american society of naturalists and polish copernicus society of naturalists . see also . evolutionary history of life history of evolutionary thought naturalism ( philosophy ) nature documentary nature study nature writing russian naturalists terra : the nature of our world ( video podcast ) timeline of natural history . references . further reading . peter anstey ( 2011 ) , two forms of natural history , early modern experimental philosophy . farber , paul lawrence ( 2000 ) , finding order in nature : the naturalist tradition from linnaeus to e . o . wilson . johns hopkins university press : baltimore . kohler , robert e . ( 2002 ) , landscapes and labscapes : exploring the lab-field border in biology . university of chicago press : chicago . mayr , ernst . ( 1982 ) , the growth of biological thought : diversity , evolution , and inheritance . the belknap press of harvard university press : cambridge , massachusetts . rainger , ronald ; keith r . benson ; and jane maienschein ( eds ) ( 1988 ) , the american development of biology . university of pennsylvania press : philadelphia . external links . a history of the ecological sciences by frank n . egerton