Brigg

history . the area of present-day brigg has been used for thousands of years as both a crossing point of the ancholme and for access to the river itself . prehistoric boats of sewn boat and dugout construction have been found in the town , both dating to around 900 bc . a causeway or jetty also stood on the riverside during the late bronze age , although its exact use is uncertain . during the anglo-saxon period the area became known as glanford . the second element of the name is not disputed , but the origin of the first element is unclear . it is possibly derived from the old english gleam meaning joy or revelry , and thus the full word is interpreted as '' ford where sports are held '' . another suggestion is that the first element refers to a 'glamping ' track & mdash ; a walkway formed by placing interlocking planks or logs over boggy ground & mdash ; and thus describes a ford crossed in this manner . a third possibility is that it means '' smooth ford '' although its etymology is not specified . local lore has it that the original name was '' glamis ' ford , '' i.e . a ford beside which a man named glamis lived ( and who possibly charged a toll for crossing the ford ? ) . this became corrupted to glamford and then to glanford . when a bridge was finally built , the name of the town became glanford bridge . bridge then became corrupted to briggs and then brigg , and the glanford part was dropped . glanford brigg was founded at the crossing place of the ancholme before 1183 , its first mention being a pipe roll entry for that year . the town 's formal charter for a weekly market and yearly fair date from a royal grant to hugh nevil in 1205 , in which the founder 's name is given as his father & ndash ; in & ndash ; law stephen de camera . the fair began on 25 july & mdash ; the feast of saint james & mdash ; and continued for three days afterward . the grant of a market and fair were subsequently reconfirmed to hugh 's son ernisius in 1235 . the second part of the town 's full name dates to this time , coming from the new bridge built to replace the existing ford across the river . its non-standard form of brigg is due to influence from old norse bryggja , which although usually describes a jetty or quay here refers to a bridge . the name of a place spelt '' glawemfordbrigge '' in lincolnshire , appears in 1418 . plea rolls of the court of common pleas ; national archives ; cp 40/629 ; 4th entry , line 1 , home of john barton , yeoman brigg originally sat at the meeting point of four parishes ( broughton , kettleby , scawby and wrawby ) , although it lay mainly in the last , and was officially regarded as part of that village . in the 1190s , the lord of the manor of broughton , adam paynel , founded a hospital for the poor within the town . several small chapels also existed during medieval times , with another hospital and chapel founded by william tyrwhitt in 1441 . however , the dissolution of the monasteries in 1536 & ndash ; 41 also affected hospitals and chapels , leaving the town without ecclesiastical coverage except the parish church in nearby wrawby . due to its strategic position , brigg was fortified by cavalier forces during the civil war . after the battle of winceby in 1643 , roundhead forces attacked and seized the garrison on their way to help relieve the siege of hull . sir john nelthorpe , a local landowner who had been a member of parliament during the protectorate , bequeathed some of his estate in 1669 for the foundation and maintenance of a free school in the town . four other local gentlemen established a chapel of ease in bigby street in 1699 , restoring church presence in the town after 150 years of absence . the town was substantially improved and rebuilt in the late 1700s and early 1800s , partly through the demands of the elwes family , the largest landowner in the town . the old town hall—now known as the buttercross—was built in 1817 . later , in 1842–43 , the existing chapel of ease was replaced by a full–sized church dedicated to st john the evangelist , cox , j . charles ( 1916 ) lincolnshire p . 81 ; methuen & co . ltd and a cemetery was established on wrawby road in 1857 , following significant controversy over the burial of non–conformists . brigg 's ecclesiastical parish was established in 1872 , finally separating the town from wrawby , but also incorporating neighbouring parts of scawby , broughton , and bigby parishes . a workhouse was built at the east end of the town in 1835 , and was the responsibility of the glanford brigg poor law union . its architect was william adams nicholson who also designed the similar building in lincoln , and replaced an earlier alms house dating back to 1701 . the workhouse at brigg is one of the best known and best documented of its type , probably because of the national interest that arose after percy grainger collected traditional songs from the inmates . an infirmary was later built attached to the workhouse , and this portion remained open as a hospital until 1991 . . governance . brigg lies within the unitary authority of north lincolnshire , the majority of the town being within the brigg and wolds electoral ward , and represented by three councillors . the town also has a civil parish governed by brigg town council . the council has nineteen members , serving four year terms ; the last elections took place in may 2011 . however , part of the town 's urban area lies in scawby brook , which is split between the civil parishes of scawby and broughton . the area is likewise split between ridge ward and broughton & appleby wards within north lincolnshire council . there is no joint body that covers brigg and scawby brook . historically , the town was part of the county of lincolnshire , and remains part of the ceremonial county today . within lincolnshire , the town was mostly in the wapentake of yarborough in the north riding of lindsey . local government in the town began with the establishment of a local government board in 1864 , which was replaced with an urban district in 1894 . on the creation of humberside in 1974 , the town 's urban district was merged with the surrounding rural district to create glanford borough , named after the town which was at its centre . the dissolution of humberside in 1996 saw the town transferred to north lincolnshire . brigg is part of the brigg and goole parliamentary constituency , and is represented by andrew percy of the conservative party . . geography . brigg is roughly directly north of london . the nearest big towns are lincoln to the south , scunthorpe to the west , grimsby to the east , and hull to the north . the local area is broadly the south bank of the humber estuary . the town itself sits on a gravel spur of the lincolnshire wolds that juts out into the valley of the ancholme—a tributary of the humber—which historically provided a narrow crossing point of the river and its flood plain . the wolds proper rise to the east , reaching a maximum of roughly about from the town , although with a lower pass at the kirmington gap . to the west the land gently slopes up to roughly on the lincolnshire edge about away . between these low ranges of hills the ancholme river runs south to north through its flat , low & ndash ; lying flood plain , with a north & ndash ; south height difference of only a few metres . the town sits on alluvial soils of the ancholme , and the area surrounding the town was previously a semi & ndash ; flooded marsh known as carrs . a series of drainage improvements from the 1630s to the 1820s transformed the whole of the valley into arable land . the largest of the drainage channels is also a canal known as the new river ancholme . the original course of the river has been obliterated in places by the drainage works , but its discontinuous surviving length is known as the old river ancholme . the town itself lies mostly on the east bank of the old river , with a small amount to the west . a portion of the west bank is cut off from the rest by the new river , forming an island & ndash ; like piece of land known as island carr . due to nearness of the river , the town regularly suffers minor flooding , and concerns over flood plain development are a major issue in local planning . the only other watercourse of reasonable size is candley beck , which runs through the very southern parts of the town . there are also about half a dozen clayponds along the riverside in brigg where clay was formerly extracted for brick & ndash ; making . townscape . the old town is centred on the marketplace and the adjoining streets of bridge street , wrawby street , and bigby street . the marketplace and wrawby street , where much of the town 's retail is located , were pedestrianized in the early 1990s . a significant number of buildings in the town centre date to the late 1700s or early 1800s and are listed , with the old town as a whole designated a conservation area . the marketplace is dominated by the buttercross and the angel , a former coaching inn with an early mock tudor façade , which is now home to brigg town council and various north lincolnshire council services . another former coaching inn , the exchange , stands in bigby street , opposite the former manor house of the elwes family . the anglican church of saint john the evangelist , built in 1843 , also lies on bigby street . its style is of the gothic revival architecture popular at the time , but pevsner notes the curious construction where the stone has first been carved into the shape of bricks before being laid in courses . much of the town 's poorer housing formerly lay in a series of narrow yards that ran northward from the marketplace and wrawby street . the yards were considered unsanitary slums by the late 1800s , but the housing was not finally vacated and demolished until the 1950s . however , the yards themselves remain in use , with the larger ones repurposed for retail and services , and the smaller for alley . the a18 bisects the town , running just north of the town centre . to the north and east of this road , housing development throughout the 1900s expanded the town significantly in size . to the west beyond the new river ancholme , the town 's urban area continues into the neighbouring hamlet of scawby brook . the settlement is substantially bounded by the m180 motorway to the north and the grimsby branch of the sheffield to lincoln line to the south . economy . the economy of brigg is substantially retail and service based , according with its traditional position of a market town , and acts as a service centre for the surrounding rural area . the main shopping street is wrawby street , although retail is present throughout much of the old town . many of the businesses are independent , retaining the character of the traditional high street , although some chain retailers , namely tesco , lidl , wilko and boyes have large stores in the town . a general market is held on thursdays and saturdays , and a farmers ' market is also held on the fourth saturday of each month , selling local produce from pork and organic vegetables to ostrich meat , and locally produced condiments . artisan breads baked in a nearby mill using traditional french bread making techniques are also available as is local cheese including the very tasty lincolnshire poacher vintage . light industry is present on the island carr and atherton way industrial estates . a 260 mw gas–fired power station , owned by centrica , sits to the south–west of the town . a second , 40 mw straw–fired , power station has been approved for construction alongside . a significant number of residents commute to work in nearby scunthorpe and grimsby , although the town is not characterized as a commuter town . past industries were more strongly connected to the rural economy , such as a beet sugar factory in scawby brook , a livestock market , and spring 's jam factory ; the latter being a nationally known brand . a corn exchange was built in the town in the 1800s , and the local corn prices were quoted nationally . scawby brook was also home to bratleys roller flour mill , which was demolished in the 1940s although several of the old houses built for the mill owners in the 1830s remain , formerly known as mill place , now numbers 83-91 scawby road . the town was home to the falcon cycles factory for much of its independent existence , the company having moved to brigg from nearby barton-upon-humber in the early 1900s . other small independent businesses exist , including several accounts and a stationers . these generally operate out of private residences . culture and community . culture in brigg is mostly small–scale and self–organized , although there are a few larger events . currently , there are three yearly general fairs : the summer fest in june , the horse fair in august ( see below ) , and a christmas fair at the end of november . more specialized events include the north lincolnshire music and drama festival in march , a beer festival in may , and the briggstock acoustic music festival in early september . brigg live arts also hold a two–yearly cultural festival and art exhibition in the town . brigg has numerous traditional pubs : the black bull , britannia and the white horse inn on wrawby street , the woolpack inn and lord nelson in the market place , the exchange hotel and the dying gladiator on bigby street , and the nelthorpe arms , the white hart and the yarborough hunt on bridge street , which is very old and formerly the tap for the attached sargents brigg brewery , which has long since been demolished . the pub recently won the local camra '' pub of the season '' award for winter 2014 for its extensive selection of quality real ales , many of which are produced locally by tom wood 's brewery in nearby melton ross . public facilities in the town include two health centres , a library , heritage centre , three children 's playgrounds , and a sure start centre . there is also a tourist information centre in the marketplace . sport and leisure . brigg is home to brigg town football club , known locally as the zebras for their black and white striped home kit . the team has won the fa vase twice & mdash ; once in 1996 and again in 2003 . the ancholme rowing club , founded in 1868 , is based in manley gardens . it holds an annual head race every october , attracting crews from across the eastern midlands and northern england . lincsquad hold two triathlons and a quadrathlon in and around the town every year . ancholme leisure centre is on scawby road ( a18 ) in scawby brook , to the west of the town . ancholme leisure centre its facilities include swimming pools , a sports hall , a gym and a skatepark . the recreation ground on wrawby road provides an area for field sports . horse fair . the town hosts a yearly horse fair on the first saturday of august . large numbers of romani and irish travellers come from across england to attend the event . the fair is partly an opportunity to buy and sell horses , but also presents a significant opportunity for community socializing . for several decades local volunteers organized the official fair and promoted it as a tourism event , but in recent years it has been left unorganized and unofficial . the fair has been claimed to be the second largest horse fair in england , after appleby horse fair . it is also the surviving continuation of the medieval fair which was in existence at least as early as 1205 , meaning it is now over 800 years old . the difference in date & mdash ; from 25 july to early august & mdash ; is a result of the eleven days 'skipped ' upon the adoption of the gregorian calendar in 1752 . the fair is also the subject of a well & ndash ; known folk song brigg fair , see below . folk song . brigg is the source of several early recordings of english folk song , which subsequently inspired other composers . at competitions arranged by gervase elwes in 1905-06 , several folk singers from the surrounding area & mdash ; including joseph taylor and george gouldthorpe & mdash ; sang for the composer percy grainger songs such as brigg fair and lisbon . he also collected horkstow grange at nearby redbourne . these songs inspired grainger 's work lincolnshire posy and subsequently frederick delius own brigg fair . transport . the main transport to and from brigg is by road . the a18 passes east–west through the town , connecting into the national road network , with the a1084 ( bigby road ) heading south–east to caistor . the m180 bypasses the town carrying longer distance traffic , including the a15 between lincoln and hull . a few bus services operate in the town , most of which travel to scunthorpe and stop in intermediate villages . on thursdays a bus service travels solely within the town , carrying passengers to and from the weekly market . brigg railway station is on the grimsby branch of the sheffield to lincoln line . the passenger service is limited , with only six trains a week , all on saturdays . however , the line is still used regularly for freight transport . there is a level crossing over the a1084 . humberside international airport , near the village of kirmington , is about 5 miles away . the ancholme river , although once extensively used for transport , is now mostly used for leisure . there is no significant transport of either passengers or freight on the river . education . primary education in brigg is provided by brigg county primary school and st mary 's catholic primary voluntary academy . there was also previously a private preparatory school , which closed in 2009 and was replaced by demeter house special school . secondary education in brigg also covers the surrounding villages and is provided by two comprehensive schools : the vale academy , formerly the vale of ancholme school , and the sir john nelthorpe school , a former grammar school , which has been a comprehensive since 1976 . these two schools also collaborate to provide further education for post & ndash ; 16 pupils , although some attend colleges in nearby scunthorpe . students of sir john nelthorpe school call themselves briggensians , after the town , and maintain a former students ' association . . notable residents . malcolm flemyng , a scottish physiologist , practised medicine in the town in the 1750s . while resident , flemyng published his introduction to physiology and conducted research into amniotic fluid and obesity . joseph kitchen english footballer , who played as a striker for the fa cup winning sheffield united team in 1939 resided at the gables , 91 scawby road and later owned the wheatsheaf pub in barton upon humber . thomas ball , member of the 4th new zealand parliament , was born in brigg in 1809 . the son of a bookseller , ball practised as a pharmacist in the town until 1859 , when he led a party of 137 local people to settle in new zealand . most of the party settled near mangonui on the north auckland peninsula of the north island . revd richard enraght , who later became known as a religious controversialist , served as curate for st john 's church in brigg from 1866 to 1867 . gervase elwes , concert and oratorio singer , had a family home at brigg manor in bigby street , where he would sometimes reside . north lincolnshire music and drama festival was founded by elwes and his wife winifrede in 1900 . they twice hosted their friend percy grainger , who collected a number of early folksongs at the festival . one of the singers , george gouldthorpe ( 1839–1910 ) , was an inmate of brigg workhouse . john osborne , writer and creator of sky 1 show after hours , as well as several storytelling shows for bbc radio 4 grew up in brigg , attending sir john nelthorpe school from 1993-1998 and brigg sixth form ( 1998-2000 ) . joan plowright , actress and wife of laurence olivier , was born on central square in 1929 . her brother david , a television executive , was born a year later . their father william was a local journalist and newspaper editor . the plowright theatre in nearby scunthorpe is named after her . matt sparrow , footballer , playing for scunthorpe united and brighton and hove albion grew up in brigg , where he played football for sir john nelthorpe school from 1993-1998 . he carried on living in brigg while playing for scunthorpe united . david yelland , journalist and editor of the sun from 1998 to 2003 , was a student at sir john nelthorpe school from 1976 to 1981 . references . external links . brigg heritage centre - visitor attraction brigg town history this is brigg - a website of the scunthorpe telegraph description of the workhouse history brigg amateur social historians ( bash )