J. Wellington Wimpy

inspiration . the character seems to have been inspired by more than one person whom segar had encountered . wimpy 's personality was based upon that of william schuchert , the manager of the chester opera house where segar was first employed . '' windy bill '' , as he was known , was a pleasant , friendly man , fond of tall tales and hamburgers . additional sources suggest that segar composed the character 's name from the names of two other acquaintances . according to fellow cartoonist bill mauldin , the name was suggested by that of wellington j . reynolds , one of segar 's instructors at the chicago art institute . bill mauldin , the brass ring , new york : w . w . norton & co . , 1972 in a brief 1935 interview in the oklahoman , h . hillard wimpee of atlanta indicated that he was connected to the character , having worked with segar at the chicago herald-examiner in 1917 . it became a custom in the office that whoever accepted an invitation for a hamburger would pay the bill . according to wimpee , after seeing the character in the newspaper , he wrote segar in 1922 about wimpy , '' afraid of being connected with what segar was doing with the character . '' he said segar replied , '' you have n't seen anything yet . '' . character . wimpy is popeye 's friend , and plays the role of “ straight man ” to popeye . wimpy is a soft-spoken romantic , intelligent and educated , a lazy coward , a miser , and a glutton . he is a scam artist , and almost a tramp , but pretends to have high social status . besides mooching hamburgers , he also picks up discarded cigars . popeye often tries to reform wimpy 's character , but wimpy never reforms . he first appeared in a 1929 sunday page . hamburgers are wimpy 's all-time favorite food , and he is usually seen carrying or eating one or more at a time – e.g . , in popeye the sailor meets sindbad the sailor he is seen grinding meat or eating burgers almost the entire time – however , he is usually too cheap to pay for them himself . a recurring joke involves wimpy 's attempts to con other patrons of the diner owned by rough house into buying his meal for him . his best-known catchphrase started in 1931 as , '' cook me up a hamburger . i 'll pay you tuesday . '' in 1932 , this then became the famous '' i 'll gladly pay you tuesday for a hamburger today '' . rough house explains why wimpy is able to get away with this tactic in one strip , stating that '' he never comes around on tuesday '' . rough house once suffered a mental breakdown from wimpy 's shenanigans , and demanded that wimpy be kept out of his hospital room . wimpy disobeyed this command , resulting in a rare altercation with popeye . the phrase was also slightly altered in the episode '' spree lunch '' to '' i 'll have a hamburger , for which i will gladly pay you tuesday . '' this phrase is now commonly used to illustrate financial irresponsibility and still appears in modern comedies such as the drew carey show and the office . the initial part of the phrase was even the title of episode 6 of the fourth season of cheers '' i 'll gladly pay you tuesday . '' in robert altman 's 1980 live-action musical film popeye , where wimpy was played by veteran character actor paul dooley , one of harry nilsson 's original songs , '' everything is food '' , featured dooley singing the catch-phrase , as he took a hamburger , as '' i would gladly pay you tuesday for a hamburger today . '' the response from the chorus , as they reclaimed the same hamburger from him , uneaten , was '' he would gladly pay you tuesday for a hamburger today . '' later in the film , a sign in a restaurant reads '' positively no credit . this means you , wimpy . '' wimpy had other frequently used lines in the original comic strip . on some occasions , wimpy tries to placate someone by saying , '' i 'd like to invite you over to my house for a duck dinner . '' he then moves away quickly to a safe distance and yells , '' you bring the ducks ! '' another such line was , '' jones is my name.i 'm one of the jones boys '' – an attempt to defuse a hostile situation with a mistaken identity . to deflect an enemy 's wrath , he would sometimes indicate a third party and say , '' let 's you and him fight '' , starting a brawl from which he quickly withdrew . he also said '' shake hands , my friend.i want to start my wristwatch '' on occasion , once more a reference to his lazy behavior . wimpy is especially fond of duck hunting , and goes hunting with popeye on numerous occasions , but usually gains his ducks in dishonest ways as well . wimpy 's mother made a cameo appearance in the sunday strips . she is an elderly widow . popeye and rough house both try to make wimpy seem as respectable as possible when she visits , because she does n't know about her son 's disreputable behavior . on one occasion , popeye almost makes the truth come out by remarking that wimpy is a loafer , but then relieves mrs . wimpy by stating that wimpy is actually a baker who '' makes loaves '' and that he was only having a good natured jest . in the daily strips , wimpy was appointed general of popeye 's country , popilania , and injured his head by saluting . wimpy made two cameo appearances in the segar universe outside of the thimble theater comic strip . he appeared once in the side feature '' popeye 's cartoon club , '' as an example of how not to behave , and once in a sappo strip . the sappo occurrence came out when professor o.g . wotasnozzle invented a machine that would produce synthetic hamburger , only to discover that wimpy was going to eat it all . this led sappo to say , '' yeah , break it up . we do n't want him around , '' indicating that they both somehow knew about wimpy 's obsession with hamburgers . wotasnozzle promptly destroys the device with a hammer . this storyline break was equally as bizarre as the iconic joke with sappo 's nose where sappo 's elongated nose breaks a panel and becomes the swing on which a child ( in popeye 's cartoon club ) is swinging . wimpy is an annoyance and an irritant to his nemesis , nazilian shoemaker george w . geezil , a satirical immigrant character , who goes so far as to poison wimpy and shoot him . he has a habit of slurping soup . in geezil 's opinion , '' he should be killed to death ! '' this , too , was a repetitive catchphrase . in the plunder island storyline , wimpy disguises himself as alice the goon and scares geezil off the boat . geezil attempts to commit suicide upon learning that he is in close proximity to wimpy on board the ship . wimpy also converts the sea hag 's five lions into hamburgers through the use of a meat grinder . he refuses to eat a cheese sandwich that olive oyl offers him . he tries to make an ape into a hamburger , but the ape refuses to submit . the plunder island storyline also contained a creative alteration of one of wimpy 's famous lines . upon coming to a cannibal island , a cannibal says to wimpy , '' come on down to the house for a duck dinner.you be the duck '' . in one storyline , popeye , olive oyl , swee'pea , and castor oyl go on a trip to the desert to find gold . after leaving his landlady with an enormous amount of bills , he gets lost in the desert and separated from the rest of the group , in part because he drank swee'pea 's milk and wasted his own rations . he gets '' desert madness , '' a condition which involves long poems and illusions . he eventually reunites with his friends , and finds a cache of gold but admits that he was n't working hard to look for the gold , he was only trying to kill a snake with his pickaxe . while at home , wimpy ponders his gold , and a caption states that '' he may take unto himself a wife . '' this storyline was either scrapped or forgotten , however ; wimpy never gets married for the rest of the segar strips . wimpy does have romance in his soul , however , although usually with ulterior motives . popeye once found that rough house had employed a sexy waitress , but wimpy decided that he was in love with her instead . when popeye kicks him out to make love , wimpy betrays popeye and informs olive oyl that popeye is cheating , resulting in a catfight between olive and the sexy waitress . in another incident , wimpy tried to seduce olive herself by stating that he was , in reality , an eccentric millionaire who hid his money beneath a rock . olive falls for the ploy , but stops falling for it when wimpy states that he forgot his hiding place . in yet another notable incident , wimpy had his own lover , waneeta , but only loved her because her father owned a herd of beef cows . in popular culture . during world war ii , '' wimpy '' , in reference to the character , was the nickname given to the vickers wellington bomber . wimpy is also the namesake of the large chain of wimpy ( restaurant ) which was founded in bloomington , indiana in the 1930s and opened in the uk in 1954 ; it has maintained operations overseas since 1967 . their uk website states , '' the name wimpy is believed to have come from popeye 's friend j wellington wimpy who loved hamburgers as much as popeye loved spinach . '' wimpy wimpy can also be found as the mascot for '' wimpy 's seafood restaurant and market '' in osterville , ma on cape cod . ( established 1938 ) wimpy made a cameo appearance ( as an in-gag to both his facial features ; in the context of beef related heart disease and affinity for hamburgers ) in the family guy episode '' mcstroke '' . wimpy has appeared in two episodes of the adult swim animated series robot chicken , often using his '' i 'll gladly pay you tuesday '' line to buy hamburgers . often it fails . voiced by scott adsit and seth green . in the good eats second season episode '' daily grind '' ( aka '' a grind is a terrible thing to waste '' ) , alton brown prepares the '' perfect burger '' ( as well as meatloaf & meatballs ) for a character named '' j . wellington whimpy '' ( misspelled , but looking mostly like the version of wimpy played by paul dooley in the popeye film ) played by then cast regular steve rooney . in the final pooch the pup cartoon called she done him right , a dog character looking like wimpy is seen playing a slot machine . wimpy 's famous catchphrase gives the name to the hamburger review website a hamburger today . wimpy is also the focus of an animated bank of america commercial in which he uses a new smartphone app to finally pay for the food he mooched from his friends . season 4 episode 6 of cheers is named '' i 'll gladly pay you tuesday '' . season 2 episode 14 of the office , michael can be heard whispering to stanley '' i 'll gladly pay you tuesday for a hamburger today '' . in the hit video game world of warcraft , an npc named topper mcnabb can be heard repeating '' i 'll gladly pay you tuesday for a hamburger today '' in the city of stormwind , among other phrases . in the cartoon '' a clean shaven man '' , the name of his barber shop is called wimby 's not wimpy 's ; however while the sign on the door of the empty shop reads '' out getting a haircut '' , bluto remarks '' i 'll bet he 's out getting some hamburgers '' , and popeye responds '' i would n't be at all surprised '' . in a may 12 , 2020 9 chickweed lane strip , wimpy 's catchphrase was mentioned along with a thinly-veiled romantic innuendo between characters amos and edda . . see also . mr micawber harold skimpole . references . external links . popeye the home of popeye the sailor man