Hacktivism

origins and definitions . writer jason sack first used the term hacktivism in a 1995 article in conceptualizing new media artist shu lea cheang 's film fresh kill . however , the term is frequently attributed to the cult of the dead cow ( cdc ) member '' omega , '' who used it in a 1996 e-mail to the group . due to the variety of meanings of its root words , the definition of hacktivism is nebulous and there exists significant disagreement over the kinds of activities and purposes it encompasses . some definitions include acts of cyberterrorism while others simply reaffirm the use of technological hacking to effect social change . peter ludlow '' what is a 'hacktivist ' ? '' the new york times . january 2013 . . forms and methods . self-proclaimed '' hactivists '' often work anonymously , sometimes operating in groups while other times operating as a lone-wolf with several cyber-personas all corresponding to one activist within the cyberactivism umbrella that has been gaining public interest and power in pop-culture . hactivists generally operate under apolitical ideals and express uninhibited ideas or abuse without being scrutinized by society while representing or defending them publicly under an anonymous identity giving them a sense of power in the cyberactivism community . in order to carry out their operations , hacktivists might create new tools ; or integrate or use a variety of software tools readily available on the internet . one class of hacktivist activities includes increasing the accessibility of others to take politically motivated action online . repertoire of contention of hacktivism includes among others : code : software and websites can achieve political goals . for example , the encryption software pgp can be used to secure communications ; pgp 's author , phil zimmermann said he distributed it first to the peace movement . jim warren suggests pgp 's wide dissemination was in response to senate bill 266 , authored by senators biden and deconcini , which demanded that '' . communications systems permit the government to obtain the plain text contents of voice , data , and other communications . '' . wikileaks is an example of a politically motivated website : it seeks to '' keep governments open '' . mirroring . website mirroring is used as a circumvention tool in order to bypass various censorship blocks on websites . this technique that copies the content of a censored website and disseminates it on other domains and sub-domains that are not censored . document mirroring , similar to website mirroring , is a technique that focuses on backing up various documents and other works . recap is software that was written with the purpose to 'liberate us case law ' and make it openly available online . the software project takes the form of distributed document collection and archival . major mirroring projects include initastives such as internet archive and wikisource . anonymity : a method of speaking out to a wide audience about human rights issues , government oppression , etc . that utilizes various web tools such as mailinator , ip masking , and blogging software to preserve a high level of anonymity . doxing : the practice in which private and/or confidential documents and records are hacked into and made public . hactivists view this as a form of assured transparency , experts claim it is harassment . denial-of-service attacks : these attacks , commonly referred to as dos attacks , use large arrays of personal and public computers that hackers take control of via malware executable files usually transmitted through email attachments or website links . after taking control , these computers act like a herd of zombies , redirecting their network traffic to one website , with the intention of overloading servers and taking a website offline . virtual sit-ins : similar to dos attacks but exectuted by individuals rather than softeware , a large numbers of protesters visit a targeted website and rapidly load pages to overwhelm the site with network traffic to slow the site or take it offline . website defacements : hackers infiltrate a web server to replace a specific web page with one of their own , usually to convey a specific message . url redirection : this method involves changing the address of a website within the server so would-be visitors of the site are redirected to a site created by the perpetrator , typically to denounce the original site . geo-bombing : a technique in which netizens add a geo-tag while editing youtube videos so that the location of the video can be seen in google earth . . controversy . depending on who is using the term , hacktivism can be a politically motivated technology hack , a constructive form of anarchic civil disobedience , or an undefined anti-systemic gesture . it can signal anticapitalist or political protest ; it can denote anti-spam activists , security experts , or open source advocates . some people describing themselves as hacktivists have taken to defacing websites for political reasons , such as attacking and defacing government websites as well as web sites of groups who oppose their ideology . others , such as oxblood ruffin ( the '' foreign minister '' of cult of the dead cow and hacktivismo ) , have argued forcefully against definitions of hacktivism that include web defacements or denial-of-service attacks . hactivism is often seen as shadowy due to its anonymity , commonly attributed to the work of fringe groups and outlying members of society . the lack of responsible parties to be held accountable for the social-media attacks performed by hactivists has created implications in corporate and federal security measures both on and offline . while some self-described hacktivists have engaged in dos attacks , critics suggest that dos attacks are an attack on free speech and that they have unintended consequences . dos attacks waste resources and they can lead to a '' dos war '' that nobody will win . in 2006 , blue security attempted to automate a dos attack against spammers ; this led to a massive dos attack against blue security which knocked them , their old isp and their dns provider off the internet , destroying their business . following denial-of-service attacks by anonymous on multiple sites , in reprisal for the apparent suppression of wikileaks , john perry barlow , a founding member of the eff , said '' i support freedom of expression , no matter whose , so i oppose ddos attacks regardless of their target . they 're the poison gas of cyberspace . '' . on the other hand , jay leiderman , an attorney for many hacktivists , argues that ddos can be a legitimate form of protest speech in situations that are reasonably limited in time , place and manner . . notable hacktivist events . the earliest known instance of hacktivism as documented by julian assange is as follows : '' hacktivism is at least as old as october 1989 when doe , hepnet and span ( nasa ) connected vms machines world wide were penetrated by the anti-nuclear wank worm . '' in 1990 , the hong kong blondes helped chinese citizens get access to blocked websites by targeting the chinese computer networks . the group identified holes in the chinese internet system , particularly in the area of satellite communications . the leader of the group , blondie wong , also described plans to attack american businesses that were partnering with china . in 1996 , the title of the united states department of justice 's homepage was changed to '' department of injustice '' . pornographic images were also added to the homepage to protest the communications decency act . . lulzsec . in may 2011 , five members of anonymous formed the hacktivist group lulzsec , otherwise known as lulzsec . lulzsec 's name originated from the conjunction of the internet slang term '' lulz '' , meaning laughs , and '' sec '' , meaning security . the group members used specific handles to identify themselves on internet relay channels , the most notable being : '' sabu , '' '' kayla , '' '' t-flow , '' '' topiary , '' '' avunit , '' and '' pwnsauce . '' though the members of lulzsec would spend up to 20 hours a day in communication , they did not know one another personally , nor did they share personal information . for example , once the members ' identities were revealed , '' t-flow '' was revealed to be 15 years old . other members , on the basis of his advanced coding ability , thought he was around 30 years old . one of the first notable targets that lulzsec pursued was hbgary , which was performed in response to a claim made by the technology security company that it had identified members of anonymous . following this , the members of lulzsec targeted an array of companies and entities , including but not limited to : fox television , tribune media , pbs , sony , nintendo , and the senate.gov website . the targeting of these entities typically involved gaining access to and downloading confidential user information , or defacing the website at hand . united states of america v . hector monsegur . southern district court of new york . 23 may 2014 . cryptome.org . n.p . , n.d . web . 20 oct . 2016 . though the attacks carried out by lulzsec were not as strongly political as those typical of wikileaks or anonymous , they shared similar sentiments for the freedom of information . one of their distinctly politically driven attacks involved targeting the arizona state police in response to new immigration laws . the group 's first attack that garnered significant government attention was in 2011 , when they collectively took down a website of the fbi . following the incident , the leader of lulzsec , '' sabu , '' was identified as hector monsegur by the fbi , and he was the first of the group to be arrested . immediately following his arrest , monsegur admitted to criminal activity . he then began his cooperation with the us government , helping fbi authorities to arrest 8 of his co-conspirators , prevent 300 potential cyber attacks , and helped to identify vulnerabilities in existing computer systems . in august 2011 , monsegur pleaded guilty to '' computer hacking conspiracy , computer hacking , computer hacking in furtherance of fraud , conspiracy to commit access device fraud , conspiracy to commit bank fraud , and aggravated identity theft pursuant to a cooperation agreement with the government . '' he served a total of one year and seven months and was charged a 1,200 fine . . related practices . culture jamming . hacking has been sometime described as a form of culture jamming . this term refers to the practice of subverting and criticizing political messages as well as media culture with the aim of challenging the status quo . it is often targeted toward subliminal thought processes taking place in the viewers with the goal of raising awareness as well as causing a paradigm shift . culture jamming takes many forms including billboard hacking , broadcast signal intrusion , ad hoc art performances , memes , and artivism . the term '' culture jamming '' was first coined in 1984 by american musician donald joyce of the band negativland . however , some speculation remains as to when the practice of culture jamming first began . social researcher vince carducci believes culture jamming can be traced back to the 1950s with european social activist group situationist international . author and cultural critic mark dery believes medieval carnival is the earliest form of culture jamming as a way to subvert the social hierarchy at the time . culture jamming is sometimes confused with acts of vandalism . however , unlike culture jamming , the main goal of vandalism is to cause destruction with any political themes being of lesser importance . artivism usually has the most questionable nature as a form of culture jamming because defacement of property is usually involved . media hacking . media hacking refers to the usage of various electronic media in an innovative or otherwise abnormal fashion for the purpose of conveying a message to as large a number of people as possible , primarily achieved via the world wide web . a popular and effective means of media hacking is posting on a blog , as one is usually controlled by one or more independent individuals , uninfluenced by outside parties . the concept of social bookmarking , as well as web-based internet forums , may cause such a message to be seen by users of other sites as well , increasing its total reach . media hacking is commonly employed for political purposes , by both political parties and dissident . a good example of this is the 2008 us election , in which both the democratic and republican parties used a wide variety of different media in order to convey relevant messages to an increasingly internet-oriented audience . at the same time , political dissidents used blogs and other social media like twitter in order to reply on an individual basis to the presidential candidates . in particular , sites like twitter are proving important means in gauging popular support for the candidates , though the site is often used for dissident purposes rather than a show of positive support . mobile technology has also become subject to media hacking for political purposes . sms has been widely used by political dissidents as a means of quickly and effectively organising smart mobs for political action . this has been most effective in the philippines , where sms media hacking has twice had a significant impact on whether or not the country 's presidents are elected or removed from office . . reality hacking . reality hacking is any phenomenon that emerges from the nonviolent use of illegal or legally ambiguous digital tools in pursuit of politically , socially , or culture jamming ends . these tools include website defacements , url redirections , denial-of-service attacks , information theft , web-site parodies , virtual sit-ins , and virtual sabotage . art movements such as fluxus and happenings in the 1970s created a climate of receptibility in regard to loose-knit organizations and group activities where spontaneity , a modern primitive , and an ethics where activities and artivism practices became tantamount to aesthetic concerns . the conflation of these two histories in the mid-to-late 1990s resulted in cross-overs between virtual sit-ins , electronic civil disobedience , denial-of-service attacks , as well as mass protests in relation to groups like the international monetary fund and the world bank . the rise of collectives , net.art groups , and those concerned with the fluid interchange of technology and real life ( often from an environmental concern ) gave birth to the practice of '' reality hacking '' . reality hacking relies on tweaking the everyday communications most easily available to individuals with the purpose of awakening the political and social connectedness of the larger population . the term first came into use among new york and san francisco artists , but has since been adopted by a school of political activists centered around culture jamming . in fiction . the 1999 science fiction-action film the matrix , among others , popularized the simulation hypothesis — the suggestion that reality is in fact a simulation of which those affected by the simulants are generally unaware . in this context , '' reality hacking '' is reading and understanding the code which represents the activity of the simulated reality environment ( such as matrix digital rain ) and also modifying it in order to bend the laws of physics or otherwise modify the simulated reality . reality hacking as a mystical practice is explored in the gothic-punk aesthetics-inspired white wolf urban fantasy role-playing game mage : the ascension . in this game , the reality coders ( also known as reality hackers or reality crackers ) are a faction within the virtual adepts , a secret society of mages whose magick revolves around digital technology . they are dedicated to bringing the benefits of cyberspace to real life . to do this , they had to identify , for lack of a better term , the '' source code '' that allows our universe to function . and that is what they have been doing ever since . coders infiltrated a number of levels of society in order to gather the greatest compilation of knowledge ever seen . one of the coders ' more overt agendas is to acclimate the masses to the world that is to come . they spread virtual adept ideas through video games and a whole spate of '' reality shows '' that mimic virtual reality far more than '' real '' reality . the reality coders consider themselves the future of the virtual adepts , creating a world in the image of visionaries like grant morrison or terence mckenna . in a location-based game ( also known as a pervasive game ) , reality hacking refers to tapping into phenomena that exist in the real world , and tying them into the game story universe . . academic interpretations . there have been various academic approaches to deal with hacktivism and urban hacking . in 2010 , günther friesinger , johannes grenzfurthner and thomas ballhausen published an entire reader dedicated to the subject . they state : '' urban spaces became battlefields , signifiers have been invaded , new structures have been established : netculture replaced counterculture in most parts and also focused on the everchanging environments of the modern city . important questions have been brought up to date and reasked , taking current positions and discourses into account . the major question still remains , namely how to create culturally based resistance under the influence of capitalistic pressure and conservative politics . '' . see also . crypto-anarchism e-democracy open-source governance patriotic hacking tactical media 1984 network liberty alliance chaos computer club cicada 3301 decocidio jester internet vigilantism lulzsec milw0rm 2600 : the hacker quarterly citizen lab hackthissite cypherpunk mr . robot – a television series . references . further reading . olson , parmy . ( 05-14-2013 ) . we are anonymous : inside the hacker world of lulzsec , anonymous , and the global cyber insurgency . coleman , gabriella . ( 2014-11-4 ) . hacker , hoaxer , whistleblower , spy : the many faces of anonymous . verso books . shantz , jeff ; tomblin , jordon ( 2014-11-28 ) . cyber disobedience : re : //presenting online anarchy . john hunt publishing . deseriis , marco ( 2017 ) . hacktivism : on the use of botnets in cyberattacks . theory , culture & society 34 ( 4 ) : 131–152 . external links . hacktivism and politically motivated computer crime history , types of activity and cases studies