Wizardry

development . wizardry began as a simple dungeon crawl by andrew c . greenberg and robert woodhead . it was written when they were students at cornell university and published by sir-tech . the game was influenced by earlier games from the plato system , most notably oubliette . the earliest installments of wizardry were very successful , as they were the first graphically-rich incarnations of dungeons & dragons-type gameplay for home computers . the release of the first version coincided with the height of dungeons & dragons ' popularity in north america . the first five games in the series were written in apple pascal , an implementation of ucsd pascal . they were ported to many different platforms by writing ucsd pascal implementations for the target machines ( mac ii cross-development ) . david w . bradley took over the series after the fourth installment , adding a new level of plot and complexity . in 1998 , the rights were transferred to 1259190 ontario inc . , and in 2006 to aeria ipm . in 2008 , aeria ipm merged with gamepot , the developer of wizardry online . datamost released wizplus , a menu driven utility program designed to modify the characters and the playing environment of wizardry ; bob reams reviewed the utility for computer gaming world , and stated that '' wizplus should be used with great caution or the spirit of adventuring will be diluted and , more importantly , you will not be able to continue with this exciting series . '' . games . main series . the original wizardry series is composed of eight different titles . all of the titles were first released in north america , and then ported to japanese computers . some of the titles were also officially released in europe . the first three games are a trilogy , with similar settings , plots , and gameplay mechanics . a second trilogy is formed by installments 6 through 8 – bane of the cosmic forge , crusaders of the dark savant and wizardry 8 – with settings and gameplay mechanics that differed greatly from the first trilogy . the fourth game , the return of werdna , was a significant departure from the rest of the series . in it , the player controls werdna ( '' andrew , '' one of the game 's developers , spelled backwards ) , the evil wizard slain in the first game , and summons groups of monsters to aid him as he fights his way through the prison in which he had been held captive . rather than monsters , the player faced typical adventuring parties , some of which were pulled from actual user disks sent to sir-tech for recovery . further , the player had only a limited number of keystrokes to use to complete the game . in japan , the wizardry series was translated by ascii entertainment , and became very influential during the 1980s , even as its popularity at home declined . when first introduced , the games suffered from the culture barrier compounded by low-quality translation . this meant that the game was taken seriously by players who overlooked the in-game jokes and parodies . for example , blade cusinart was introduced in early games as '' a legendary sword made by the famous blacksmith , cusinart '' but its meaning was misinterpreted because cuisinart food processors were virtually unknown in japan . however , this misconception appealed to early computer gamers who were looking for something different and made the wizardry series popular . conversely , the fourth game , the return of werdna , was poorly received , as , lacking the knowledge of subcultures necessary to solving the game , japanese players had no chance of figuring out some puzzles . the eight main titles in the series are : . reception . the original wizardry game was a success , selling 24,000 copies by june 1982 , just nine months after its release according to softalk ‘ s sales surveys . in the june 1983 issue of electronic games , wizardry was described as '' without a doubt , the most popular fantasy adventure game for the apple ii at the present time '' . while noting limitations such as the inability to divide the party , or the emphasis on combat over role-playing , the magazine stated that '' no other game comes closer to providing the type of contest favored by most players of non-electronic role-playing games . one outstanding programming achievement , and an absolute 'must buy ' for those fantasy gamers who own an apple '' . by 1987 , the series had sold over 1.5 million copies and by 1994 , over 4.6 million copies had been sold . spin-offs originally released in japan received generally positive reviews in north america . gamespot reviewed wizardry : tale of the forsaken land in 2002 and awarded it a score of 8.5 out of 10 . wizardry : tale of the forsaken land review - gamespot in 2011 , wizardry : labyrinth of lost souls was also reviewed by gamespot and received a score of 7.5 out of 10 . wizardry : labyrinth of lost souls review - gamespot in japan , readers of famitsu magazine considered the famicom port of the original wizardry i to be one of the 100 best games of all time . the series was ranked as the 60th top game ( collectively ) by next generation in 1996 . they cited the '' huge dungeons with elaborate quests and tons of differing enemies . '' next generation 21 ( september 1996 ) , pp . 48 , 51 . fans of the series included robin williams , harry anderson , and the crown prince of bahrain ; the latter even called sir-tech on the phone . . legacy . innovation in gameplay . together with the ultima series , wizardry established the conventions of role-playing video games . the command-driven battle system with a still image of the monster being fought would be emulated in later games , such as the bard 's tale , dragon quest , and final fantasy . the party-based combat in wizardry also inspired richard garriott to include a similar party-based system in ultima iii : exodus . other user interface elements were influential in japanese role-playing games . the later wizardry games implemented multiple endings , some of which were only accessible to people who imported characters from previous games . wizardry features what would later be called prestige classes . aside from the traditional character classes , such as fighter , players could take more advanced ones that combined the abilities of multiple classes if they had the right attributes and alignment . in the early wizardry games , some classes were inaccessible during character creation due to the high requirements ; this meant the player needed to first gain levels and then change their class . wizardry vi allowed starting with any class if the player invested enough time during the random character attribute generation . influence on subsequent games . wizardry inspired many clones and served as a template for role-playing video games . some notable series that trace their look and feel to wizardry include 1985 's the bard 's tale and the might and magic series . the specific wizardry formula , that of a turn based rpg taking place primarily in a dungeon via first person exploration , is referred to as a dungeon crawl . wizardry is the major inspiration to the nintendo ds title the dark spire . while the game follows its own story and maps , much of the game uses the same game play mechanics , even going so far as including a '' classic '' mode that removes all of the game 's graphics , replacing them with a wireframe environment , 8-bit-style sprites for monsters and characters , and chiptune music . the game 's publisher , atlus , also published another wizardry spin-off , wizardry : tale of the forsaken land . while designing the popular japanese role-playing game dragon quest , yuji horii drew inspiration from the wizardry series , 1986 's mugen no shinzou ( heart of phantasm ) , and the ultima series of games . horii 's obsession with wizardry was manifested as an easter egg in one of his earlier games , the portopia serial murder case in 1983 . in a dungeon-crawling portion of that adventure game , a note on the wall reads '' monster surprised you . '' the english fan translation added a sidenote explaining '' this is yuji horii wishing he could have made this game an rpg like wizardry ! '' wizardry 's legacy continued in japan after the parent company ended , with titles such as wizardry gaiden , wizardry empire , and wizardry xth , being developed after the original games were released and generally keeping the same tropes , themes , and mechanics . notably wizardry xth : academy of frontier swapped the original 's gothic themes for a modern day military school setting , adding item crafting and party member compatibility to the wizardry formula . much like the original wizardry , xth spawned a direct storyline sequel , wizardry xth : unlimited students . the second xth game was used as the basis for and shared code with class of heroes , which swapped the modern science fiction elements for a combination of high school , high fantasy , and anime aesthetics . class of heroes would go on to spawn several sequels and spinoffs itself . following the shutdown of michaelsoft , the director of wizardry xth , motoya ataka took a group of programmers he called '' team muramasa '' that had worked on empire and xth and went on to found experience inc . , creating a series of pc games with wizardry xth 's mechanics called generation xth . these would later be ported to the playstation vita , their ports localized as operation abyss and operation babel . experience would go on to create several other drpgs using wizardry 's mechanics as a starting point , including students of the round , stranger of sword city , and demon gaze . starfish , the development team behind wizardry empire , would later go on to create elminage , a series of drpgs that retained the original gothic aesthetic ( and difficulty ) of the western wizardry games . elminage was notable for using the expanded '' kemonojin '' races from wizardry asterisk , also by starfish , as well as the summoner class from wizardry : summoner—these included '' were-beast , '' '' dragonnewt , '' '' fairy , '' and '' devilkin '' as well as expanded classes such as '' brawler '' ( a hand to hand melee specialist ) , '' alchemist '' ( a combination crafting class and spellcaster ) , and '' summoner '' ( a spellcasting class that can tame and summon monsters from the dungeon ) . these '' expanded '' japanese wizardry mechanics would be reused in future elminage games as well as notably class of heroes . after cancellation of wizardry : stones of arnhem in the mid 1990s , one the developers , cleveland mark blakemore , started work on the game grimoire : heralds of the winged exemplar which is heavily wizardry inspired . it was eventually released in august 2017 . wizardry renaissance . in 2009 several japanese publishers and development teams started a '' brand revitalization plan , '' which they called the '' wizardry renaissance '' . after sir-tech , the original wizardry creator in the us , was dissolved , several semi-official games were created in japan of varying quality and thematic elements . '' wizardry renaissance '' aimed to '' rebuild '' the brand by agreeing to a certain '' worldview '' and quality standards to these semi-official wizardry games . wizardry renaissance titles include : wizardry online , a pc mmorpg , shut down in 2016 . wizardry : torawareshi tamashii no meikyū , a playstation 3 , ios , vita , and pc rpg ( localized in the west as wizardry : labyrinth of lost souls ) wizardry : seimei no kusabi , a nintendo ds title wizardry : bōkyaku no isan , a nintendo ds title , which re-used elements from seimei no kusabi wizardry online mobile , a mobile phone mmorpg , shut down in 2011 . wizardry : torawareshi bōrei no machi , a playstation 3 rpg tōkyō meikyū - wizardry 0 - , a social-networking card-battle rpg using the mobage service on smartphones , shut down sometime in 2012 wizardry : senran no matō , a social-networking rpg for smartphones , shut down in 2015 wizardry schema , an incremental game rpg for smartphones , shut down in 2017 wizrogue : labyrinth of wizardry , an isometric roguelike rpg with gacha game elements , originally shut down in 2015 , it was re-launched in 2017 with the gacha game elements removed . these titles were released from late 2009 to 2016 ; the latest activity is the port of wizardry : labyrinth of lost souls to the pc in january 2020 . related media . the popularity of wizardry in japan also inspired various light novels , manga comics , japanese role-playing game , and an original video animation , produced by tms entertainment . a popular light novel series titled sword art online also had a character who stated that his inspiration came from this game . most have been released only in japan . references . external links . wizardry archives info about the wizardry games