Jacobus Kapteyn

kapteyn 's family and early life . kapteyn was born in barneveld in the netherlands to gerrit j . and elisabeth c . ( née koomans ) kapteyn , and was one of 15 children . many of the kapteyns were gifted in mathematics and physics . he passed his entrance exams for university at the age of 16 but kapteyn 's parents would n't allow him to go until the following year . he went to the utrecht university to study mathematics and physics in 1868 . he did very well in his studies and when he graduated he was magna cum laude . this laid the foundation for his later career . jacobus kapteyn was a very doting father during the earlier years in his career and took an interactive role which during the 1880s was not done much by fathers . when kapteyn 's children reached schooling age both his daughters , jacoba cornelia and henrietta , and his son , gerrit , went to a boys ' school . his daughters later made significant strides for women by going to university to read law and medicine . his daughter henrietta ( 1881–1956 ) married astronomer ejnar hertzsprung and gave him a granddaughter named rigel . . career . in 1875 , after having finished his thesis , he worked for three years at the leiden observatory . in 1878 kapteyn was inducted as the first professor of astronomy and theoretical mechanics at the university of groningen . also at groningen , he founded the astronomical laboratory in 1896 and consequently became the director of the facility . kapteyn fulfilled both occupational roles as professor and director at groningen until his retirement in 1921 . in 1888 he became a member of the royal netherlands academy of arts and sciences . between 1896 and 1900 , lacking an observatory , he volunteered to measure photographic plates taken by david gill , who was conducting a photographic survey of southern hemisphere stars at the royal observatory at the cape of good hope . to measure these plates he used a special parallacticic instrument that kapteyn himself had constructed . the results of this collaboration was the publication of cape photographic durchmusterung , a catalog listing positions and magnitudes for 454,875 stars in the southern hemisphere . in 1897 , as part of the above work , he discovered kapteyn 's star . it had the highest proper motion of any star known until the discovery of barnard 's star in 1916 . in 1904 , studying the proper motions of stars , kapteyn reported that these were not random , as it was believed in that time ; stars could be divided into two streams , moving in nearly opposite directions . it was later realized that kapteyn 's data had been the first evidence of the rotation of our galaxy , which ultimately led to the finding of galactic rotation by bertil lindblad and jan oort . in 1906 , kapteyn launched a plan for a major study of the distribution of stars in the galaxy , using counts of stars in different directions . the plan involved measuring the apparent magnitude , spectral type , radial velocity , and proper motion of stars in 206 zones . this enormous project was the first coordinated statistical analysis in astronomy and involved the cooperation of over forty different observatories . around 1913 kapteyn developed a theory of how stars were made based on his observations of irregular nebulae and their velocities . he theorized that stars in irregular nebulae eventually evolved into planetary nebulae . although this theory is not entirely correct it did have some redeeming qualities . he was awarded the james craig watson medal in 1913 . the year of 1920 kapteyn took a part-time job at university of leiden after leaving the university of groningen . this move made kapteyn able to see his granddaughter rigel and his daughter henrietta . in kapteyn 's later years of work he spent his time working on the combination of his life 's work revising and editing the kapteyn universe . kapteyn later retired in 1921 at the age of seventy , but on the request of his former student and director of leiden observatory willem de sitter , kapteyn went back to leiden to assist in upgrading the observatory to contemporary astronomical standards . the astronomy institute of the university of groningen is named after kapteyn . a street in the city of groningen is also named after kapteyn : the j.c . kapteynlaan . and the isaac newton group of telescopes on la palma in the canary islands named the jacobus kapteyn telescope ( jkt ) after him . the kapteyn universe . the structure and size of the galaxy was of great interest to many astronomers during kapteyn 's time . around 1900 , hugo von seegler made an attempt at the structure of the galaxy by making counts of stars between successive magnitudes . ultimately , von seegler was able to determine the rates at which the galaxy was diminishing in multiple different areas of the sky . in 1901 , kapteyn employed the proper motions technique and derived a statistical approach that allowed him to estimate the average distance to stars between successive magnitudes , effectively providing a scale for von seegler 's discoveries . conclusive results from von seegler and kapteyn estimated the galaxy to be an oblate star system approximately 10 kpc in width and 2 kpc in thickness , the sun being relatively close ( 0.6 kpc ) to the center . using the method of star counts , kapteyn was able to confirm his results and dubbed his findings as his first model of the galaxy . despite having made great strides and providing a model for the galaxy , there was one major issue . kapteyn 's work was based on an unproven presumption , that is , there is no light absorption in space . if there were light absorption in space , then stars would look more faint , thus , seeming further away than they actually are . light absorption would also cause the galaxy to disperse more quickly than it actually does . if light absorption proved to be a considerable factor , then kapteyn 's work , or at least his conclusions , would more or less be obsolete . to circumvent this dilemma , kapteyn spent years studying and measuring the amount of absorption . in 1917 kapteyn 's assumptions on interstellar absorption were debated . the arguments were centered around an issue with the '' zone of avoidance '' . by 1918 , he was convinced light absorption was of negligible amounts and confidently stood behind his first model for the structure of the galaxy . kapteyn had presented his findings in his life 's work , first attempt at a theory of the arrangement and motion of the sidereal system , which was published in 1922 . it was determined that his model of the galaxy was valid at high galactic latitudes but failed in the galactic plane because of the lack of knowledge on interstellar absorption . kapteyn was not well enough to meet with his peers and discuss his work . he died in june 1922 , soon after its publishing . it was only after kapteyn 's death , in amsterdam , that robert trumpler determined that the amount of interstellar reddening was actually much greater than had been assumed . this discovery estimated the size of the galaxy to be about 2.5 times larger than initially was thought , with the sun replaced to a distance of 9.2 kpc from the galactic center . honours . awards gold medal of the royal astronomical society ( 1902 ) james craig watson medal ( 1913 ) bruce medal ( 1913 ) named after him kapteyn ( crater ) on the moon asteroid 818 kapteynia kapteyn 's star kapteyn astronomical institute at the university of groningen jacobus kapteyn telescope ( jkt ) at la palma , one of the canary islands kapteyn package , astronomical package for python . references . external links . history of the kapteyn institute