Fukuda Hideko

early life . fukuda hideko , born kageyama hideko , was the child of samurai kageyama katashi and his wife umeko . her mother was a teacher and often brought fukuda along with her to school . like some other prominent women in the reform movement , fukuda 's family found her resistant to conforming to '' proper '' feminine behavior . fukuda even described herself as a tomboy during her childhood . by fifteen , the bright fukuda was exposed to japanese , chinese , and western thought . fukuda first began her political activities after encouragement from her friend and future fiance kobayashi kusuo . it was kobayashi who would loan her a translated biography of joan of arc , who fukuda then aspired to emulate . in 1882 she was inspired by a speech from toshiko kishida , a prominent women 's right activist at the time , to join the freedom and people 's rights movement . the people 's rights movement was a group quickly garnering support that pushed for democracy and more egalitarian laws in the country . one year later , fukuda and her mother founded an all-girls private school , at which they both taught . the school was founded on the ideals of the popular rights movement , and aimed at teaching children of working mothers . however , the school was shut down in 1884 on order of the government , which was worried about the spreading popularity of the people 's rights movement and the growing political ambitions of women . angry and wishing to provide more significant support , fukuda moved to tokyo . the osaka incident . incident . soon after arriving in tokyo she met oi kentaro , the leader of a radical wing of the liberal party . the group was an offshoot of the freedom and people 's rights movement that was sweeping across the nation . fukuda would join the group in attempting to transport weapons and money to korea . their goal was to create a disturbance large enough to undo the sino-japanese accord signed in 1885 . both fukuda and kentaro were angered at the government 's perceived lack of action in korea . they hoped that inciting reform movements there would either push the japanese government into following suit or initiate a war , giving the liberals an opportunity to make domestic reforms . jansen , m . ( 1952 ) . ii . oi kentaro : radicalism and chauvinism . the far eastern quarterly , 11 ( 3 ) , pg . 305-316 . doi:10.2307/2049571 fukuda helped raise funds for the korean revolutionary movement , but she was frustrated by the lack of discipline and habit of many of the male members to go visit brothels , which delayed the group 's acquisition of supplies . however , eventually they succeeded in raising enough money and gathering weaponry , including guns and bombs . the party then traveled to nagasaki on november 20 , 1885 , from where they planned to depart for korea . however , the police had already been investigating the large number of robberies in the osaka area caused by the group , and before the party could travel to seoul , on november 23 , 1885 the roughly 130 members were arrested and charged with the illegal possession of weapons and encouraging riots . ushioda , s . c . ( 1977 ) . women and war in meiji japan : the case of fukuda hideko ( 1865-1927 ) . peace & change , 4 ( 3 ) , 9-12 . doi:10.1111/j.1468-0130.1977.tb00351 fukuda , the only female included in the trial , was given a sentence of eighteen months , but was released after ten months . aftermath . though fukuda would write that she regretted her involvement in the incident , her trial was widely publicized and served to bring her national attention . the media popularized her as '' japan 's joan of arc '' , and she was met with enthusiasm after her release . afterwards , she and oi kentaro became involved in a relationship that produced one son . the partnership was short-lived , and within a year oi had left her for another woman . fukuda 's family came to tokyo to support her , and together they opened a women 's vocational school . shortly afterwards , however , her father , aunt , and brother died and fukuda was unable to maintain running the school . in 1892 fukuda married fukuda yusaku , another liberal intellectual , with whom she would have three sons . yusaku had studied in america and was influenced by the labor movement there . he became ill and died in 1900 , leaving fukuda the single mother to four children . heiminsha . fukuda would go on to establish a women 's technological school one year later , relying on philanthropist support to teach impoverished women trade skills . here she would meet ishikawa sanshiro , a reformist collaborator and eventual lover . she was introduced to socialism via her neighbor , toshihiko sakai . this was at the same time as japan 's first socialist party-the social democratic party- was being created . sakai was anti-war and promoted equal rights between men and women . in 1903 he and a group of collaborators called the heiminsha started the heimin shimbun , a newspaper dedicated to spreading the socialist message . the paper , focusing on both domestic and foreign affairs , attracted worldwide attention and achieved wide circulation . fukuda often socialized with members of the heiminsha and attended their meetings . it was around this time that she published her autobiography half my life , which proved to be highly successful . half my life was the first autobiography written by a woman in japan , and included references to the works of benjamin franklin , joan of arc , and russian nihilists , among others . with the introduction of socialist thought , fukuda 's views on reform began to solidify . she disagreed with japan 's imperialist policies and the excesses of the upper class , but also found issue with the liberal party 's '' insincerity '' and disreputable behavior , which had led her to break off with the group responsible for the osaka incident . the government would eventually suppress the heimin shimbun in 1905 due to the articles protesting the russo-japanese war . . later life and sekai fujin . sekai fujin . on january 1 , 1907 , the first issue of sekai fujin ( women of the world ) was published . it was the first japanese socialist women 's newspaper . matsugu , m . ( 2012 ) . an age of melodrama : family , gender , and social hierarchy in the turn-of-the-century japanese novel . by ito ken k . stanford , ca : stanford university press , 2008 . pg . 805 the journal of asian studies , 71 ( 3 ) , doi:10.1017/s0021911812000903 established by fukuda , who was also its chief editor , and ishikawa sanshiro , the newspaper focused on women and reform interests . fukuda declared the intention of the newspaper to be to “ find women ’ s talent and vocation and to inspire women to join a reform movement based on their natural talent . '' while it included articles about domestic women 's interest , such as sewing or poetry , sekai fujin had an international emphasis and attempted to bring global ideas to women in japan . fukuda hoped the newspaper would advance the cause of women 's emancipation . two major campaigns supported by the newspaper were the repeal of a law banning women from being a part of political meetings and the yanaka village relief campaign . the law , article five of the police security regulations , specifically forbade women from joining political parties or taking a public role in policy or debates . fukuda organized petitions to the senate and helped the bill reach the house of representatives , where it passed , but it would repeatedly fail in the house of peers . . yanaka village . yanaka village was a small town near tokyo that was the proposed site of a reservoir for the watarase river . when some families refused to leave their homes , government officials began a series of attempts to force them off the land . sekai fujin backed the efforts of local villagers who refused to move out . fukuda and her supporters provided funds and aid after the government officials destroyed the villagers houses and left the dike protecting the village from flood unrepaired . following the end of the post-war economic boom , the government began to go after socialist groups with increased vigor . the heimin shimbun was shut down , labor revolts were violently repressed , the socialist party was banned , and sakai toshihiko was imprisoned . the government began a process of heavy suppression against sekai fujin , usually through heavy fines and censorship . the newspaper was eventually banned from discussing current events , and co-founder ishikawa sanshiro was arrested . this eventually forced sekai fujin to close down in 1909 . . seito article . fukuda 's last years were spent in poverty and hardship . ishikawa moved to belgium and shortly afterwards fukuda contracted beriberi . nevertheless , she continued writing and had her article '' the solution to the woman question '' printed in seito , a popular women 's rights magazine . inclusion of fukuda 's article caused the entire issue to be banned . the government was especially sensitive to fukuda 's article because it not only focused on women , but brought in issues of class . fukuda saw the difficulties faced by women as intrinsically tied to the exploitative capitalist system in place , and yearned for a return to an agrarian-modeled society . the article also spurred intense debate within the seito group , composed primarily of educated young women . fukuda moved beyond the goals of many other prominent feminists by discussing the plight of the labor class and impoverished in japan . fukuda saw the issue of gender inequality as intrinsically tied in with class inequality , saying '' along with the liberation of women , the liberation of men , too , must be accomplished . '' fukuda 's article pushed for an encompassing discussion of equality as a societal issue over the more personal approach taken by other leading feminists of the day . she was one of the pioneers of reform movements in japan , and pursued reforms in the meiji period longer than any other woman . . death . fukuda died on may 2 , 1927 , aged 61 . while her role in helping trail blaze the feminist movement in japan was not fully acknowledged until after her death , a group of activists celebrated her achievements 100 years after her birth by erecting a memorial in her honor in okayama . the memorial includes a quotation from her autobiography : “ my life has been one adversity upon another . but i always fought back . not once , not even once , did i flinch from adversity . ” raichō , h . , & craig , t . ( 2006 ) . in the beginning , woman was the sun : the autobiography of a japanese feminist . columbia university press . pg . 210 . retrieved from . see also . socialist thought in imperial japan feminism in japan japanese literature list of japanese authors . references . . notes . nussbaum , louis-frédéric and käthe roth . ( 2005 ) . '' fukuda hideko '' in japan encyclopedia . cambridge : harvard university press . ; oclc 58053128 . further reading . berenice , caroll . “ the outsiders : comments on fukuda hideko , catherine marshall and dorothy detzer . ” peace and change 4 ( fall 1977 ) : 23–26 . conroy , h . the japanese seizure of korea , 1868–1910 : a study of realism and idealism in international relations . philadelphia : university of pennsylvania press , 1960 . fukuda , hideko . warawa no hanseigai . tokyo : iwanami bunko , 1985 . hane , misiko . reflections on the way to the gallows : rebel women in prewar japan . berkeley : university of california press , 1988 . hunter , janet . concise dictionary of modern japanese history . berkeley : university of california press , 1984 . hunter , janet . the emergence of modern japan : an introductory history since 1853 . london ; new york : longman , 1989 . marius jansen '' oi kentaro : radicalism and chauvinism , '' far eastern quarterly , vol . 11 ( may 1952 ) : 305–316 . donald keene . ( 2002 ) . emperor of japan : meiji and his world , 1852–1912 . new york : columbia university press . ; oclc 46731178 murata shizuko and ōki motoko , eds . fukuda hideko shū . fuji shuppan , 1998 . ōki motoko . jiyū minken undō to josei . domesu shuppan , 2003 . sievers , sharon l . flowers in salt : the beginnings of feminist consciousness in modern japan . california : stanford university press , 1983 . tsuzuki , chushichi . the pursuit of power in modern japan , 1825–1995 . oxford : oxford university press , 2000 . ushioda , sharlie . “ women and war in meiji japan : the case of fukuda hideko ( 1865–1927 ) . ” peace and change 4 ( fall 1977 ) : 9–12 .