Web hosting service

history . until 1991 , the internet was restricted to use only '' . for research and education in the sciences and engineering . '' march 16 , 1992 memo from mariam leder , nsf assistant general counsel to steven wolff , division director , nsf dncri ( included at page 128 of management of nsfnet , a transcript of the march 12 , 1992 hearing before the subcommittee on science of the committee on science , space , and technology , u.s . house of representatives , one hundred second congress , second session , hon . rick boucher , subcommittee chairman , presiding ) and was used for email , telnet , ftp and usenet traffic—but only a tiny number of web pages . the world wide web protocols had only just been written and not until the end of 1993 would there be a graphical web browser for mac or windows computers . even after there was some opening up of internet access , the situation was confused until 1995 . '' retiring the nsfnet backbone service : chronicling the end of an era '' , susan r . harris and elise gerich , connexions , vol . 10 , no . 4 , april 1996 to host a website on the internet , an individual or company would need their own computer or server . as not all companies had the budget or expertise to do this , web hosting services began to offer to host users ' websites on their own servers , without the client needing to own the necessary infrastructure required to operate the website . the owners of the websites , also called webmasters , would be able to create a website that would be hosted on the web hosting service 's server and published to the web by the web hosting service . as the number of users on the world wide web grew , the pressure for companies , both large and small , to have an online presence grew . by 1995 , companies such as geocities , angelfire and tripod were offering free hosting . . classification . smaller hosting services . the most basic is web page and small-scale file hosting , where files can be uploaded via file transfer protocol ( ftp ) or a web interface . the files are usually delivered to the web '' as is '' or with minimal processing . many internet service providers ( isps ) offer this service free to subscribers . individuals and organizations may also obtain web page hosting from alternative service providers . free web hosting service is offered by different companies with limited services , sometimes supported by advertisements , and often limited when compared to paid hosting . single page hosting is generally sufficient for personal web pages . personal web site hosting is typically free , advertisement-sponsored , or inexpensive . business web site hosting often has a higher expense depending upon the size and type of the site . larger hosting services . many large companies that are not internet service providers need to be permanently connected to the web to send email , files , etc . to other sites . the company may use the computer as a website host to provide details of their goods and services and facilities for online orders . a complex site calls for a more comprehensive package that provides database support and application development platforms ( e.g . asp.net , coldfusion , java ee , perl/plack , php or ruby on rails ) . these facilities allow customers to write or install scripts for applications like forums and content management . also , secure sockets layer ( ssl ) is typically used for websites that wish to keep the data transmitted more secure . types of hosting . internet hosting services can run web servers . the scope of web hosting services varies greatly . shared web hosting service . one 's website is placed on the same server as many other sites , ranging from a few sites to hundreds of websites . typically , all domains may share a common pool of server resources , such as ram and the cpu . the features available with this type of service can be quite basic and not flexible in terms of software and updates . resellers often sell shared web hosting and web companies often have reseller accounts to provide hosting for clients . reseller web hosting . allows clients to become web hosts themselves . resellers could function , for individual domains , under any combination of these listed types of hosting , depending on who they are affiliated with as a reseller . resellers ' accounts may vary tremendously in size : they may have their own virtual dedicated server to a colocated server . many resellers provide a nearly identical service to their provider 's shared hosting plan and provide the technical support themselves . virtual dedicated server . also known as a virtual private server ( vps ) , divides server resources into virtual servers , where resources can be allocated in a way that does not directly reflect the underlying hardware . vps will often be allocated resources based on a one server to many vpss relationship , however virtualisation may be done for a number of reasons , including the ability to move a vps container between servers . the users may have root access to their own virtual space . customers are sometimes responsible for patching and maintaining the server ( unmanaged server ) or the vps provider may provide server admin tasks for the customer ( managed server ) . dedicated hosting service . the user gets his or her own web server and gains full control over it ( user has superuser for linux/administrator access for windows ) ; however , the user typically does not own the server . one type of dedicated hosting is self-managed or unmanaged . this is usually the least expensive for dedicated plans . the user has full administrative access to the server , which means the client is responsible for the security and maintenance of his own dedicated server . managed hosting service . the user gets his or her own web server but is not allowed full control over it ( user is denied root access for linux/administrator access for windows ) ; however , they are allowed to manage their data via ftp or other remote management tools . the user is disallowed full control so that the provider can guarantee quality of service by not allowing the user to modify the server or potentially create configuration problems . the user typically does not own the server . the server is leased to the client . colocation center . similar to the dedicated web hosting service , but the user owns the colo server ; the hosting company provides physical space that the server takes up and takes care of the server . this is the most powerful and expensive type of web hosting service . in most cases , the colocation provider may provide little to no support directly for their client 's machine , providing only the electrical , internet access , and storage facilities for the server . in most cases for colo , the client would have his own administrator visit the data center on site to do any hardware upgrades or changes . formerly , many colocation providers would accept any system configuration for hosting , even ones housed in desktop-style minitower cases , but most hosts now require rack mount enclosures and standard system configurations . cloud hosting . this is a new type of hosting platform that allows customers powerful , scalable and reliable hosting based on clustered load-balanced servers and utility billing . a cloud hosted website may be more reliable than alternatives since other computers in the cloud can compensate when a single piece of hardware goes down . also , local power disruptions or even natural disasters are less problematic for cloud hosted sites , as cloud hosting is decentralized . cloud hosting also allows providers to charge users only for resources consumed by the user , rather than a flat fee for the amount the user expects they will use , or a fixed cost upfront hardware investment . alternatively , the lack of centralization may give users less control on where their data is located which could be a problem for users with data security or privacy concerns . cloud hosting users can request additional resources on-demand such as only during periods of peak traffic , while offloading it management to the cloud hosting service . clustered hosting . having multiple servers hosting the same content for better resource utilization . clustered servers are a perfect solution for high-availability dedicated hosting , or creating a scalable web hosting solution . a cluster may separate web serving from database hosting capability . ( usually web hosts use clustered hosting for their shared hosting plans , as there are multiple benefits to the mass managing of clients ) . . grid hosting . this form of distributed hosting is when a server cluster acts like a grid and is composed of multiple nodes . home server . usually a single machine placed in a private residence can be used to host one or more web sites from a usually consumer-grade broadband connection . these can be purpose-built machines or more commonly old pcs . some isps actively attempt to block home servers by disallowing incoming requests to tcp port 80 of the user 's connection and by refusing to provide static ip addresses . a common way to attain a reliable dns host name is by creating an account with a dynamic dns service . a dynamic dns service will automatically change the ip address that a url points to when the ip address changes . some specific types of hosting provided by web host service providers : file hosting service : hosts files , not web pages image hosting service video hosting service blog hosting service paste bin shopping cart software e-mail hosting service . host management . the host may also provide an interface or control panel for managing the web server and installing scripts , as well as other modules and service applications like e-mail . a web server that does not use a control panel for managing the hosting account , is often referred to as a '' headless '' server . some hosts specialize in certain software or services ( e.g . e-commerce , blogs , etc . ) . reliability and uptime . the availability of a website is measured by the percentage of a year in which the website is publicly accessible and reachable via the internet . this is different from measuring the uptime of a system . uptime refers to the system itself being online . uptime does not take into account being able to reach it as in the event of a network outage . a hosting provider 's service-level agreement ( sla ) may include a certain amount of scheduled downtime per year in order to perform maintenance on the systems . this scheduled downtime is often excluded from the sla timeframe , and needs to be subtracted from the total time when availability is calculated . depending on the wording of an sla , if the availability of a system drops below that in the signed sla , a hosting provider often will provide a partial refund for time lost . how downtime is determined changes from provider to provider , therefore reading the sla is imperative . not all providers release uptime statistics . most hosting providers will guarantee at least 99.9 % uptime which will allow for 43m of downtime per month , or 8h 45m of downtime per year . obtaining hosting . web hosting is often provided as part of a general internet access plan from internet service providers . there are also many free and paid providers offering web hosting . a customer needs to evaluate the requirements of the application to choose what kind of hosting to use . such considerations include database server software , scripting software , and operating system . most hosting providers provide linux-based web hosting which offers a wide range of different software . a typical configuration for a linux server is the lamp platform : linux , apache , mysql , and php/perl/python . the web hosting client may want to have other services , such as email for their business domain , databases or multimedia services . a customer may also choose windows as the hosting platform . the customer still can choose from perl , php , python , and ruby , but the customer may also use asp.net or asp classic . web hosting packages often include a web content management system , so the end-user does not have to worry about the more technical aspects . security . because web hosting services host websites belonging to their customers , online security is an important concern . when a customer agrees to use a web hosting service , they are relinquishing control of the security of their site to the company that is hosting the site . the level of security that a web hosting service offers is extremely important to a prospective customer and can be a major consideration when considering which provider a customer may choose . web hosting servers can be attacked by malicious users in different ways , including uploading malware or malicious code onto a hosted website . these attacks may be done for different reasons , including stealing credit card data , launching a distributed denial of service attack ( ddos ) or spamming .