Future Shock

development . the book grew out of an article '' the future as a way of life '' in horizon magazine , summer 1965 issue . toffler , alvin , '' the future as a way of life '' , horizon magazine , summer 1965 , vol vii , num 3 eisenhart , mary , '' alvin and heidi toffler : surfing the third wave : on life and work in the information age '' , microtimes 118 , january 3 , 1994 '' alvin toffler : still shocking after all these years : new scientist meets the controversial futurologist '' , new scientist , 19 march 1994 , pp . 22–25 . '' what led you to write future shock ? – while covering congress , it occurred to us that big technological and social changes were occurring in the united states , but that the political system seemed totally blind to their existence . between 1955 and 1960 , the birth control pill was introduced , television became universalized , commercial jet travel came into being and a whole raft of other technological events occurred . having spent several years watching the political process , we came away feeling that 99 per cent of what politicians do is keep systems running that were laid in place by previous generations of politicians . our ideas came together in 1965 in an article called 'the future as a way of life ' , which argued that change was going to accelerate and that the speed of change could induce disorientation in lots of people . we coined the phrase 'future shock ' as an analogy to the concept of culture shock . with future shock you stay in one place but your own culture changes so rapidly that it has the same disorienting effect as going to another culture '' . major themes . future shock . alvin toffler argued that society is undergoing an enormous structural change , a revolution from an industrial society to a '' super-industrial society '' . this change overwhelms people . he argues that the accelerated rate of technological and social change leaves people disconnected and suffering from '' shattering stress and disorientation '' —future shocked . toffler stated that the majority of social problems are symptoms of future shock . in his discussion of the components of such shock he popularized the term '' information overload . '' this analysis of the phenomenon of information overload is continued in later publications , especially the third wave and powershift . in the introduction to an essay entitled '' future shock '' in his book , conscientious objections , neil postman wrote : '' sometime about the middle of 1963 , my colleague charles weingartner and i delivered in tandem an address to the national council of teachers of english . in that address we used the phrase '' future shock '' as a way of describing the social paralysis induced by rapid technological change . to my knowledge , weingartner and i were the first people ever to use it in a public forum . of course , neither weingartner nor i had the brains to write a book called future shock , and all due credit goes to alvin toffler for having recognized a good phrase when one came along '' ( p . & nbsp ; 162 ) . . development of society and production . alvin toffler distinguished three stages in development of society and production : agrarian , industrial and post-industrial . each of these waves develops its own '' super-ideology ” in order to explain reality . this ideology affects all the spheres which make up a civilization phase : technology , social patterns , information patterns , and power patterns . the first stage began in the period of the neolithic era with the advent of agriculture , thereby passing from barbarian to a civilization . a large number of people acted as prosumers ( eating their grown food , hunting animals , building their own houses , making clothes , . ) . people traded by exchanging their own goods for commodities of others . the second stage began in england with the industrial revolution with the invention of the machine tool and the steam engine . people worked in factories to make money they could spend on goods they needed ( it means they produced for exchange , not for use ) . countries also created new social systems . the third stage began in the second half of the 20th century in the west when people invented automatic production , robotics and the computer . the services sector attained great value . toffler proposed one criterion for distinguishing between industrial society and post-industrial society : the share of the population occupied in agriculture versus the share of city labor occupied in the services sector . in a post-industrial society , the share of the people occupied in agriculture does not exceed 15 % , and the share of city laborers occupied in the services sector exceeds 50 % . thus , the share of the people occupied with brainwork greatly exceeds the share of the people occupied with physical work in post-industrial society . the third wave led to the information era ( now ) . homes are the dominant institutions . most people carry on their own production and consumption in their homes or electronic cottages , they produce more of their own products and services and markets become less important for them . people consider each other to be equally free as vendors of prosumer-generated commodities . fear of the future . alvin toffler 's main thought centers on the idea that modern man feels shock from rapid changes . for example , toffler 's daughter went to shop in new york city and she could n't find a shop in its previous location . thus new york has become a city without a history . the urban population doubles every 11 years . the overall production of goods and services doubles each 50 years in developed countries . society experiences an increasing number of changes with an increasing rapidity , while people are losing the familiarity that old institutions ( religion , family , national identity , profession ) once provided . the so-called '' brain drain '' – the emigration of european scientists to the united states – is both an indicator of the changes in society and also one of their causes . features of post-industrial society . many goods have become disposable as the cost of manual repair or cleaning has become greater than the cost of making new goods due to mass production . examples of disposable goods include ballpoint pens , lighters , plastic bottles , and paper towels . the design of goods becomes outdated quickly . ( and so , for example , a second generation of computers appears before the end of the service life of the first generation ) . it is possible to rent almost everything ( from a ladder to a wedding dress ) , thus eliminating the need for ownership . whole branches of industry die off and new branches of industry arise . this affects unskilled workers who are compelled to change their residence to find new jobs . the constant change in the market also poses a problem for advertisers who must deal with moving targets . people of post-industrial society change their profession and their workplace often . people have to change professions because professions quickly become outdated . people of post-industrial society thus have many careers in a lifetime . the knowledge of an engineer becomes outdated in ten years . people look more and more for temporary jobs . to follow transient jobs , people have become nomads . for example , immigrants from algeria , turkey and other countries go to europe to find work . transient people are forced to change residence , phone number , school , friends , car license , and contact with family often . as a result , relationships tend to be superficial with a large number of people , instead of being intimate or close relationships that are more stable . evidence for this is tourist travel and holiday romances . the driver 's license , received at age 16 , has become the teenager 's admission to the world of adults , because it symbolizes the ability to move independently . death of permanence . the post industrial society will be marked by a transient culture where everything ranging from goods to human relationships will be temporary . significance and reception . the book has sold over 6 million copies within five years and has been widely translated ( it had translations into twenty foreign languages as of 2003 ) . it has been described as '' an international bestseller within weeks of publication '' . a documentary film based on the book was released in 1972 with orson welles as on-screen narrator . . in popular culture . the 1981 album by the rock band gillan was named future shock after this book . curtis mayfield 's song '' future shock '' on the album back to the world took its name from this book , and was in turn covered by herbie hancock as the title track for his 1983 album future shock . that album was considered groundbreaking for fusing jazz and funk with electronic music . stanley clarke performed a song with the same title on his 1984 album time exposure . the rock band , bang released '' future shock '' on their self titled capitol records release in 1972 . october 2019 would see the release of metapop artist kurt riley 's single ftr shk . in the 1974 movie the parallax view the character joe relates a story to lee about a wife having an affair with her psychiatrist and then a bulldozer knocking down his house by calling it future shock . other works taking their title from the book include : the futurama episode '' future stock '' ; the rocko 's modern life episode '' future schlock , '' the gordons 1981 ep on flying nun records ; a segment on the daily show starring samantha bee ; kevin goldstein 's recurring column on the baseball prospectus website ; a magic : the gathering pre-constructed deck ; and the national wrestling alliance 's 1989 starrcade event . since 1977 , uk comic 2000 ad has run a series of short stories called future shocks based on this concept , some of which were written by alan moore . the abbreviated derogatory term futsies was applied to citizens in 2000 ad stories ( mainly in the judge dredd universe ) who had been driven insane by future shock . works deriving themes and elements from future shock include the science fiction novels the forever war ( 1974 ) by joe haldeman , the shockwave rider ( 1975 ) by john brunner , the rpg transhuman space ( 2002 ) by steve jackson games , and the indie rpg shock : social science fiction ( 2006 ) by designer joshua a.c . newman . experimental music group death grips use the lyric '' culture shock , future shock , fuck yourself , choke yourself '' in their song '' exmilitary '' . the line '' you knocked a future shock crowbar upside my head '' occurs in the track '' the outsiders '' on the alternative rock band r.e.m . 's 2004 album around the sun . in 2011 , a song titled '' future shock '' by darwin , obie , and mr-e appeared on the album nu nrg 100 , the final installment of the world-renowned label nu energy , while brooklyn-based band tv on the radio included a song titled '' no future shock '' on their album nine types of light . the same year , the unsound festival in krakow , poland took the concept of 'future shock ' as its theme . rapper mos def included a reference to the book title in his song entitled mathematics . william brittelle , the brooklyn-based composer of pop-influenced electro-acoustic art music , has an album called future shock . the sense of future shock is an integral aspect of cyberpunk . futureshock were also an electronic music duo recording for junior boys own and parlophone / emi . the members were phil dockerty and alex tepper . a copy of the book can be seen lying on the deceased wendell armbruster sr . 's desk in the 1972 movie avanti ! starring jack lemmon . in the episode '' a friend in deed '' ( 1974 ) of the television series columbo , a colleague says to lt . columbo , '' have n't you ever heard of future shock ? the world 's going to hell with itself . '' . see also . . references . external links .