Cain and Abel

genesis narrative . the story of cain 's murder of abel and its consequences is told in : robert alter , trans . 2008 . '' genesis 4 . '' in the five books of moses . p . 29 . 4:1 – the hebrew verb '' knew '' implies intimate or sexual knowledge , along with possession . the name '' cain '' , which means '' smith '' , resembles the verb translated as '' gotten '' but also possibly meaning '' to make '' . ( alter 2008:29 ) . and the human knew eve his woman and she conceived and bore cain , and she said , '' i have got me a man with the lord . '' 4:2 – abel 's name could be associated with '' vapor '' or '' puff of air '' . ( alter 2008:29 ) . and she bore as well his brother abel , and abel became a herder of sheep while cain was a tiller of the soil . and it happened in the course of time that cain brought from the fruit of the soil an offering to the lord . and abel too had brought from the choice firstlings of his flock , and the lord regarded abel and his offering but did not regard cain and his offering . and cain was very incensed , and his face fell . and the lord said to cain , 4:8 – '' let us go out to the field '' does not appear in the masoretic text , but is found in other versions including the septuagint and samaritan pentateuch . and cain said to abel his brother , '' let us go out to the field , '' and when they were in the field cain rose against abel his brother and killed him . 4:9 – the phrase traditionally translated '' am i my brother 's keeper ? '' is hebrew '' hă-šōmêr 'āḥî 'ānōḵî ? '' '' keeper '' is from the verb shamar ( שמר ) , '' guard , keep , watch , preserve . '' and the lord said to cain , '' where is abel your brother ? and he said , '' i do not know : am i my brother 's keeper ? '' 4:10–12 – cain is cursed min-ha-adamah , from the earth , being the same root as '' man '' and adam . and he said , '' what have you done ? listen ! your brother 's blood cries out to me from the soil . and so , cursed shall you be by the soil that gaped with its mouth to take your brother 's blood from your hand . if you till the soil , it will no longer give you strength . a restless wanderer shall you be on the earth . '' and cain said to the lord , '' my punishment is too great to bear . now that you have driven me this day from the soil i must hide from your presence , i shall be a restless wanderer on the earth and whoever finds me will kill me . '' and the lord said to him , '' therefore whoever kills cain shall suffer sevenfold vengeance . '' and the lord set a mark upon cain so that whoever found him would not slay him . and cain went out from the lord 's presence and dwelled in the land of nod east of eden . and cain knew his wife and she conceived and bore enoch . then he became the builder of a city and he called the name of the city like his son 's name , enoch . . translation notes . . origins . etymology . cain and abel are traditional english renderings of the hebrew names . it has been proposed that the etymology of their names may be a direct pun on the roles they take in the genesis narrative . abel ( hbl ) is thought to derive from a reconstructed word meaning 'herdsman ' , with the modern arabic cognate ibil now specifically referring only to 'camels ' . cain ( qyn ) is thought to be cognate to the mid-1st millennium bce yemen word qyn , meaning 'metalsmith ' . this theory would make the names descriptive of their roles , where abel works with livestock , and cain with agriculture—and would parallel the names adam and eve . original appearance . the oldest known copy of the biblical narrative is from the dead sea scrolls , and dates to the first century bce . cain and abel also appear in a number of other texts , and the story is the subject of various interpretations . abel , the first murder victim , is sometimes seen as the first martyr ; while cain , the first murderer , is sometimes seen as an ancestor of evil . some scholars suggest the pericope may have been based on a sumerian story representing the conflict between nomadic shepherds and settled farmers . modern scholars typically view the stories of adam and eve and cain and abel to be about the development of civilization during the age of agriculture ; not the beginnings of man , but when people first learned agriculture , replacing the ways of the hunter-gatherer . cain and abel are symbolic rather than real . like almost all of the persons , places and stories in the primeval history ( the first eleven chapters of genesis ) , they are mentioned nowhere else in the hebrew bible , a fact that suggests that the history is a late composition attached to genesis to serve as an introduction . just how late is a matter for dispute : the history may be as late as the hellenistic period ( first decades of the 4th century bce ) , but the high level of babylonian myth behind its stories has led others to date it to the babylonian exile ( 6th century bce ) . a prominent mesopotamian parallel to cain and abel is the sumerian myth of the courtship of inanna and dumuzid , in which the shepherd dumuzid and the farmer enkimdu compete for the affection of the goddess inanna , with dumuzid ( the shepherd ) winning out . another parallel is enlil chooses the farmer-god , in which the shepherd-god emesh and the farmer-god enten bring their dispute over which of them is better to the chief god enlil , who rules in favor of enten ( the farmer ) . jewish and christian interpretations . islamic interpretation . the story appears in the quran 5:27-31 : the story of cain and abel has always been used as a deterrent from murder in islamic tradition . abdullah ibn mas'ud reported that muhammad said in a hadith : sahih bukhari and sahih muslim no soul is wrongfully killed except that some of the burden falls upon the son of adam , for he was the first to establish the practice of murder . muslim scholars were divided on the motives behind cain 's murder of abel , and further why the two brothers were obliged to offer sacrifices to god . some scholars believed that cain 's motives were plain jealousy and lust . both cain and abel desired to marry adam 's beautiful daughter , aclima ( arabic : aqlimia . seeking to end the dispute between them , adam suggested that each present an offering before god . the one whose offering god accepted would marry aclima . abel , a generous shepherd , offered the fattest of his sheep as an oblation to god . but cain , a miserly farmer , offered only a bunch of grass and some worthless seeds to him . god accepted abel 's offering and rejected cain's—an indication that abel was more righteous than cain , and thus worthier of aclima . as a result , it was decided that abel would marry aclima . cain , on the other hand , would marry her less beautiful sister . blinded by anger and lust for aclima , cain sought to get revenge on abel and escape with aclima . ibn kathir . '' surat al-ma'ida . '' in tafsir al-qur'an al-adhim interpretation of the holy qur'an . according to another tradition , the devil appeared to cain and instructed him how to exact revenge on abel . '' hit abel 's head with a stone and kill him , '' whispered the devil to cain . after the murder , the devil hurried to eve shouting : '' eve ! cain has murdered abel ! '' . eve did not know what murder was or how death felt like . she asked , bewildered and horrified , '' woe to you ! what is murder ? '' . '' he abel does not eat . he does not drink . he does not move that 's what murder and death are , '' answered the devil . eve burst out into tears and started to wail madly . she ran to adam and tried to tell him what happened . however , she could not speak because she could not stop wailing . since then , women wail broken-heartedly when a loved one dies . adapted from ibn abul-hatim 's narrative in tafsir al-qur'an al-adhim and tafsir al-tabari , surat al-ma'ida a different tradition narrates that while cain was quarreling with abel , the devil killed an animal with a stone in cain 's sight to show him how to murder abel . tafsir al-qur'an al-adhim and tafsir al-tabari , surat al ma'ida after burying abel and escaping from his family , cain got married and had children . they died in noah 's flood among other tyrants and unbelievers . the beginning and the end , ibn kathir – volume i some muslim scholars puzzled over the mention of offerings in the narrative of cain and abel . offerings and sacrifices were ordained only after the revelation of tawrat to musa . this led some scholars , such as said ibn al-musayyib , to think that the sons of adam mentioned in the quran are actually two israelites , not cain and abel . . legacy and symbolism . allusions to cain and abel as an archetype of fratricide appear in numerous references and retellings , through medieval art and shakespearean works up to present day fiction . a millennia-old explanation for cain being capable of murder is that he may have been the offspring of a fallen angel or satan himself , rather than being from adam . louis ginzberg , the legends of the jews , vol . 1 , johns hopkins university press , 1998 , , pp . 105–09 a treatise on hermeticism , meditations on the tarot , describes the biblical account of cain and abel as a myth , in that it expresses , in a form narrated for a particular case , an '' eternal '' idea . it shows us how brothers can become mortal enemies through the very fact that they worship the same god in the same way . according to the author , the source of religious wars is revealed . it is not the difference in dogma or ritual which is the cause , but the '' pretention to equality '' or '' the negation of hierarchy . '' powell , robert , trans . 1985 2002 . meditations on the tarot . pp . 14–15 there were other , minor traditions concerning cain and abel , of both older and newer date . the apocryphal life of adam and eve tells of eve having a dream in which cain drank his brother 's blood . in an attempt to prevent the prophecy from happening the two young men are separated and given different jobs . williams , david . 1982 . '' cain and beowulf : a study in secular allegory . '' p . 21 . university of toronto press . . cultural references . like other prominent biblical figures , cain and abel appear in many works of art , including works by titian , peter paul rubens and william blake . in william shakespeare 's hamlet , the characters king claudius and king hamlet are parallels of cain and abel . lord byron rewrote and dramatized the story in the play cain ( 1821 ) , viewing cain as symbolic of a four temperaments , provoked by abel 's hypocrisy and sanctimony . john steinbeck 's 1952 novel east of eden ( also a 1955 film ) refers in its title to cain 's exile and contains discussions of the cain and abel story which then play out in the plot . james baldwin 's 1957 short story , '' sonny 's blues '' , has been seen as alluding to the cain and abel story . cain and abel have cain and abel ( comics ) since the 1950s . in 1989 , neil gaiman made the two recurring characters in his comic series the sandman . bobby and j.r . ewing in the tv series dallas ( 1978 ) have been described as variations of cain and abel . cain and abel appear in the stephen schwartz musical children of eden ( 1991 ) . author daniel quinn , first in his book ishmael ( 1992 ) and later in the story of b ( 1996 ) , proposes that the story of cain and abel is an account of early semitic herdsmen observing the beginnings of what he calls totalitarian agriculture , with cain representing the first 'modern ' agriculturists and abel the pastoralism . the heavy metal band avenged sevenfold took their name from the biblical story , and their song '' chapter four '' on the album waking the fallen ( 2003 ) is based on it . the danish stage play biblen ( 2008 ) discusses and reenacts various bible story , including abel 's murder by cain . cain appeared on the tv series supernatural ( season 9 & 10 , 2014-2015 ) as a recurring character . the series portrays an alternate version of the story where cain only killed abel to save him from corruption by the devil . in darren aronofsky 's allegory film mother ! ( 2017 ) , the characters '' oldest son '' and '' younger brother '' represent cain and abel . cain and abel appear on the tv series lucifer ( season 3 , 2017 ) .