Khutbah

origins and definition . religious narration ( including sermons ) may be pronounced in a variety of settings and at various times . the khutbah , however , refers to khutbah al-jum ' a , usually meaning the address delivered in the mosque at weekly ( usually friday ) and annual rituals . other religious oratory and occasions of preaching are described as dars ( a lesson ) or waz ( an admonition ) , and their formats differ accordingly . '' khutba '' , encyclopedia of islam and the muslim world the khutbah originates from the practice of the islamic prophet , muhammad , who used to deliver words of exhortation , instruction , or command at gatherings for worship in the mosque , which consisted of the courtyard of his house in medina . after the conquest of mecca , muhammad presented himself as a khatib to the city in ad 630 . the rashidun , and the ummayads caliphs and provincial governors all delivered sermons . there were not necessarily exhortatory , but addressed practical questions of government and sometimes even included direct orders . under the abbasids , the caliph himself no longer preached but assigned the task to the qadi . the abbasids insisted they were clearing islam of the secularism of the umayyads , and this probably helped in strengthening the religious aspect of the sermon . '' khutba '' , students ' britannica india , p.236 . delivery . at the beginning of the service the adhan is given , during which the khatib ( the individual who delivers the khutbah ) remains sitting . the iqama is given when the khatib descends . the sermon is delivered in two parts . both parts are delivered while khatib is standing and punctuated by a pause in between them when the khatib sits down . during the sermon itself , it is obligatory to pronounce the following : the hamdala , or an expression to praise god and show gratitude towards him ; saying al-hamdu li'llāh '' praise belongs to allāh '' at the beginning of the sermon is usually sufficient , '' ḥamdala '' , encyclopaedia of islam the salawaat , or invocations of peace and blessings on muhammad , recitation of a part of the qur'an in the first part of the sermon or , according to some doctrines , in both , admonitions to piety in both parts of the sermon , and dua ( prayer ) on behalf of the faithful . the khatib must be in a state of ritual purity ; his islam and clothing . it is commendable for the khatib to be on a minbar or an elevated place ; to salute the congregation when directing himself towards them ; to sit down until the adhan is pronounced by the muezzin ; and to direct himself straightway to his audience . finally the khatib should make the sermon short . '' khutba '' , encyclopaedia of islam historically , sermons were delivered in classical arabic . this linguistic requirement required substantial training on the part of the khatib and this contributed to the growth of a literary genre consisting of model sermons , such as those by the renowned ibn nubata ( d . 984 ) . the sahabah , even after migrating to foreign lands , always kept the khutbah in classical arabic but would instead conduct a longer lecture before the khutbah in the local language . according to the madhhab , it is a requirement for the khutbah to be delivered completely in classical arabic . in the modern era however , preaching in colloquial languages , while often retaining certain arabic expressions , has become common in contemporary and non-traditional circles . . activities prohibited during the khutbah . talking offering sunnat and nafl salaat ( permissible ) eating and drinking using mobile phone reciting the quran shareef . friday . image : inside masjid negara.jpg thumb worshipers listening to a sermon at the national mosque of malaysia one of the conditions for the validity of the friday service is that it must be preceded by two sermons . the sermons are delivered when the number of auditors required for a valid j̲umu ‘ a are present . traditionally , as instructed in classical islamic legal treatises , friday congregational prayers in which sermons were delivered were restricted to urban centers and normally to one major mosque in each city . such a mosque is referred to as a masjid jami ‘ , that is , a '' friday mosque '' ( or a '' cathedral mosque '' ) . these mosques were distinguished by their central location , large dimensions , monumental architecture , symbolic furnishings indicative of its exalted stature , and , the most demonstrative of all , the minbar ( ritual pulpit ) . in contemporary times , friday congregational prayers with sermons are common in mosques of all sizes and conditions , and not just restricted to a few central locations . sermons are also dispensed through newspapers and broadcast on radio and television . . special occasions . sermons on special occasions generally contain features that are relevant to the celebrations ( e.g . eid ) or the natural phenomena for which they are delivered ( e.g . sunnah salat ) . for instance , on eid al-fitr , the preacher has a duty to instruct the faithful congregation concerning the zakat , or almsgiving . on eid al-adha the preacher includes remarks specifying the rules for the qurbani . there is a slight difference in the sermon delivered on eid ul-fitr . the sermon 's first part must open with nine takbirs , the second part with seven . the sermon may also be pronounced while sitting . regarding the sermons delivered during an eclipse or excessive drought , classical texts advise that such sermons must admonish the audience and ask god 's forgiveness . usually the verse 9 of sūra lxvi is also recited and a special prayer called '' muḥammad 's du ' a '' ʾ is said . . sovereign 's name . in the pre-modern middle east , the mention of a ruler 's name in the sermon was one of the two prerogatives of sovereignty ( the other being the right to mint coins ) . mentioning meant accepting the sovereignty and suzerainty of a ruler , and it was considered the principal criterion of sovereignty for an islamic ruler . omitting the name of a ruler from the sermon was like publicly declaring independence . this prerogative of sovereignty was introduced by islam . it was not present in the pre-islamic era . in addition , the sermon , a major vehicle of communication , also announced the deposition of a ruler , the accession of a ruler , nomination of an heir , and the beginning and end of a war . lewis p . 82-5 the sovereign 's name was also declared in khutbas during the mughal rule ; babur was styled 'zahir-ud-din bábar muhammad ' during friday khutbas . sher khan , an adversary of the mughal emperor humayun , was content if bengal was given to him in return of the emperor retaining his right to mint coins and proclaim the khutba in the emperor 's name , and thereby becoming the '' emperor 's vassal '' . currently , some muslim monarchies practise this in their state-regulated sermon like in brunei and malaysia . . khutbah and the ministries of islamic affairs in modern states . in a number of countries like turkey , the gulf states , saudi arabia etc . there is a central religious authority supervised by the government which issues a weekly sermon to be read in all mosques under its jurisdiction . in turkey the sermons are prepared by the diyanet , in saudi arabia by the ministry for islamic affairs . in egypt a similar proposal is currently being discussed . egypt 's new plan : 1 weekly sermon for over 80 million muslims . related concept . abu-al-faraj ibn al-jawzi writes in his ru'ūs al-qawārīr of a similar concept also called khutbah . also referred to by the same name as the sermon , this concept was different . its primary purpose was not to admonish , instruct or reprove , but rather to exalt and praise god . it invited others to worship and celebrate god 's greatness . ibn al-jawzi employed a variety of metaphors and alluded to nature frequently . hovannisian , p . 41-3 . see also . nahj al balagha qur'an reading sermon , christian analogue the sermon for necessities- a popular sermon in the islamic world , particularly as the introduction to a khutbah during jumu'ah . notes . references . gaffney , patrick d . '' khutba . '' encyclopedia of islam and the muslim world . edited by martin , richard c . macmillan reference , 2004 . vol . 1 p . & nbsp ; 394 . 20 april 2008 hoiberg , dale ; ramchandani , indu . student 's britannica india . popular prakashan , 2000 . hovannisian , richard g ; sabagh , georges . religion and culture in medieval islam . cambridge university press , 2000 . jones , linda , preaching and sermons , in muhammad in history , thought , and culture : an encyclopedia of the prophet of god ( 2 vols . ) , edited by c . fitzpatrick and a . walker , santa barbara , abc-clio , 2014 , vol . ii , pp . & nbsp ; 478–482 . lewis , bernard . from babel to dragomans : interpreting the middle east . oxford university press , 2004 . wensinck , a.j . encyclopaedia of islam . edited by : p . bearman , th . bianquis , c.e . bosworth , e . van donzel and w.p . heinrichs . brill , 2008 . brill online . 20 april 2008 contemporary fataawa , idara-e-islamiyat , 2001 . external links .