The Four Seasons (Vivaldi)

structure . vivaldi 's arrangement is as follows : concerto no . 1 in e major , op . 8 , rv 269 , '' spring '' ( la primavera ) . ; 1727 ( or 1730 , 1731 ) vivaldi based his setting of '' gelido in ogni vena '' , an aria from metastasio 's siroe , re di persia libretto , on the first movement of the '' winter '' concerto . vivaldi 's siroe , containing an aria on this text , premiered in 1727 ( music lost ) . an aria on the '' gelido in ogni vena '' text also appeared in his 1730 argippo ( music lost ) . in 1731 , he inserted the extant version of this aria in his farnace when this opera was restaged in pavia . ; 1739 nicolas chédeville ( france ) arranged the concerti ( as '' le printemps , ou les saisons amusantes '' ) for hurdy-gurdy or musette , violin , flute , and continuo . ; 1765 the french composer michel corrette composed and published a choral motet , laudate dominum de coelis , subtitled motet à grand chœur arrangé dans le concerto de printemps de vivaldi . the work , for choir and orchestra , consists of the words of psalms set to the music from the spring concerto with vocal soloists singing the solo concerto parts . 1775 jean-jacques rousseau published his flute version of the '' spring '' concerto . jean-jacques rousseau le printems de vivaldi arrangé pour une flute sans accompagnement . paris : bignon , 1775 . le printemps de vivaldi at ; 1969 the swingle singers ( france ) recorded an album ( the joy of singing ) based on the work ( and that of other composers ) . ; 1970 astor piazzolla ( argentina ) published estaciones porteñas , '' the four seasons of buenos aires '' ; these have been included in '' eight seasons '' performances , along with vivaldi 's work , by various artists . ; 1972 moe koffman ( canada ) recorded a jazz album of the concerti . moe koffman '' the four seasons '' , grt or derby record label , discogs listing . ; 1976 the new koto ensemble ( japan ) recorded the concerti on koto instruments . new koto ensemble '' koto four seasons '' , discogs listing . ; 1978 michael franks ( united states ) composed a vocal serenade based on the theme of the adagio from the '' summer '' concerto . michael franks , '' vivaldi 's song '' , '' burchfield nines '' album . this was subsequently covered by woongsan ( korea ) in 2010 . woongsan , '' vivaldi 's song '' , album '' close your eyes '' ( pony canyon label ) . ; 1981 the four seasons is used in the eponymous 1981 film , along with other vivaldi concertos for flute . ; 1982 patrick gleeson ( united states ) recorded a '' computer realization '' of the concerti . ; 1984 thomas wilbrandt ( west germany ) composed and recorded '' the electric v '' ( later adapted for film ) , which interprets vivaldi 's work with ambient electronics , vocals , and samples of the original concerti . roland petit ( france ) choreographed a ballet ( entitled '' les quatre saisons '' ) to an i musici performance of vivaldi 's work . ; 1987 ben shedd ( united states ) produced a scenic tour of nature with the concerti as background music ( narrated by william shatner ) . ben shedd , '' seasons '' , listed on imdb ; trailer featured on vimeo ( photagrapher 's channel ) . ; 1990 a midi arrangement of the '' spring '' concerto by passport designs was included with windows 3.0 . ; 1993 jean-pierre rampal ( france ) recorded arrangements of the concerti for flute ; flute '' jean-pierre rampal plays vivaldi 's four seasons '' , sony classical ( 53105 ) , allmusic listing . these were also recorded by jadwiga kotnowska . ; 1995 arnie roth ( united states ) recorded '' the four seasons suite '' , including sonnets ( recited by patrick stewart ) . this may not qualify as a derivative work , depending on whether vivaldi 's translated sonnets were meant to be narrated with the music ( versus being read in italian , or silently by the audience ) . arnie roth , '' the compleat four seasons '' , listed on allmusic . ; 1997 the baronics ( canada ) recorded surf music versions of one movement from each of the concerti . the baronics '' get bach ! '' , on discogs . french musician jacques loussier composed and recorded , with his trio , jazz-swing interpretations of the concerti . ; 1998 the great kat ( england/united states ) recorded a shred guitar ( and violin ) version of the presto movement from the '' summer '' concerto . the great kat , '' bloody vivaldi '' , album . vanessa-mae ( singapore/britain ) recorded a crossover version of the same movement for electric violin . vanessa-mae '' storm '' , album . ; 1999 the chinese baroque players recorded arrangements of the concerti for traditional chinese instruments . chinese baroque players '' four seasons '' , xien records ( xnc2 44032 ) , allmusic listing petrova & tikhonov ( russia ) performed their long program to a medley of vivaldi 's seasons to win the european figure skating championships . ; 2000 venice harp quartet ( italy ) recorded arrangements of the concerti for harp ensemble . venice harp quartet '' four seasons for four harps '' , fine classics ( 4423–2 ) , allmusic listing . gustavo montesano ( argentina ) recorded a tango guitar version of the '' spring '' allegro with the royal philharmonic orchestra . primavera tango '' flamenco fantasy '' , on discogs . jochen brusch ( germany ) & sven-ingvart mikkelsen ( denmark ) recorded arrangements of the concerti for violin and organ . brusch & mikkelsen '' the four seasons '' , classico classcd333 ; 2001 bond ( australia/britain ) recorded two singles based on the '' winter '' concerto , with electric strings ( violin , cello , viola ) , vocals , and electronic music , . bond : viva ! /wintersun . they similarly interpreted a movement from each season for peugeot car advertisements ( 2009 ) . önder sisters ( turkish twin sisters ) recorded a transcription of the concerti for two pianos by antun tomislav šaban . ferhan & ferzan discography '' vivaldi reflections '' , emi classics . retrieved on 23 june 2013 . banya ( south korea ) recorded a dance version of the '' winter '' concerto for the pump it up video game . susan osborn ( united states ) recorded a new-age vocal serenade based on the '' winter '' largo . susan osborn , '' winter/vivaldi '' , album '' still life '' ( pony canyon label ) . the charades ( finland ) recorded the presto from the '' summer '' concerto as '' summer twist '' , for surf guitar ensemble . the charades , '' vivaldi 's summer twist '' , album '' as hot as cool can be '' ( power records ) . an electronic cover of the same movement was recorded by takayuki ishikawa ( under the pseudonym dj taka ) with the title '' v '' for the rhythm game beatmania iidx 5th style . the song has become one of the most popular in the series , being included in every release since its debut . ; 2003 red priest ( uk ) recorded arrangements of the concerti for recorder . red priest 's '' four seasons '' ( dorian 90317 ) , allmusic listing . hayley westenra ( new zealand ) adapted the '' winter '' concerto into a song titled '' river of dreams '' which is sung in english . it was recorded for her pure album on july 10 . ; 2004 tafelmusik ( canada ) arranged a cross-cultural arts special based on the concerti , involving a chinese pipa , indian sarangi and inuit throat-singing . '' the four seasons mosaic '' dvd is paired with tafelmusik 's l'estro armonico cd , featured on vimeo ( producer 's channel ) . ; 2005 mỹ linh ( vietnamese singer ) adapted the '' winter '' concerto into a song titled '' mùa đông '' ( which means '' winter '' also ) on her album chat với mozart ( chat with mozart ) . dark moor ( spain ) recorded an electric-guitar version of the allegro non molto movement from the '' winter '' concerto ; this was later integrated into the finnish video game frets on fire . frets on fire '' dark moor 's winter '' , featured on youtube ( open source gameplay recording ) . ; 2006 juliette pochin ( wales ) performed on her debut album an operatic suite of sonnets set to the concerti . accentus chamber choir ( france ) recorded a choir version of the '' winter '' concerto . accentus '' transcriptions 2 '' , on discogs . stéphane lambiel ( switzerland ) performed his long program to a medley of the concerti to win the world figure skating championships . ; 2007 celtic woman ( ireland ) recorded the '' winter '' largo with vocals ( italian lyrics ) . celtic woman : a new journey , '' vivaldi 's rain '' . the youngest former member , chloë agnew , originally recorded it for her walking in the air album which was released in 2002 . percadu ( israel ) performed an arrangement of the allegro non molto movement from the '' winter '' concerto , for marimbas with chamber orchestra . percadu ( tomer yariv and adi morag ) , '' vivaldi , winter arr for marimbas '' , featured on youtube ( recording artist 's channel ) . mauro bigonzetti ( italy ) choreographed a ballet of the concerti for a french-canadian dance company . lesgrandsballets '' les quatre saisons '' , featured on youtube ( producer 's channel ) . tim slade ( australia ) directed 4 , a documentary which follows four classical violinists in their homelands ( of tokyo ; thursday island , new york ; and lapland ) , as they relate to vivaldi 's four seasons . tim slade '' 4 '' , listed on imdb . seoul metropolitan traditional music orchestra performed the concerti with arrangement for korean traditional music ( gugak ) orchestra by seong-gi kim . it was recorded live and released with cd from synnara music same year . information about cd '' 국악으로 듣는 비발디의 사계 ( in korean ) '' , on aladin communication inc . ; 2008 sveceny & dvorak ( czech republic ) produced both an album and stage production of world music based on the concerti . jaroslav sveceny & michal dvorak '' vivaldianno mmviii '' , featured on vimeo ( recording artist 's channel ) . yves custeau ( canada ) recorded a rock & roll '' one-man band '' version of the '' spring '' allegro . yves custeau '' vivaldi rock spring '' , featured on youtube ( recording artist 's channel ) . daisy jopling ( england/united states ) recorded a violin & hip-hop version of the allegro non molto movement from the '' winter '' concerto , and also performs it reggae-style . daisy jopling , '' winter ( hip hop ) '' , album '' key to the classics '' , '' winter ( reggae ) '' , featured on youtube ( recording artist 's channel ) . innesa tymochko ( ukraine ) performed her crossover version of the presto from the '' summer '' concerto , for violin . innesa tymochko , '' vivaldi 's storm '' , featured on youtube ( recording artist 's channel ) . wez bolton ( isle of man ) recorded a cover version of the allegro non molto movement from the '' winter '' concerto , based on the japanese video game '' beatmania '' remix . wez bolton , '' winter ( cover version ) '' , featured on youtube ( recording artist 's channel ) . patrick chan ( canada ) performed his long program to a medley of the concerti to win the canadian figure skating championships . patrick chan , '' 2008 nationals '' , featured on youtube ( channel for the skater ) . ; 2009 absynth against anguish ( romania ) produced an electronic ( trance ) version of the concerti . absynth against anguish '' the four seasons 2.0 '' , creative commons audio . riccardo arrighini ( italy ) recorded the concerti for solo piano , in a jazz style . riccardo arrighini , '' le quattro stagioni '' , album '' vivaldi in jazz '' . christophe monniot recorded ambient-jazz interpretations of the concerti . christophe monniot , '' vivaldi universel , saison 5 '' , cristal records ( cr 149 ) . christian blind ( france ) recorded a surf guitar/acid rock version of the allegro movement from the '' spring '' concerto . blindchris '' vivaldi dead springs '' , creative commons media . sodagreen ( taiwan ) launched their '' vivaldi project '' which resulted in a series of pop albums based on the concerti : spring/daylight , summer/fever , autumn/story and winter/endless . the project was completed in 2015 with the release of the fourth album . ; 2010 art color ballet ( poland ) performed their '' 4 elements '' show to the presto movement from the '' summer '' concerto , arranged by hadrian filip tabęcki ( kameleon ) . art color ballet '' vivaldi 4 elements '' , featured on youtube ( producer 's channel ) . david garrett ( germany ) recorded a crossover version of vivaldi 's winter ( allegro non molto ) , combining classical violin with modern rock music . david garrett '' vivaldi/vertigo '' , album '' rock symphonies '' , featured on vimeo ( producer 's channel ) . ; 2011 black smith ( russia ) performed the presto movement from the '' summer '' concerto in the style of thrash metal music ( likewise , this movement has been covered numerous times by aspiring electric guitar virtuosos , and other crossover musicians ) . black smith '' vivaldi tribute '' , against all odds ( dvd ) , featured on youtube ( recording artist 's channel ) . angels ( greece ) performed their crossover version of the same movement , scored for electric strings . angels ensembles , '' angels summer '' , featured on youtube ( recording artist 's channel ) . szentpeteri csilla ( hungary ) performed her crossover version of the same movement , scored for piano . szentpeteri csilla , '' storm – crossover '' , featured on youtube ( recording artist 's channel ) . leonel valbom ( portugal ) remixed the presto movement from the '' summer '' concerto with vst synths . leonel valbom , '' summer vivaldi '' , featured on soundcloud ( recording artist 's channel ) . tim kliphuis ( netherlands ) performed the allegro from the '' spring '' movement as a crossover of world-music styles . tim kliphuis '' spring – gypsy jazz and celtic version '' , '' live at iford manor '' ( dvd ) , featured on youtube ( recording artist 's channel ) . ; 2012 russian violinist olga kholodnaya and argentinian drummer marino colina arranged and recorded live in berlin a version for violin and drum kit . german-born british composer max richter created a postmodern and minimalist recomposition , recomposed by max richter : vivaldi - the four seasons . working with solo violinist daniel hope , richter discarded around 75 per cent of the original source material ; the album is 44 minutes long . aura ( japan ) recorded an a cappella arrangement of the concerti , and had also performed vivaldi 's spring chorus ( from dorilla in tempe ) on a prior album . aura discography '' le quattro stagioni '' , epic records ( escl 3932 ) . retrieved on 3 june 2013 . sinfonity ( spain ) performed the concerti for '' electric-guitar orchestra '' . sinfonity '' the four seasons '' , live in madrid , featured on vimeo ( recording artist 's channel ) . bachod chirmof ( usa ) produced a midi recording & animation of vivaldi 's winter ( movements i & iii ) . bachod chirmof , '' midi animation – vivaldi '' , featured on vimeo ( recording artist 's channel ) . tornado classic ( russia ) performed the presto movement from the '' summer '' concerto , with electric guitar and slap bass . tornado classic , '' vivaldi summer '' , featured on vimeo ( producer 's channel ) . the symphonic rock band trans-siberian orchestra used a portion of the first movement of the '' winter '' concerto in their song '' dreams of fireflies ( on a christmas night ) '' on their dreams of fireflies ep . the song also uses a portion of mozart 's '' der hölle rache kocht in meinem herzen , '' which it had used previously . ; 2013 richard galliano ( france ) recorded the concerti for accordion , as well as a few of his opera arias on the instrument . richard galliano , dg label '' vivaldi '' ( featured on artist 's site ) . vito paternoster ( italy ) recorded the concerti in the form of sonatas for cello . vito paternoster '' the four seasons in forma di sonata for cello '' ( '' baryton brt 006 '' , tracks featured on magnatune ) . periodic ( germany ) produced a megamix of the concerti , which incorporates electronica with samples of a classical recording . the periodic project & lennart wittenhagen '' vier jahreszeiten '' , featured on vimeo ( recording artist 's channel ) . steven buchanan ( usa ) produced a tetralogy of '' midseasons '' ( slow movements and corresponding sonnets ) from vivaldi 's program music . a vivaldi compendium '' midseasons '' , creative commons media , featured on youtube ( producer 's channel ) . ; 2014 the piano guys ( usa ) recorded an arrangement for piano and cello , a crossover between the '' winter '' concerto and '' let it go '' from the computer-animated film frozen . the piano guys - '' let it go ( disney 's '' frozen '' ) vivaldi winter '' , featured on youtube ( group 's channel ) . along with the original composition of '' winter '' included in fantasia : music evolved , there are also two mixes : the '' alt rock '' mix , and the '' steve porter '' mix . ; 2015 nihad hrustanbegovic ( the netherlands ) recorded the concerti for solo accordion on zefir records . zozimo rech and adrianne simioni ( brazil ) recorded the concerti on electric and acoustic guitar on the astronomusic label . lupe fiasco 's songs '' summer '' , '' fall '' , '' winter '' , & '' spring '' on his album tetsuo & youth reference the concerti . ; 2016 justin bird ( new zealand ) transcribed the concerti for solo piano . in april , violist david aaron carpenter recorded the concerti , arranged for viola and released with an arrangement of piazzolla 's estaciones porteñas and the four seasons of manhattan by alexey shor . . references . external links . free scores of the concerti at mutopia project an in-depth overview and comparison of recordings of the concerti on weta 90.9 's website