Radical Faeries

philosophy and ritual . their conference , set for labor day 1979 , was to be called the '' spiritual conference for radical fairies '' , hay and others switched to the older spelling , '' faeries '' , after 1979 . harry hay ( 1996 ) radically gay : gay liberation in the words of its founder , edited by will roscoe . with the term '' radical faerie '' having been coined by hay . the term '' radical '' was chosen to reflect both political extremity and the idea of '' root '' or '' essence '' , while the term '' faerie '' was chosen in reference both to the fairy and to the fact that '' fairy '' had become a pejorative slang term for gay men . initially , hay rejected the term '' movement '' when discussing the radical faeries , considering it to instead be a '' way of life '' for gay males , and he began referring to it as a '' not-movement '' . in organising the event , hay handled the political issues , burnside the logistics and mechanics , kilhefner the budgetary and administrative side , and walker was to be its spiritual leader . a flier , written by kilhefner , advertising the event was released and proclaimed that gays had a place in the '' paradigm shift '' of the new age , and quoted mark satin and aleister crowley alongside hay ; these fliers were sent out to gay and leftist bookstores as well as gay community centres and health food stores . around 220 men turned up to the event , despite the fact that the ashram could only accommodate around 75 . hay gave a welcoming speech in which he outlined his ideas regarding subject-subject consciousness , calling on those assembled to '' throw off the ugly green frogskin of hetero-imitation to find the shining faerie prince beneath '' . rather than being referred to as '' workshops '' , the events that took place were known as '' faerie circles '' , and were on such varied subjects as massage , nutrition , local botany , healing energy , the politics of gay enspiritment , english country dancing , and auto-fellatio . those assembled took part in spontaneous rituals , providing invocations to spirits and performing blessings and chants , with most participants discarding the majority of their clothes , instead wearing feathers , beads , and bells , and decorating themselves in rainbow makeup . many reported feeling a change of consciousness during the event , which one person there described as '' a four day lsd trip & ndash ; without the acid ! '' . on the final night of the gathering , they put together a performance of the symmetricon , an invention of burnside 's , while hay gave a farewell speech . growth , friction , and split : 1979 & ndash ; 80 . after hay and the others returned to los angeles , they received messages of thanks from various participants , many of whom asked when the next faerie gathering would be . hay decided to found a faerie circle in los angeles that met at their house , which became known as '' faerie central '' , devoting half their time to serious discussion and the other half to recreation , in particular english circle dancing . as more joined the circle , they began meeting in west hollywood 's first presbyterian church and then the olive grove atop the hill at barnsdall park ; however they found it difficult to gain the same change of consciousness that had been present at the rural gathering . the group began to discuss what the faerie movement was developing into ; hay encouraged them to embark on political activism , using marxism and his subject-subject consciousness theory as a framework for bringing about societal change . others however wanted the movement to focus on spirituality and exploring the psyche , lambasting politics as part of '' the straight world '' . another issue of contention was over what constituted a '' faery '' ; hay had an idealized image of what someone with '' gay consciousness '' thought and acted like , and turned away some prospective members of the circle because he disagreed with their views . one prospective member , the gay theatre director john callaghan , joined the circle in february 1980 , but was soon ejected by hay after he voiced concern about hostility toward heterosexuals among the group . the second faerie gathering took place in august 1980 in estes park near boulder , colorado . twice as long and almost twice as large as the first , it became known as faery woodstock . it also exhibited an increasing influence from the u.s . pagan movement , as faeries incorporated elements from evans ' witchcraft and the gay counterculture and starhawk 's the spiral dance into their practices . at that gathering , dennis melba'son presented a shawl that he had created with a crocheted depiction of the northwest european iron age deity cernunnos on it ; the shawl became an important symbol of the faeries , and would be sent from gathering to gathering over subsequent decades . there , hay publicly revealed the founding trio 's desire for the creation of a permanent residential faerie community , where they could grow their own crops and thus live self-sustainably . this project would involve setting up a non-profit corporation to purchase property under a community land trust with tax-exempt status . they were partly inspired by a pre-existing gay collective in rural tennessee , short mountain . the gathering was also attended by an increasing number of men from outside of america , particularly canada , but also from australia , norway , france and germany , many of whom returned to their countries of origin to establish faerie communes , such as the wellington boot , common ground etc . in australia . there was some antagonism between hay and walker from the beginning of their venture , due to walker 's concern about addressing unconscious power issues , '' the shadow , '' in his preferred jungian psychological orientation ; walker saw analytical psychology as central to his world view and believed that it could be utilized to aid the gay movement , whereas hay was disdainful of it . as the los angeles circle grew , kilhefner also became annoyed with hay over the latter 's tendency to dominate conversations both in and out of the circle , as well as his proselytizing attitude . in 1980 walker , frustrated with hay 's dominating personality , formed the '' faerie fascist police '' on the outskirts to combat '' faerie fascism '' and '' power-tripping '' within the faeries . he specifically targeted hay : '' i recruited people to spy on harry and see when he was manipulating people , so we could undo his undermining of the scene . '' at a winter 1980 gathering in southern oregon designed to discuss acquiring land for a faerie sanctuary , walker brought his close friend , chris kilbourne , and two other members , sai and david , brought ion . hay , kilhefner and burnside were outraged at being challenged with having a closed circle and acted as if kilbourne and ion did not exist , a terribly difficult situation for them , especially as ten people were holed-up in a small house in the pouring rain , for six days . finally , kilbourne could n't take the hypocrisy of the three leaders and confronted harry about the power dynamics within the core circle . in the ensuing conflict , the core circle splintered . plans for the land sanctuary stalled and a separate circle formed . the core circle made an attempt to reconcile , but at a meeting that came to be known as '' bloody sunday '' , kilhefner quit , accusing hay and burnside of '' power tripping '' , along with walker . walker and kilhefner formed a new los angeles-based gay spiritual group called treeroots which promoted a form of rural gay consciousness associated with jungian psychology and ceremonial magic . however , despite the division among its founders , the radical faerie movement continued to grow , largely as a result of its anti-authoritarian structure , with many participants being unaware of the conflict regarding disowned power agendas . walker and kilbourne also continued to be involved in southern california gatherings for many years , occasionally offering workshops on the problem of the shadow , stirring up controversy due to many participants ' difficulty with their message . an effort to exclude walker and kilbourne was controversially attempted in the early 1990s and , to this day some individuals , including kilhefner attempt to erase walker from his pivotal role in the original organizing efforts . hay himself continued to be welcomed at gatherings , coming to be seen as an wikt : statesman in some peoples ' eyes , and a patronized mascot in others . continued growth : 1981 & ndash ; present . the first faerie gathering in australia was held in january 1981 , at tony newman 's whole earth dream farm near ourimbah ( established in 1974 ) , inspired by the reporting of the second faerie gathering in colorado by rfd , and held in conjunction with sydney 's gay men 's rap , although this first gathering did not generate any ongoing faerie activity . a subsequent and unconnected faerie gathering was held on 9–12 april 1982 , at mandala , a gay spiritual commune established near uki in northern nsw in 1974 by david johnstone . this second gathering included faeries who had attended the second and third gatherings in the united states , and led to continued growth of the radical faeries in australia , and repeated attempts to establish faerie communes , such as common ground ( clarence river valley ) , and eventually the ongoing commune faerieland , near nimbin , nsw . guided by mica kindman , lloyd fair , cass brayton , and will roscoe , the san francisco faerie circle had formed a non-profit corporation under the name of nomenus ( varyingly interpreted as '' no men us '' , '' no menace '' , and '' no menus '' ) , supported by hay . they raised enough money to put a down payment on some land from a 1983 gathering in napa , however decided against forming a self-sufficient community , instead choosing to purchase a smaller piece of land that could be stationed by a few caretakers and which could house regular gatherings . in 1987 they purchased magdalene farm & ndash ; an 80-acre property near grant 's pass , oregon & ndash ; from george jalbert , who has unsuccessfully hoped to establish his own rural gay commune there over the preceding decade . throughout the 1980s the radical faerie movement had spread out from the united states and had gatherings in canada , australia , the united kingdom , and italy , as well as folleterre in france . black leather wings is an organization for spiritual gay leather folk affiliated with the radical faeries . the san francisco south of market leather history alley includes bronze boot prints that honor 28 people important to the local leather communities , including mark thompson , a co-founder of black leather wings , and alexis sorel , a black leather wings member . ringold alley leather memoir . sanctuaries and gatherings . rural land or urban buildings where faeries come together to live a communal life are called sanctuaries ' , morgensen , scott . 2009 . '' back and forth to the land : negotiating rural and urban sexuality among the radical faeries . '' in ellen lewin and william l . leap eds . out in public : reinventing lesbian / gay anthropology in a globalizing world : readings in engaged anthropology . john wiley and sons . , . which may host gatherings from time to time . . cultural influence . participants at the 1979 faerie gathering helped establish the sisters of perpetual indulgence in san francisco that same year . a sistory : blow by blow history of the faeries , with murray edelman , joey cain , and agnes de garron ; transcribed from the 2nd annual philly faerie gatherette , 15 january 2012 in the late 1990s faeries sustained the new york city drag march , an activist event held the friday before the corporate-sponsored nyc pride march . the drag march began in 1994 in response to attempts to ban leather and drag during festivities marking the 25th anniversary of the stonewall riots . queer as folk episode queer as folk ( season 4 ) features a storyline where the characters emmett and michael attend a rural gathering to discover their '' inner faerie . '' faeries were a contributing influence to the 2006 john cameron mitchell film shortbus , including the casting of performance artist justin vivian bond . taylor mac invokes '' radical faerie realness ritual '' during performances . . see also . lgbt themes in mythology religion and lgbt people running water farm , site of several faerie gatherings between 1978 and 1989 subject-subject consciousness , concept proposed by harry hay modern pagan views on lgbt people pink capitalism . bibliography . . republished in thompson ( 1987 ) . gunny catell : rise like a faerie . vienna , eigenverlag , 2015 , gunny catell : zuhören . listen without prejudice . listen to the earth . vienna , eigenverlag , 2019 , . periodicals . r.f.d . , often dubbed the radical faerie digest white crane , a journal of gay wisdom & culture . notes . . references . works cited . . external links . radfae , web portal for faerie-related resources including local circles beginnings of a movement , personal recollections from men involved in early days of the faeries ( and the sisters ) faerie tales ( 1992 ) documentary short by philippe roques radical faeries at the short mountain sanctuary ( 2006 ) storycorps segment for nashville public radio