Recumbent bicycle

description . recumbents can be categorized by their wheelbase , wheel sizes , steering system , faired or unfaired , and front-wheel or rear-wheel drive . wheelbase . long-wheelbase ( lwb ) models have the pedals located between the front and rear wheels ; short-wheelbase ( swb ) models have the pedals in front of the front wheel ; compact long-wheelbase ( clwb ) models have the pedals either very close to the front wheel or above it . within these categories are variations , intermediate types , and even convertible designs ( lwb to clwb ) – there is no '' standard '' recumbent . wheel sizes . the rear wheel of a recumbent is usually behind the rider and may be any size , from around to the 700c ( or 27 '' on some older models , as on upright road bikes of that time ) of an upright racing cycle . the front wheel is commonly smaller than the rear , although a number of recumbents feature dual 26-inch ( iso 559 ) , iso 571 ( 650c ) , iso 622 ( 700c ) , or even 29 x 4 '' oversize all-terrain tires . given the higher rolling resistance of the smaller front wheel , loss of steering and control are somewhat more likely attempting sharp or quick changes of direction while crossing over patches of loose dirt , sand or pebbles . larger diameter wheels generally have lower rolling resistance but a higher profile leading to higher air resistance . high-racer aficionados also claim that they are more stable , and although it is easier to balance a bicycle with a higher center of mass , the wide variety of recumbent designs makes such generalizations unreliable . another advantage of both wheels being the same size is that the bike requires only one size of inner tube . one common arrangement is an iso 559 ( 26-inch ) rear wheel and an iso 406 or iso 451 ( 20-inch ) front wheel . the small front wheel and large rear wheel combination is used to keep the pedals and front wheel clear of each other , avoiding the problem on a short wheelbase recumbent called '' heel strike '' ( where the rider 's heels catch the wheel in tight turns ) . a pivoting-boom front-wheel drive ( pbfwd aka moving bottom bracket recumbent ) configuration also overcomes heel strike since the pedals and front wheel turn together . pbfwd bikes may have dual wheels or larger . steering . steering for recumbent bikes can be generally categorized as over-seat ( oss ) or above seat steering ( ass ) ; under-seat ( uss ) ; or center steering or pivot steering . oss/ass is generally direct—the steerer acts on the front fork like a standard bicycle handlebar—but the bars themselves may extend well behind the front wheel ( more like a tiller ) ; alternatively the bars might have long rearward extensions ( sometimes known as superman or kingcycle bars ) . chopper-style bars are sometimes seen on lwb bikes . uss is usually indirect—the bars link to the headset through a system of rods or cables and possibly a bell crank . most tadpole trikes are uss . center steered or pivot steered recumbents , such as flevobikes and pythons , may have no handlebars at all . in addition , some trikes such as the sidewinder have used rear-wheel steer , instead of the more common front-wheel steer . they can provide good maneuverability at low speeds , but have been reported to be potentially unstable at speeds above . . drive . most recumbents have the cranks attached to a boom fixed to the frame , with a long drive chain for rear wheel drive . however , due to the proximity of the crank to the front wheel , front wheel drive ( fwd ) can be an option , and it allows for a much shorter chain . one style requires the chain to twist slightly to allow for steering . another style , pivoting-boom fwd ( pbfwd ) , has the crankset connected to and moving with the front fork . in addition to the much shorter chain , the advantages to pbfwd are use of a larger front wheel for lower rolling resistance without heel strike ( you can pedal while turning ) and use of the upper body when sprinting or climbing . the main disadvantage to all fwd designs is '' wheelspin '' when climbing steep hills covered with loose gravel , wet grass , etc . this mainly affects off-road riders , and can be ameliorated by shifting the weight forward , applying steady pressure to the pedals , and using tires with more aggressive tread . another disadvantage of pbfwd for some riders is a slightly longer '' learning curve '' due to adaptation to the pedal-steer effect ( forces applied to the pedal can actually steer the bike ) . beginner riders tend to swerve along a serpentine path until they adapt a balanced pedal motion . after adaptation , a pbfwd recumbent can be ridden in as straight a line as any other bike , and can even be steered accurately with the feet only . cruzbike is the only pbfwd recumbent currently in production , and features a traditional steering axis similar to most standard and recumbent bikes . flevobike formerly produced a center-steered fwd bike similar to the python lowracer . yet another drive-train variation is on rowing cycles where the rider rows using arms and legs . fully suspended bikes . modern recumbent bikes are increasingly being fitted with front and rear suspension systems for increased comfort and traction on rough surfaces . coil , elastomer , and air-sprung suspension systems have all been used on recumbent bikes , with oil or air-damping in the forks and rear shock absorbers . the maturation of fully suspended conventional mountain bikes has aided the development of these designs , which often use many of the same parts , suitably modified for recumbent use . fairings . some riders fit their bikes with aerodynamic devices called fairings . these can reduce aerodynamic drag and help keep the rider warmer and drier in cold and wet weather . fairings are also available for upright bikes , but are much less common . fully enclosed bikes and trikes are considered velomobiles . seats . the seats themselves are either of mesh stretched tightly over a frame or foam cushions over hard shells like the stinger pictured , which might be moulded or assembled from sheet materials . hard-shell seats predominate in europe , mesh seats in the usa . variations . mountain bike recumbents . with the right equipment and design , recumbent bikes can be used for riding unpaved roads and offroad , just as with conventional mountain bikes . because of their longer wheelbase and the manner in which the rider is confined to the seat , recumbents are not as easy to use on tight , curving unpaved singletrack . large-diameter wheels , mountain gearing and off-road specific design have been used since 1999 . crank forward designs that facilitate climbing out of the saddle , such as the rans dynamik , also can be used off-road . . lowracers . lowracers are a type of recumbent more common in europe among racing enthusiasts . these typically have two 20 '' wheels or a 26 '' wheel at the rear and 20 '' wheel at the front . the seat is positioned between the wheels rather than above them . the extreme reclined position , and the fact that the rider is sitting in line with the wheels rather than atop them , makes this type the most aerodynamic of unfaired recumbents . highracers . highracers are distinguished by using two large wheels ( usually iso 559 , 650c or 700c ) . this necessitates a higher bottom bracket than on a lowracer so that the rider 's legs are above the front wheel , and this in turn requires a higher seat . the seating position may be otherwise identical to that on a lowracer allowing similar aerodynamics . '' racer '' in the name implies that this will often be the case , since these bikes strive for speed . highracers are generally more maneuverable than lowracers since their higher center of mass make them easier to balance at lower speeds . given the same seating position they may be faster than lowracers , since it is widely believed that rolling resistance is inversely proportional to wheel diameter . however , lowracer proponents reply that their design is faster due to aerodynamics . the reasoning is that the riders body is in line with the wheels , reducing drag . hip and elbow injuries are more common on highracers than on lowracers due to the greater height from which the rider can fall . however , the injuries are very rare and seldom serious . semi-recumbent and crank forward bicycles . bicycles that use positions intermediate between a conventional upright and a recumbent are called semi-recumbent or crank forward designs . these generally are intended for casual use and have comfort and ease of use as primary objectives , with aerodynamics sacrificed for this purpose . tandem recumbents . just as with upright bicycles , recumbents are built and marketed with more than one seat , thus combining the advantages of recumbents with those of tandem bicycles . in order to keep the wheelbase from being any longer than absolutely necessary , tandem recumbents often place the stoker 's crankset under the captain 's seat . a common configuration for two riders in the recumbent position is the sociable tandem , wherein the two riders ride side by side . there are also hybrid recumbent designs such as the hase pino allround that utilize a recumbent stoker in the front , and an upright pilot in the rear . recumbent tricycles . recumbent tricycles ( trikes ) are closely related to recumbent bicycles , but have three wheels instead of two . handcycles . in order to accommodate paraplegics and other individuals with little or no use of their legs , many manufacturers have designed and released hand-powered recumbent trikes , or handcycles . handcycles are a regular sight at hpv meetings and are beginning to be seen on the streets . they usually follow a delta design with front wheels driven by standard dérailleur gearing powered by hand cranks . brake levers are usually mounted on the hand holds , which are usually set with no offset rather than the 180° of pedal cranks . the entire crank assembly and the front wheel turn together , allowing the rider to steer and crank simultaneously . although arms are weaker than legs , many hand cyclists are able to make use of the power of the whole upper body . a good hand cyclist can still achieve a respectable pace in competitions . handcycles have also been used for touring , though few designers incorporate mudguards or luggage racks . also , the gear ratios of standard handcycles tend to be less useful for long steep climbs . hand-and-foot recumbent tricycles . recumbent cycles offer the possibility of combined hand and foot power inputs , and thus the potential for a full-body workout , and the option for persons with a weak or missing leg ( s ) to power a cycle . in one recumbent tricycle design the user makes the two front wheels change direction by shifting his center of weight , and moves forward by rotating the rear wheel . there are also hybrids between a handcycle , a recumbent bike and a tricycle ; these bikes enable cycling by use of legs , despite a spinal cord injury . recumbent quadracycles . recumbent four-wheel cycles have the same general advantages of tricycles . for quadracycles with only one seat the stability improvements of the fourth wheel offer only a marginal advantage over a tadpole recumbent tricycle . more wheels introduce more weight and more complexity . the fourth wheel is only of the most benefit to the single-seat rider when going off-road . when two and sometimes four riders want to ride together in a sociable configuration the four-wheel recumbent cycle is a viable option . . homebuilts . as with upright bikes , there is a subculture of recumbent builders who design and build home-built recumbents . often these are assembled of parts from other bikes , particularly mountain bikes . the frame designs may be as simple as a long steel tube bent into the appropriate shape , or as elaborate as hand-built carbon fiber frames . for many builders , the engineering and construction of the bikes is as much of a challenge as riding them . folding . several manufacturers offer folding recumbents to facilitate packing and travelling . . couplers . it is possible to add couplers either during manufacturing or as a retrofit so that the frame can be disassembled into smaller pieces to facilitate packing and travel . stationary recumbents . as well as road-going recumbent bicycles with wheels , stationary versions also exist . these are often found in gyms but are also available for home use . like a regular stationary exercise bike , these stay in one place and the user pedals against some kind of resistance mechanism such as a fan or alternator but in a recumbent position . these have the same comfort advantages as road-going recumbents . stationary recumbents almost always have a fairly upright seat and the pedal crank is lower than the level of the seat . the seat is normally adjustable and is adjusted by sliding it along a rail . . compared to uprights . there are striking differences between recumbents and upright bikes . since recumbents vary widely , the advantages and disadvantages listed below may apply to different types to different degrees or not at all . ( for example , balance is not a concern with tricycles . ) . history . recumbent bicycle designs date back to the middle of the 19th century . several designs were patented around 1900 , but these early designs were unsuccessful . early recumbents . recumbent designs of both prone and supine varieties can be traced back to the earliest days of the bicycle . before the shape of the bicycle settled down following starley 's safety bicycle , there was a good deal of experimentation with various arrangements , and this included designs which might be considered recumbent . although these dated back to the 1860s the first recorded illustration of a recumbent considered as a separate class of bicycle is considered to be in the magazine fliegende blätter of 10 september 1893 . this year also saw what is considered the first genuine recumbent , the fautenil vélociped . patent applications for a number of recumbent designs exist in the late years of the 19th century , and there were discussions in the cycling press of the relative merits of different layouts . the challand designs of 1897 and the american brown of 1901 are both recognisable as forerunners of today 's recumbents . the mochet 'vélo-velocar ' and 'vélorizontal' . a four-wheeled , two-seater , pedal-propelled car called the 'velocar ' was built in the 1930s by france inventor and light car builder charles mochet . velocars sold well to french buyers who could not afford a motor car , possibly because of a poor economy during the great depression . the four-wheeled velocars were fast but did n't corner well at high speed . mochet then experimented with a three-wheel design and finally a mould-breaking two-wheel design based on the vélocar technology . the early models of mochet 's 'la bicyclette de l'avenir ' ( the bicycle of the future ) , the 'vélo-vélocar ' , or ' v-v ' as the factory referred to them , used a 40mm steel-tube , single-beam frame and 450 x 55 wheels with handlebars over the rider and steering torque transmitted by bevel gears . various types of mochet-designed derailleur gears were fitted , with a single gear for the track models . gears were mid-mounted using primary and secondary chains . the back-rest was adjustable on more sporting models . to demonstrate the speed of his recumbent bicycle , mochet had the design ratified by the uci and uvf and enlisted cyclist francis faure , a category 2 racer , to ride it in races . faure was highly successful , defeating many of europe 's top cyclists both on the track and in road races , and setting new world records at short distances . another cyclist , paul morand , won the paris-limoges race in 1933 on one of mochet 's recumbents . on 7 july 1933 , at a paris velodrome , faure rode a modified vélo-velocar in one hour , beating an almost 20-year-old hour record held by oscar egg , and attracting a great deal of attention . when the union cycliste internationale ( uci ) met in february 1934 , manufacturers of 'upright ' bicycles lobbied to have faure 's one-hour record declared invalid . on 1 april 1934 , the uci published a new definition of a racing bicycle that specified how high the bottom bracket could be above the ground , how far it could be in front of the seat and how close it could be to the front wheel . the new definition effectively banned recumbents from uci events for a combination of tradition , safety , and economic reasons . charles mochet died a short time after the ban was enacted , still protesting against the uci decision , and the firm continued to make recumbents under his widow and , later , georges mochet until at least 1941 for a limited number of customers . their final versions were a single-chain design named the 'vélorizontal ' , the final model using a 'cyclo ' four-speed gear . after the uci decision , faure continued to race , and consistently beat upright bicycles with the velocar . in 1938 , faure and mochet 's son , georges , began adding fairings to the velocar in hopes of bettering the world record of one hour for a bicycle with aerodynamic components . on 5 march 1938 , faure rode a faired velocar 50.537 kilometers in an hour and became the first cyclist to travel more than 50 kilometers in an hour without the aid of a derny . the uci ban on recumbent bicycles and other aerodynamic improvements virtually stopped development of recumbents for four decades and remains in force . although recumbent designs continued to crop up over the years they were mainly the work of lone enthusiasts and numbers remained insignificant until the 1970s . georges mochet died in 2008 . 1970s resurgence and the ihpva . while developments had been made in this fallow period by paul rinkowski and others , the modern recumbent movement was given a boost in 1969 when the ground hugger by robert riley was featured in popular mechanics . there was also the work of chester kyle and particularly david gordon wilson of mit , two americans who opposed the uci restrictions and continued to work on fairings and recumbents . in 1974 , they also nucleated the international human power speed championship in long beach , california , from which the ihpva grew . kyle and his students had been experimenting with fairings for upright bicycles , also banned by the uci . in 1975 the brothers john and randy schlitter started producing recumbents at their company , rans , and became the first u.s . company to do so . in 1978 , the '' vélérique '' is the very first commercialized recumbent bicycle ( fully faired ) , by the belgian erik abergen . the avatar 2000 , a lwb bike very much like the current easy racers products , arrived in 1979 . it was featured in the 1983 film brainstorm , ridden by christopher walken , and in the popular cycling reference richard 's bicycle book by richard ballantine . from 1983 to 1991 steven roberts toured the u.s . in a modified avatar , pulling a trailer with solar panels and a laptop , gaining press coverage and writing the book computing across america . a faired avatar 2000 was the first two-wheeler to beat the european vector three-wheeler in the streamliner races . for about ten years afterward , speed records were exchanged between easy racers with freddy markham in the cockpit and the lightning team . so america 's strength became the flying 200 meter sprint in the streamliner division . the oil crises of the 1970s sparked a resurgence in cycling coincident with the arrival of these '' new '' designs . a parallel but somewhat separate scene grew up in europe , with the first european human power championships being held in 1983 . the european scene was more dominated by competition than was the us , with the result that european bikes are more likely to be low swb machines , while lwb are much more popular in the us ( although there have been some notable european lwb bikes , such as the peer gynt ) . in the 1980s . in 1984 , linear recumbents of iowa began producing bicycles . in 2002 , linear manufacturing 's assets were bought by bicycle man llc and moved to new york . since then owner peter stull has been working with senior engineering students at alfred university , local engineers and machinists utilizing available technology including computer fea testing to improve their recumbent bikes . in the uk in the 1980s , the most publicised recumbent cycle in the uk was the delta configuration , sometime electrically powered sinclair c5 . although sold as an '' electric car '' , the c5 could be characterised as a recumbent tricycle with electrical assistance . a study by bussolari and nadel ( 1989 ) led them to pick a recumbent riding position for the daedalus flight even though the english channel crossing was accomplished in the gossamer albatross with an upright position . drela in 1998 confirmed '' that there was no significant difference in power output between recumbent and conventional bicycling . '' . in the 2000s . three of the largest recumbent manufacturers in the us went out of business after the 1990s , including bikee ( august 2002 ) , atp-vision ( early 2004 ) and burley design cooperative ( september 2006 ) . performance . over distances recumbent bicycles outperform upright bicycles as evidenced by their dominance in ultra-distance events like 24 hours at sebring . official speed records for recumbents are governed by the rules of the international human powered vehicle association . a number of records are recognised , the fastest of which is the '' flying 200 m '' , a distance of 200 & nbsp ; m on level ground from a flying start with a maximum allowable tailwind of 1.66 & nbsp ; m/s . the current record is , set by sebastiaan bowier of the netherlands in a fully faired front-wheel-drive recumbent lowracer bicycle designed by the delft university of technology and the vu university amsterdam . the official record for an upright bicycle under ihpva-legal conditions ( but at sea level , not high altitude ) is set by jim glover in 1986 with an english-made moulton bicycle with a usa-made hardshell fairing around him and the bike . the ihpva hour record is , set by sam whittingham on 19 july 2009 . the equivalent record for an upright bicycle is , set by victor campenaerts in 2019 . the uci no longer considers the bike chris boardman rode for his 1996 record to be in compliance with its definition of an upright bicycle . boardman 's monocoque bike was designed by mike burrows , whose windcheetah recumbent trike ( see above ) also holds the record from land 's end to john o ' groats , in 41 h 4 min 22 s with andy wilkinson riding . in 2003 , rob english took on and beat the uk 4-man pursuit champions vc st raphael in a 4000 & nbsp ; m challenge race at reading , beating them by a margin of 4 min 55.5 s to 5 min 6.87 s – and dropping one of the st raphael riders along the way . in 2009 team rans won the race across america ( raam ) on recumbents .