Korean name

usage . forms of address . the usage of names is governed by strict norms in traditional korean society . it is generally considered rude to address people by their given names in korean culture . this is particularly the case when dealing with adults or one 's elders . the northern forum ( 2006 ) , p.29 . it is acceptable to call someone by his or her given name if he or she is the same age as the speaker . however , it is considered rude to use someone 's given name if that person 's age is a year older than the speaker . this is often a source of pragmatic difficulty for learners of korean as a foreign language , and for korean learners of western languages . a variety of replacements are used for the actual name of the person . it is acceptable among adults of similar status to address the other by their full name , with the suffix ssi ( 氏 , 씨 ) added . however , it is inappropriate to address someone by the surname alone , even with such a suffix . ri 2005 , p.182 . whenever the person has an official rank , it is typical to address him or her by the name of that rank ( such as '' manager '' ) , often with the honorific nim ( 님 ) added . in such cases , the full name of the person may be appended , although this can also imply the speaker is of higher status . among children and close friends , it is common to use a person 's birth name . traditional nicknames . among the common people , who have suffered from high child mortality , children were often given an amyeong ( childhood name ) , to wish them long lives by avoiding notice from the messenger of death . these sometimes-insulting nicknames are used sparingly for children today . naver encyclopedia , nickname ( 별명 , 別名 ) . after marriage , women usually lost their amyeong , and were called by a taekho , referring to their town of origin . in addition , teknonymy , or referring to parents by their children 's names , is a common practice . it is most commonly used in referring to a mother by the name of her eldest child , as in '' cheolsu 's mom '' ( 철수 엄마 ) . however , it can be extended to either parent and any child , depending upon the context . hwang ( 1991 ) , p.9 . . gender . korean given names ' correlation to gender is complex , and by comparison to european languages less consistent . ask a korean , it 's not just that they all look the same , 4 august 2008 certain sino-korean syllables carry masculine connotations , others feminine , and others unisex . these connotations may vary depending on whether the character is used as the first or second character in the given name . a dollimja generational marker , once confined to male descendants but now sometimes used for women as well , may further complicate gender identification . native korean given names show similar variation . a further complication in korean text is that the singular pronoun used to identify individuals has no gender . hee-geun yoon , seng-bae park , yong-jin han , sang-jo lee , '' determining gender of korean names with context , '' alpit , pp.121-126 , 2008 international conference on advanced language processing and web information technology , 2008 this means that automated translation often misidentifies or fails to identify individuals ' gender in korean text and thus presents stilted or incorrect english output . ( conversely , english source text is similarly missing information about social status and age critical to smooth korean-language rendering . ) children traditionally take their father 's family name . nahm , andrew c . ( 1988 ) . korea : tradition and transformation — a history of the korean people . elizabeth , nj : hollym international . under south korean civil law effective 1 january 2008 , though , children may be legally given the last name of either parent or even that of a step-parent . park , chung-a , children can adopt mothers surname , the korean times , 3 june 2007 . history . the use of names has evolved over time . the first recording of korean names appeared as early as in the early three kingdoms period . the adoption of chinese characters contributed to korean names . a complex system , including courtesy names and pen names , as well as posthumous names and childhood names , arose out of confucian tradition . the courtesy name system in particular arose from the classic of rites , a core text of the confucian canon . lee , hong-jik ( 1983 ) , p.1134 . during the three kingdoms period , native given names were sometimes composed of three syllables like misaheun ( 미사흔 ) and sadaham ( 사다함 ) , which were later transcribed into hanja ( 未斯欣 , 斯多含 ) . the use of family names was limited to kings in the beginning , but gradually spread to aristocrats and eventually to most of the population . do ( 1999 ) , sec . 2 . some recorded family names are apparently native korean words , such as toponym . at that time , some characters of korean names might have been read not by their sino-korean pronunciation , but by their native reading . for example , the native korean name of yeon gaesomun ( 연개소문 ; 淵蓋蘇文 ) , the first grand prime minister of goguryeo , can linguistically be reconstructed as '' eol kasum '' ( / älkasum/ ) . chang , sekyung , phonetic and phonological study on the different transcriptions of the same personal names , seoul : dongguk university ( 1990 ) . early silla names are also believed to represent old korean vocabulary ; for example , bak hyeokgeose , the name of the founder of silla , was pronounced something like '' bulgeonuri '' ( 弗矩內 ) , which can be translated as '' bright world '' . do ( 1999 ) , sec . 3 . in older traditions , if the name of a baby is not chosen by the third trimester , the responsibility of choosing the name fell to the oldest son of the family . often , this was the preferred method as the name chosen was seen as good luck . according to the chronicle samguk sagi , family names were bestowed by kings upon their supporters . for example , in 33 ce , king yuri gave the six headmen of saro ( later silla ) the names lee ( 이 ) , bae ( 배 ) , choi ( 최 ) , jeong ( 정 ) , son ( 손 ) and seol ( 설 ) . however , this account is not generally credited by modern historians , who hold that confucian-style surnames as above were more likely to have come into general use in the fifth and subsequent centuries , as the three kingdoms increasingly adopted the chinese model . do ( 1999 ) . only a handful of figures from the three kingdoms period are recorded as having borne a courtesy name , such as seol chong . the custom only became widespread in the goryeo period , as confucianism took hold among the literati . naver encyclopedia , 자 字 . seol chong 's courtesy name , chongji ( 총지 ) is reported in the samguk sagi , yeoljeon 6 , '' seol chong '' . in 1055 , goryeo established a new law limiting access to the civil service examination to those with family names . for men of the aristocratic yangban class , a complex system of alternate names emerged by the joseon period . on the other hand , commoners typically only had a first name . surnames were originally a privilege reserved for the yangban class , but members of the jungin and common classes of joseon society frequently paid to acquire a surname from a yangban and be included into a clan ; this practice became rampant by the 18th century , leading to a significant growth in the yangban class but conversely diluting and weakening its social dominance . for instance , in the region of daegu , the yangban who had comprised 9.2 % of daegu 's demographics in 1690 rose to 18.7 % in 1729 , 37.5 % in 1783 , and 70.3 % in 1858 . it was not until the gabo reform of 1894 that members of the outcast class were allowed to adopt a surname . according to a census called the minjeokbu ( 民籍簿 ) completed in 1910 , more than half of the korean population did not have a surname at the time . for a brief period after the mongol invasion of korea during the goryeo dynasty , korean kings and aristocrats had both mongolian and sino-korean names . the scions of the ruling class were sent to the yuan court for schooling . lee ( 1984 ) , p.156 . for example , king gongmin had both the mongolian name bayan temür ( 伯顏帖木兒 ) and the sino-korean name wang gi ( 王祺 ) ( later renamed wang jeon ( 王顓 ) ) . lee , hong-jik ( 1983 ) , p.117 . during the korea under japanese rule of korea ( 1910–1945 ) , koreans were forced to adopt japanese-language names . u.s . library of congress , korea under japanese rule . koreans also voluntarily adopted japanese family names . even today , it is common for korean nationals living in japan to use japanese family names unofficially . this practice is called tsumei ( 通名 ) . in 1939 , as part of governor-general jiro minami 's policy of cultural assimilation ( 同化政策 ; dōka seisaku ) , ordinance no . 20 ( commonly called the '' name order '' , or sōshi-kaimei ( 創氏改名 ) in japanese ) was issued , and became law in april 1940 . nahm ( 1996 ) , p.223 . see also empas , '' 창씨개명 '' . although the japanese governor-general officially prohibited compulsion , low-level officials effectively forced koreans to adopt japanese-style family and given names . by 1944 , about 84 % of the population had registered japanese family names . sōshi ( japanese ) means the creation of a japanese family name ( shi , korean ssi ) , distinct from a korean family name or seong ( japanese sei ) . japanese family names represent the families they belong to and can be changed by marriage and other procedures , while korean family names represent paternal linkages and are unchangeable . japanese policy dictated that koreans either could register a completely new japanese family name unrelated to their korean surname , or have their korean family name , in japanese form , automatically become their japanese name if no surname was submitted before the deadline . empas , '' 창씨개명 '' . after the liberation of korea from japanese rule , the name restoration order ( 조선 성명 복구령 ; 朝鮮姓名復舊令 ) was issued on october 23 , 1946 , by the united states military administration south of the 38th parallel north , enabling koreans to restore their original korean names if they wished . japanese conventions of creating given names , such as using '' 子 '' ( japanese ko and korean ja ) in feminine names , is seldom seen in present-day korea , both north and south . in the north , a campaign to eradicate such japanese-based names was launched in the 1970s . in the south , and presumably in the north as well , these names are regarded as old and unsophisticated . romanization and pronunciation . in english-speaking nations , the three most common family names are often written and pronounced as '' kim '' ( 김 ) , '' lee '' ( south ) or '' rhee '' ( north ) ( 이 , 리 ) , and '' park '' ( 박 ) . the initial sound in '' kim '' shares features with both the english ' k ' ( in initial position , an aspirated voiceless velar stop ) and '' hard g '' ( an unaspirated voiced velar stop ) . when pronounced initially , kim starts with an unaspirated voiceless velar stop sound ; it is voiceless like , but also unaspirated like . as aspiration is a distinctive feature in korean but voicing is not , '' gim '' is more likely to be understood correctly . however , '' kim '' is used as romanized name in both north and south korea . yonhap ( 2004 ) , 484–536 and 793–800 , passim . the family name '' lee '' is romanized as 리 ( ri ) in north korea and as 이 ( i ) in south korea . in the former case , the initial sound is a liquid consonant . there is no distinction between the alveolar liquids and , which is why '' lee '' and '' rhee '' are both common spellings . in south korea , the pronunciation of the name is simply the english vowel sound for a '' long e '' , as in 'see ' . this pronunciation is also often spelled as '' yi '' ; the northern pronunciation is commonly romanized '' ri '' . yonhap ( 2004 ) , pp . 561–608 and 807–810 , passim . in korean , the name that is usually romanized as '' park '' actually has no ' r ' sound . its initial sound is an unaspirated voiced bilabial stop , like english ' b ' at the beginning of words . the vowel is , similar to the ' a ' in father and the ' a ' in heart , so the name is also often transcribed '' pak , '' bak '' and '' bahk . '' yonhap ( 2004 ) , pp.438–457 . many korean names were romanized incorrectly from their actual pronunciation . for instance , kim , lee and park are pronounced closer to gim , yi and bak in korea . in order to correct this problem , south korea 's ministry of culture , sports has developed the revised romanization of korean to replace the older mccune–reischauer system in the year 2000 and now the official spelling of these three names has been changed to gim , i and bak . south korea 's ministry of culture , sports and tourism is encouraging those who '' newly '' register their passports to follow the revised romanization of korean if possible , but it is not mandatory and people are allowed to register their english name freely given that it 's their first registration . . in english . in english publications , usually korean names are written in the original order , with the family name first and the given name last . this is the case in western newspapers . koreans living and working in western countries have their names in the western order , with the given name first and the family name last . the usual presentation of korean names in english is similar to those of chinese names and differs from those of japanese names , which , in english publications , are usually written in a reversed order with the family name last . power , john . '' japanese names . '' ( archive ) the indexer . june 2008 . volume 26 , issue 2 , p . & nbsp ; c4-2-c4-8 ( 7 pages ) . accession number 502948569 . available on ebscohost . . see also . list of korean surnames list of south korean surnames by prevalence bon-gwan korean clan names of foreign origin article 809 of the korean civil code chinese name . notes . further reading . . external links . translate your name into korean korean surnames at wiktionary table of in 2001 added hanja for personal name use choosing between korean hanja and hangul names family register law , act 6438 , 호적법 , 법률6438호 , partially revised october 24 , 2005 . examples of koreans who used japanese names : by saga women 's junior college