Ramsey's theorem

examples . r ( 3 , 3 ) 6 . frame suppose the edges of a complete graph on 6 vertices are coloured red and blue . pick a vertex , v . there are 5 edges incident to v and so ( by the pigeonhole principle ) at least 3 of them must be the same colour . without loss of generality we can assume at least 3 of these edges , connecting the vertex , v , to vertices , r , s and t , are blue . ( if not , exchange red and blue in what follows . ) if any of the edges , ( r , s ) , ( r , t ) , ( s , t ) , are also blue then we have an entirely blue triangle . if not , then those three edges are all red and we have an entirely red triangle . since this argument works for any colouring , any k 6 contains a monochromatic k 3 , and therefore r ( 3 , 3 ) ≤ 6 . the popular version of this is called the theorem on friends and strangers . an alternative proof works by double counting . it goes as follows : count the number of ordered triples of vertices , x , y , z , such that the edge , ( xy ) , is red and the edge , ( yz ) , is blue . firstly , any given vertex will be the middle of either 0 & nbsp ; × & nbsp ; 5 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 0 ( all edges from the vertex are the same colour ) , 1 & nbsp ; × & nbsp ; 4 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 4 ( four are the same colour , one is the other colour ) , or 2 & nbsp ; × & nbsp ; 3 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 6 ( three are the same colour , two are the other colour ) such triples . therefore , there are at most 6 & nbsp ; × & nbsp ; 6 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 36 such triples . secondly , for any non-monochromatic triangle ( xyz ) , there exist precisely two such triples . therefore , there are at most 18 non-monochromatic triangles . therefore , at least 2 of the 20 triangles in the k 6 are monochromatic . conversely , it is possible to 2-colour a k 5 without creating any monochromatic k 3 , showing that r ( 3 , 3 ) & nbsp ; > & nbsp ; 5 . the unique up to automorphisms of the graph colouring is shown to the right . thus r ( 3 , 3 ) & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 6 . the task of proving that r ( 3 , 3 ) & nbsp ; ≤ & nbsp ; 6 was one of the problems of william lowell putnam mathematical competition in 1953 , as well as in the hungarian math olympiad in 1947 . a multicolour example : r ( 3 , 3 , 3 ) 17 . right right a multicolour ramsey number is a ramsey number using 3 or more colours . there are ( up to symmetries ) only two non-trivial multicolour ramsey numbers for which the exact value is known , namely r ( 3 , 3 , 3 ) & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 17 and r ( 3 , 3 , 4 ) & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 30 . suppose that we have an edge colouring of a complete graph using 3 colours , red , green and blue . suppose further that the edge colouring has no monochromatic triangles . select a vertex v . consider the set of vertices that have a red edge to the vertex v . this is called the red neighbourhood of v . the red neighbourhood of v can not contain any red edges , since otherwise there would be a red triangle consisting of the two endpoints of that red edge and the vertex v . thus , the induced edge colouring on the red neighbourhood of v has edges coloured with only two colours , namely green and blue . since r ( 3 , 3 ) 6 , the red neighbourhood of v can contain at most 5 vertices . similarly , the green and blue neighbourhoods of v can contain at most 5 vertices each . since every vertex , except for v itself , is in one of the red , green or blue neighbourhoods of v , the entire complete graph can have at most 1 + 5 + 5 + 5 16 vertices . thus , we have r ( 3 , 3 , 3 ) ≥ 17 . to see that r ( 3 , 3 , 3 ) 17 , it suffices to draw an edge colouring on the complete graph on 16 vertices with 3 colours that avoids monochromatic triangles . it turns out that there are exactly two such colourings on k 16 , the so-called untwisted and twisted colourings . both colourings are shown in the figures to the right , with the untwisted colouring on the top , and the twisted colouring on the bottom . image : clebsch graph.svg thumb right clebsch graphif we select any colour of either the untwisted or twisted colouring on k 16 , and consider the graph whose edges are precisely those edges that have the specified colour , we will get the clebsch graph . it is known that there are exactly two edge colourings with 3 colours on k 15 that avoid monochromatic triangles , which can be constructed by deleting any vertex from the untwisted and twisted colourings on k 16 , respectively . it is also known that there are exactly 115 edge colourings with 3 colours on k 14 that avoid monochromatic triangles , provided that we consider edge colourings that differ by a permutation of the colours as being the same . proof . 2-colour case . the theorem for the 2-colour case can be proved by induction on . it is clear from the definition that for all , . this starts the induction . we prove that exists by finding an explicit bound for it . by the inductive hypothesis and exist . : lemma 1 . : proof . consider a complete graph on vertices whose edges are coloured with two colours . pick a vertex from the graph , and partition the remaining vertices into two sets and , such that for every vertex , is in if is blue , and is in if is red . because the graph has without any monochromatic set of size t . this contradicts the infinite ramsey theorem . if a suitable topological viewpoint is taken , this argument becomes a standard compactness theorem showing that the infinite version of the theorem implies the finite version . . hypergraphs . the theorem can also be extended to hypergraphs . an m-hypergraph is a graph whose '' edges '' are sets of m vertices – in a normal graph an edge is a set of 2 vertices . the full statement of ramsey 's theorem for hypergraphs is that for any integers m and c , and any integers n 1 , … , n c , there is an integer r ( n 1 , … , n c ; c , m ) such that if the hyperedges of a complete m-hypergraph of order r ( n 1 , … , n c ; c , m ) are coloured with c different colours , then for some i between 1 and c , the hypergraph must contain a complete sub-m-hypergraph of order n i whose hyperedges are all colour i . this theorem is usually proved by induction on m , the 'hyper-ness ' of the graph . the base case for the proof is m & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 2 , which is exactly the theorem above . directed graphs . it is also possible to define ramsey numbers for directed graphs ; these were introduced by . let r ( n ) be the smallest number q such that any complete graph with singly directed arcs ( also called a '' tournament '' ) and with ≥ & nbsp ; q nodes contains an acyclic ( also called '' transitive '' ) n-node subtournament . this is the directed-graph analogue of what ( above ) has been called r ( n , & nbsp ; n ; & nbsp ; 2 ) , the smallest number z such that any 2-colouring of the edges of a complete undirected graph with ≥ & nbsp ; z nodes , contains a monochromatic complete graph on n nodes . ( the directed analogue of the two possible arc colours is the two directions of the arcs , the analogue of '' monochromatic '' is '' all arc-arrows point the same way '' ; i.e . , '' acyclic . '' ) we have r ( 0 ) & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 0 , r ( 1 ) & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 1 , r ( 2 ) & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 2 , r ( 3 ) & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 4 , r ( 4 ) & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 8 , r ( 5 ) & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 14 , r ( 6 ) & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 28 , and 32 & nbsp ; ≤ & nbsp ; r ( 7 ) & nbsp ; ≤ & nbsp ; 54 . . relationship to the axiom of choice . in reverse mathematics , there is a significant difference in proof strength between the version of ramsey 's theorem for infinite graphs ( the case n 2 ) and for infinite multigraphs ( the case n ≥ 3 ) . the multigraph version of the theorem is equivalent in strength to the arithmetical comprehension axiom , making it part of the subsystem aca 0 of second-order arithmetic , one of the big five subsystems in reverse mathematics . in contrast , by a theorem of david seetapun , the graph version of the theorem is weaker than aca 0 , and ( combining seetapun 's result with others ) it does not fall into one of the big five subsystems . over zf , however , the graph version is equivalent to the classical kőnig 's lemma . . see also . ramsey cardinal paris–harrington theorem sim ( pencil game ) infinite ramsey theory van der waerden number ramsey game erdős–rado theorem . notes . references . . . . . . . . . . external links . ramsey home is a distributed computing project designed to find new lower bounds for various ramsey numbers using a host of different techniques . the electronic journal of combinatorics dynamic survey of small ramsey numbers ( by stanisław radziszowski ) ramsey number – from mathworld ( contains lower and upper bounds up to r ( 19 , 19 ) ) ramsey number – geoffrey exoo ( contains r ( 5 , 5 ) > 42 counter-proof )