Æ

latin . in classical latin , the combination ae denotes the diphthong , which had a value similar to the long i in fine as pronounced in most dialects of modern english . james morwood ( 1999 ) . latin grammar , oxford university press . , p . 3 both classical and present practice is to write the letters separately , but the ligature was used in medieval and early modern writings , in part because æ was reduced to the simple vowel during the roman empire . in some medieval scripts , the ligature was simplified to ę , an e with ogonek , the e caudata . that was further simplified into a plain e , which may have influenced or been influenced by the pronunciation change . however , the ligature is still relatively common in liturgical books and musical scores . french . in the modern french alphabet , æ ( called '' a e-dans-l ’ a '' ) is used to spell latin and greek borrowings like curriculum vitæ , et cætera , ex æquo , tænia and the first name lætitia . it is mentioned in the name of serge gainsbourg 's song elaeudanla téïtéïa , a reading of the french spelling of the name lætitia : '' l , a , e dans l ' a , t , i , t , i , a '' . english . in english , usage of the ligature varies between different places and contexts , but it is fairly rare . in modern typography , if technological limitations make the use of æ difficult ( such as in use of typewriters , telegraphs , or ascii ) , the digraph ae is often used instead . in the united states , the issue of the ligature is sidestepped in many cases by use of a simplified spelling with '' e '' , as happened with œ as well . usage , however , may vary ; for example , medieval is now more common than mediaeval ( and the now old-fashioned mediæval ) even in the united kingdom , the spelling medieval is given priority in both oxford and cambridge advanced learner 's dictionary . accessed september 22 , 2014 . but archaeology is preferred over archeology , even in the us . merriam-webster advanced learner 's dictionary . accessed september 22 , 2014 . given their long history , ligatures are sometimes used to show archaism or in literal quotations of historic sources ; for instance , in those contexts , words such as dæmon and æther are often so spelled . the ligature is seen on gravestones of the 19th century , short for ætate ( '' at the age ( of ) '' ) : '' æ xxys , yyms , zzds . '' it is also common in formal typography ( invitations , resolutions , announcements and some government documents ) ; for example , the court circular has continued to use the spelling orthopædic online search , february 2021 well into the 21st century . in old english , æ represented a sound between a and e , very much like the short a of cat in many dialects of modern english . if long vowels are distinguished from short vowels , the long version is marked with a macron ( ǣ ) or , less commonly , an acute ( ǽ ) . other germanic languages . in old norse , æ represents the long vowel . the short version of the same vowel , , if it is distinguished from , is written as ę . in most varieties of faroese , æ is pronounced as follows : when simultaneously stressed and occurring either word-finally , before a vowel letter , before a single consonant letter , or before the consonant-letter groups kl , kr , pl , pr , tr , kj , tj , sj and those consisting of ð and one other consonant letter except for ðr when pronounced like gr ( except as below ) a rather open when directly followed by the sound , as in ( silent ð ) and ( silent g ) in all other cases one of its etymological origins is old norse é ( the other is old norse æ ) , which is particularly evident in the dialects of suðuroy , where æ is or : ( eider ) : southern , northern faroese ( family , direction ) : southern , northern faroese in icelandic , æ represents the diphthong , which can be long or short . in danish and norwegian , æ is a separate letter of the alphabet that represents a monophthong . it follows z and precedes ø and å . in norwegian , there are four ways of pronouncing the letter : as in ( the name of the letter ) , , , , , , , , , , , , , ( '' trees '' ) as in , , , , , , , , ( where is pronounced as a diphthong as in , , , , , , , , , , ( '' thread ( s ) '' ( verb ) ) as in , , , , , , in many western , northern and southwestern norwegian dialects and in the western danish dialects of and southern jutland , has a significant meaning : the first person singular pronoun i . it is thus a normal spoken word and is usually written when such dialects are rendered in writing . it is pronounced , contrary to the definite article which is pronounced . in western and southern jutish dialects of danish , is also the proclitic definite article : ( the house ) , as opposed to standard danish and all other nordic varieties which have enclitic definite articles ( danish , swedish , norwegian : , icelandic , faroese : ( the house ) ) . the equivalent letter in german and swedish is , but it is not located at the same place within the alphabet . in german , it is not a separate letter from '' a '' but in swedish , it is the second-last letter ( between å and ö ) . in the normalised spelling of middle high german , represents a long vowel . the actual spelling in the manuscripts varies , however . ossetic . ossetic used the letter æ when it was written using the latin script from 1923 to 1938 . since then , ossetian has used a cyrillic script with an identical-looking letter ( ӕ ) . it is pronounced as a mid-central vowel ( schwa ) . south american languages . the letter æ is used in the official orthography of kawésqar spoken in chile and also in that of the fuegian language yaghan . international phonetic alphabet . the symbol is also used in the international phonetic alphabet to denote a near-open front unrounded vowel like in the word cat in many dialects of modern english , which is the sound that was most likely represented by the old english letter . in the ipa , it is always in lowercase . uralic phonetic alphabet . the uralic phonetic alphabet ( upa ) uses several additional æ-related symbols : . computer encodings and entering . when using the latin-1 or unicode/html character sets , the code points for æ and æ are and , respectively . the characters can be entered by holding the alt key while typing in 0198 ( upper case ) or 0230 ( lower case ) on the number pad on windows systems ( the alt key and 145 for æ or 146 for æ may also work from the legacy ibm437 codepage ) . in the tex typesetting system , ӕ is produced by \ae . in microsoft word , æ or æ can be written using the key combination + + followed by or . on us-international keyboards , æ is accessible with the combination of altgr+z . in x , altgr+a is often mapped to æ/æ , or a compose key sequence compose + a + e can be used . for more information , see unicode input . in all versions of the mac os ( systems 1 through 7 , mac os 8 and 9 , and the current os x ) , the following key combinations are used : æ : option + ' ( apostrophe key ) , æ : option + shift + ' . on the iphone , ipod touch and ipad , as well as phones running google 's android os or windows mobile os and on the kindle touch and paperwhite , æ and æ are accessed by holding down '' a '' until a small menu is displayed . the icelandic keyboard layout has a separate key for æ ( and ð , þ and ö ) . the norwegian keyboard layout also has a separate key for æ , rightmost of the letters , to the right of ø and below å . cyrillic . the latin letters are frequently used in place of the cyrillic ӕ and ӕ in cyrillic texts ( such as on ossetian sites on the internet ) .