Capitol Records

history . founding . songwriter johnny mercer founded capitol records in 1942 with financial help from songwriter and film producer buddy desylva and the business acumen of glenn wallichs , owner of wallichs music city . mercer raised the idea of starting a record company while golfing with harold arlen and bobby sherwood and with wallichs at wallichs 's record store . on february 2 , 1942 , mercer and wallichs met desylva at a restaurant in hollywood to talk about investment by paramount pictures . on march 27 , 1942 , the three men incorporated as liberty records ( not capitol 's future sister label liberty records ) . in may 1942 , the application was amended to change the label 's name to capitol records . on april 6 , 1942 , mercer supervised capitol 's first recording session where martha tilton recorded the song '' moon dreams '' . on may 5 , bobby sherwood and his orchestra recorded two tracks in the studio . on may 21 , freddie slack and his orchestra recorded three tracks in the studio : one with the orchestra , one with ella mae morse called '' cow-cow boogie '' and '' air-minded executive '' supervised by mercer . on june 4 , 1942 , capitol opened its first office in a second-floor room south of sunset boulevard . on that same day , wallichs presented the company 's first free record to los angeles disc jockey peter potter . on june 5 , 1942 , paul whiteman and his orchestra recorded four songs at the studio . on june 12 , the orchestra recorded five more songs in the studio , including '' trav'lin ' light '' with billie holiday . on june 11 , tex ritter recorded '' jingle jangle jingle '' and '' goodbye my little cherokee '' for his first capitol recording session , and the songs comprised capitol 's 110th produced record . the earliest recording artists included co-owner mercer , johnnie johnston , morse , jo stafford , the pied pipers , tex ritter , tilton , paul weston , whiteman , and margaret whiting . capitol 's first gold single was morse 's '' cow cow boogie '' in 1942 . capitol 's first album was capitol presents songs by johnny mercer , a three disc set with recordings by mercer , stafford and the pied pipers , all with weston 's orchestra . the label 's other 1940s musicians included les baxter , les brown , jimmy bryant , billy butterfield , nat king cole , sammy davis jr . , dinning sisters , tennessee ernie ford , mary ford , benny goodman , skitch henderson , betty hutton , stan kenton , peggy lee , billy may , les paul , alvino rey , andy russell , smilin ' jack smith , kay starr , speedy west , and cootie williams . musicians on the capitol americana label included lead belly , cliffie stone , hank thompson , merle travis , wesley tuttle , jimmy wakely , and tex williams . capitol was the first major west coast label to compete with major labels on the east coast such as rca victor , columbia , and decca . in addition to its los angeles recording studios , capitol owned a second studio in new york city and occasionally sent mobile recording equipment to other cities . other genres . in 1946 , writer-producer alan w . livingston created bozo the clown for the company 's children 's record library . examples of notable capitol albums for children during that era are sparky 's magic piano and rusty in orchestraville . capitol also developed a noted jazz catalog that included the capitol jazz men and issued the miles davis 's album birth of the cool . capitol released a few classical albums in the 1940s , some of which contained handsome heavily embossed , leather-like covers . these recordings appeared on the 78 rpm format and were subsequently reissued on the new lp format in 1949 . among the recordings : brazilian composer heitor villa-lobos ' choros no . 10 , with contributions from a los angeles choral group and the janssen symphony orchestra ( 1940–1952 ) , conducted by werner janssen ; symphony no . 3 by russian composer reinhold moritzovich glière ; and césar franck 's symphony in d minor , with willem mengelberg and the concertgebouw orchestra . in 1949 , capitol opened a branch office in canada and purchased khj studios on melrose avenue adjacent to paramount in hollywood . by the 1950s , capitol had become a huge label that concentrated primarily on popular music . the label 's roster at that time included the andrews sisters , ray anthony , shirley bassey , june christy , tommy duncan , tennessee ernie ford , the four freshmen , the four knights , the four preps , jane froman , judy garland , jackie gleason , andy griffith , dick haymes , harry james , the louvin brothers , dean martin , al martino , skeets mcdonald , louis prima , nelson riddle , dinah shore , frank sinatra , and keely smith . capitol began recording rock and roll acts such as the jodimars and gene vincent . there were comedy records by stan freberg , johnny standley , and mickey katz . children listened to capitol 's bozo the clown albums . although various people played bozo the clown on television , capitol used the voice of pinto colvig , who was also the voice of goofy in walt disney cartoons . don wilson also released children 's records . in june 1952 , billboard magazine contained a chronicle of the label 's first ten years in business . '' the record decade , 1942-42 . '' billboard , august 2 , 1952 , 49-82 . . ownership under emi . in 1955 , the british record company emi ended its 55-year mutual distribution agreement with rca victor and acquired 96 % of capitol 's stock for 8.5 & nbsp ; million . emi built a studio at hollywood and vine to match its state-of-the-art abbey road studios in london . in 1957 , emi 's classical label angel was merged into capitol . some classical recordings were issued in high fidelity and stereophonic sound . these included william steinberg and the pittsburgh symphony orchestra , leopold stokowski with various orchestras ( including the los angeles philharmonic orchestra ) and sir thomas beecham and the royal philharmonic orchestra , as well as light classical albums by carmen dragon and the hollywood bowl orchestra and albums of film music conducted by hollywood composers such as alfred newman . the capitol of the world series introduced in 1956 and active into the 1970s encompassed german beer drinking songs , honeymoon in rome , australian aboriginals , and kasongo ! modern music of the belgian congo . many were produced by dave dexter jr . this series contained over 400 albums . . ownership under universal music group . in 2012 , the recorded music operations of emi were sold to the universal music group and the world headquarters were re-established in the capitol tower in hollywood as part of the subsequent reorganization of the capitol music group . steve barnett , previously an employee of columbia , was hired as chairman and ceo of the division . capitol filed a lawsuit against vimeo , an online video-sharing website , for audio copyright infringement . capitol filed the claim after users were visibly lip-synching to some of their tracks . following legal action by capitol against the redigi.com online company in april 2013 , the latter was found to have violated copyright law . capitol records claimed that redigi was guilty of copyright infringement due to a business model that facilitated the creation of additional copies of capitol 's digital music files , whereby users could upload the files for downloading or streaming to the new purchaser of the file . redigi argued that the resale of mp3/digital music files is permitted under certain doctrines ( '' fair use '' and '' first sale '' ) but the court maintained that the doctrines ' application '' was limited to material items that the copyright owner put into the stream of commerce . '' in 2014 , pgh live music joined the team and katy perry founded the record label metamorphosis music , starting a label venture with capitol . the name of the label was later changed to unsub records in 2016 . also that year , capitol rose to number two market share and won four categories at the grammy awards for music by beck and sam smith . in 2018 , capitol 's electronic division astralwerks relaunched with a new team and moved its entire operations to capitol 's tower in los angeles . in december 2019 , jeff vaughn was named president of capitol records , assuming his position as of january 1 , 2020 , and is based in hollywood at the iconic capitol tower . . headquarters . designed by welton becket with louis naidorf , a young architect from becket 's office , serving as project designer the thirteen-story , earthquake-resistant capitol records tower is the world 's first circular office building . home to several recording studios , it is one of hollywood 's most distinctive landmarks . although not intended as a tribute to record players , its wide curved awnings and tall narrow tower mimic the appearance of a stack of gramophone records atop a phonograph . the building was commissioned by emi after its acquisition of capitol records in 1955 and was completed in april 1956 . the building is north of the intersection of hollywood and vine and is the center of the company 's consolidated west coast operations . it was nicknamed '' the house that nat built '' after the financial success of capitol singer nat king cole . the rectangular ground floor is a separate structure joined to the tower after it was completed . in september 2006 , emi announced that it had sold the tower and adjacent properties for 50 & nbsp ; million to new york-based developer argent ventures . in mid-2008 , a controversy erupted over a plan to build a condominium complex next door , igniting fears that the building 's acoustic properties , specifically its underground echo chambers , would be compromised . it was announced in november 2012 that steve barnett would become chairman and ceo of capitol music group and would be based at the capitol records building . capitol and artist richard wyatt jr . restored his hollywood jazz mural on the south wall of the capitol records building . . studios . capitol 's recording studios were designed to minimize noise and vibration , then newly important goals in the high-fidelity sound era . an inner wall floating on layers of rubber and cork was erected inside the building 's concrete exterior walls , leaving a one-inch air gap to provide complete sound isolation . the facility also features subterranean echo chambers that allow engineers to add reverberation during the recording process . eight trapezoidal chambers are located underground , with 10-inch concrete walls and concrete ceilings . speakers on one side and microphones on the other permit an echo effect of up to five seconds . studios a and b can be combined for the recording of orchestral music and symphonic film soundtracks . the first album recorded in the tower was frank sinatra conducts tone poems of color . international operations . capitol modified albums that were originally released in other countries on other labels . albums released in the united states contained fewer tracks , usually no more than 11 or 12 , compared to albums released in the united kingdom due to differences in the method of publishing royalties were calculated in the two countries . fox , hank . '' disk firms swing to less-groove policy '' billboard march 4 , 1967 : 10 also , in the american market it was expected that albums would include the current hit single , whereas british albums typically did not duplicate songs released as singles . the beatles . possibly the best-known treatment of an international artist 's recordings was the label 's release pattern for various albums by the beatles . this began with capitol 's release of meet the beatles ! , the first album by the band to be released by capitol in the united states . it was based on the british album with the beatles , which contained 14 tracks and a running time of around 35 minutes . capitol removed five tracks ( '' money '' , '' you 've really got a hold on me '' , '' devil in her heart '' , '' please mister postman '' , and '' roll over beethoven '' ) and added both sides of the band 's first american hit single ( '' i want to hold your hand '' c/w '' i saw her standing there '' ) and the british single 's b-side , '' this boy '' . '' i saw her standing there '' was on the beatles ' first british album , please please me . this resulted in capitol releasing meet the beatles as a 12-track album with a duration of around 30 minutes and made it comparable with other american pop albums . it also provided capitol with unreleased tracks for use in later us beatles albums such as the beatles ' second album . capitol also issued '' duophonic '' stereo releases of some recordings where the original master was monophonic . capitol engineers split the single master mono track into two , boosted the bass on the right channel , boosted treble on the left channel and added a split-second delay between channels to produce a '' stereo '' release . this duophonic process meant that the beatles ' american fans occasionally heard a slightly different song from that heard by the rest of the world if they listened to the stereo version . this trend in the beatles ' american discography continued until 1967 when a new recording contract with emi was signed . unhappy with the way capitol in the us and other companies around the world were issuing their work in almost unrecognizable forms , beginning in 1967 the beatles gained full approval of album titles and cover art , track listing and running order in north america . starting with sgt . pepper 's lonely hearts club band beatles ' albums were released unmodified . the issue of 45 rpm singles featuring album tracks was also stopped . instead , non-album tracks were issued as singles between album releases . united kingdom . beginning in 1948 , capitol records were released in the uk on the capitol label by decca . after its 1955 acquisition of capitol , emi took over distribution in 1956 . emi 's parlophone unit handled capitol label marketing in the uk in later years . in 2012 , emi was sold to universal music group . universal music started capitol as an autonomous label in the uk with the rights to the beatles ' catalog . this marks the first time that capitol in the uk operated as an autonomous label . . canada . capitol records of canada was established in 1949 by businessman w . lockwood miller . capitol broke with miller 's company and formed capitol record distributors of canada limited in 1954 . emi acquired this company when it acquired capitol . the company was renamed capitol records of canada ltd . in 1958 after miller 's rights to the name expired . in 1959 , capitol of canada picked up distribution rights for emi 's labels angel , pathé , odeon , and parlophone . in 1957 , paul white joined capitol of canada and in 1960 established an a & r department independent of the american company to promote talent for the canadian market . the division found native talent such as anne murray and emi musicians from other countries . beginning in 1962 , capitol of canada issued albums by british musicians such as cliff richard , helen shapiro and frank ifield . they accepted the beatles long before the american company . by 1967 , they were distributing non-emi labels such as 20th century fox , buena vista records , disneyland , and pickwick . the company was renamed capitol records-emi of canada in 1974 , before the emi music canada name was adopted in 1993 . emi music canada was absorbed into universal music canada in 2012 . in 2016 , universal music canada donated the emi music canada archives to the university of calgary . . other countries . capitol latin focuses on latin music artists in latin america and the united states . it was founded in 1989 as emi latin and was renamed to capitol latin in 2009 . capitol latin was merged with universal music latin entertainment in 2013 . capitol music germany was founded by emi music germany and inherited most of emi 's german artists catalog . in 2013 , capitol germany was acquired by universal and merged with umg 's vertigo berlin domestic division . the new label is called vertigo/capitol . capitol music group sweden was relaunched in 2015 after umg rebranded the lionheart music group label . it originally existed as a division of emi music sweden during the 90 's and mid-2000 's . emi 's swedish offices were included in the parlophone label group sale and were acquired by warner music group , which owns the capitol sweden 's back catalog . in france , capitol label services ( formerly capitol music france ) exists as a division of universal music france , and bears the 70 's capitol '' c '' logo .