Elizabeth Barry

early career . barry 's first performance was at the age of 17 in thomas otway 's alcibiades . her performance was so poor that she was fired from the duke 's company . she then met john wilmot , 2nd earl of rochester . their relationship grew from professional colleagues to lovers . they had one child named elizabeth , who was born in 1677 and died in 1689 . barry drew on her relationship with rochester for many of her sexual performances . while multiple sources confirm that rochester was barry 's lover , the only source for the coaching story is a life of barry published in 1741 & ndash ; 65 years after the events & ndash ; by edmund curll , well known for his fanciful and inaccurate biographies . barry was a successful comedian who created a variety of restoration comedy heroines throughout her career , but her greatest impact on restoration drama was as a tragic actress . her capacity for projecting pathos was an inspiration to playwrights thomas otway and thomas southerne in the three famous tragic roles they wrote for her : monimia in otway 's the orphan ( 1680 ) , belvidera in otway 's venice preserved ( 1682 ) , and isabella in southerne 's the fatal marriage ( 1694 ) . these three roles , wrote the prompter john downes , '' gain 'd her the name of famous mrs . barry , both at court and city , for whenever she acted any of these three parts , she forc 'd tears from the eyes of her auditory , especially those who have any sense of pity for the distress't . '' in his autobiography , many years later , colley cibber recalled the power of her voice : '' when distress of tenderness possess 'd her , she subsided into the most affecting melody and softness . in the art of exciting pity , she had a power beyond all the actresses i have yet seen , or what your imagination can conceive . '' elizabeth howe has argued that it was barry 's success in the role of monimia that '' clinched the movement away from heroic drama and started the establishment of 'she-tragedy ' as a popular genre . '' also known as pathetic tragedy , innocent women were represented as sexual objects and as victims of male lust . barry was always described as being a plain woman . portraits suggest intelligence but heavy features and the playwright thomas shadwell writes in a letter in 1692 that it would have been better to have staged nicholas brady 's the rape in roman dress , '' and then w'th a mantle to have covered her hips mrs barry would have acted ye part . '' apparently , none of this mattered to contemporaries . even though barry was '' the ugliest woman '' in the world off stage , wrote an anonymous author in a comparison between the two stages ( 1702 ) , she was '' the finest woman in the world upon the stage . '' barry 's acting style was embedded in the influences from her own personality and life . elizabeth as a person was seen to be beautiful and virtuous . although many of the characters she played were virgins , it was known about her relationship with rochester . it has also been known that she channeled her sexual relationship with rochester through many of her performances . also during this time , it was seen that barry 's body had metaphorical meaning to the description of her character . when barry starred in the orphan , it was implied that '' the trope of the female breast to represent innocence or ruin ( consider the many references to monimia ’ s '' swelling breasts '' or '' white breasts '' ) . thus otway uses the dismemberment of the female body , expressed through the '' mangled breasts besmeared with blood '' , to signify the ruin of the state '' . . later career . later into barry ’ s career , she was given more roles of a motherhood figure than a sexual object . barry worked for the duke 's company from 1675 to 1682 , taking the role of cordelia opposite thomas betterton 's lear in nahum tate 's 1681 the history of king lear . after the duke 's and the king 's companies were amalgamated in 1682 , she continued as one of the star performers of the new united company , which remained for 12 years the only theatrical company in london . the absence of rival companies left the actors in a weak bargaining position in relation to management . one year after her performance in the fatal marriage , barry decided to leave the united company due to a salary dispute in 1695 . she then proceeded to work for a new company with actor thomas betterton and actress anne bracegirdle . barry was one of the original patent-holders of the actors ' company , which opened at lincoln 's inn fields with the smash hit of william congreve 's love for love in 1695 and continued to successfully challenge rich 's united company.there was a huge wage gap between men and woman performers as betterton was paid £4 and 20s per week and barry received only £2 and 10s shillings . barry officially retired from the stage in 1710 at 52 years old ; her acting career lasted a total of 35 years . her retirement fell short as she died three years later at the age of 55 due to a fever . list of plays and roles . fictional portrayals . barry is a supporting character in the libertine , stephen jeffreys play about john wilmot 's life , as well as its 2004 film adaptation , in which she is portrayed by samantha morton . barry also appears as a character in the 2015 play exit mrs behn or , the leo play by christopher vander ark . notes . references . cibber , colley ( first published 1740 , everyman 's library ed . 1976 ) . an apology for the life of colley cibber . london : j . m . dent & sons ltd . drougge , helga . '' love , death , and mrs . barry in thomas southerne ’ s plays '' . comparative drama , vol . 27 , no . 4 , 1994 , pp . & nbsp ; 408–425 . hamilton , kate . '' the 'famous mrs . barry ' : elizabeth barry and restoration celebrity '' . studies in eighteenth-century culture , vol . 42 , 2013 , pp . 291-320 . highfill , philip jr , burnim , kalman a . , and langhans , edward ( 1973 & ndash ; 93 ) . biographical dictionary of actors , actresses , musicians , dancers , managers and other stage personnel in london , 1660 & ndash ; 1800 . 16 volumes . carbondale : southern illinois university press . howe , elizabeth ( 1992 ) . the first english actresses : women and drama 1660 & ndash ; 1700 . cambridge : cambridge university press . hume , robert . '' elizabeth barry ’ s first roles and the cast of '' the man of mode '' . theatre history studies , vol . 5 , 1 jan . 1985 . milhous , judith ( 1979 ) . thomas betterton and the management of lincoln 's inn fields 1695 & ndash ; 1708 . carbondale , illinois : southern illinois university press . hartley , jimmy ( 2014 ) , the dramatic life of elizabeth barry . london : amazon . milling , j . et al . ( eds ) the cambridge history of british theatre 1660 to 1895 , vol . 2 , cambridge , short run press , p . & nbsp ; 78 . joseph donohue ( ed . ) ( 2004 ) , the cambridge history of british theatre , vol . 2 : 1660 to 1895 . external links .