Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)

history . auditors took the leading role in developing gaap for business enterprises . accounting standards have historically been set by the american institute of certified public accountants ( aicpa ) subject to u.s . securities and exchange commission ( sec ) regulations . financial accounting standards . quickmba . the aicpa first created the committee on accounting procedure in 1939 and replaced that with the accounting principles board in 1959 . in 1973 , the accounting principles board was replaced by the financial accounting standards board ( fasb ) under the supervision of the financial accounting foundation with the financial accounting standards advisory council serving to advise and provide input on the accounting standards . financial accounting standards advisory council ( fasac ) . fasb fasac . other organizations involved in determining united states accounting standards include the governmental accounting standards board ( gasb ) , formed in 1984 ; and the federal accounting standards advisory board ( fasab ) , formed in 1990 . circa 2008 , the fasb issued the fasb accounting standards codification , which reorganized the thousands of u.s . gaap pronouncements into roughly 90 accounting topics . in 2008 , the securities and exchange commission issued a preliminary '' roadmap '' that may lead the united states to abandon generally accepted accounting principles in the future , and to join more than 100 countries around the world instead in using the london-based international financial reporting standards . as of 2010 , the convergence project was underway with the fasb meeting routinely with the iasb . progress report on commitment to convergence of accounting standards—june 24 , 2010 . fasb . the sec expressed their aim to fully adopt international financial reporting standards in the u.s . by 2014 . with the convergence of the u.s . gaap and the international ifrs accounting systems , as the highest authority over international financial reporting standards , the international accounting standards board is becoming more important in the united states . basic characteristic . financial reporting should provide information that is : useful to present to potential investors and creditors and other users in making rational investment , credit , and other financial decisions helpful to present to potential investors and creditors and other users in assessing the amounts , timing , and uncertainty of prospective cash receipts about economic resources , the claims to those resources , and the changes in them helpful for making financial decisions helpful in making long-term decisions helpful in improving the performance of the business useful in maintaining records . required departures from gaap . under the aicpa 's code of professional ethics under rule 203 – accounting principles , a member must depart from gaap if following it would lead to a material misstatement on the financial statements , or otherwise be misleading . in the departure , the member must disclose , if practical , the reasons why compliance with the accounting principle would result in a misleading financial statement . under rule 203-1-departures from established accounting principles , the departures are rare , and usually take place when there is new legislation , the evolution of new forms of business transactions , an unusual degree of materiality , or the existence of conflicting industry practices . . involved in development . these organizations influence the development of gaap in the united states . united states securities and exchange commission ( sec ) : the sec was created as a result of the great depression . at that time there was no structure setting accounting standards . the sec encouraged the establishment of private standard-setting bodies through the aicpa and later the fasb , believing that the private sector had the proper knowledge , resources , and talents . the sec works closely with various private organizations setting gaap , but does not set gaap itself . american institute of certified public accountants ( aicpa ) : in 1939 , urged by the sec , the aicpa appointed the committee on accounting procedure ( cap ) . during the years 1939 to 1959 cap issued 51 accounting research bulletins that dealt with a variety of timely accounting problems . however , this problem-by-problem approach failed to develop the much needed structured body of accounting principles . thus , in 1959 , the aicpa created the accounting principles board ( apb ) , whose mission it was to develop an overall conceptual framework . it issued 31 opinions and was dissolved in 1973 for lack of productivity and failure to act promptly . after the creation of the fasb , the aicpa established the accounting standards executive committee ( acsec ) . it publishes : : audit and accounting guidelines , which summarizes the accounting practices of specific industries ( e.g . casinos , colleges , airlines , etc . ) and provides specific guidance on matters not addressed by fasb or gasb . u.s . gaap does not take into account ethics in deciding it 's guidelines . this allows room for the perpetuation of wage inequality : statements of position , which provides guidance on financial reporting topics until the fasb or gasb sets standards on the issue . : practice bulletins , which indicate the acsec 's views on narrow financial reporting issues not considered by the fasb or the gasb . financial accounting standards board ( fasb ) : realizing the need to reform the apb , leaders in the accounting profession appointed a study group on the establishment of accounting principles ( commonly known as the wheat committee for its chair francis wheat ) . this group determined that the apb must be dissolved and a new standard-setting structure is created . this structure is composed of three organizations : the financial accounting foundation ( faf , it selects members of the fasb , funds and oversees their activities ) , the financial accounting standards advisory council ( fasac ) , and the major operating organization in this structure the financial accounting standards board ( fasb ) . fasb previously had 4 major types of publications : : statements of financial accounting standards – the most authoritative gaap setting publications . 168 standard has been issued before the new codification . : statements of financial accounting concepts – first issued in 1978 . they are part of the fasb 's conceptual framework project and set forth fundamental objectives and concepts that the fasb use in developing future standards . however , they are not a part of gaap . there have been 7 concepts published to date . : interpretations – modify or extend existing standards . there have been around list of fasb interpretations . : technical bulletins or staff positions – guidelines on applying standards , interpretations , and opinions . usually solves some very specific accounting issue that will not have a significant , lasting effect . : in 1984 the fasb created the emerging issues task force ( eitf ) which deals with new and unusual financial transactions that have the potential to become common ( e.g . accounting for internet-based companies ) . it acts more like a problem filter for the fasb – the eitf deals with short-term , quickly resolvable issues , leaving long-term , more pervasive problems for the fasb . : however , now all gaap resides in the asc ( accounting standards codification ) so the fasb and eitf do not issue new standards but rather updates to the codification . the concepts statements still exist outside of the asc but are not authoritative . governmental accounting standards board ( gasb ) : created in 1984 , the gasb addresses state and local government reporting issues . its structure is similar to that of the fasb 's , and the fasb and gasb are located together and share resources . other influential organizations : the government finance officer 's association ( gfoa ) also influences financial policies for governments ( disagreements between the gfoa and gasb are rare , but can continue for many years ) ; american accounting association , institute of management accountants , financial executives institute . precedence of gaap-setting authorities . in the united states , gaap derives , in order of importance , from : issuances from an authoritative body designated by the american institute of certified public accountants ( aicpa ) council ( for example , the financial accounting standards board statements , aicpa accounting principles board opinions , and aicpa accounting research bulletins ) ; other aicpa issuances such as aicpa industry guides ; industry practice ; and into para-accounting literature in the form of books and articles . codification in accounting – fasb accounting standards codification . the codification is effective for interim and annual periods ending after september 15 , 2009 . all existing accounting standards documents are superseded as described in fasb statement no . 168 , the fasb accounting standards codification and the hierarchy of generally accepted accounting principles . all other accounting literature not included in the codification is non-authoritative . the codification reorganizes the thousands of u.s . gaap pronouncements into roughly 90 accounting topics and displays all topics using a consistent structure . it also includes relevant securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , guidance that follows the same topical structure in separate sections in the codification . to prepare users for the change , the aicpa has provided a number of tools and training resources . while the codification does not change gaap , it introduces a new structure—one that is organized in an easily accessible , user-friendly online research system . the fasb expects that the new system will reduce the amount of time and effort required to research an accounting issue , mitigate the risk of noncompliance with standards through improved usability of the literature , provide accurate information with real-time updates as new standards are released , and assist the fasb with the research efforts required during the standard-setting process . see also . accounting standard international financial reporting standards other comprehensive basis of accounting philosophy of accounting statutory accounting principles for us insurance companies . notes . external links . sec accounting bulletins – united states sec division of corporate finance – united states financial accounting standards board website ( fasb ) – united states government accounting standards board website ( gasb ) – united states us gaap xbrl taxonomy – united states es : principios de contabilidad generalmente aceptados he : עקרונות חשבונאיים מקובלים