Television in the United Kingdom

broadcast television providers . free-to-air , free-to-view and subscription providers operate , with differences in the number of channels , capabilities such as the programme guide ( epg ) , video on demand ( vod ) , high-definition ( hd ) , interactive television via the red button , and coverage across the uk . all providers make available the uk 's five most-watched channels : bbc one , bbc two , itv , channel 4 and channel 5 . broadcast television is distributed as radio waves via terrestrial or satellite transmissions , or as electrical or light signals through ground-based cables . in the uk , these use the digital video broadcasting standard . most tvs sold in the uk come with a dvb-t ( terrestrial ) tuner for freeview – a rare thing in europe . set-top boxes are generally used to receive channels from other providers . most services have integrated their broadcast tv services with additional video streams distributed via the internet , or through their own internet protocol network . defunct channels . there are nearly 200 defunct british channels . for a list , see list of former tv channels in the uk or : category : defunct british television channels . commentary . . the rise of television in the uk . the british broadcasting corporation ( bbc ) was established in 1927 to develop radio broadcasting , and inevitably became involved in tv in 1936 . the bbc is funded by income from a '' broadcast receiving licence '' purchased by uk residents . the cost of this is set by agreement with the uk government . television caught on in the united kingdom in 1947 , but its expansion was slow . by 1951 , with only two transmitters , near london and birmingham , only 9 % of british homes owned a television set . the united kingdom was the first country in the world to have a regular daily television schedule direct to homes and it was the first to have technical professions to work on tvs . a . smith , television : an international history 1995 up until 1972 , television broadcasting hours were tightly regulated by the british government , under the control of the postmaster general . before the launch of the commercial channel itv in 1955 , the bbc was restricted by law to just five hours maximum of television in a day . this was increased at the launch of the commercial channel itv to a 7-hour broadcasting day for both channels . gradually the number of hours were increased . typically during the late 1960s the law regulated a 50-hour broadcasting week for all television channels in the uk . this meant bbc1 , bbc2 and itv could only broadcast normal programming for 7 hours a day mondays to fridays , and 7.5 hours a day on saturdays and sundays . until 1957 , television in the united kingdom could not air from 6.00pm-7.00pm . this was called '' toddler 's truce '' , where the idea was that parents could put their children to bed , before prime time television would commence . this restriction was lifted in 1957 . however , on sundays , television remained off the air from 6.00pm-7.00pm . this was in response to religious leaders fears that television would interfere with people attending church services . in 1958 a compromise was reached , where only religious programming could be aired during this time slot . this restriction was lifted in january 1972 . the postmaster general allowed exemptions to the regulations . all schools programming , adult education , religious programming , state occasions , political broadcasts and welsh language programming were totally exempt from the restrictions . sport and outside broadcasting events were given a separate quota of broadcasting hours which could be used in a year , starting off at 200 hours a year in the mid 1950s , rising to a quota of 350 hours a year by the late 1960s . broadcasting on christmas eve , christmas day , boxing day , new year 's eve and new year 's day were also exempt from the tightly controlled restrictions . the election of a conservative government in june 1970 brought in changes to the control of broadcasting hours . at first the typical broadcasting day was extended to 8 hours a day , with an increase in exemptions over christmas and an increase in the sport/outside broadcasting quota . on 19 january 1972 , the then minister for posts and telecommunications , christopher chataway , announced to the british house of commons that all restrictions on broadcasting hours on television would be lifted from that day , with the broadcasters allowed to set their own broadcasting hours from then on . by november 1972 a full daytime schedule had been launched on itv from 9.30am each day , with the bbc also expanding their schedules to include more daytime programming . the uk government previously appointed people to the bbc 's board of governors , a body responsible for the general direction of the organisation , and appointment of senior executives , but not its day-to-day management . from 2007 , the bbc trust replaced the board of governors . it is operationally independent of bbc management and external bodies , and aims to act in the best interests of licence fee payers . commercial television was first introduced in the united kingdom , in 1955 . unlike the us , there was a distinct split between advertisements and programming . advertisers purely purchased spots within pre-defined breaks within programming , and had no connection to the programme content . the content and nature of adverts being strictly controlled by the ita the body controlling commercial television . history of satellite television . the first commercial direct-broadcast satellite ( dbs , also known as direct-to-home ) service in the united kingdom , sky television , was launched in 1989 and used the newly launched astra satellite at 19.2° east , providing four analogue tv channels . the channels and subsequent videocrypt video encryption system used the existing pal broadcast standard , unlike the winner of the uk state dbs licence , british satellite broadcasting ( bsb ) . in 1990 , bsb launched , broadcasting five channels ( now , galaxy , the movie channel , the power station and the sports channel ) in d-mac format and using the eurocypher video encryption system which was derived from the general instruments videocipher system used in the usa . one of the main selling points of the bsb offering was the squarial , a flat plate antenna and low-noise block converter ( lnb ) . sky 's system used conventional and cheaper dish and lnb technology . the two companies competed over the uk rights to movies . sky operated from an industrial park in isleworth in west london , whereas bsb had newly built offices in london ( marco polo house ) . the two services subsequently merged to form british sky broadcasting ( bskyb ) . bsb 's d-mac/eurocypher system was gradually replaced with sky 's videocrypt video encryption system . in 1994 17 % of the group was floated on the london stock exchange ( with adrs listed on the new york stock exchange ) , and rupert murdoch 's news corporation owns a 35 % stake . by 1998 , following the launch of several more satellites to astra 's 19.2° east position , the number of channels had increased to around 60 and bskyb launched the first subscription-based digital television platform in the uk , offering a range of 300 channels broadcast from astra 's new satellite , at 28.2° east position under the brand name sky digital . bskyb 's analogue service has now been discontinued , with all customers having been migrated to sky digital . in may 2008 , a free-to-air satellite service from the bbc and itv was launched under the brand name freesat , carrying a variety of channels from astra 28.2°e , including some content in hd formats .