Dungan people

present day . as ding ( 2005 ) notes , '' the dungan people derive from china 's hui people , and now live mainly in kyrgyzstan and kazakhstan . their population is about 110,000 . this people have now developed a separate ethnicity outside china , yet they have close relations with the hui people in culture , ethnic characteristics and ethnic identity . '' today the dungans play a role as cultural '' shuttles '' and economic mediators between central asia and the chinese world . husei daurov , the president of the dungan center , дауров хусей шимарович ( '' best people '' , the great international encyclopedia ) has succeeded in transforming cultural exchanges into commercial partnerships . in february 2020 , a conflict broke out between ethnic kazakhs and dungans in the korday area in kazakhstan on the border to kyrgyzstan . according to official kazakh sources , 10 people were killed and many more were wounded . in the altercation , cars and homes were burned and rifles were fired . 600 people fled across the border to kyrgyzstan . . language . the dungan language , which the dungan people call the '' hui language '' ( хуэйзў йүян or huejzw jyian ) , is similar to the zhongyuan mandarin , which is widely spoken in the south of gansu and the west of guanzhong in shaanxi in china . like other varieties of chinese , dungan is tonal . there are two main dialects , one with four tones and the other , considered standard , with three tones in the final position in words and four tones in the non-final position . some dungan vocabulary may sound old-fashioned to chinese people . for example , they refer to a president as an '' emperor '' ( хуаңды , huan ' g-di ) and call government offices yamen ( ямын , ya-min ) , a term for mandarins ' offices in ancient china . their language also contains many loanwords from arabic , persian and turkic . since the 1940s , the language has been written in cyrillic script , demonstrating that chinese can be written with an alphabet ( compare the pinyin system ) . unlike other minority nationalities in central asia , such as the koryo-saram , most dungan people are trilingual . more than two-thirds of the dungan also speak russian and a small proportion can speak kyrgyz or other languages belonging to the titular nationality of the countries where they live . . . culture . nineteenth century explorer henry lansdell noted that the dungan people abstained from spirits and opium , neither smoked nor took snuff and '' are of middle height , and inclined to be stout . they have high and prominent foreheads , thick and arched eyebrows , eyes rather sunken , fairly prominent cheek-bones , face oval , mouth of average size , lips thick , teeth normal , chin round , ears small and compressed , hair black and smooth , beard scanty and rough , skin smooth , neck strong , and extremities of average proportions . the characteristics of the dungans are kindness , industry , and hospitality . they engage in husbandry , horticulture , and trade . in domestic life parental authority is very strong . after the birth of a child the mother does not get up for fifteen days , and , without any particular feast , the child receives its name in the presence of a mullah the day succeeding that of its birth . circumcision takes place on the eighth , ninth , or tenth day . when a girl is married she receives a dowry . in sickness they have recourse to medicine and doctors , but never to exorcisms . after death , the mullah and the aged assemble to recite prayers ; the corpse is wrapped in white linen and then buried , but never burned . on returning from the interment the mullah and the elders partake of bread and meat . to saints they erect monuments like little mosques , for others simple hillocks . the widow may re-marry after 90 days , and on the third anniversary of the death a feast takes place . '' the dungan are primarily farmers , growing rice and vegetables such as sugar beet . many also raise dairy cattle . in addition , some are involved in opium production . the dungan tend to be endogamous . the dungan are well known for their hospitality and hold many ceremonies and banquets to preserve their culture . they have elaborate and colorful observances of birthdays , weddings , and funerals . in addition , schools have museums to preserve other parts of their culture , such as embroidery , traditional clothing , silver jewelry , paper cuts of animals and flowers and tools . the dungan still practice elements of chinese culture , in cuisine and attire , up to 1948 they also practiced foot binding . the conservative shaanxi dungan cling more tightly to chinese customs than the gansu dungan . the dungans have retained chinese traditions which have disappeared in modern china . traditional marriage practices are still widespread with matchmakers , the marriages conducted by the dungan are similar to chinese marriages in the 19th century , hairstyles worn by women and attire date back to the qing dynasty . shaanxi female attire is still chinese , though the rest of the dungans dress in western attire . chopsticks are used by dungans . the cuisine of the dungan resembles northwestern chinese cuisine . around the late 19th century the bride price was between 240 and 400 rubles for dungan women . dungans have been known to take other women such as kirghiz and tatars as brides willingly , or kidnap kirghiz girls . shaanxi dungans are even conservative when marrying with other dungans ; they want only other shaanxi dungans marrying their daughters , while their sons are allowed to marry gansu dungan , kirghiz , and kazakh women . as recently as 1962 , inter-ethnic marriage was reported to be anathema among dungans . . identity . during the qing dynasty , the term zhongyuanren was synonymous with being mainstream chinese , especially referring to han chinese and hui muslims in xinjiang or central asia . for religious reasons , while hui people do not consider themselves han and are not han chinese , they consider themselves part of the wider chinese race and refer to themselves as zhongyuanren . the dungan people , descendants of hui who fled to central asia , called themselves zhongyuanren in addition to the standard labels lao huihui and huizi . zhongyuanren was used generally by turkic muslims to refer to han and hui chinese people . when central asian invaders from kokand invaded kashgar , in a letter the kokandi commander criticizes the kashgari turkic muslim ishaq for allegedly not behaving like a turkic-origin muslim and wanting to be a zhongyuanren . . see also . dungan revolt ( 1862–1877 ) , rebellion of various muslim ethnic groups in shaanxi and gansu , china dungan revolt ( 1895–1896 ) , rebellion of various muslim ethnic groups in qinghai and gansu , china tunganistan . notes . references . allès , elisabeth . 2005 . '' the chinese-speaking muslims ( dungans ) of central asia : a case of multiple identities in a changing context , '' asian ethnicity 6 , no . 2 ( june ) : 121-134 . ding hong . 2005 . '' a comparative study on the cultures of the dungan and the hui people , '' asian ethnicity 6 , no . 2 ( june ) : 135-140 . svetlana rimsky-korsakoff dyer . 1979 . '' soviet dungan kolkhozes in the kirghiz ssr and the kazakh ssr ( oriental monograph series ) '' . faculty of asian studies , australian national university . svetlana rimsky-korsakoff dyer . karakunuz : an early settlement of the chinese muslims in russia , with an english translation of v.tsibuzgin and a.shmakov 's work . '' asian folklore studies '' , vol . 51 ( 1992 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 243–279 . 马通 ( ma tong ) , '' 吉尔吉斯草原上的东干族穆斯林文化 '' ( dungans ' muslim culture on the grasslands of kyrgyzstan ) , series '' 丝绸之路上的穆斯林文化 '' ( muslim cultures of the silk road ) , 2003-april–27 . ( this article has some details additional to rimsky-korsakoff ( 1992 ) ) . сушанло мухамед , имазов мухаме . imazov . '' dungan soviet literature : textbook for 9th and 10th grade '' . frunze , 1988 ) . . external links . map of dungan settlement in kyrgyzstan and kazakhstan ' a very dungan wedding ' article on kyrgyz dungans dungans forum ( rus ) chinabroadcast.cn soviet census data analyzed by mother tongue and second language , in english association of dungans of the kyrgyz republic , in english and russian samples of the dungans ' cuisine