Eric Johnson (guitarist)

music career . early life . born into a musically inclined family , eric johnson and his three sisters studied piano , while his father was a whistling enthusiast . johnson started learning the guitar at age 11 and rapidly progressed while listening to the musicians that would heavily influence his future style , including mike bloomfield , chet atkins , cream , jimi hendrix , stevie ray vaughan , ric bailey , wes montgomery , jerry reed , bob dylan , and django reinhardt , among others . at the age of 15 , he joined his first professional band , mariani , a psychedelic rock group . in 1970 , johnson and the group recorded a demo , which saw an extremely limited release . the recording became a prized collector 's item years later . simon , scott . '' eric johnson 's guitar gets to austin 's roots '' , npr , august 13 , 2005 . landers , rick . '' eric johnson interview '' – modern guitars magazine – august 11 , 2005 . '' an interview with eric johnson '' – boston beats . sonobeats page . '' mariani with eric johnson '' . . early bands . image : eric-johnson-electromagnets.jpg thumb 250px right the electromagnets with johnson ( left ) performing at north carolina state university in raleigh , north carolina , 1976 after graduating from high school , johnson briefly attended the university of texas at austin and traveled with his family to africa . he eventually returned to austin and in 1974 , joined a local fusion group called electromagnets . the group toured and recorded regionally but did not attract attention from major record labels and disbanded in 1977 . the strength of johnson 's playing , however , attracted a small cult following to the group 's early recordings and , decades later , their two albums were given wide release on compact disc . obrecht , jas . . seven worlds . following the electromagnets ' demise , johnson formed a touring trio , the eric johnson group , with drummer bill maddox and bassist kyle brock . they played to audiences around austin . from 1976–1978 , johnson recorded seven worlds , his debut album , at odyssey studios in austin . contract disputes followed , and seven worlds was not released until 1998 on ark21 records . musician 's friend . '' musician 's friend 's artist spotlight exclusive interview with eric johnson , part 1 and 2 '' – musician 's friend . santiago , james . '' eric johnson on seven world 's '' – '' ericjohnson.com '' . unable to secure a new management contract , johnson began working as a session guitarist for some well-known acts , including cat stevens , junior , chris . '' storytime : eric johnson '' – the medleyville us – march 22 , 2004 . carole king , and christopher cross . willcox , james . '' starpolish interview : eric johnson '' – starpolish.com – november 6 , 2003 . while a session musician , johnson continued to perform locally in austin . johnson 's career rebounded in 1984 when he was signed to warner bros . records . christopher cross and producer david tickle recommended johnson to the label . his breakthrough appearance at austin city limits on july 31 , 1984 , was recorded and later released on cd/dvd in 2010 . the performance of '' cliffs of dover '' from the concert was distributed in a flexi-disc soundpage in the may 1986 issue of guitar player magazine . tones and ah via musicom . in may 1986 , guitar player magazine ran a cover story about johnson . the article helped promote the release of tones and brought johnson critical praise as well as elevating his profile in the guitar and music community . blackett , matt . '' editor 's note '' – musicplayer . the album 's track '' zap '' was nominated for the 1987 grammy award for best rock instrumental performance , but as a whole , the album did not sell well , and warner bros . let johnson 's contract expire . he signed on with indie label cinema records , distributed by capitol records . hernandez , raoul . – the austin chronicle . by the time johnson released his 1990 capitol records debut album , ah via musicom , he was regularly winning awards for his musicianship in the guitar press . during this period , johnson also drew recognition for the rich , violin-like lead sound he coaxed from his beloved 1954 fender stratocaster , which he named virginia . the album 's second track , '' cliffs of dover '' , exemplified his unique sound and won johnson a 1991 grammy award for best rock instrumental performance . ah via musicom was a crossover hit and was certified platinum . venus isle . johnson is an admitted perfectionist , and those traits seemed to work against the ah via musicom follow-up release . unhappy with his recordings , johnson mastered , then later scrapped several completed tracks for the new album and delayed its release for three years , on top of the three years he had spent touring in support of ah via musicom . he also had setbacks involving musical growth and personal issues while recording his next album venus isle . hernandez , raoul . '' austin chronicle interview – part 1 '' – the austin chronicle . hernandez , raoul . '' austin chronicle interview – part 2 '' – the austin chronicle . venus isle was released on september 3 , 1996 . it was an album with world music that demonstrated johnson 's growth as a guitarist , songwriter , producer , musical arranger , and vocalist . but the album received mixed reviews and did not match the success of its predecessor . as a result , johnson was dropped from capitol records . he rebounded with a successful tour from october to november 1996 with fellow guitarists joe satriani and steve vai . named the g3 ( tour ) , it resulted in a platinum-selling compact disc and dvd titled g3 : live in concert . solo albums in the 2000s . johnson eventually returned to the recording studio , releasing souvenir in january 2002 on his own vortexan records label . the album , released on the internet , received nearly 65,000 plays in the first seven weeks after it was made available on mp3.com . griswold , susan . '' eric johnson – official biography '' -fishman . johnson promoted souvenir with an electric tour in 2003 and an acoustic tour in 2004 . baker , brian . citybeat.com , july 2 , 2003 . love , jianda . '' jianda interview with eric johnson '' sugarmamapr.com , 2003 . johnson 's album bloom was released in june 2005 , on vai 's favored nations label . the album was divided into three sections with different musical styles , intended to showcase johnson 's versatility . leslie , jimmy . – guitar player magazine – september 2005 . his december 1988 austin city limits performance was released on both dvd and compact disc on new west records in november 2005 . his instructional guitar dvd , the art of guitar ( hal leonard corporation ) , was also released at the end of 2005 . on june 24 , 2014 , provogue records released europe live , a retrospective of johnson 's work that features two new compositions . one of the new compositions is entitled '' evinrude fever '' and draws inspiration from water skiing and boating . guitarinternational.com '' eric johnson conquers europe , returns with live album '' . other projects . in 1994 , johnson formed a side project called alien love child and played shows sporadically while recording venus isle . the positive fan feedback from the shows made alien love child a permanent gig . a live performance recording , live and beyond , was released in 2000 on steve vai 's favored nations label . levy , adam . , guitar player , december 2000 . vance , brian . , gibson guitars online , june 28 , 2001 . st . james , adam . , guitar.com , october 26 , 2000 . alien love child featured the vocal prowess of malford milligan , an austin area musician who fronted the very popular local band storyville , made up of members of stevie ray vaughn 's double trouble . in 1998 , johnson was among the judges in musician magazine 's '' best unsigned bands '' competition , along with ani difranco , moby , art alexakis of everclear , keb ' mo ' , and joe perry of aerosmith . weeks , lisa . '' soundbites '' , tucson weekly , november 6 , 1997 . in 2003 , johnson contributed a guitar solo on mike tramp 's solo album , more to life than this . the solo was featured on the track '' the good , the sad and the ugly '' . in september 2006 , johnson took part in a theatrical production titled primal twang : the legacy of the guitar – the first definitive theatrical journey through the guitar 's colorful and controversial 3,500-year history . in september 2007 , johnson participated in a second theatrical production by the same company titled love in : a musical celebration in which he performed a jimi hendrix set , a tribute to the year 1967 , often called '' the summer of love '' . kirby , dave – september 27 – october 3 , 2007 . in late 2006 , johnson participated in a second g3 tour in south america , with joe satriani and john petrucci . johnson appeared as part of guitar player magazine 's ultimate musician 's fantasy camp in las vegas in february 2014 , with guitarists joe perry , steve vai , elliot easton , michael anthony , and others . rockcamp.com ; '' rock ' n ' roll fantasy camp '' – february 17 , 2014 he appeared with zakk wylde , buddy guy , jonny lang , kenny wayne shepherd , dweezil zappa , and doyle bramhall ii as part of the eighth edition of the experience hendrix tour highlighting the music of jimi hendrix , in march 2014 . ericjohnson.com '' tour '' – april 7 , 2014 johnson returned to the experience hendrix tour in september and october 2014 . ericjohnson.com '' tour '' johnson and fellow guitarist mike stern kicked off their eclectic guitar tour on november 6 , 2014 , and released an album supporting it on october 27 , 2014 . in august 2015 , he participated in the '' vai academy '' along with guitarists steve vai and sonny landreth , and also kicked off an acoustic tour of the southwest . in 2016 , eric released '' ej : explorations on guitar and piano '' , which was his first entirely acoustic album . he toured that album in early 2017 . in 2017 , eric released '' collage '' , which also coincided with the announcement of a tour revisiting his hit album '' ah via musicom '' . in the fall of 2018 , eric was invited to promote the fender and nissan collaboration for car stereo systems designed by fender audio . in january 2020 , eric released '' ej : volume ii '' , which is a follow up to his first acoustic album . . guitars and equipment . guitars . johnson is best known for playing the lightly modified fender stratocasters and gibson es-335 electric guitars through a triple amp setup that consists of fender , dumble and marshall amplifiers . he tends to swap out the bridge pickups in some of his stratocasters for dimarzio hs-2 pickups , because they do n't hum as much as standard single-coils . johnson has also played other guitar brands such as robin , rickenbacker , jackson , and a charvel , which appears on the cover of the ah via musicom album . in 2001 , johnson added a gibson custom shop '59 les paul reissue to his collection of guitars . it is noteworthy that he no longer uses a dumble amplifier , as he had to replace a faulty component in his favorite dumble , the steel string singer . it never sounded the same afterwards , and he sold the amplifier to carlos santana . johnson has had several models built by his specifications for sale in the mass market . in 2003 , c . f . martin & company released a limited-edition eric johnson signature mc-40 guitar built for him . johnson donated 5 % of the guitar 's sales profit to his father 's college , jefferson medical college ( now called the thomas jefferson university ) . '' jefferson medical college students to benefit from generosity of grammy-winning guitarist eric johnson '' – thomas jefferson university hospital . johnson has also been known to use the martin d-45 before his signature martin guitar was released . in 2005 , fender released an eric johnson signature fender stratocaster also built to his specifications . this was followed up by the eric johnson signature stratocaster rosewood model in 2009 . it featured the same specifications as the eric johnson maple neck guitar , but with the addition of an unusual three-ply , eight-hole white pick guard , hotter treble pickup , and a bound rosewood laminate fingerboard with pearloid dot position markers . eric generally does n't collect guitars as he is n't interested in owning a lot of superfluous items . his collection is small and limited to the best playing examples of the guitar he finds . 1967 flying v : traded at a show for a 30s dobro guitar he purchased just to swap for the flying v . 1964 sg maestro vibrola : an instrument famously played by george harrison on stage and during the recording of several beatles albums . eric generally avoided sgs for being unable to stay in tune , but traded two marshall amplifiers for this particular one for its ability to hold a tune extremely well . 1962 fender stratocaster : this is the instrument stolen from his apartment in 1982 . it had a mustang pick up that seymour duncan had rewound himself . found at a pawn shop 24 years later , eric cross referenced with serial numbers he had written down , and found the pawn shop had his stolen collection of guitars . he bought it back . it has 6.5-ohm single-coil pick ups ( similar to the seymour duncan five two pick up available for purchase ) . 1957 fender stratocaster : bought at a show in florida undated early 80s martin d45 : a reissue of a pre-war design purchased for him by his father after the 1982 incident . 1964 gibson es-335 : block inlay stop tail-piece with lower output pickups . it has a ding from the photographer dropping equipment on it during the venus isle photo shoot . 1966 fender bass vi : the replacement for one of the guitars stolen in the 1982 incident . featured on bloom '' tribute to jerry reed '' and '' on the way to love '' on up close and other tracks . in march 2018 , fender released an eric johnson signature thinline fender stratocaster built to exactly the same specifications as his first signature strat , the sole exception being that the guitar is a semi-hollow design , which is a rarity for fender . the guitar is available in vintage white and two-color sunburst , with quarter-sawn maple necks exclusively . prototype ej signature fender stratocasters : eric tours with the final prototypes sent to him before production began of his signature models including the thinline , and is not using examples from the production line up available in stores . in january 2006 , a man named brian sparks was arrested for posing as johnson and , in the process , defrauding businesses out of about us 18,000 worth of guitars and equipment . redorbit breaking news '' man poses as grammy winner to get guitars '' - january 3 , 2006 . also in 2006 , some of johnson 's guitars that had been stolen 24 years earlier were recovered . '' eric johnson recovers stolen guitars '' – ernieball.com – march 2006 . johnson has also released other signature gear such as ghs eric johnson nickel rockers electric guitar strings , dimarzio dp211 eric johnson signature custom pickups , and a fulton-webb amplifier . jim dunlop also has released an eric johnson signature jazz iii plectrum and an eric johnson signature fuzz face . the eminence eric johnson signature 12 '' alnico guitar speaker was introduced in 2012 . in early 2015 , roland corporation announced the '' eric johnson tone capsule '' , an accessory to roland blues cube amplifiers . in early 2020 fender announced the eric johnson '' virginia '' custom shop stratocaster , modeled after a 1954 stratocaster he owned . . effects . johnson uses effect pedals such as the dallas-arbiter fuzz face , bk butler tube driver , mxr kd iv stereo chorus , vox crybaby wah-wah , toadworks barracuda flanger , prescription electronics experience octave fuzz , xotic ac booster , mxr flanger/doubler , electro-harmonix deluxe memory man delay , boss corporation dd-2 digital delay , mxr 1500 digital delay , line 6 echo pro studio modeler , and up to two echoplex tape delays . all of these are connected to multiple a/b boxes to create sounds and tones that are both clean and distorted . dunlop has also begun selling johnson 's signature fuzz face pedal . . recording . in late 2006 , johnson switched from recording in analog digidesign.com . to digital format . euphonix.com '' guitarist eric johnson adds euphonix to studio arsenal '' – december 5 , 2006 . . discography . tones ( 1986 ) ah via musicom ( 1990 ) venus isle ( 1996 ) seven worlds ( 1998 ) souvenir ( 2002 ) bloom ( 2005 ) up close ( 2010 ) eclectic ( 2014 ) ej ( 2016 ) collage ( 2017 ) ej vol . ii ( 2020 ) . awards and nominations . grammy award nomination for best rock instrumental , '' zap '' ( 1987 ) grammy award nomination for best rock instrumental , ah via musicom ( 1991 ) grammy award for best rock instrumental , '' cliffs of dover '' ( 1992 ) grammy award nomination for best rock instrumental , '' pavilion '' ( 1997 ) grammy award nomination for best rock instrumental , '' s.r.v . '' ( 1998 ) grammy award nomination for best pop instrumental , live and beyond ( 2002 ) grammy award nomination for best pop instrumental , bloom ( 2006 ) . references . external links . eric johnson interview on fingerstyleguitarists.com