Doolittle Raid

after the war . the doolittle raiders held an annual reunion almost every year from the late 1940s to 2013 . the high point of each reunion was a solemn , private ceremony in which the surviving raiders performed a roll call , then toasted their fellow raiders who had died during the previous year . specially engraved silver chalice , one for each of the 80 raiders , were used for this toast ; the goblets of those who had died were inverted . each raider 's name was engraved on his goblet both right side up and upside down . the raiders drank a toast using a bottle of cognac that accompanied the goblets to each raider reunion . rightmyer , don . '' a gut check of sorts : the doolittle brandy '' . usafa class of 1973 . retrieved 27 january 2015 . in 2013 , the remaining raiders decided to hold their last public reunion at fort walton beach , florida , not far from eglin air force base , where they trained for the original mission . the bottle and the goblets had been maintained by the united states air force academy on display in arnold hall , the cadet social center , until 2006 . on 19 april 2006 , these memorabilia were transferred to the national museum of the united states air force at wright-patterson afb , ohio . '' 'doolittle goblets ' find new home '' . department of defense news . retrieved 24 april 2010 . on 18 april 2013 , a final reunion for the surviving raiders was held at eglin air force base , with robert hite the only survivor unable to attend . nelson-gabriel , melissa . '' doolittle raiders hold final reunion '' . military.com , 15 february 2014 . the '' final toast to fallen comrades '' by the surviving raiders took place at the nmusaf on 9 november 2013 , preceded by a b-25 flyover , and was attended by richard cole , edward saylor , and david thatcher . kenney , jerry . '' doolittle raiders offer final toast to 71-year-old mission '' . npr . retrieved 21 november 2013 . seven other men , including lt . miller and raider historian col . carroll v . glines , are considered honorary raiders for their efforts for the mission . joyce , todd . '' 80 brave men : the doolittle tokyo raiders roster '' . the doolittle tokyo raiders , 10 december 2008 . retrieved 12 may 2009 . the children of the doolittle raiders organization was founded on 18 april 2006 , authorized by the doolittle raiders organization and the surviving members at the time . descendants of the doolittle raiders organize fundraisers for a scholarship fund and continue to organize the doolittle raiders reunions . the 2019 reunion was held at lt . col . richard e . cole 's memorial service . . last surviving airmen . col . bill bower , the last surviving doolittle raider aircraft commander , died on 10 january 2011 at age 93 in boulder , colorado . rees shapiro , t . '' bill bower , last surviving bomber pilot of wwii doolittle raid , dies at 93 '' . the washington post , 15 january 2011 . retrieved 30 january 2011 . lt . col . edward saylor , the then-enlisted engineer/gunner of aircraft no . 15 during the raid , died 28 january 2015 of natural causes at his home in sumner , washington , at the age of 94 . chawkins , steve . '' edward saylor dies at 94 ; doolittle raider who flew risky wwii raid '' . los angeles times , 2 february 2015 . retrieved 22 february 2015 . lt . col . robert l . hite , co-pilot of aircraft no . 16 , died at a nursing home in nashville , tennessee , at the age of 95 on 29 march 2015 . '' lt . col . robert hite , of 'doolittle tokyo raiders , ' dead at 95 '' . fox news , 30 march 2015 . hite was the last living prisoner of the doolittle raid . s/sgt . david j . thatcher , gunner of aircraft no . 7 , died on 22 june 2016 in missoula , montana , at the age of 94 . lt col . richard e . cole , doolittle 's copilot in aircraft no . 1 , was the last surviving doolittle raider joyce , todd . '' richard e . cole , 0-421602 , colonel , co-pilot crew 1 '' . doolittle tokyo raiders , 2012 . retrieved 11 october 2012 . and the only one to live to an older age than doolittle , who died in 1993 at age 96 . cole was the only raider still alive when the wreckage of hornet was found in late january 2019 by the research vessel at a depth of more than off the solomon islands . cole died 9 april 2019 , at the age of 103 . . doolittle raiders exhibit . the most extensive display of doolittle raid memorabilia is at the national museum of the united states air force ( on wright-patterson air force base ) in dayton , ohio . the centerpiece is a like-new b-25 , which is painted and marked as doolittle 's aircraft , 40-2344 , ( rebuilt by north american aviation to b-25b configuration from an f-10d photo reconnaissance version of the b-25d ) . the bomber , which north american aviation presented to the raiders in 1958 , rests on a reproduction of hornets flight deck . several authentically dressed mannequins surround the aircraft , including representations of doolittle , hornet captain marc mitscher , and groups of army and navy men loading the bomber 's bombs and ammunition . also exhibited are the silver goblets used by the raiders at each of their annual reunions , pieces of flight clothing and personal equipment , a parachute used by one of the raiders in his bailout over china , and group photographs of all 16 crews , and other items . the last b-25 to be retired from the u.s . air force inventory is displayed at the air force armament museum at eglin afb , also in the markings of gen . doolittle 's aircraft . a fragment of the wreckage of one of the aircraft , and the medals awarded to doolittle , are on display at the smithsonian national air and space museum in washington , dc . the 2006 pacific aviation museum pearl harbor on ford island , oahu , hawaii , also has a 1942 exhibit in which the centerpiece is a restored b-25 in the markings of the ruptured duck used on the doolittle raid . '' b-25 mitchell '' . pacific aviation museum pearl harbor . retrieved 14 november 2010 . the san marcos , texas , chapter of the commemorative air force has in its museum the armor plate from the pilot seat of the b-25 doolittle flew in the raid . the interchange of edmund highway ( south carolina 302 ) and interstate 26 nearest the former columbia army air base is designated the doolittle raiders interchange . doolittle raiders re-enactment . on 21 april 1992 , in conjunction with other department of defense world war ii 50th-anniversary commemorative events , two b-25 mitchell bombers , b-25j heavenly body and b-25j in the mood , were hoisted aboard . the bombers participated in a commemorative re-enactment of the doolittle raid on tokyo , taking off from rangers flight deck before more than 1,500 guests . the launch took place off the coast of san diego . four b-25s were approved by the us navy for the reenactment with two selected . the other two participants were b-25j executive sweet and b-25j pacific princess . following the launch , eight b-25s flew up the coast where general doolittle and his son john p . doolittle watched as each b-25 came in for a low pass , dropping 250 red , white , and blue carnations into the surf , concluding the event . congressional gold medal . on 19 may 2014 , the united states house of representatives passed , to award the doolittle raiders a congressional gold medal for '' outstanding heroism , valor , skill , and service to the united states in conducting the bombings of tokyo . '' '' h.r . 1209 – summary '' . united states congress . retrieved 20 may 2014 . the award ceremony took place at the capitol building on 15 april 2015 with retired air force lieutenant general john hudson , the director of the national museum of the air force , accepting the award on behalf of the doolittle raiders . . northrop grumman b-21 raider . in september 2016 , the northrop grumman b-21 was formally named '' raider '' in honor of the doolittle raiders . the last surviving doolittle raider , retired lt col richard e . cole , was present at the naming ceremony at the air force association conference . . in popular culture . books . many books have been written about the doolittle raid : thirty seconds over tokyo ( 1943 ) , by captain ted w . lawson – a pilot who participated in the raid , focuses on the experiences of himself and his crew . a popular film based on the book was released in 1944 . written while the war was still in progress , lawson disguised the identities of the persons in china assisting the raiders and did not publish the story until after the usaaf had released an official communique on 20 april 1943 detailing most aspects of the mission , including the identities of the raiders and their fates . doolittle 's tokyo raiders , by c . v . glines ( 1964 ) – tells the complete story of the raid , including the unique experiences of each b-25 crew . he followed this with a second account , the doolittle raid : america 's daring first strike against japan ( 1988 ) , incorporating information from first-hand accounts of the raiders and from japanese sources . target tokyo : jimmy doolittle and the raid that avenged pearl harbor , by james m . scott ( 2015 ) – based on scores of never-before-published records drawn from archives across four continents as well as new interviews with survivors . films . the raid inspired several films . the 1943 rko film bombardier starred randolph scott and pat o'brien . the climax of this movie is an attack on japan by a group of b-17s . a highly fictionalized film in 1943 , destination tokyo starring cary grant , tangentially involved the raid , concentrating on the fictional submarine . the submarine 's mission is to enter tokyo bay undetected and place a landing party ashore to obtain weather information vital to the upcoming doolittle raid . the film suggests the raid did not launch until up-to-the-minute data were received . all the after-action reports indicated the raid launched without time for weather briefings because of the encounter with the picket ship . a 1944 film , the purple heart was a highly fictionalized account of the torture and execution of doolittle raid prisoners . the doolittle raid was the subject of another 1944 feature film , thirty seconds over tokyo , based on the book of the same title by ted lawson , who was seriously injured in a crash landing off the coast of china . spencer tracy played doolittle and van johnson portrayed lawson . footage from the film was later used for the opening scenes of midway and in the tv miniseries war and remembrance . the 2001 film pearl harbor ( with alec baldwin playing doolittle ) presented a heavily fictionalized version of the raid . the film used the retired world war ii aircraft carrier in corpus christi , texas , to stand in for a japanese carrier , while the aircraft were launched from , standing in for hornet from which the doolittle raid was launched . the film 's portrayal of the planning of the raid , the air raid itself , and the raid 's aftermath , is not historically accurate . gutthman , edward . '' 'pearl ' – hyped , yet promising / movie to honor vets , nation 's wartime spirit '' . myusa , 7 december 2000 . heines , vivienne . '' bringing 'pearl harbor ' to corpus christi '' . military.com , 1 august 2000 . the vhs video deshazer including film footage of doolittle and the flight preparations , along with the b-25s launching , is the story of missionary sergeant jake deshazer of b-25 no . 16 ( the last to launch from hornet ) . the video is based on the amazing story of sergeant jacob de shazer : the doolittle raider who turned missionary by c . hoyt watson . at the end of both the video and the book , deshazer after the war meets mitsuo fuchida , the commander and lead pilot of the pearl harbor attack . doolittle 's raiders : a final toast , a documentary by tim gray and the world war ii foundation , released in 2015 , has interviews with the few surviving members of the raid . the 2017 film the chinese widow aka the hidden soldier presented a heavily fictionalized version of the raid with emile hirsch playing a fictional captain jack turner who was hidden from the japanese in china by a chinese widow and her daughter , after he parachutes from his b-25 near her village . vincent riotta played jimmy doolittle . the raid is depicted in the 2019 film midway , with actor aaron eckhart portraying jimmy doolittle . emperor hirohito is seen being told to go to a shelter during this scene . television . the character of harry broderick in the 1979 television series salvage 1 ( played by andy griffith ) , was a fictional veteran of the raid . notes .