ThaiBev

history . thaibev was founded on 29 october 2003 with the consolidation of 58 beer and spirits businesses , among them chang beer , second in the beer market after singha . it is owned by charoen sirivadhanabhakdi , a chinese immigrant . thaibev brands include green-tea beverage oishi and est , a cola knockoff . the sirivadhanabhakdi family 's stake in thai beverage is around 30 % . charoen is chairman and his son thapana serves as president and ceo . thai beverage is listed on the singapore stock exchange as the stock exchange of thailand ( set ) prohibits the listing of alcohol-related stocks . . overview . thai beverage public company limited owns and distributes several significant brands , including chang beer , mekhong , and sangsom rum . it has significant operations in europe , producing malt scotch whisky , vodka , gin , and liqueurs at five distilleries in scotland , uk . charoen sirivadhanabhakdi , in early 2013 , added fraser and neave , limited , a food and beverage , brewing , property , and publishing industries conglomerate in singapore , to his drinks and property empire . chang beer , which started production in march 1995 at a brewery in the bang ban district of ayutthaya province , is the top-selling brand in thailand . it managed to win 60 percent market share in thailand after a hard market fight with the previous leading brand , singha . in 2006 , the company 's beer market share was 49 percent , according to research company canadean . beer . chang . thaibev brews chang ( or chang beer ) , a pale lager . '' chang '' is the thai word for elephant , an animal of cultural and historical significance in thailand . the logo depicts two elephants face-to-face . in 2006 , the company launched chang light , 4.2 percent abv and chang draught in bottles at five percent abv . they were discontinued in 2015 . in 2015 , thaibev celebrated its 20th anniversary chang beer . for this occasion , thaibev consolidated all chang brands in chang classic . thaibev stopped production of chang light , chang draught , and chang export . in addition , the new bottle was introduced in emerald green . production of chang classic is shared between thaibev 's three breweries . the recipe was changed to include rice , previously only used in the domestic 6.4 percent version . its abv in thailand is 5.0 ( currently 2018 ) . thaibev 's flagship brand chang beer won a gold quality award three times in the beers , water , and soft drinks category at the world quality selections 2018 , organized each year by monde selection . . archa . in 2004 , the company introduced archa 'horse ' ) beer , at 5.4 percent abv . archa won a gold medal at the 2007 australian international beer awards ( aiba ) . the abv was lowered to five percent in 2014 . the first market outside thailand to distribute archa beer was singapore , where it was successfully launched in 2012 by interbev ( singapore ) ltd . . federbräu . federbräu is a german-inspired quality beer brewed using the imported german malt . using only a single source of german malt in the brewing process . federbräu is five percent alcohol by volume . . chang/carlsberg . in december 2000 , carlsberg and chang established a 50–50 joint venture , carlsberg asia , to create a significant brewing company in asia . the carlsberg influence can be seen in the typography of the '' beer chang '' logo , which resembles the classic '' carlsberg beer '' . in 2005 , carlsberg pulled out of the venture and terminated its licence agreement with chang due to non-fulfillment of contractual obligations , resulting in chang claiming us 2.5 billion in damages . a final settlement of us 120 million was subsequently paid by carlsberg . saigon and 333 . thaibev bought a majority of shares in sabeco in 2018 for 4.8 billion us dollars . sabeco owns leading beer brands in vietnam including saigon beer and 333 . at the time of the acquisition , sabeco 's vietnam market share had fallen below 40 percent . . spirits . thaibev produces brown and white spirits , including rum . thaibev 's most famous , but not best selling , spirit is mekhong , which originated in 1941 at the bangyikhan distillery west of bangkok . originally a state-owned distillery , it dates back over 200 years to the beginning of the current chakri dynasty . the launch of mekhong ( a rum with added rice ) was aimed at producing a high-quality thai spirit to stem the increase in the import of foreign liquor and to eventually replace imported brands . sangsom ( rum ) , however , has been the country 's most popular spirit brand for over 29 years , until 2006 holding almost 50 percent share of the entire brown spirits market in thailand . the company also produces mungkorn thong and hong thong and brands based on whisky , such as crown 99 and blue , as well as scotch whisky brands such as hankey banister and pinwinnie royal scotch whisky . white spirits are made from molasses without any mixture or colour , and produced in four alcohol contents : 28 , 30 , 35 , and 40 percent . the company 's largest-selling white spirits is ruang khao . the labels are colour-coded to reflect the alcoholic strength but do not have the brand name printed on them . other brands in this category are niyomthai and white tiger . production . molasses are the main raw material used for the production of thaibev 's spirits , so that most of the products fall under the category of rum . as is the case with all distilled spirits , the distillate is crystal clear when first distilled . amber and dark brown spirits obtain their colour from the extracts from the oak barrel during aging and from caramel , a natural coloring agent . thaibev 's yeast cultures , used for fermentation , are grown in its own laboratory and propagated in a yeast propagation tank . the yeast , molasses diluted by water , steamed rice that has been sprayed with mould ( to create sugar ) and incubated for four days , and water are added into a fermenter and the mixture is allowed to ferment for approximately 72 hours . the liquid that is left at the end of the fermentation process is known as fermented mash . distillation takes place in a distilling column and a pot still , which is a large copper or stainless steel kettle . distilling involves boiling the '' fermented mash '' and condensing its vapour . the spent sludge remaining in the pot still is removed to be processed . the company 's white spirits are then diluted with demineralized water to the desired alcohol content in a white spirits blending tank and sent to be packaged and bottled after filtering . brown spirits are diluted with demineralized water and then aged in oak barrels for three to eight years depending on the brand . the aged alcohol is then further diluted with demineralized water before bottling . liquor concentrate alcohol and caramel color are added . the brown spirits are passed through filters and then bottled and packaged . thaibev also makes chinese herb spirits , branded as chiang-chun and sua dum . these are produced by blending alcohol , white spirits , sugar , caramel , and chinese herbs , and then further diluting the mixture with demineralized water . everton-chang . in 2004 , chang became the sponsor of everton f.c . of the english premier league . together , they initiated five projects in the aftermath of the tsunami disaster in thailand . everton-chang is a village on the khao lak coast in phang nga province of thailand . it consists of 50 houses and a football field . it was built following the 2004 tsunami that struck the area and destroyed the existing village of ban naan khem . local youth teams compete for the chang-everton cup . officials from everton f.c . and chang beer have been involved in the project . together , they sponsor chang everton football cup and send promising thai footballers to liverpool for a trial with everton . criticism and protest . in 2005 , thaibev became the subject of nationwide criticism in thailand by the buddhist sangha and other religious groups . at the time , thai beverage had announced its intent to list publicly on the stock exchange of thailand ( set ) , which would be the biggest listing in thai history . despite attempts by the national office of buddhism ( a government agency ) to prohibit monks from protesting , 2,000 monks from wat phra dhammakaya organized chants of buddhist texts in front of the stock exchange to halt thai beverage 's ipo . in an unprecedented cooperative effort , the temple was joined by former black may revolt leader chamlong srimuang and the santi asoke movement . subsequently , another 122 religious and social organizations joined the opposition , reaching numbers of 10,000 protesters . the organizations asked prime minister thaksin shinawatra 's cooperation to stop the company , in what some of the protest leaders described as '' a grave threat to the health and culture '' of thai society . while set pointed out the economic benefits of the listing , opponents referred to rising alcohol abuse in thai society , ranking fifth in alcohol consumption according to the un food and agriculture organization . ultimately , the protests led to an indefinite postponement of the listing by the exchange . thai beverage chose to list in singapore instead , as the thai stock exchange chief resigned as a result .