Arthur Bliss

biography . early years . bliss was born in barnes , a london suburb , the eldest of three sons of francis edward bliss ( 1847–1930 ) , a businessman from massachusetts , and his second wife , agnes kennard née davis ( 1858–1895 ) . burn , andrew . '' bliss , sir arthur edward drummond ( 1891–1975 ) '' . oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 ; online edition , october 2009 , accessed 21 march 2011 agnes bliss died in 1895 , and the boys were brought up by their father , who instilled in them a love for the arts . bliss was educated at bilton grange preparatory school , rugby and pembroke college , cambridge , where he studied classics , but also took lessons in music from charles wood . other influences on him during his cambridge days were edward elgar , whose music made a lasting impression on him , and e.j . dent . cole , hugo and andrew burn . '' bliss , sir arthur . '' grove music online , oxford music online ; accessed 21 march 2011 . bliss graduated in classics and music in 1913 and then studied at the royal college of music in london for a year . at the rcm he found his composition tutor , sir charles stanford , of little help to him , in 1919 , he arranged incidental music from elizabethan sources for as you like it at stratford-on-avon , and conducted a series of sunday concerts at lyric theatre , hammersmith , where he also conducted pergolesi 's opera la serva padrona . viola tree 's production of the tempest at the aldwych theatre in 1921 , interspersed incidental music by thomas arne and arthur sullivan , with new music by bliss for an ensemble of male voices , piano , trumpet , trombone , gongs and five percussionists dispersed through the theatre . evans , edwin . '' arthur bliss '' . the musical times , february 1923 , pp . 95–99 , accessed 21 march 2011 the times wrote that '' bliss was acquiring a reputation as a tearaway '' by the time he was commissioned , through elgar 's influence , to write a large-scale symphonic work ( a colour symphony ) for the three choirs festival of 1922 . the work was well received ; in the manchester guardian , samuel langford called bliss '' far and away the cleverest writer among the english composers of our time '' ; langford , samuel . '' bliss 's colour symphony '' , the manchester guardian , 8 september 1922 , p . 9 the times praised it highly ( though doubting if much was gained by the designation of the four movements as purple , red , blue and green ) and commented that the symphony confirmed bliss 's transition from youthful experimenter to serious composer . '' the three choirs festival '' , the times , 8 september 1922 , p . 13 after the third performance of the work , at the queen 's hall under henry wood , the times wrote , '' continually changing patterns scintillate … till one is hypnotised by the ingenuity of the thing . '' '' bliss 's 'colour symphony . ' queen 's hall concert '' , the times , 12 march 1923 , p . 15 elgar , who attended the first performance , complained that the work was '' disconcertingly modern . '' program notes of the fort wayne philharmonic orchestra 's february 2010 performance in 1923 bliss 's father , who had remarried , decided to retire in the us . he and his wife settled in california . bliss went with them and remained there for two years , working as a conductor , lecturer , pianist and occasional critic . while there he met gertrude '' trudy '' hoffmann ( 1904–2008 ) , youngest daughter of ralph and gertrude hoffmann . they were married in 1925 . the marriage was happy and lasted for the rest of bliss 's life ; there were two daughters . soon after the marriage , bliss and his wife moved to england . from the mid-1920s onwards bliss moved more into the established english musical tradition , leaving behind the influence of stravinsky and the french modernists , and in the words of the critic frank howes , '' after early enthusiastic flirtations with aggressive modernism admitted to a romantic heart and has given rein to its less and less inhibited promptings '' howes , frank , '' sir arthur bliss – a modern romantic '' , the times , 27 april 1956 , p . 3 he received two major commissions from american orchestras , the introduction and allegro ( 1926 ) for the philadelphia orchestra and leopold stokowski and hymn to apollo ( 1926 ) for the boston symphony and pierre monteux . bliss began the 1930s with pastoral ( 1930 ) . in the same year he wrote morning heroes , a work for narrator , chorus and orchestra , written in the hope of exorcising the spectre of the first world war : '' although the war had been over for more than ten years , i was still troubled by frequent nightmares ; they all took the same form . i was still there in the trenches with a few men ; we knew the armistice had been signed , but we had been forgotten ; so had a section of the germans opposite . it was as though we were both doomed to fight on till extinction . i used to wake with horror . '' bliss ( 1970 ) , p . 96 , quoted in palmer , christopher . '' aspects of bliss '' . the musical times , august 1971 , pp . 743–745 , accessed 22 march 2011 during the decade bliss wrote chamber works for leading soloists including a clarinet quintet for frederick thurston ( 1932 ) and a viola sonata for lionel tertis ( 1933 ) . in 1935 , in the words of the grove dictionary of music and musicians , '' he firmly established his position as elgar 's natural successor with the romantic , expansive and richly scored music for strings . '' two dramatic works from this decade remain well known , the music for alexander korda 's 1936 film of h . g . wells 's things to come , and a ballet score to his own scenario based on a chess game . choreographed by ninette de valois , checkmate was still in the repertoire of the royal ballet in 2011 . '' checkmate '' . birmingham royal ballet , accessed 21 march 2011 . by the late 1930s , bliss was no longer viewed as a modernist ; the works of his juniors william walton and the youthful benjamin britten were increasingly prominent , and bliss 's music began to seem old-fashioned . kennedy ( 1989 ) , p . 96 palmer , christopher . '' aspects of bliss '' . the musical times , august 1971 , pp . 743–745 ; accessed 21 march 2011 his last large-scale work of the 1930s was his piano concerto , composed for the pianist solomon , who gave the world premiere at the world 's fair in new york in june 1939 . bliss and his family attended the performance and then stayed on in the us for a holiday . while they were there , the second world war broke out . bliss initially stayed in america , teaching at the university of california , berkeley . he felt impelled to return to england to do what he could for the war effort , and in 1941 , leaving his wife and children in california , he made the hazardous atlantic crossing . . 1940s . at first , bliss found little useful work to do in england . he joined the bbc 's overseas music service in may 1941 , '' new bbc director of music '' , the times , 1 april 1942 , p . 7 but was plainly under-employed . he suggested to adrian boult , who was at that time both the chief conductor of the bbc symphony orchestra and the bbc 's director of music , that boult should step down in his favour from the latter post . jacobs , p . 367 bliss wrote to his wife : '' i want more power as i have a lot to give which my comparatively minor post does not allow me to use fully . '' kennedy , p . 195 boult agreed to the proposal , which freed him to concentrate on conducting . bliss served as director of music at the bbc from 1942 to 1944 , laying the foundations for the launch of the bbc radio 3 after the war . during the war , he also served on the music committee of the british council together with vaughan williams and william walton . '' news in brief '' , the times , 7 may 1943 , p . 6 in 1944 , when bliss 's family returned from the us , he resigned from the bbc and returned to composing , having written nothing since his string quartet in 1941 . '' bliss , sir arthur '' , who was who , a & c black , 1920–2008 ; online edition , oxford university press , december 2007 , accessed 21 march 2011 he composed more film music , and two ballets , miracle in the gorbals ( 1944 ) , '' sadler 's wells ballet '' , the times , 27 october 1944 , p . 6 and adam zero ( 1946 ) . '' arthur bliss 's new ballet '' , the times , 11 april 1946 , p . 6 in 1948 , bliss turned his attention to opera , with the olympians . he and the novelist and playwright j . b . priestley had been friends for many years , and they agreed to collaborate on an opera , despite their lack of any operatic experience . priestley 's libretto was based on a legend that '' the pagan deities , robbed of their divinity , became a troupe of itinerant players , wandering down the centuries '' . priestley , j . b . '' my friend bliss '' , the musical times , august 1971 , pp . 740–741 , accessed 22 march 2011 the opera portrays the confusion that results when the actors unexpectedly find themselves restored to deity . the opera opened the 1949–50 covent garden season . it was directed by peter brook , with choreography by frederick ashton . the doyen of english music critics , ernest newman , herbage , julian . shostakovitch 's eighth symphony '' , the musical times , july 1944 , p . 201 praised it highly : '' here is a composer with real talent for opera . in mr . priestley he has been fortunate enough to find an english boito '' , but generally it received a polite rather than a rapturous reception . priestley attributed this to the failure of the conductor , karl rankl to learn the music or to cooperate with brook , and to lack of rehearsal of the last act . the critics attributed it to priestley 's inexperience as an opera librettist , and to the occasional lack of '' the soaring tune for the human voice '' in bliss 's music . '' the royal opera – 'the olympians ' '' , the times , 30 september 1949 , p . 6 ; hope-wallace , philip , '' the olympians '' , the manchester guardian , 30 september 1949 , p . 5 ; and eric blom , '' priestley for bliss '' , the observer 2 october 1949 , p . 6 after the covent garden run of ten performances , haltrecht , p . 132 the company presented the work in manchester , '' palace theatre – 'the olympians ' '' , the manchester guardian , 25 march 1950 , p . 5 but did not revive it in subsequent years ; it received a concert performance and broadcast in 1972 . greenfield , edward . '' the olympians on radio 3 '' , the guardian , 22 february 1972 , p . 10 . later years . in 1950 , bliss was knighted . after the death of arnold bax he was appointed master of the queen 's music in 1953 , to the relief of walton , who feared he would be asked to take the post . kennedy ( 1989 ) p . 170 in the times , howes commented , '' the duties of a master of the queen 's music are what he chooses to make of them , but they include the composition of ceremonial and occasional music '' . bliss , who composed quickly and with facility , was able to discharge the many duties of the post , providing music as required for state occasions , from the birth of a child to the queen , to the funeral of winston churchill , to the investiture of the prince of wales . arnold-forster , mark . '' birthday song '' , the observer , 21 february 1960 , p . 1 tracey , edmund . '' march of homage set the stately tone '' , the observer , 31 january 1965 , p . 4 howes commended bliss 's processional for the 1953 coronation , and a song of welcome , bliss 's first official pièce d'occasion . in 1956 , bliss headed the first delegation by british musicians to the soviet union since the end of the second world war . the party included the violinist alfredo campoli , the oboist léon goossens , the soprano jennifer vyvyan , the conductor clarence raybould and the pianist gerald moore . bliss , arthur , '' a musical embassy to the ussr – russia through english eyes '' , the times , 1 june 1956 , p . 11 bliss returned to moscow in 1958 , as a member of the jury of the international tchaikovsky competition , with fellow jurors including emil gilels and sviatoslav richter . '' the jury – 1958 '' international tchaikovsky competition , accessed 22 march 2011 in addition to his official functions , bliss continued to compose steadily throughout the 1950s . his works from that decade include his second string quartet ( 1950 ) ; a scena , the enchantress ( 1951 ) , for the contralto kathleen ferrier ; a piano sonata ( 1952 ) ; and a violin concerto ( 1955 ) , for campoli . the orchestral meditations on a theme by john blow ( 1955 ) was a particularly deep-felt work , and bliss regarded it highly among his output . in 1959–60 he collaborated with the librettist christopher hassall on an opera for television , based on the scriptural story of tobias and the angel . it won praise for the way in which bliss and hassall had understood and adapted to the more intimate medium of television , '' bliss 's new opera for television '' , the times , 18 may 1960 , p . 18 though some critics thought bliss 's music competent but unremarkable . heyworth , peter . '' piedmont in seville '' , the observer , 22 may 1960 , p . 22 ; and mason , colin . '' opera on stage and screen . '' the guardian , 18 may 1960 . p . 7 in 1961 , bliss and hassall collaborated on a cantata , the beatitudes , commissioned for the opening of the new coventry cathedral . reviews were friendly , '' sacred music , but in a secular atmosphere '' , the times , 26 may 1962 , p . 4 ; and mason , colin . '' new music at the coventry festival '' , the guardian , 26 may 1962 , p . 5a but the work has rarely been performed since , and has been eclipsed by another choral work written for coventry at the same time , britten 's war requiem . bliss followed this with two further large-scale choral works , mary of magdala ( 1962 ) and the golden cantata ( 1963 ) . throughout his life , bliss was vigilant on the state of music in britain , about which he had written extensively since the 1920s . see for example , bliss , arthur . '' some aspects of the present musical situation '' . proceedings of the musical association , 49th session ( 1922–1923 ) , pp . 59–77 , accessed 23 march 2011 ; and bliss , arthur . '' aspects of contemporary music '' , the musical times , may 1934 , pp . 401–05 ; accessed 23 march 2011 in 1969 he publicly censured the bbc for its plan to cut its classical music budget and disband several of its orchestras . he was delegated by his colleagues walton , britten , peter maxwell davies and richard rodney bennett to make a strong protest to william glock , the bbc 's controller of music . bliss continued to compose into his eighth and ninth decades , in which his works included the cello concerto ( 1970 ) for mstislav rostropovich , the metamorphic variations for orchestra ( 1972 ) , and a final cantata , shield of faith ( 1974 ) , for soprano , baritone , chorus and organ , celebrating 500 years of st . george 's chapel , windsor castle , setting poems chosen from each of the five centuries of the chapel 's existence . howard , philip . '' for england and st george '' , the times , 23 april 1975 , p . 16 bliss died at his london home in 1975 at the age of 83 . his wife trudy outlived him by 33 years , dying in 2008 at the age of 104 . music . early works . the musicologist christopher palmer was censorious of those who sought to characterise bliss 's music as '' an early tendency to enfant terribilisme yielding very quickly to a compromise with the establishment and a perpetuating of the elgar tradition '' . nonetheless , as a young man bliss was certainly regarded as avant garde . madam noy , a '' witchery '' song , was first performed in june 1920 . the lyric is by an anonymous author , and the setting is for soprano with flute , clarinet , bassoon , harp , viola , and bass . in a 1923 study of bliss , edwin evans wrote that the piquant instrumental background to the gruesome story established the direction that bliss was to take . the second chamber rhapsody ( 1919 ) is '' an idyllic work for soprano , tenor , flute , cor anglais , and bass , the two voices vocalising on 'ah ' throughout , and being placed as instruments in the ensemble . '' bliss contrasted the pastoral tone of that work with rout ( 1920 ) an uproarious piece for soprano and instrumental ensemble ; '' the music conveys an impression such as one might gather at an open window at carnival time … the singer is given a series of meaningless syllables chosen for their phonetic effect '' . in his next work , conversations for violin , viola , cello , flute and oboe ( 1921 ) , bliss chose a deliberately prosaic subject . it consists of five sections , entitled '' committee meeting , '' '' in the wood , '' '' in the ball-room , '' '' soliloquy , '' and '' in the tube at oxford circus . '' evans wrote of this work that although the instrumentation is ingenious , '' much of the interest is polyphony , especially in the first and last numbers . '' bliss followed these works with three compositions for larger forces , a concerto ( 1920 ) and two orchestral studies ( 1920 ) . the concerto , for piano , voice and orchestra , was experimental , and bliss later revised it , removing the vocal part . the melée fantasque ( 1921 ) showed bliss 's skill in writing glittering orchestration . . mature works . of bliss 's early works , rout is occasionally performed , and has been recorded , but the first of his works to enter the repertoire ( at least in the uk ) is the colour symphony . each of the four movements represents a colour : '' purple , the colour of amethysts , pageantry , royalty , and death ; red , the colour of rubies , wine , revelry , furnaces , courage , and magic ; blue , the colour of sapphires , deep water , skies , loyalty , and melancholy ; and green , the colour of emeralds , hope , joy , youth , spring , and victory . '' the first and third are slow movements , the second a scherzo , and the fourth fugal , described by the bliss specialist andrew burn as '' a compositional tour de force , a superbly constructed double fugue , the initial subject slow and angular for strings , gradually becoming an elgarian ceremonial march , the second a bubbling theme for winds . '' burn , andrew ( 2006 ) . notes to chandos cd chan 10380 burn observes that in three works written soon after his marriage , the oboe quintet ( 1927 ) , pastoral ( 1929 ) and serenade ( 1929 ) , '' bliss 's voice assumed the mantle of maturity … all are imbued with a quality of contentment reflecting his serenity . '' of the works of bliss 's maturity , burn comments that many of them were inspired by external stimuli . some by the performers for whom they were written , such as the concertos for piano ( 1938 ) , violin ( 1955 ) and cello ( 1970 ) ; some by literary and theatrical partners , such as the film music , ballets , cantatas and the olympians ; some by painters , such as the serenade and the metamorphic variations ; some by classical literature , such as hymn to apollo ( 1926 ) , the enchantress , and pastoral . of bliss 's works after the second world war , his opera , the olympians is generally considered a failure . the idiom was judged to be old-fashioned . a contemporary critic , in a broadly favourable review , wrote , '' bliss has wisely cleared his idiom of modern harmonic astringency . he uses quite a lot of common chords and progressions ; in fact , he has gone back to the harmony of the musical gods . the result , inevitably , is a certain air of reminiscence . '' '' the olympians '' , the musical times , october 1949 , pp . 367–368 among the late works , the cello concerto is one of the more frequently played . when its dedicatee , rostropovich , gave the first performance at the 1970 aldeburgh festival , britten , who conducted the performance , regarded it as a major work and persuaded bliss to change its title from '' concertino '' to '' concerto '' . it is an approachable piece of which bliss said '' there are no problems for the listener – only for the soloist '' . burn , andrew ( 1991 ) . notes to chandos cd chan 8818 both palmer and burn comment on a sinister vein that sometimes breaks out in bliss 's music , in passages such as the interlude '' through the valley of the shadow of death '' in the meditations on a theme of john blow , and the orchestral introduction to the beatitudes . in burn 's words , such moments can be profoundly disquieting . palmer comments that the musical forerunner of such passages is probably '' the extraordinary spectral march-like irruption '' in the scherzo of elgar 's second symphony . in a centenary assessment of bliss 's music , burn singles out for mention '' the youthful vigour of a colour symphony '' , '' the poignant humanity of morning heroes '' , '' the romantic lyricism of the clarinet quintet '' , '' the drama of checkmate , miracle in the gorbals and things to come '' , and '' the spiritual probing of the meditations on a theme of john blow and shield of faith . '' other works of bliss classed by palmer as among the finest are the introduction and allegro , the music for strings , the oboe quintet , a knot of riddles and the golden cantata . . honours , legacy and reputation . in addition to his knighthood , bliss was appointed kcvo ( 1969 ) and ch ( 1971 ) . he received honorary degrees from the universities of bristol , cambridge , edinburgh , glasgow , lancaster , and london , as well as from princeton university . the london symphony orchestra appointed him its honorary president in 1958 . in 1963 , he received the gold medal of the royal philharmonic society . bliss 's archive is kept at cambridge university library . there is an arthur bliss road in newport , an arthur bliss gardens in cheltenham and a block of flats , sir arthur bliss court , in mitcham , south london . the arthur bliss society was founded in 2003 to further the knowledge and appreciation of bliss 's music . the society 's website includes listings of forthcoming performances of bliss 's works ; in march 2011 the following works were listed as scheduled for performance in the uk and u.s . : ceremonial prelude ; clarinet quartet ( 2 performances ) ; four songs for voice , violin and piano ; music for strings ; pastoral ( lie strewn the white flocks ) ; royal fanfares ; seven american poems ; string quartet no . 2 ( 5 performances ) ; things to come suite ( 2 performances ) ; things to come march . '' live performances '' , the arthur bliss society , accessed 23 march 2011 many of bliss 's works have been recorded . he was a capable conductor , and was in charge of some of the recordings . the library of cambridge university maintains a complete bliss discography . in march 2011 it contained details of 281 recordings : 120 orchestral , 56 chamber and instrumental , 58 choral and vocal , and 47 stage and screen works . among the works that have received multiple recordings are a colour symphony ( 6 recordings ) ; the cello concerto ( 6 ) ; the piano concerto ( 6 ) ; music for strings ( 7 ) ; the oboe quintet ( 7 ) ; the viola sonata ( the violin sonata was first recorded in 2010 ) ( 7 ) ; and checkmate ( complete ballet and ballet suite ( 9 ) ) . '' sir arthur bliss , recordings and cds '' , cambridge university library , accessed 22 march 2011 on receiving the gold medal of the royal philharmonic society in 1963 , bliss said , '' i do n't claim to have done more than light a small taper at the shrine of music . i do not upbraid fate for not having given me greater gifts . endeavour has been the joy '' . bliss ( 1991 ) , p . 209 a hundred years after bliss 's birth , byron adams wrote , . see also . color symbolism . notes and references . ; notes ; references . sources . . external links . texts and translations of vocal music by arthur bliss at the liedernet archive the arthur bliss society leicestershire schools symphony orchestra website review of cello concerto arthur bliss boosey & hawkes '' music from the western front '' , performance by chamber domaine , which includes the bliss piano quartet in a from 1915 , given at gresham college , 26 september 2007 ( available as an mp3 or mp4 download , as well as a text file ) . . videos . a short video of the leicestershire schools symphony orchestra conducted by eric pinkett . played on the piano by sir arthur bliss girl in a broken mirror a documentary featuring the ballet the lady of shallot performed by school pupils from leicestershire and the lsso conducted by eric pinkett .