Caerleon

history . roman fortress . caerleon is a site of considerable archaeological importance as the location of a roman legionary fortress or castra . it was the headquarters for legio ii augusta from about 75 to 300 ad , and on the hill above was the site of an iron age hillfort . the romans called the site isca after the river usk ( welsh wysg ) . the name caerleon may derive from the welsh for '' fortress of the legion '' ; around 800 ad it was referred to as cair legeion guar uisc . hywel wyn jones , the place-names of wales , university of wales press , 2005 , p.19 , substantial excavated roman remains can be seen , including the military amphitheatre , thermae ( baths ) and barracks occupied by the roman legion . in august 2011 the remains of a roman harbour were discovered in caerleon . according to gildas , followed by bede , roman caerleon was the site of two early christian martyrdoms , those of julius and aaron . recent finds suggest roman occupation of some kind as late as ad 380 . roman remains have also been discovered at the mynde , itself a distinctive historical site . . middle ages . during the middle ages , caerleon or nearby venta silurum ( now caerwent ) was the administrative centre of the kingdom of gwent . the parish church , st cadoc 's was founded on the site of the legionary headquarters building probably sometime in the 6th century . a norman-style motte and bailey castle was built outside the eastern corner of the old roman fort , possibly by the welsh lord of caerleon , caradog ap gruffydd . the domesday book of 1086 recorded that a small colony of eight carucates of land ( about 1.5 square miles ) in the jurisdiction of caerleon , seemingly just within the welsh lordship of gwynllwg , was held by turstin fitzrolf , standard bearer to william the conqueror at hastings , subject to william d'ecouis , a magnate of unknown antecedents with lands in hereford , norfolk and other counties . also listed on the manor were three welshmen with as many ploughs and carucates , who continued their welsh customs ( leges walensi viventes ) . caerleon itself may have remained in welsh hands , or may have changed hands frequently . jermyn , anthony . '' 4 : caerleon through the centuries to the year 2000 '' . 2010 accessed 13 feb 2013 . from the apparent banishment of turstin by william ii , turstin 's lands were transferred in 1088 by wynebald de ballon , brother of hamelin de ballon who held abergavenny further up the river usk . at about the same time as wynebald 's lands may have passed via his daughter to henry newmarch , bl harley 4757 , f.7 possible illegitimate son of bernard de newmarch , newmarch , george frederick & newmarch charles h . , the newmarch pedigree , verified by public records , authentic manuscripts and general and local histories , cirencester , 1868 , p.2 . contains scanty information , not sourced to any ancient records c . 1155 the welsh lord of caerleon , morgan ab owain , grandson of king caradog ap gruffudd , was recognized by henry ii . jenkins , robert thomas ( 1959 ) , '' morgan ap hywel '' , dictionary of welsh biography , honourable society of cymmrodorion , retrieved 12 april 2016 subsequently , caerleon continued in welsh hands , subject to occasional battles with the normans . caerleon was an important market and port and possibly became a borough by 1171 , although no independent charters exist . in 1171 iorwerth ab owain and his two sons destroyed the town of caerleon and burned the castle . both castle and borough were seized by william marshal from morgan ap hywel in 1217 and caerleon castle was rebuilt in stone . the remains of many of the old roman buildings stood to some height until this time and were probably demolished for their building materials . welsh revolt . during the welsh revolt in 1402 rhys gethin , general for owain glyndŵr , took caerleon castle together with those of newport , cardiff , llandaff , abergavenny , caerphilly and usk by force . this was probably the last time caerleon castle was ruined , though the walls were still standing in 1537 and the castle ruins only finally collapsed in 1739 - their most obvious remnant is the round tower at the hanbury arms public house . the tower is a grade ii listed building . . english civil war . across the afon lwyd from caerleon , in the region of penrhos farm , are two civil war forts . in 1648 oliver cromwell 's troops camped overnight on christchurch hill , overlooking newport , before their attack on newport castle the next day . 18th and 19th centuries . the old wooden bridge was destroyed in a storm in 1779 and caerleon bridge was erected in the early 19th century . until the victorian development of the downstream docks at newport docks , caerleon acted as the major port on the river usk . the wharf was located on the right bank , to the west of today 's river bridge which marked the limit of navigability for masted ships . a tinplate works and mills were established on the outskirts of the town , in ponthir , around this time , and caerleon expanded to become almost joined to newport . a plaque on the mynde wall in high street references the newport rising of 1839 in which john frost of newport was a prominent figure in the chartism movement . john jenkins , owner of mynde house and owner of ponthir tinplate works , built the wall to keep demonstrators out . the name of the former drovers ' arms on goldcroft common bore witness to the ancient drovers ' road on the old road from malpas . it is thought that the common itself was once the site of a cattle market . . mari lwyd . writing in 1951 , local historian and folklorist fred hando described the traditional journey through caerleon of the mari lwyd or '' venerable mary '' , a tradition similar to that of hoodening found in kent , padstow and cheshire , and involving a man dressed with a horse 's skull . the jaw of the skull could be made to move , with the aid of rods . hando 's informant , gus sergeant of bulmoor , reported that the mari lwyd had not been seen in the town for at least 20 years , but he was still able to describe it : '' we filled the eye-holes with wadding and 'pop alleys ' and fixed great ears made of wadding stiffened with cardboard ; then we stuck rosettes on the sides of the skull and strung long coloured ribbons as reins . '' one man acted as leader of the mari , holding the ribbons , and then came the mari itself draped in a white sheet . it was followed by three singers , who sang in welsh although '' they did n't understand the words '' . on occasion , the procession of the mari lwyd would start as far north as newbridge-on-usk and proceed through the town , ending as far south as goldcliff . the party would be invited into houses along the way and given '' money and home-made cakes and gallons of beer '' . another of hando 's informants provides a description , dated 1841 , of the yuletide tradition : '' the custom of chaunting at their neighbours ' doors on the twelfth night . on which occasion they are fantastically dressed with ribbons of various colours . one of the party carries a horse 's head decorated in the same manner . representations of trees , to which are appended apples and oranges , are also carried about , and on one of the branches an artificial bird , called '' aderyn pica llwyd '' ( the grey hobgoblin bird ) is placed . '' fred hando , ( 1951 ) '' journeys in gwent '' , r . h . johns , newport : chapter 2 - the mari llwyd at caerleon . . arthurian legend . says of caerleon , '' the roman ambassadors here received their audience at the court of the great king arthur . '' geoffrey of monmouth , the first author to write at length of king arthur , makes caerleon one of the most important cities in britain in his historia regum britanniæ . he gives it a long , glorious history from its foundation by king belinus to when it becomes a metropolitan see , the location of an archbishopric superior to canterbury and york , under saint dubricius , followed by st david who moved the archbishopric to st david 's cathedral . geoffrey makes arthur 's capital caerleon and even thomas malory has arthur re-crowned there . the still-visible roman amphitheatre at caerleon has been associated with arthur 's 'round-table ' element of the tales ; and has been suggested as a possible source for the legend . : '' for it was located in a delightful spot in glamorgan , on the river usk , not far from the severn sea . abounding in wealth more than other cities , it was suited for such a ceremony . for the noble river i have named flows along it on one side , upon which the kings and princes who would be coming from overseas could be carried by ship . but on the other side , protected by meadow and woods , it was remarkable for royal palaces , so that it imitated rome in the golden roofs of its buildings . famous for so many pleasant features , caerleon was made ready for the announced feast . '' ( historia regum britanniae '' history of the kings of britain '' ) though the huge scale of the ruins along with caerleon 's importance as an urban centre in early medieval kingdom of gwent may have inspired geoffrey , the main historical source for arthur 's link with '' the camp of the legion '' is the list of the twelve battles of arthur in the 9th-century historia brittonum . however the '' urbs legionis '' mentioned there may rather more probably be chester & ndash ; or even york . keith fitzpatrick-matthews , '' the arthurian battle list '' '' camelot '' first appears in chrétien de troyes ' lancelot , though chretien also mentions caerleon . caerleon also has associations with later arthurian literature as the birthplace of the writer arthur machen who often used it as a location in his work . the hanbury arms was visited by tennyson who lodged there while he wrote his morte d'arthur ( later incorporated into his idylls of the king ) . today caerleon has a modern statue of a knight , '' the hanbury knight '' , in reflecting stainless steel by belgian sculptor thierry lauwers . in michael morpurgo 's novel arthur , high king of britain , caerleon is the castle where arthur unknowingly commits incest with his half-sister morgaine , resulting in the conception of his son mordred who will later bring about his downfall . mary stewart 's account of the arthurian legends also mentions caerleon as a place where arthur held court . in that telling , the incest took place at luguvalium . . modern caerleon . overview . caerleon is centred around a small common . goldcroft common is the only remaining of the seven commons of caerleon . most of the small businesses of caerleon are near the common as is the town hall which has a world war i and world war ii memorial garden . caerleon library is located within the town hall and is associated with newport central library . the intersection of high street and cross street is known as the square . buildings of note are saint cadoc 's church , the national roman legion museum , the roman baths museum , the mynde , the priory hotel , julius and aaron and rectory , caerleon endowed school , the round tower , the toll house at caerleon bridge , the malt house hotel , former university of south wales caerleon campus and st cadoc 's hospital . there are 86 listed buildings in caerleon . british listed buildings , '' british listed buildings - caerleon , newport '' , britishlistedbuildings.co.uk , 27 february 2019 the historic remains of the roman legionary fortress isca augusta is popular with tourists and school parties and there is a marked heritage trail in the town . the millennium wildlife garden is a small nature garden on the banks of the river usk . the hilltop vantage point at christchurch provides panoramic views of the vale of usk and bristol channel . the municipal playing fields are at caerleon broadway and a children 's playground is in cold bath road . private sport and leisure facilities are available at the celtic manor . caerleon has a few restaurants , cafés and take-away food outlets and many public houses that have restaurant facilities . the ffwrrwm is a small specialist shopping courtyard with an eclectic display of sculpture . governance . caerleon is an electoral ward of newport city council . the ward includes christchurch and bulmore . caerleon is within the united kingdom constituencies of newport west , the senedd constituency of newport west . until january 2020 it was within the wales european parliament constituency . the community includes christchurch and the afon gardens area of ponthir . geography . the centre of caerleon sits in the vale of usk and the river usk forms part of the community 's southern boundary . in the north-west part of the town , across the railway bridges , the land rises sharply up to lodge wood and its hill fort . the community 's western boundary is formed by the a4042 road ( heidenheim drive ) and the northern boundary partly by the malthouse road and partly by the afon llwyd river which flows southwards to the river usk along the town 's eastern side . across the river usk from caerleon , to the south-east and east , st julian 's park , the village of christchurch and the upland region around christchurch hill as far as the m4 motorway and the a449 road are also within the community , along with the hamlet of ultra pontem . transportation . road caerleon is from newport city centre and from cwmbran . caerleon is north of the m4 motorway . the b4596 ( caerleon road ) links newport city centre to caerleon via m4 junction 25 , crossing caerleon bridge into caerleon high street . the b4236 ( ponthir road ) links caerleon to cwmbran . the usk road links caerleon to usk . a regular bus service links caerleon to newport city centre and cwmbran . there is a limited city sightseeing open-top bus service in summer months . a cycle and pedestrian walkway alongside the river usk links caerleon to malpas and newport city centre at crindau , route 88 of the national cycle network . rail trains pass through caerleon on the welsh marches line , but do not stop at the closed caerleon railway station . the nearest passenger stations are newport railway station , and cwmbran railway station . transport for wales have announced that caerleon is a potential future station as part of the south wales metro project . . education . education is generally conducted in the english language in schools but at least a mandatory welsh language content must be provided under the welsh education curriculum . there are no welsh-medium schools in caerleon but there are three primary schools elsewhere in newport ; ysgol gymraeg bro teyrnon in brynglas , ysgol gymraeg casnewydd in ringland and ysgol gymraeg ifor hael in bettws . the nearest welsh-medium secondary school is ysgol gyfun gwynllyw in trevethin , pontypool . primary schools the primary schools are charles williams church in wales primary school ( one of the largest church primary schools in wales ) and lodge hill primary school . secondary educationhigher education a former campus of the university of south wales is located in caerleon . the campus closed on 31 july 2016 . the campus was the main campus of the university of wales , newport and the second largest campus of the university of south wales after the merger of universities in 2013 . it hosted a variety of undergraduate and postgraduate courses , including education , sports and photography . the campus had extensive sports facilities , library , students ' union shop , students ' union bar and accommodation blocks . during september 2014 , it was announced by the university of south wales that the caerleon campus would close in 2016 with courses being integrated into the remaining campuses . the university intends to sell the campus for housing development but there is strong opposition to the proposed re-development from local residents . the caerleon civic society has asked cadw , the body that looks after historic monuments and buildings in wales , to give the edwardian main building grade ii listed building status to save it from demolition . in august 2016 , the welsh government announced that they would recommend that the main building , gatehouses and gate-piers be listed as ‘ buildings of special architectural and historic interest ’ . the university of south wales expressed their continued opposition to the proposed listing but the announcement was welcomed by local politicians and the caerleon civic society . grade ii listing of the main building , the principal 's residence , gate piers and caretaker 's / gardener 's lodge was confirmed on the 3 march 2017 . . housing . historically housing was largely located on the west bank of the river usk between caerleon bridge and caerleon common with a small number of houses on the east bank . a number of substantial housing developments have been created to the west of caerleon : lodge hill , home farm , roman reach , trinity view , brooklea and the brades as well as smaller cluster developments near the centre of the town . substantial housing developments in nearby ponthir and cwmbran have increased traffic congestion in caerleon . pubs and restaurants . the town has long been a well-known spot for nightlife and eateries , with a number of coaching inns opening in the early 19th century . today there are thirteen pubs , bars or restaurants , including : the priory ( an abbey was first built here in 1179 ) olde bull inn ( 15th century ) the hanbury arms ( 1565 ) the bell ( originally built as a chapel in 1814 ) the white hart ( a hotel later becoming a pub in 1815 ) . sport . caerleon has been home to a number of sporting competitions . newport half marathon . it is a part of the newport half marathon route , entering the town via the national cycle route 88 path , into the historic village centre past the amphitheatre , over caerleon bridge and onto caerleon road back towards the city centre finish . . tour de gwent . on 8 july 2018 the velothon wales included caerleon on a 140 & nbsp ; km route , as well as two shorter routes of 125 & nbsp ; km and 60 & nbsp ; km . in 2019 it was announced the velothon wales would not resume . instead , the tour de gwent will be the main cycling event for south wales each year , with a 93-mile route and other distances for different ability levels on offer . it will again start in caerleon and head to abergavenny , returning to caerleon via the wye valley . tour of britain 2017-2018 . caerleon has twice hosted the british national cycling tournament , in 2017 and 2018 . it has welcomed international riders including julian alaphilippe , andré greipel , tony martin , and geraint thomas to the popular cycle routes in the area . it includes a category 2 climb at belmont hill which has proven popular with organisers . on 10 september 2017 the tour of britain came to caerleon along the 180.2 & nbsp ; km ( 112 & nbsp ; mi ) western route from worcester to the competition 's finish in cardiff city centre . the peak of the british domestic cycling calendar , it saw a dramatic breakaway over belmont hill by riders gorka izagirre ( movistar ) and mark stewart ( an post–chain reaction ) which is a category 2 climb and has been a feature of the tour with a 9 % average gradient . the riders were only eventually caught by the peloton near cardiff at the close of the stage . the stage was won by edvald boasson hagen of team dimension data . on 2 september 2018 caerleon again hosted the tour of britain route as it headed east from pembrey to newport , a flat stage of 175 & nbsp ; km ( 109 & nbsp ; mi ) . the event was welsh tour de france champion geraint thomas ' first competition following his success in france , with the route following near his birthplace in cardiff . the stage was won by andré greipel of lotto–soudal . the event organisers sent riders from newport city centre to caerleon via sustrans national cycle route 88 , which was mostly flat along the usk riverside . the route passed the roman fortress towards the countryside around the celtic manor resort , and then into usk . the king of the mountains stage was again set at nearby belmont hill , with tour de france winner thomas famously describing the climb as 'too steep ' after he lost lead position in the peloton to climber alaphilippe . 2010 ryder cup . the local ward golf club was included in promotional material for the 2010 ryder cup which was hosted at the nearby celtic manor resort . caerleon golf club is owned by the celtic manor resort , and is a 9-hole municipal golf course , driving range and golf clubhouse . during winter months the golf course is prone to flooding due to its location alongside the river usk . other sports . caerleon bowls club has a good quality outdoor green and recently became home of the city 's newport athletic bowls club which moved from rodney parade . the association football club caerleon a.f.c . is based in caerleon along with two rugby union clubs ; newport high school old boys rfc and caerleon rfc whose grounds are less than a mile apart . both rugby clubs have large junior sections and caerleon junior youth football club is a substantial junior football club . bulmore lido was opened in caerleon in july 1934 land with an open-air swimming pool , cafe and restaurant , closing in the 1980s . newport racecourse staged the welsh grand national at easter in 1948 the only time the race was held at the course . following the closure of the course the race was transferred to chepstow . culture and community . . caerleon arts festival . caerleon has hosted an arts festival in july each year since 2003 , established initially to welcome participants and sculptors from around the world . many of the sizeable sculptures are retained around caerleon as a sculpture park and local landmarks . the arts festival coincides with the roman military re-enactment in the amphitheatre which demonstrates roman military armour , infantry tactics , cavalry tactics , equipment and siege engines such as ballistae . recent developments with the festival have seen expansion , with the inclusion of a literary festival , food and drink offerings , and a 'big free weekend ' of entertainment and visual arts staged at venues including the open-air roman amphitheatre , which hosts plays in the summer . other events . an informative and wide-ranging history of caerleon was published in 1970 by local amateur historian primrose hockey mbe , hockey , primrose ( 1981 ) caerleon past and present . risca : starling press who was a founder member of caerleon local history society . an archive of her local history collection is kept by the gwent record office . st cadoc 's hospital in caerleon has been featured as a location of episodes in the bbc television programmes doctor who and being human . the former campus of the university of south wales located in caerleon was one of the filming sites of the netflix series sex education . notable people . notable people who were born , resided or were schooled in caerleon , include the following : the darling buds , alternative rock band , formed in caerleon john byrne ( 1832–1879 ) , victoria cross recipient roger freestone , wales international footballer len hill ( 1941–2007 ) , footballer and cricketer gary hocking , motorcycle racer arthur machen , author james may , television presenter lyndon mustoe , wales international rugby union player tyler morgan , welsh international rugby player banita sandhu , actress carl sargent , author caroline sheen , actress ashton hewitt , newport gwent dragons player james sommerin , chef wendy van der plank , actress nigel vaughan , wales international footballer nick walne , wales international rugby union player violet lawrence ( 1908–2014 ) , in 2010 became britain 's oldest surviving police widow . see also . caerleon ii , racehorse caerleon urban district hms caerleon , ship pontypool , caerleon and newport railway usk valley walk brigandine ( video game ) in which caerleon is a playable country . references . bibliography . barber , chris ( 1996 ) arthurian caerleon : in literature and legend . blorenge books brewer , richard j . ( 2000 ) caerleon and the roman army : roman legionary museum , a guide ; 2nd ed . cardiff : national museum wales books ( 1st ed . caerleon - isca : the roman legionary museum , 1987 ) . external links . photos of caerleon and surrounding area roman caerleon & king arthur national roman legion museum home to the academy of historical fencing encyclopædia britannica : caerleon caerleon arts home page caerleon net