Eadbald of Kent

early kent and early sources . settlement of kent by continental peoples , primarily jutes , was complete by the end of the sixth century . yorke , kings and kingdoms , p . 26 . eadbald 's father , æthelberht , probably came to the throne in about 589 or 590 , though the chronology of his reign is very difficult to determine accurately . kirby , earliest english kings , pp . 31–33 , provides an extended discussion of the chronology of æthelberht 's reign . æthelberht was recorded by the early chronicler bede as having overlordship , or imperium , over other anglo-saxon kingdoms . bede , ecclesiastical history , bk . ii , ch . 5 , p . 111 . this dominance led to wealth in the form of tribute , and kent was a powerful kingdom at the time of æthelberht 's death in 616 , with trade well-established with the europe . roman britain had become fully christianized , but the anglo-saxons retained their native faith . in 597 augustine was sent by pope gregory i to england to convert them to christianity . augustine landed in eastern kent , and soon managed to convert æthelberht , who gave augustine land in canterbury . two other rulers , sæberht , king of essex , and rædwald , king of east anglia , were converted through æthelberht 's influence . bede , ecclesiastical history , bk . i , ch . 25 , p . 74 . kirby , earliest english kings , pp . 30–37 . an important source for this period in kentish history is the ecclesiastical history of the english people , written in 731 by bede , a benedictine monk from northumbria . bede was primarily interested in the christianization of england , but he also provides substantial information about secular history , including the reigns of æthelberht and eadbald . one of bede 's correspondents was albinus , abbot of the monastery of st . peter and st . paul ( subsequently renamed st . augustine 's ) in canterbury . a series of related texts known as the legend of st mildrith provides additional information about events in the lives of eadbald 's children and throws some light on eadbald himself . the anglo-saxon chronicle , a collection of annals assembled in about 890 in the kingdom of wessex , also provides information . other sources include papal letters , regnal lists of the kings of kent , and early charters . charters were documents drawn up to record grants of land by kings to their followers or to the church , and they provide some of the earliest documentary sources in england . none survive in original form from eadbald 's reign , but some later copies exist . yorke , kings and kingdoms , p . 25 . . ancestry and immediate family . left the ancestry of æthelberht , eadbald 's father , is given by bede , who states that he was descended from the legendary founder of kent , hengist . however , historians believe that hengist and his brother horsa were probably mythical figures . barbara yorke , kent , kings of , oxford online dictionary of national biography , 2004 it is known that æthelberht married twice as eadbald married his step-mother after his father 's death , to the consternation of the church . s . e . kelly , æthelberht i , oxford online dictionary of national biography , 2004 eadbald had a sister , æthelburg , who was probably also the child of bertha . æthelburg married edwin , king of northumbria , one of the dominant anglo-saxon kings of the seventh century . it is possible that there was another brother , named æthelwald : the evidence for this is a papal letter to justus , archbishop of canterbury from 619 to 625 , in which a king named aduluald is referred to , and who is apparently different from audubald , which refers to eadbald . there is no agreement among modern scholars on how to interpret this : '' aduluald '' might be intended as a representation of '' æthelwald '' , and hence this may be an indication of another king , perhaps a subking of west kent ; yorke , kings and kingdoms , pp . 32–33 . or it may be merely a scribal error which should be read as referring to eadbald . kirby , earliest english kings , pp . 37–42 . archbishop laurence of canterbury persuaded eadbald to accept christianity and give up his wife . he then remarried , and his second wife , according to kentish tradition recorded in the 'kentish royal legend ' , was a woman named ymme of frankish royal blood , though recently it has been suggested that she may have instead been the daughter of erchinoald , mayor of the palace in neustria , the western part of francia . yorke , kings and kingdoms , p . 29 . rollason , mildrith legend , p . & nbsp ; 9 . . east and west kent . the surviving regnal lists show only one king reigning at a time in kent , but subkingdoms were common among the anglo-saxons and from the reign of hlothhere , in the late seventh century , there is evidence that kent was usually ruled by two kings , though often one is clearly dominant . it is less clear that this is the case before hlothhere . forged charters preserve a tradition of eadbald ruling during his father 's reign , presumably as a subking over west kent . the papal letter that has been interpreted as indicating the existence of æthelwald , a brother of eadbald 's , refers to æthelwald as a king ; if he existed , he would presumably have been a junior king to eadbald . the two kingdoms within kent were east and west kent . western kent has fewer archaeological finds from the earliest periods than east kent , and the eastern finds are somewhat distinct in character , showing jutish and frankish influence . the archaeological evidence , combined with the known political division into two kingdoms , makes it likely that the origin of the subkingdoms was the conquest of the western half by the eastern , which would have been the first area settled by the invaders . yorke , kings and kingdoms , p . 27 . . accession and pagan reaction . eadbald came to the throne on the death of his father on 24 february 616 , or possibly 618 . although æthelberht had been christian since about 600 and his wife bertha was also christian , eadbald was a pagan . bertha died some time before eadbald 's accession , and æthelberht remarried . the name of æthelberht 's second wife is not recorded , but it seems likely that she was a pagan , since on his death she married eadbald , her stepson : a marriage between a stepmother and stepson was forbidden by the church . bede records that eadbald 's repudiation of christianity was a '' severe setback '' to the growth of the church . sæberht , the king of essex , had become a christian under æthelberht 's influence , but on sæberht 's death , at about the same time , his sons expelled mellitus , the bishop of london . according to bede , eadbald was punished for his faithlessness by '' frequent fits of insanity '' , and possession by an '' evil spirit '' ( perhaps referring to epileptic fits ) , yorke , kings and kingdoms , p . 175 . but was eventually persuaded to abandon paganism and give up his wife . eadbald 's second wife , ymme , was a frank , and it is possible that kent 's strong connections with francia were a factor in the king 's conversion . the missionaries in canterbury seem to have had frankish support . in the 620s , eadbald 's sister æthelburg came to kent , but sent her children to the court of king dagobert i in francia ; in addition to the diplomatic connections , trade with the franks was important to kent . it is thought likely that frankish pressure had been influential in persuading æthelberht to become christian , and eadbald 's conversion and marriage to ymme are likely to have been closely connected diplomatic decisions . yorke , kings and kingdoms , p . 39 . two graves from a well-preserved sixth and seventh-century anglo-saxon cemetery at finglesham have yielded a bronze pendant and a gilt buckle with designs that are related to each other and may be symbolic of religious activity involving the germanic deity wōden . these objects probably date from the period of the pagan reaction . commentary , and images of both objects , can be found in s . chadwick hawkes , '' finglesham . a cemetery in east kent '' and '' the archaeology of conversion : cemeteries '' , both in campbell , the anglo-saxons , pp . 24–25 and 48–49 . . bede 's account . bede 's account of eadbald 's rejection of the church and subsequent conversion is quite detailed but not without some internal inconsistency . bede 's version of events is laid out as follows : 24 february 616 : æthelberht dies and eadbald succeeds . 616 : eadbald leads a pagan reaction to christianity . he marries his stepmother , contrary to church law , and refuses baptism . at about this time mellitus , bishop of london , is expelled by the sons of sæberht in essex and goes to kent . 616 : mellitus and justus , bishop of rochester , leave kent for francia . 616/617 : some time after mellitus and justus depart , laurence , the archbishop of canterbury , plans to leave for francia but has a vision in which st peter scourges him . in the morning he shows the scars to eadbald who is converted to christianity as a result . bede , ecclesiastical history , bk . ii , ch . 6 , p . 113 . 617 : justus and mellitus both return from francia '' the year after they left '' . justus is restored to rochester . c . 619 : laurence dies , and mellitus becomes archbishop of canterbury . bede , ecclesiastical history , bk . ii , ch . 7 , p . 114 . 619–624 : eadbald builds a church which is consecrated by archbishop mellitus . 24 april 624 : mellitus dies and justus succeeds him as archbishop of canterbury . 624 : after justus 's succession , pope boniface writes to him to say that he has heard in letters from king aduluald ( possibly a scribal error for eadbald ) of the king 's conversion to christianity . boniface sends the pallium with this letter , adding that it is only to be worn when celebrating '' the holy mysteries '' . bede , ecclesiastical history , bk . ii , ch . 8 , p . 116 . by 625 edwin of deira , king of northumbria , asks for the hand in marriage of æthelburg , eadbald 's sister . edwin is told he must allow her to practice christianity and must consider baptism himself . bede , ecclesiastical history , bk . ii , ch . 9 , p . 117 . 21 july 625 : justus consecrates paulinus bishop of york . july or later in 625 : edwin agrees to the terms and æthelburg travels to northumbria , accompanied by paulinus . easter 626 : æthelburg gives birth to a daughter , eanflæd . 626 : edwin completes a military campaign against the west saxons . at '' about this time '' boniface writes to both edwin and æthelburg . the letter to edwin urges him to accept christianity and refers to the conversion of eadbald . the letter to æthelburg mentions that the pope has recently heard the news of eadbald 's conversion and encourages her to work for the conversion of her husband , edwin . bede , ecclesiastical history , bk . ii , ch . 10 , p . 120 . . alternative chronology . although bede 's narrative is widely accepted , an alternative chronology has been proposed by d.p . kirby . kirby points out that boniface 's letter to æthelburg makes it clear that the news of eadbald 's conversion is recent , and that it is unthinkable that boniface would not have been kept up to date on the status of eadbald 's conversion . hence eadbald must have been converted by justus , as is implied by boniface 's letter to justus . the pallium accompanying that letter indicates justus was archbishop by that time , and the duration of mellitus 's archiepiscopate means that even if bede 's dates are somewhat wrong in other particulars , eadbald was converted no earlier than 621 , and no later than april 624 , since mellitus consecrated a church for eadbald before his death in that month . the account of laurence 's miraculous scourging by st peter can be disregarded as a later hagiographical invention of the monastery of st augustine . as mentioned above , it has been suggested that king '' aduluald '' in the letter to justus is a real king æthelwald , perhaps a junior king of west kent . in that case it would appear that laurence converted eadbald , and justus converted æthelwald . it has also been suggested that the pallium did not indicate justus was archbishop , since justus is told the limited circumstances in which he may wear it ; however , the same phrasing occurs in the letter conveying the pallium to archbishop augustine , also quoted in bede . another possibility is that the letter was originally two letters . in this view , bede has conflated the letter conveying the pallium with the letter congratulating justus on the conversion , which according to bede 's account was seven or so years earlier ; however , the grammatical details on which this suggestion is based are not unique to this letter , and as a result it is usually considered to be a single composition . the letter to æthelburg makes it clear that she was already married at the time the news of eadbald 's conversion reached rome . this is quite inconsistent with the earlier date bede gives for eadbald 's acceptance of christianity , and it has been suggested in bede 's defence that æthelburg married edwin substantially earlier and stayed in kent until 625 before travelling to rome , and that the letter was written while she was in kent . however , it would appear from boniface 's letter that boniface thought of æthelburg as being at her husband 's side . it also appears that the letter to justus was written after the letters to edwin and æthelburg , rather than before , as bede has it ; boniface 's letter to edwin and æthelburg indicates he had the news from messengers , but when he wrote to justus he had heard from the king himself . the story of æthelburg 's marriage being dependent on edwin allowing her to practice her faith has been questioned , since revising the chronology makes it likely , though not certain , that the marriage was arranged before eadbald 's conversion . in this view , it would have been the church that objected to the marriage , and æthelburg would have been christian before eadbald 's conversion . the story of paulinus 's consecration is also problematic as he was not consecrated until at least 625 and possibly later , which is after the latest possible date for æthelburg 's marriage . however , it may be that he traveled to northumbria prior to his consecration and only later became bishop . a revised chronology of some of these events follows , taking the above considerations into account . 616 : eadbald leads a pagan reaction to christianity . 616 : mellitus and justus , bishop of rochester , leave kent for francia . c . 619 : laurence dies , and mellitus becomes archbishop of canterbury . early 624 ? : justus converts eadbald . messengers go to rome . also at about this time æthelburg 's marriage to edwin is arranged , perhaps before the conversion . eadbald builds a church , and mellitus consecrates it . 24 april 624 : mellitus dies and justus succeeds him as archbishop of canterbury . mid 624 : edwin agrees to the marriage terms and æthelburg travels to northumbria , accompanied by paulinus . later 624 : the pope receives news of eadbald 's conversion and writes to æthelburg and edwin . still later 624 : the pope hears from eadbald of his conversion , and also hears of mellitus 's death . he writes to justus to send him the pallium . 21 july 625 or 626 : justus consecrates paulinus bishop of york . this timeline extends the duration of the pagan reaction from less than a year , in bede 's narrative , to about eight years . this represents a more serious setback for the church . . relations with other english kingdoms and church affairs . thumb eadbald 's influence over other anglo-saxon kingdoms was less than æthelberht 's . eadbald 's reduced power is apparent in his inability to restore mellitus to the see of london : in bede 's words , his authority in essex '' was not so effective as that of his father '' . however , kentish power was still sufficient to make alliance with eadbald 's relatives attractive to other kingdoms . edwin 's marriage to eadbald 's sister , æthelburg , was probably also motivated by a desire to gain better access to communications with the continent . kirby , earliest english kings , p.61 . the relationship would have been valuable to eadbald , too ; it may have been as a result of this alliance that edwin 's overlordship of britain did not include kent . yorke , kings and kingdoms , p . 36 . another factor in edwin 's treatment of kent may have been the location of the archbishopric in canterbury : edwin was well aware of the importance of canterbury 's metropolitan status , and at one time planned to make york an archbishopric too , with paulinus as the planned first incumbent . kirby , earliest english kings , p.79 . paulinus eventually returned to kent , where at eadbald 's and archbishop honorius 's request he became bishop of rochester , and york was not made an archbishopric for another century . bede , ecclesiastical history , bk . ii , ch . 20 , p . 141 . kirby , earliest english kings , p.80 . within a year of edwin 's death in 633 or 634 , oswald took the throne of northumbria , and it seems likely that his relations with eadbald were modelled on edwin 's . oswald 's successor , oswiu , married eanflæd , who was edwin 's daughter and eadbald 's niece , thereby gaining both deiran and kentish connections . kirby , earliest english kings , p.88 . kirby , earliest english kings , p.92 . eadbald and ymme had a daughter , eanswith ( who founded the very first nunnery on english soil at folkestone , 15 miles from canterbury ) , and two sons , eorcenberht and eormenred . eormenred was the older of the two , and may have held the title of regulus , perhaps implying that he held the junior kingship of kent . he appears to have died before his father , leaving eorcenberht to inherit the throne . yorke , kings and kingdoms , p.35 . an additional son , ecgfrith , is mentioned in a charter of eadbald 's , but the charter is a forgery , probably dating from the eleventh century . see the charter itself can be seen at stenton , anglo-saxon england , p . 141 . several of eadbald 's near relatives were involved in diplomatic marriages . king anna of east anglia married his daughter , seaxburh , to eorcenberht , and their daughter eormenhild married wulfhere of mercia , one of the most powerful kings of his day . eanflæd , eadbald 's niece , married oswiu , king of northumbria and the last of the northern angles bede listed as holding imperium over southern england . eadbald 's granddaughter eafe married merewalh , king of the magonsæte . kirby , earliest english kings , p.43 . . trade and connections to the franks . there is little documentary evidence about the nature of trade in eadbald 's reign . it is known that the kings of kent had established royal control of trade in the late seventh century , but it is not known how early this control began . there is archaeological evidence that suggests that the royal influence predates any of the written sources , and it may have been eadbald 's father , æthelberht , who took control of trade away from the aristocracy and made it a royal monopoly . the continental trade provided kent access to luxury goods , which was an advantage in trading with the other anglo-saxon nations , and the revenue from trade was important in itself . yorke , kings and kingdoms , p . 40 . kent traded locally made glass and jewelry to the franks ; kentish goods have been found as far south as the mouth of the loire , south of brittany . there was probably also a flourishing slave trade . the wealth this commerce brought to kent may have been the basis of the continuing , though diminished , importance of kent in eadbald 's reign . campbell et al . , the anglo-saxons , p . 44 . coins were probably first minted in kent in æthelberht 's reign , though none bear his name . these early golden coins were probably the shillings that are mentioned in æthelberht 's laws . the coins are also known to numismatics as '' thrymsas '' . m.a.s . blackburn , '' coinage '' , in lapidge , encyclopedia of anglo-saxon england , pp . & nbsp ; 113–116 . thrymsas are known from eadbald 's reign , but few are known that carry his name : one such was minted at london and inscribed '' avdvarld '' . it has been suggested that kings did not have a monopoly on the production of coinage at that time . yorke , kings and kingdoms , pp . 40–41 . connections with francia went beyond trade and the royal marriages æthelberht and eadbald made with frankish princesses . eadbald 's granddaughter , eorcengota , became a nun at faremoutiers , and his great-granddaughter , mildrith , was a nun at chelles . when edwin was killed in about 632 , æthelburg , escorted by paulinus , fled by sea to eadbald 's court in kent , but in a further sign of her family 's ties across the channel she sent her children to the court of king dagobert i of the franks , to keep them safe from the intrigues of eadbald and oswald of northumbria . . succession . eadbald died in 640 , and according to most versions of the kentish royal legend was succeeded solely by his son eorcenberht . however , an early text ( caligula a.xiv ) refers to eormenred as 'king ' , suggesting either he was a junior king under eorcenberht , or had a shared kingship . one suggestion is that the other version of events in the 'legend ' , which gives him no title , may have been an attempt to discredit royal claimants from eormenred 's line . kirby , earliest english kings , p.44 . . notes . references . primary sources secondary sources . external links . coin with image of eabald