Magnesium oxide

production . magnesium oxide is produced by the calcination of magnesium carbonate or magnesium hydroxide . the latter is obtained by the treatment of magnesium chloride solutions , typically seawater , with limewater or milk of lime . : mg 2+ + ca ( oh ) 2 → mg ( oh ) 2 + ca 2+ calcining at different temperatures produces magnesium oxide of different reactivity . high temperatures 1500 – 2000 & nbsp ; °c diminish the available surface area and produces dead-burned ( often called dead burnt ) magnesia , an unreactive form used as a refractory . calcining temperatures 1000 – 1500 & nbsp ; °c produce hard-burned magnesia , which has limited reactivity and calcining at lower temperature , ( 700–1000 & nbsp ; °c ) produces light-burned magnesia , a reactive form , also known as caustic calcined magnesia . although some decomposition of the carbonate to oxide occurs at temperatures below 700 & nbsp ; °c , the resulting materials appears to reabsorb carbon dioxide from the air . . applications . mgo is prized as a refractory , i.e . a solid that is physically and chemically stable at high temperatures . it has two useful attributes : high thermal conductivity and low electrical conductivity . filling the spiral calrod range top heating elements on kitchen electric stoves is a major use . '' by far the largest consumer of magnesia worldwide is the refractory industry , which consumed about 56 & nbsp ; % of the magnesia in the united states in 2004 , the remaining 44 & nbsp ; % being used in agricultural , chemical , construction , environmental , and other industrial applications . '' mgo is used as a basic refractory material for crucibles . it is a principal fireproofing ingredient in construction materials . as a construction material , magnesium oxide wallboards have several attractive characteristics : fire resistance , termite resistance , moisture resistance , mold and mildew resistance , and strength . . niche uses . mgo is one of the components in portland cement in dry process plants . magnesium oxide is used extensively in the soil and groundwater remediation , wastewater treatment , drinking water treatment , air emissions treatment , and waste treatment industries for its acid buffering capacity and related effectiveness in stabilizing dissolved heavy metal species . many heavy metals species , such as lead and cadmium are most soluble in water at acidic ph ( below 6 ) as well as high ph ( above 11 ) . solubility of metals affects bioavailability of the species and mobility soil and groundwater systems . most metal species are toxic to humans at certain concentrations , therefore it is imperative to minimize metal bioavailability and mobility . granular mgo is often blended into metals-contaminated soil or waste material , which is also commonly of a low ( acidic ) ph , in order to drive the ph into the 8–10 range where most metals are at their lowest solubilities . metal-hydroxide complexes have a tendency to precipitate out of aqueous solution in the ph range of 8–10 . mgo is widely regarded as the most effective metals stabilization compound when compared to portland cement , lime , kiln dust products , power generation waste products , and various proprietary products due to mgo 's superior buffering capacity , cost effectiveness , and ease/safety of handling . most , if not all products that are marketed as metals stabilization technologies create very high ph conditions in aquifers whereas mgo creates an ideal aquifer condition with a ph of 8–10 . additionally , magnesium , an essential element to most biological systems , is provided to soil and groundwater microbial populations during mgo-assisted metals remediation as an added benefit . medical . magnesium oxide is used for relief of heartburn and dyspepsia , as an antacid , magnesium supplement , and as a short-term laxative . it is also used to improve symptoms of indigestion . side effects of magnesium oxide may include nausea and cramping . magnesium oxide . medlineplus . last reviewed 02/01/2009 in quantities sufficient to obtain a laxative effect , side effects of long-term use include enteroliths resulting in bowel obstruction . . other . as a food additive , it is used as an anticaking agent . it is known to the us food and drug administration for cacao products ; canned peas ; and frozen dessert . it has an e number of e530 . it was historically used as a reference white color in colorimetry , owing to its good diffusing and reflectivity properties . it may be smoked onto the surface of an opaque material to form an integrating sphere . it is used extensively as an electrical insulator in tubular construction heating elements . there are several mesh sizes available and most commonly used ones are 40 and 80 & nbsp ; mesh per the american foundry society . the extensive use is due to its high dielectric strength and average thermal conductivity . mgo is usually crushed and compacted with minimal airgaps or voids . the electrical heating industry also experimented with aluminium oxide , but it is not used anymore . as a reagent in the installation of the carboxybenzyl ( cbz ) group using benzyl chloroformate in etoac for the n-protection of amines and amides . it is also used as an insulator in heat-resistant electrical cable . mgo doping has been shown to effectively inhibit grain growth in ceramics and improve their fracture toughness by transforming the mechanism of crack growth at nanoscale . left pressed mgo is used as an optical material . it is transparent from 0.3 to 7 & nbsp ; µm . the refractive index is 1.72 at 1 & nbsp ; µm and the abbe number is 53.58 . it is sometimes known by the eastman kodak trademarked name irtran-5 , although this designation is obsolete . crystalline pure mgo is available commercially and has a small use in infrared optics . mgo is packed around transuranic waste at the waste isolation pilot plant , to control the solubility of radionuclides . wipp.energy.gov step-by-step guide for waste handling at wipp . waste isolation pilot plant . wipp.energy.gov mgo has an important place as a commercial plant fertilizer nutrient science . fertilizer101.org . retrieved on 2017-04-26 . and as animal feed . magnesium oxide for the animal feed industry . lehvoss.de an aerosolized solution of mgo is used in library science and collections management for the deacidification of at-risk paper items . in this process , the alkalinity of mgo ( and similar compounds ) neutralizes the relatively high acidity characteristic of low-quality paper , thus slowing the rate of deterioration . mgo is also used as a protective coating in plasma displays . magnesium oxide is used as an oxide barrier in spin-tunneling devices . owing to the crystalline structure of its thin films , which can be deposited by magnetron sputtering , for example , it shows characteristics superior to those of the commonly used amorphous al 2 o 3 . in particular , spin polarization of about 85 % has been achieved with mgo versus 40–60 & nbsp ; % with aluminium oxide . the value of tunnel magnetoresistance is also significantly higher for mgo ( 600 % at room temperature and 1,100 & nbsp ; % at 4.2 k ) than al 2 o 3 ( ca . 70 % at room temperature ) . mgo is thermally stable up to about 700 & nbsp ; k , vs . 600 & nbsp ; k for al 2 o 3 . precautions . inhalation of magnesium oxide fumes can cause metal fume fever . magnesium oxide . national pollutant inventory , government of australia . . see also . calcium oxide barium oxide magnesium sulfide reactive magnesia . references . external links . data page at ucl ceramic data page at nist niosh pocket guide to chemical hazards at cdc