Religion and abortion

baháʼí faith . abortion , for the purpose of eliminating an unwanted child , and permanent sterilization are generally forbidden by the baháʼí faith , unless there is some medical reason for it . at present , baháʼís are encouraged to decide based on their own conscience in light of general guidance found in baháʼí writings . . buddhism . there is no single buddhist view concerning abortion . '' abortion : buddhism . '' bbc religion & ethics . retrieved january 15 , 2008 . some traditional sources , including some buddhist monastic codes , hold that life begins at conception , and that abortion , which would then involve the deliberate destruction of life , should be rejected . harvey , peter . introduction to buddhist ethics ( 2000 ) . cambridge university press . pg . 311–20 complicating the issue is the buddhist belief that '' life is a continuum with no discernible starting point '' . buddhism and abortion on patheos among buddhists , there is no official or preferred viewpoint regarding abortion . buddhism and abortion on bbc religions the dalai lama has said that abortion is '' negative '' , but there are exceptions . he said , '' i think abortion should be approved or disapproved according to each circumstance . '' inducing or otherwise causing an abortion is regarded as a serious matter in the monastic rules followed by both theravada and vajrayana monks ; monks and nuns must be expelled for assisting a woman in procuring an abortion . traditional sources do not recognize a distinction between early- and late-term abortion , but in sri lanka and thailand the '' moral stigma '' associated with an abortion grows with the development of the foetus . while traditional sources do not seem to be aware of the possibility of abortion as relevant to the health of the mother , modern buddhist teachers from many traditions & nbsp ; – and abortion laws in many buddhist countries & nbsp ; – recognize a threat to the life or physical health of the mother as an acceptable justification for abortion as a practical matter , though it may still be seen as a deed with negative moral or karmic consequences . . christianity . there is scholarly disagreement on how early christians felt about abortion , and whether explicit prohibitions of abortion exist in either the old testament or new testament books of the christian bible . some scholars have concluded that early christians took a nuanced stance on what is now called abortion , and that at different times , and in separate places , early christians have taken different stances . when children became people : the birth of childhood in early christianity by odd magne bakke '' abortion and catholic thought : the little-told history '' abortion and the politics of motherhood by kristin luker , university of california press other scholars have concluded that early christians considered abortion a sin at all stages ; although there is disagreement over their thoughts on what type of sin it was ana s . iltis , mark j . cherry , at the roots of christian bioethics ( m & m scrivener press 2010 , p . 166 michael j . gorman , abortion and the early church : christian , jewish , and pagan attitudes ( intervarsity press 1982 , p . 50 stem cells , human embryos and ethics : interdisciplinary perspectives : lars østnor , springer 2008 and how grave a sin it was held to be , it was seen as at least as grave as sexual immorality . robert nisbet , prejudices : a philosophical dictionary ( harvard university press 1982 , p . 2 some early christians believed that the embryo did not have a soul from conception , mcbrien , richard p . the harpercollins encyclopedia of catholicism the oxford companion to christian thought dictionary of ethics , theology and society by paul a . b . clarke , andrew linzey and consequently , opinion was divided as to whether or not early abortion was murder or ethically equivalent to murder . early church councils punished women for abortions that were combined with other sexual crimes , as well as makers of abortifacient drugs , but , like some early church fathers such as basil of caesarea , did not make distinction between '' formed '' and '' unformed '' foetuses . m . therese lysaught , joseph kotva , stephen e . lammers , allen verhey , on moral medicine : theological perspectives on medical ethics ( wm . b . eerdmans publishing 2012 , p . 676 michèle goyens , pieter de leemans , an smets , science translated : latin and vernacular translations of scientific treatises in medieval europe ( leuven university press 2008 , p . 384 , 399 while gregory of nyssa and maximus the confessor held that human life already began at conception , augustine of hippo affirmed aristotle 's concepts of ensoulment occurring some time after conception , after which point abortion was to be considered homicide , the janus face of prenatal diagnostics while still maintaining the condemnation of abortion at any time from conception onward . daniel schiff , abortion in judaism ( cambridge university press 2002 , p . 40 aquinas reiterated aristotle 's views of successive souls : vegetative , animal , and rational . this would be the catholic church 's position until 1869 , when the limitation of automatic excommunication to abortion of a formed foetus was removed , a change that has been interpreted as an implicit declaration that conception was the moment of ensoulment . most early penitentials imposed equal penances for abortion whether early-term or late-term , but later penitentials in the middle ages normally distinguished between the two , imposing heavier penances for late-term abortions and a less severe penance was imposed for the sin of abortion '' before the foetus has life '' . see for instance michèle goyens , pieter de leemans , an smets ( editors ) , science translated : latin and vernacular translations of scientific treatises in medieval europe ( leuven university press 2008 , pp . 390-396 patrick j . geary , readings in medieval history ( university of toronto press 2010 , vol . 1 , p . 255 , karin e . olsen , antonina harbus , tette hofstra , germanic texts and latin models ( peeters 2001 , pp . 84-85 and john thomas mcneill , helena m . gamer , medieval handbooks of penance ( hippocrene books 1965 contemporary christian denominations have nuanced positions , thoughts , and teachings about abortion , especially in extenuating circumstances . '' religious groups ’ official positions on abortion '' pew forum '' where does god stand on abortion ? '' usa today the catholic church , the catholic teaching on abortion , allocution to large families , nov . 26 , 1951 , pope pius xii the eastern orthodox church oriental orthodoxy , and most evangelical oppose deliberate abortion as immoral , while allowing what is sometimes called indirect abortion , namely , an action that does not seek the death of the foetus as an end or a means , but that is followed by the death as a side effect . christopher robert kaczor , the ethics of abortion ( taylor & francis 2010 , p . 187 some mainline protestant denominations such as the methodist church , united church of christ , presbyterian church ( usa ) , and the evangelical lutheran church of america , among others , are more permissive of abortion . more generally , some christian denominations can be considered anti-abortion , while others may favor abortion rights . additionally , there are sizable minorities in some denominations that disagree with their denomination 's stance on abortion . . hinduism . classical hindu texts strongly condemn abortion . the british broadcasting corporation writes , '' when considering abortion , the hindu way is to choose the action that will do least harm to all involved : the mother and father , the foetus and society . '' the bbc goes on to state , '' in practice , however , abortion is practiced in hindu culture in india , because the religious ban on abortion is sometimes overruled by the cultural preference for sons . this can lead to sex-selective abortion , which is called 'female foeticide ' . '' bbc '' hinduism and abortion '' hindu scholars and women 's rights advocates have supported bans on sex-selective abortions . some hindus support abortion in cases where the mother 's life is at imminent risk or when the foetus has a life-threatening developmental anomaly . some hindu theologians and brahma kumaris believe personhood begins at three months and develops through to five months of gestation , possibly implying permitting abortion up to the third month and considering any abortion past the third month to be destruction of the soul 's current incarnate body . chapter 1 : dilemmas of life and death : hindu ethics in a north american context date : 1995 author : crawford , s . cromwell . islam . although there are different opinions among islamic scholars about when life begins , and when abortion is permissible , most agree that the termination of a pregnancy after 120 days - the point at which , in islam , a foetus is thought to become a living soul - is not permissible . the pew forum . september 30 , 2008 . religious groups ’ official positions on abortion , retrieved on april 29 , 2009 . several islamic thinkers contend that in cases prior to four months of gestation , abortion should be permissible only in instances in which the mother 's life is in danger or in cases of rape . bbc.co.uk some schools of sharia permit abortion in the first sixteen weeks of pregnancy , whereas others only allow it in the first seven weeks of pregnancy . the further along the pregnancy has progressed , the greater the wrong . the quran states to not have an abortion for fear of poverty . all schools accept abortion as a means to save the mother 's life . . judaism . orthodox jewish teaching allows abortion if necessary to safeguard the life of the pregnant woman . judaism and abortion , bbc ( 2005-02-08 ) . bank , richard . the everything judaism book , page 186 ( everything books , 2002 ) . while the reform , reconstructionist , and conservative movements openly advocate for the right to a safe and accessible abortion , the orthodox movement is less unified on the issue . many orthodox jews oppose abortion , except when it is necessary to save a woman 's life ( or , according to some , the woman 's health ) . in judaism , views on abortion draw primarily upon the legal and ethical teachings of the hebrew bible , the talmud , the case-by-case decisions of responsa , and other rabbinic literature . generally speaking , orthodox jews oppose abortion after the 40th day , talmud , yevomot 69a states that prior to the 40th day , a foetus is '' considered to be mere water '' grodzenski , achiezer vol . 3 , 65:14 with health-related exceptions , and reform jews tend to allow greater latitude for abortion . articles published by the schlesinger institute on abortion in judaism : articles in english and in hebrew , and the entry on abortion from the encyclopedia of jewish medical ethics ( hebrew ) there are rulings that often appear conflicting on the matter . the talmud states that a foetus is not legally a person until it is delivered . jewish abortion perspective 1 on patheos the torah contains the law that , '' when men fight , and one of them pushes a pregnant woman , and a miscarriage results , but no other misfortune , the one responsible shall be fined.but if other misfortune ensues , the penalty shall be life ( nefesh ) for life ( nefesh ) . '' . that is , causing a woman to miscarry is a crime , but not a capital crime , because the fetus is not considered a person . jewish abortion perspective 2 on patheos jeremiah 1:5 states that , '' before i formed you in the womb , i knew you , before you were born , i set you apart ; i appointed you as a prophet to the nations . '' for some , this verse , while talking specifically about jeremiah , is an indication that god is aware of the identity of '' developing unborn human beings even before they enter the womb '' , james d . slack , abortion , execution , and the consequences of taking life ( transaction publishers 2011 , p . 27 or that for everyone , god has a plan that abortion might be seen as frustrating . jon mayled , libby ahluwalia , philosophy and ethics ( nelson thornes 2003 others say that this interpretation is incorrect , and that the verse is not related to personhood or abortion , as jeremiah is asserting his prophetic status as distinct and special . rachels , james . the elements of moral philosophy . boston : mcgraw-hill , 2003 . the hebrew bible has a few references to abortion ; exodus 21:22-25 addresses miscarriage by way of another 's actions , which it describes as a non-capital offense punishable through a fine . isser , stanley . two traditions : the law of exodus 21:22-23 revisited , catholic biblical quarterly the book of numbers in the hebrew bible describes the ordeal of the bitter water ( sotah ) to be administered by a priest to a wife whose husband thinks she was unfaithful . some scholars interpret the text as involving an abortifacient potion or otherwise that induces a miscarriage if the woman is pregnant with another man 's child . rabbinical scholar arnold ehrlich interprets the ordeal such that it ends either harmlessly if the woman is faithful , or with an abortion induced : '' the embryo falls '' . . sikhism . the sikh sikh rehat maryada ( code of conduct ) does not deal directly with abortion . however , it does explicitly prohibit the practice of 'kuri-mar ' , a punjabi term which literally means '' girl killing '' but also encompasses female foeticide . the guru granth sahib ( primary scripture and source of sikh religious guidance for sikhs ) , does not provide any specific dictate on abortion . many sikhs will therefore interpret certain parts of texts and make a personal decision when confronted with a clearly abnormal fetus . bmj however , while there is no explicit prohibition in the guru granth sahib or the sikh rehat maryada , abortion is generally viewed by some sikhs as forbidden because it is said to interfere with the creative work of god . bbc despite this theoretical viewpoint , abortion is not uncommon among the sikh community in india , and there is growing concern that sex-selective abortion because of the cultural preference for sons . . unitarian universalism . the unitarian universalism strongly supports abortion rights . in 1978 , the unitarian universalist association passed a resolution that declared , '' . the right to choice on contraception and abortion are important aspects of the right of privacy , respect for human life , and freedom of conscience of women and their families '' . right to choose the association had released earlier statements in 1963 and 1968 favoring the reform of restrictive abortion laws . wicca . although views differ , most wiccans consider abortion to be a spiritual decision that should be free from interference by the state or politicians . encyclopedia of women and religion in north america : volume 1 - page 811 , rosemary skinner keller , rosemary radford ruether , marie cantlon - 2006 . see also . abortion debate abortion law religious views on birth control separation of church and state . references .