Caged

plot . a married 19-year-old , marie allen ( eleanor parker ) , is sent to prison after a botched armed robbery attempt with her equally young husband , tom , who is killed . while receiving her initial prison physical , she learns that she is two months pregnant . marie has trouble adjusting to the monotonous and cutthroat world of the women 's prison . she meets kitty stark ( betty garde ) , a murderous shoplifter , who says once marie gets out , kitty will get her a job '' boosting '' ( shoplifting ) . marie does not want to get involved in crime , but kitty explains the realities of prison life : '' you get tough or you get killed . you better wise up before it 's too late . '' told she can be paroled in 10 months , marie witnesses prisoner after prisoner being '' flopped back '' —granted parole—but then not released from jail because no job had been arranged by her parole officer . one flopped-back prisoner , june ( olive deering ) , kills herself given the hopelessness of her situation . for marie , this steadily drains her own hopes of getting out early . despite the hardships under sadistic matron evelyn harper ( hope emerson ) , marie gives birth to a healthy baby . she plans to '' temporarily '' grant full custody to her mother , with the intent of getting the child back after she is released , but marie 's callous step-father had already decided not to allow the baby into his house . marie 's mother uses the excuses that she is '' too old '' and '' has n't a penny in her name '' as reasons why she can not help marie . after marie is denied a parole , she tries half-heartedly to escape . she is not punished for that attempt , although prison authorities do force her to give up her child for adoption . the arrival of '' vice queen '' elvira powell ( lee patrick ) sets off a rivalry with kitty . elvira bribes harper to put kitty in solitary confinement , where kitty is beaten . when a kitten is found in the jail yard , marie attempts to make it a pet , but harper tries to take the little animal away , an action that prompts the inmates to riot . the kitten is accidentally killed during the melee ; and after order is restored by the staff , marie is punished this time , also being sent to '' solitary '' . before taking marie to an isolated cell , harper shaves marie 's head , symbolically stripping her of her innocence . harper has disagreements with the sympathetic reformist prison superintendent , ruth benton ( agnes moorehead ) , especially after this latest incident with marie . because harper is a political appointee , the police commissioner refuses to fire her and instead asks for benton 's resignation . when benton declares that she will demand a public hearing , the resignation issue is dropped . kitty finally rejoins her fellow inmates after serving a month in solitary confinement , but she is distraught and mentally unstable . after being harassed by harper in the prison cafeteria , kitty stabs harper to death as the inmates watch and make no attempt to stop it . marie—now hardened by her exposure to career criminals and sadistic guards—actually encourages kitty in the fatal assault . up for parole once again , marie has allegedly found a '' cashier 's job '' outside the prison . in reality , the job is simply a ruse to get released so she can join elvira powell 's shoplifting gang . marie leaves the institution a cynical , unscrupulous woman after living and surviving there for 15 months . before she departs , benton asks her why she is going into crime when she could go back to school . marie says she got all the education she needed in prison . after she leaves , an office assistant asks benton what to do with marie 's file . benton replies , '' keep it active . she 'll be back . '' . cast . eleanor parker - marie allen agnes moorehead - ruth benton ellen corby - emma barber hope emerson - evelyn harper betty garde - kitty stark sheila macrae - helen jan sterling - jeta kovsky aka '' smoochie '' lee patrick - elvira powell jane darwell - solitary confinement matron gertrude w . hoffmann - millie olive deering - june roberts gertrude michael - georgia harrison . critical reception . in 1950 , variety gave a mixed but predominantly positive review of caged . the film industry 's long-established , widely read trade paper believed the film might struggle in the '' general market '' , characterizing it as a '' grim , unrelieved study of cause and effect '' that '' still adds up to very drab entertainment '' . “ brog . ” ( 1950 ) . '' 'caged ' '' , review , variety , may 3 , 1950 , page 6 . internet archive . retrieved august 29 , 2018 . nevertheless , variety was very complimentary of nearly all aspects of the film 's production , including its direction , editing , set designs , music , and cast performances , especially those of parker and emerson : another american reviewer in 1950 , film bulletin , gave generally high marks as well to caged . '' 'caged ’ stark , gripping prison film is highly exploitable '' , film bulletin ( new york , n.y . ) , may 8 , 1950 , page 10 . internet archive . retrieved september 1 , 2018 . the new york-based weekly publication , which promoted itself as an “ independent motion picture trade paper ” , did contend that the film 's '' stark , gripping '' social commentary would be even more powerful if the '' dismal atmosphere '' of its storyline had at least a few contrasting lighter moments . “ 'caged ’ ” , film bulletin observed , '' is to penal institutions what ‘ the snake pit ’ was to mental institutions and ‘ the lost weekend ’ to alcoholism . '' in a much later review , critic emanuel levy in 2007 generally praised the film too : leonard maltin 's movie guide in 2014 favorably awarded caged three out of four stars , also describing the film overall as “ stark ” with '' remarkable '' performances . maltin , leonard . accolades . ; academy awards ; nominations '' oscars.org -- caged '' . academy of motion picture arts and sciences . retrieved december 16 , 2013 . best actress : eleanor parker best supporting actress : hope emerson best writing ( story and screenplay ) : virginia kellogg , bernard c . schoenfeld . in popular culture . caged is satirized in a 1977 sctv comedy sketch as '' broads behind bars '' with the character of marie renamed '' cheryl '' ( and portrayed by comedian catherine o'hara ) . cheryl is depicted as a teenager in the mid-to-late 1950s , who after smoking '' pot '' ends up in prison after being framed for armed robbery and also learns later that she is pregnant . the character of kitty is played by andrea martin , while john candy , in drag , plays the role of matron harper ( called '' schultzy '' ) . a knife fight between kitty and harper occurs in the skit , as in the film , although both kitty and schultzy die . kitty is fatally stabbed by schultzy , and schultzy is later killed by cheryl . for her action , cheryl is then told she can be released from prison ; however , she responds by only laughing and declining the offer , echoing kitty 's remark in the original film , “ no dice ! ” the skit , in the end , presents itself not only as a parody of “ women-in-prison ” movies like caged but also as a spoof of the anti-marijuana films that were presented to students in many american high schools during the late 1950s and early 1960s . references . sources . . external links . . streaming audio . eleanor parker also stars in the radio version of caged , which was originally broadcast eight months after the film 's release . it was presented by nbc radio on august 2 , 1951 , as episode 112 of the network 's anthology series screen directors playhouse . that adaptation is free for download at the internet archive .