Mohair

production . image : mohair sign , camp wood , tx img 1326.jpg thumb mohair is vital to the economy of the texas hill country , including the real county community of camp wood . shearing is done twice a year , in the spring and in the fall . one goat will produce of mohair a year . shearing is done on a cleanly-swept floor and extra care is taken to keep the hair clean and free of debris . the hair is then processed to remove natural grease , dirt and vegetable matter . mohair grows in uniform locks . the angora goat is a single-coat breed , and unlike pygora or cashmere , there is no need to dehair a mohair fleece to separate the coarse hair from the down hair . south africa is the world 's largest mohair producer as of 2013 , supplying around 50 % of the total world production . due to animal cruelty in the south african farms , zara , h & m , gap , topshop , lacoste , and many more will no longer sell mohair clothing . . history . mohair is one of the oldest textile fibers in use . the angora goat is thought to originate from the mountains of tibet , reaching turkey in the 16th century . however , fabric made of mohair was known in england as early as the 8th century . the word '' mohair '' was adopted into english sometime before 1570 from the arabic : mukhayyar , '' mohaire '' . the oxford english dictionary . a type of haircloth , literally '' choice '' , from khayyara , '' he chose '' . '' mohair '' . the encyclopædia britannica . 11th ed . 1911 . in about 1820 , raw mohair was first exported from turkey to england , which then became the leading manufacturer of mohair products . the yorkshire mills spun yarn that was exported to russia , germany , austria , etc . , as well as woven directly in yorkshire . until 1849 , the turkish province of ankara was the sole producer of angora goats . charles v is believed to be the first to bring angora goats to europe . due to the great demand for mohair fiber , throughout the 1800s there was a great deal of crossbreeding between angora goats and common goats . the growing demand for mohair further resulted in attempts on a commercial scale to introduce the goat into south africa ( where it was crossed with the native goat ) in 1838 , the united states in 1849 , australia from 1856 to 1875 , and later still new zealand . in 1849 , angora goats made their way to america as a gift from turkey . during the 1960s , a blend of mohair and wool suiting fabric known as tonik or tonic was developed in england . this had a shiny , color changing appearance and was popular among rude boys and the mod subculture . gentlemans gazette similar suits were worn by mod revivalists , skinheads , and fans of ska punk and two tone music during the 1980s in fashion . chanting down babylon american counterculture today , south africa is the largest mohair producer in the world , with the majority of south african mohair being produced in the eastern cape . the united states is the second-largest producer , with the majority of american mohair being produced in texas . turkey also produces good-quality mohair . because the goats are sheared once a year ( different from south africa ) , turkey produces the longest mohair of the world . in december 2006 , the general assembly of the united nations proclaimed 2009 to be the international year of natural fibres , so as to raise the profile of mohair and other natural fibers . uses . mohair is used in scarves , winter hats , suits , sweaters , coats , socks and home furnishing . mohair fiber is also found in carpets , wall fabrics , craft yarns , and many other fabrics , and may be used as a substitute for fur . because its texture resembles fine human hair , mohair is often used in making high grade doll wigs or in rooting customized dolls . mohair is a very soft yarn when compared with other natural and synthetic fibers . due to mohair 's lacking prominent , protruding scales along the hair 's surface , it is often blended with wool or alpaca . blending the heavily scaled wool helps the smooth mohair fibers hold their shape and stick together when spun into yarn . mohair is also valued for certain other unique characteristics : it is warmer than other fibers , even when used to make a light-weight garment , and is often blended with wool for this reason ; and mohair fibers have a distinctive luster created by the way they reflect light . combined with mohair 's ability to absorb dyes exceptionally well , pure mohair yarns are usually recognizable for their vivid , saturated colours . fibers from young goats are softest and are used to manufacture yarn for clothing . fibers from mature goats are used to produce such things as rugs and carpets . mohair is also used in ski skins for randonnée skiing and ski touring . the mohair is used in a carpet allowing the skier an appropriate ascension method without sliding downhill . mohair industry worldwide . as of 2009 , world output of mohair was estimated at around 5,000 tonnes a year , down from a high of 25,000 tonnes in the 1990s . south africa accounts for 60 % of total production . south african mohair is generally exported raw or semi-processed to textile makers in europe , the uk and the far east . prices for adult mohair declined in 2010 while prices for kid mohair remained the same . an emerging market for mohair producers has been china . . us subsidies for mohair production . during world war ii , u.s . soldiers wore uniforms made of wool . worried that domestic producers could not supply enough for future wars , congress enacted loan and price support programs for wool and mohair in the national wool act of 1954 as part of the 1954 farm bill . despite these subsidies , wool and mohair production declined . the strategic importance declined as well ; the us military adopted uniforms made of synthetic fibers , such as dacron , and officially removed wool from the list of strategic materials in 1960 . nevertheless , the u.s . government continued to provide subsidies to mohair producers until 1995 , when the subsidies were '' eliminated effective with the marketing year ending december 31 , 1995 '' . in the future of freedom , fareed zakaria points out that the subsidies were reinstated a few years later , due in large part to the lobbying on behalf of the special interests of the subsidy recipients . by 2000 , congress had appropriated us 20 million for goat and sheep producers . as of 2002 , mohair producers were still able to receive special assistance loans from the u.s . government , after an amendment to eliminate the subsidy was defeated . the u.s . currently subsidizes mohair production under the marketing assistance loan program of the 2014 farm act . . see also . international year of natural fibres angora goat . references . further reading . . external links . oklahoma state university , breeds of livestock - angora goats