Skagerrak

name . the meaning of skagerrak is most likely the skagen channel/strait . skagen is a town near the northern cape of denmark ( the skaw ) . rak means 'straight waterway ' ( compare the damrak in amsterdam ) ; it is cognate with reach . nudansk ordbog ( 1993 ) , 15th edition , 2nd reprint , copenhagen : politikens forlag , entry skagerrak . den store danske encyklopædi ( 2004 ) , cd-rom edition , copenhagen : gyldendal , entry skagerrak . the ultimate source of this syllable is the proto-indo-european root reg- , 'straight ' . rak means 'straight ' as in 'straight ahead ' in both modern norwegian and swedish . råk in modern norwegian refers to a channel or opening of water in an otherwise ice-covered body of water . there is no evidence to suggest a connection with the modern danish word rak ( meaning rabble or riff-raff ) . another possibility is that the skagerrak was named by dutch seafarers , in the same way the adjacent kattegat got its name . it was quite common for the dutch to call similar stretches of waterways a rak , such as : langerak , damrak , gouderak , and tuikwerderrak . ( see kattegat for its etymology , in which gat means '' gate '' or '' hole '' . ) . geography . the skagerrak is long and between wide . it deepens toward the norwegian coast , reaching over 700 m at the norwegian trench . some ports along the skagerrak are oslo , larvik and kristiansand in norway , skagen , hirtshals and hanstholm in denmark and uddevalla , lysekil and strömstad in sweden . the skagerrak has an average salinity of 30 practical salinity units , which is very low , close to that of brackish water , but comparable to most other coastal waters . the area available to biomass is about and includes a wide variety of habitats , from shallow sandy and stony reefs in sweden and denmark to the depths of the norwegian trench . extent . the international hydrographic organization defines the limits of the skagerrak as follows : on the west . a line joining hanstholm and the naze ( lindesnes , . on the southeast . the northern limit of the kattegat a line joining skagen ( the skaw , north point of denmark ) and paternosterskären and thence northeastward through the shoals to tjörn island . . history . older names for the combined skagerrak and kattegat were the norwegian sea or jutland sea ; the latter appears in the knýtlinga saga . until the construction of the eider canal in 1784 ( a predecessor to the kiel canal ) , skagerrak was the only way in and out of the baltic sea . for this reason the strait has had a busy international traffic for centuries . after the industrial revolution , the traffic increased and today skagerrak is among the busiest straits in the world . in 1862 , a short cut , the thyborøn channel at the limfjord was constructed in denmark through skagerrak from the north sea by going directly to the kattegat . the limfjord only supports minor transports though . in both world wars , the skagerrak was strategically very important for germany . the biggest sea battle of the first world war , the battle of jutland , also known as the battle of the skagerrak , took place here may 31 to june 1 , 1916 . in the second world war , the importance of controlling this waterway , the only sea access to the baltic , was the motive for the german invasions of denmark , norway and the construction of the northern parts of the atlantic wall . both of these naval engagements have contributed to the large number of shipwrecks in the skagerrak . traffic and industry . skagerrak is a heavily trafficated strait , with c . 7,500 individual vessels ( excluding fishing vessels ) from all over the world visiting in 2013 alone . cargo ships are by far the most common vessel in skagerrak at c . 4,000 individual ships in 2013 , followed by tankers , which are nearly half as frequent . when viewed in combination with the baltic sea area , ships from 122 different nationalities visited in 2013 , with most of these carrying cargo or passengers within europe , regardless of their flag state . nearly all commercial vessels in skagerrak are tracked by the automatic identification system ( ais ) . . recreation . skagerrak is popular for recreational activities in all three countries . there are many summer house residences and several marinas along the coasts . biology . the skagerrak is habitat for approximately 2,000 marine species , many of them adapted to its waters . for example , a variety of atlantic cod called the skagerrak cod spawns off the norwegian coast . the eggs are buoyant and the hatchlings feed on zooplankton . juveniles sink to the bottom where they have a shorter maturity cycle ( 2 years ) . they do not migrate but remain local to norwegian fjords . the variety of habitats and the large volume of plankton on the surface support prolific marine life . energy moves from the top to the bottom according to vinogradov 's ladder of migrations ; that is , some species are benthic and others pelagic , but there are graded marine layers within which species move vertically for short distances . in addition , some species are benthopelagic , moving between surface and bottom . the benthic species include coryphaenoides rupestris , argentina silus , etmopterus spinax , chimaera monstrosa and glyptocephalus cynoglossus . on the top are clupea harengus , scomber scombrus , sprattus sprattus . some species that move between are pandalus borealis , sabinea sarsi , etmopterus spinax . reefs . apart from sandy and stony reefs , extensive cold water coral reefs , mostly of lophelia , are growing in skagerrak . the säcken reef in the swedish marine protection of koster fjord is an ancient cold water coral reef and the only known coral reef in the country . the tisler reef in the norwegian marine protection of ytre hvaler national park is the largest known coral reef in europe . lophelia reefs are also present in the norwegian trench and they are known from the shallow waters of many norwegian fjords . skagerrak also holds a number of rare bubble reefs ; biological reefs formed around cold seeps of geological carbohydrate outgassings , usually methane . these rare habitats are mostly known from the danish waters of skagerrak west of hirtshals , but more might be discovered in future surveys . the outgassings continue into the north sea and are also present in kattegat in the east . bubbly reefs are very rare in europe and supports a very varied ecosystem . with the centuries long heavy international seatraffic of skagerrak , the seabed also holds an abundance of shipwrecks . wrecks on shallow waters , provides a firm anchoring for several corals and polyps and explored wrecks have been revealed to support dead man 's fingers corals , brittle stars and large wolffish . . environmental concerns . scientists and environmental institutions have expressed concern about the increasing pressure on the ecosystem in skagerrak . the pressure has already had negative impacts and is caused by cumulative environmental effects , of which direct human activities are only one piece of the puzzle . climate change and ocean acidification are expected to have increasing impacts on the skagerrak ecosystem in the future . skagerrak and the north sea receives considerable inputs of hazardous waste and radioactive waste . most is ascribed to long-range transport from other countries , but not all . marine litter is also a growing problem . until recently , waste water and sewage pouring into skagerrak from settlements and industries was not treated at all . in combination with wash out of excessive nutrients from conventional farming , this has often led to large algae blooms . . protections . there are several marine protections in skagerrak , including : ; norway ytre hvaler national park , established on 26 june 2009 raet national park , established on 16 december 2016 ; sweden kosterhavet national park bratten , a newly designated natura 2000 sea area beyond kosterhavet . pockmarks and biogenic reefs at depths of . gullmarsfjorden , sweden 's first marine conservation area from 1983 . ; denmark grenen and a sea area immediately north . . see also . danish straits . notes and references . . external links . the baltic sea , kattegat and skagerrak swedish meteorological and hydrological institute ( smhi ) . skagerrak deep-water fish assemblage skagerrak marine vessel traffic