Separation of church and state

history of the concept and term . late antiquity . an important contributor to the discussion concerning the proper relationship between church and state was st . augustine , who in the city of god , book xix , chapter 17 , examined the ideal relationship between the '' earthly city '' and the '' city of god '' . in this work , augustine posited that major points of overlap were to be found between the '' earthly city '' and the '' city of god '' , especially as people need to live together and get along on earth . thus , augustine held that it was the work of the '' temporal city '' to make it possible for a '' heavenly city '' to be established on earth . feldman ( 2009 ) . medieval europe . for centuries , monarchs ruled by the idea of divine right . sometimes this began to be used by a monarch to support the notion that the king ruled both his own kingdom and church within its boundaries , a theory known as caesaropapism . on the other side was the catholic doctrine that the pope , as the vicar of christ on earth , should have the ultimate authority over the church , and indirectly over the state . moreover , throughout the middle ages the pope claimed the right to depose the catholic kings of western europe and tried to exercise it , sometimes successfully ( see the investiture controversy , below ) , sometimes not , such as was the case with henry viii of england and henry iii of navarre . in the west the issue of the separation of church and state during the medieval period centered on monarchs who sphere sovereignty but encroached on the church 's rule of the spiritual sphere . this unresolved contradiction in ultimate control of the church led to power struggles and crises of leadership , notably in the investiture controversy , which was resolved in the concordat of worms in 1122 . by this concordat , the emperor renounced the right to invest ecclesiastics with ring and crosier , the symbols of their spiritual power , and guaranteed election by the canons of cathedral or abbey and free consecration . . reformation . at the beginning of the protestant reformation , martin luther articulated a doctrine of the two kingdoms . according to james madison , perhaps one of the most important modern proponents of the separation of church and state , luther 's doctrine of the two kingdoms marked the beginning of the modern conception of separation of church and state . image : papalpolitics2.jpg left thumb antichristus , a woodcut by lucas cranach the elder of the pope using the temporal power to grant authority to a generously contributing ruler those of the radical reformation ( the anabaptists ) took luther 's ideas in new directions , most notably in the writings of michael sattler ( 1490–1527 ) , who agreed with luther that there were two kingdoms , but differed in arguing that these two kingdoms should be separate , and hence baptized believers should not vote , serve in public office or participate in any other way with the '' kingdom of the world '' . while there was a diversity of views in the early days of the radical reformation , in time sattler 's perspective became the normative position for most anabaptists in the coming centuries . anabaptists came to teach that religion should never be compelled by state power , approaching the issue of church-state relations primarily from the position of protecting the church from the state . bender , h . s . '' the anabaptists and religious liberty in the sixteenth century . '' mennonite quarterly review 29 ( 1955 ) : 83–100 . in the 1530s , henry viii , angered by the pope clement vii 's refusal to annul his marriage to catherine of aragon , decided to break with the church and set himself as ruler of the church of england . the monarchs of great britain have retained ecclesiastical authority in the church of england since henry viii , having the current title , supreme governor of the church of england . england 's ecclesiastical intermixing did not spread widely , however , due to the extensive persecution of catholics that resulted from henry 's power grab . this eventually led to nonconformism , english dissenters , and the anti-catholicism of oliver cromwell , the commonwealth of england , and the penal laws against catholics and others who did not adhere to the church of england . one of the results of the persecution in england was that some people fled great britain to be able to worship as they wished . after the american colonies revolted against george iii of the united kingdom , the constitution of united states was amended to ban the establishment of religion by congress . enlightenment . the concept of separating church and state is often credited to the writings of english philosopher john locke ( 1632–1704 ) . feldman , noah ( 2005 ) . divided by god . farrar , straus and giroux , pg . 29 ( '' it took john locke to translate the demand for liberty of conscience into a systematic argument for distinguishing the realm of government from the realm of religion . '' ) according to his principle of the social contract , locke argued that the government lacked authority in the realm of individual conscience , as this was something rational people could not cede to the government for it or others to control . for locke , this created a natural right in the liberty of conscience , which he argued must therefore remain protected from any government authority . these views on religious tolerance and the importance of individual conscience , along with his social contract , became particularly influential in the american colonies and the drafting of the united states constitution . feldman , noah ( 2005 ) . divided by god . farrar , straus and giroux , pg . 29 at the same period of the 17th century , pierre bayle and some fideism were forerunners of the separation of church and state , maintaining that faith was independent of reason . during the 18th century , the ideas of locke and bayle , in particular the separation of church and state , became more common , promoted by the philosophers of the age of enlightenment . montesquieu already wrote in 1721 about religious tolerance and a degree of separation between religion and government . voltaire defended some level of separation but ultimately subordinated the church to the needs of the state while denis diderot , for instance , was a partisan of a strict separation of church and state , saying '' the distance between the throne and the altar can never be too great '' . . jefferson and the bill of rights . in english , the exact term is an offshoot of the phrase , '' wall of separation between church and state '' , as written in thomas jefferson 's letter to the danbury baptist association in 1802 . in that letter , referencing the first amendment to the united states constitution , jefferson writes : believing with you that religion is a matter which lies solely between man & his god , that he owes account to none other for his faith or his worship , that the legitimate powers of government reach actions only , & not opinions , i contemplate with sovereign reverence that act of the whole american people which declared that their legislature should 'make no law respecting an establishment of religion , or prohibiting the free exercise thereof , ' thus building a wall of separation between church and state . jefferson was describing to the baptists that the united states bill of rights prevents the establishment of a national church , and in so doing they did not have to fear government interference in their right to expressions of religious conscience . the bill of rights , adopted in 1791 as ten amendments to the constitution of the united states , was one of the earliest political expressions of religious freedom . others were the virginia statute for religious freedom , also authored by jefferson and adopted by virginia in 1786 ; and the french declaration of the rights of the man and of the citizen of 1789 . the metaphor '' a wall of separation between church and state '' used by jefferson in the above quoted letter became a part of the first amendment jurisprudence of the u.s . supreme court . it was first used by chief justice morrison waite in reynolds v . united states ( 1878 ) . american historian george bancroft was consulted by waite in the reynolds case regarding the views on establishment by the framers of the u.s . constitution . bancroft advised waite to consult jefferson . waite then discovered the above quoted letter in a library after skimming through the index to jefferson 's collected works according to historian don drakeman . the mission of the church recognized that the realities of secularization and pluralism exist despite the traditional teaching on confessional statehood . because of this reality of secularisation , it also recognized and encouraged the role of the laity in the life of the church in the secular world , viewing the laity as much-needed agents of change in order to bring about a transformation of society more in line with catholic teaching . '' this council exhorts christians , as citizens of two cities , to strive to discharge their earthly duties conscientiously and in response to the gospel spirit . '' . this was further expanded in apostolicam actuositatem , decree on the apostolate of the laity , of 18 november 1965 . apostolicam actuositatem , the second vatican council 's '' decree on the apostolate of the laity '' , was issued 18 november 1965 . the purpose of this document was to encourage and guide lay people in their christian service . '' since the laity , in accordance with their state of life , live in the midst of the world and its concerns , they are called by god to exercise their apostolate in the world like leaven , with the ardor of the spirit of christ . '' pope paul vi . apostolicam actuositatem , §2 , 18 november 1965 francis arinze explains that lay persons '' . are called by baptism to witness to christ in the secular sphere of life ; that is in the family , in work and leisure , in science and cultural , in politics and government , in trade and mass media , and in national and international relations '' . francis cardinal arinze , the layperson 's distinctive role , ignatius press , 2013 the catholic teaching in dignitatis humanae , the second vatican council 's declaration on religious freedom ( 1986 ) , states that all people are entitled to a degree of religious freedom as long as public order is not disturbed and that constitutional law should recognize such freedom . calo , zachary a . , catholic social thought , political liberalism , and the idea of human rights , pp . 18–19 , samford university , november 2004 '' if , in view of peculiar circumstances obtaining among peoples , special civil recognition is given to one religious community in the constitutional order of society , it is at the same time imperative that the right of all citizens and religious communities to religious freedom should be recognized and made effective in practice . pope paul vi . dignitatia humanae , §6 , 7 december 1965 at the same time , the document reiterated that the church '' leaves untouched traditional catholic doctrine on the moral duty of men and societies toward the true religion and toward the one church of christ '' . the traditional teaching of the duty of society towards the church is described in the current edition of the catechism of the catholic church , number 2105 . catechism of the catholic church , 1993 edition , the catholic church takes the position that the church itself has a proper role in guiding and informing consciences , explaining the natural law , and judging the moral integrity of the state , thereby serving as check to the power of the state . grasso , kenneth l . and robert p . hunt , catholicism and religious freedom : contemporary reflections on vatican ii 's declaration on religious liberty , p . 6 , rowman & littlefield , 2006 the church teaches that the right of individuals to religious freedom is an essential dignity . catholic philosopher thomas storck argues that , once a society becomes '' catholicised '' and adopts the church as the state religion , it is further morally bound : '' 'the just requirements of public order ' vary considerably between a catholic state and a religiously neutral state . if a neutral state can prohibit polygamy , even though it is a restriction on religious freedom , then a catholic state can likewise restrict the public activity of non-catholic groups . '' the just requirements of public order '' can be understood only in the context of a people 's traditions and modes of living , and in a catholic society would necessarily include that social unity based upon a recognition of the catholic church as the religion of society , and the consequent exclusion of all other religions from public life . western secular democracies , committed to freedom of religion for all sects , find no contradiction in proscribing polygamy , although some religions permit it , because its practice is contrary to the traditions and mores of these nations . a catholic country can certainly similarly maintain its own manner of life . '' if , under consideration of historical circumstances among peoples , special civil recognition is given to one religious community in the constitutional order of a society , it is necessary at the same time that the right of all citizens and religious communities to religious freedom should be acknowledged and maintained . murray , john courtney and j . leon hooper , religious liberty : catholic struggles with pluralism , pp . 213–14 , westminster john knox press , 1993 the church takes stances on current political issues , and tries to influence legislation on matters it considers relevant . for example , the catholic bishops in the united states adopted a plan in the 1970s calling for efforts aimed at a constitutional amendment providing '' abortion law child to the maximum degree possible '' . benedict xvi regards modern idea of freedom ( meaning the church should be free from governmental coercion and overtly political influence from the state ) as a legitimate product of the christian environment , cardinal joseph ratzinger . '' theology and the church 's political stance '' . in : church , ecumenism and politics : new essays in ecclesiology ( ny : crossroad , 1988 , p . 162 ) . in a similar way to jacques le goff . '' les convictions européennes de l'historien jacques le goff . '' la vie , 01/04/2014 , . however , contrary to the french historian , '' jacques le goff : '' mes héros ne meurent jamais '' . '' l ' obs , . the pope rejects the conception of religion as just a private affair . '' religion not just a private affair , affirms pontiff . '' zenit , . . friendly and hostile separation . scholars have distinguished between what can be called '' friendly '' and '' hostile '' separations of church and state . the friendly type limits the interference of the church in matters of the state but also limits the interference of the state in church matters . the hostile variety , by contrast , seeks to confine religion purely to the home or church and limits religious education , religious rites of passage and public displays of faith . the hostile model of secularism arose with the french revolution and is typified in the mexican revolution , its resulting constitution , in the first portuguese republic of 1910 , and in the spanish constitution of 1931 . martinez-torron , javier . '' freedom of religion in the case law of the spanish constitutional court '' , pg . 2 , brigham young university law review , 2001 the hostile model exhibited during these events can be seen as approaching the type of political religion seen in totalitarian states . the french separation of 1905 félix fénéon , nouvelles en trois lignes , 1906 , éditeur libella , collection libretto , 162 pages , paris , 2019 and the spanish separation of 1931 have been characterized as the two most hostile of the twentieth century , although the current church-state relations in both countries are considered generally friendly . nevertheless , france 's former president nicolas sarkozy at the beginning of his term considered his country 's current state of affairs a '' negative laïcité '' and wanted to develop a '' positive laïcité '' more open to religion . the concerns of the state toward religion have been seen by some as one cause of the civil war in spain and mexico . the french catholic philosopher and drafter of the universal declaration of human rights , jacques maritain , noted the distinction between the models found in france and in the mid-twentieth century united states . he considered the u.s . model of that time to be more amicable because it had both '' sharp distinction and actual cooperation '' between church and state , what he called a '' historical treasure '' and admonished the united states , '' please to god that you keep it carefully , and do not let your concept of separation veer round to the european one . '' alexis de tocqueville , another french observer , tended to make the same distinction : '' in the u.s . , from the beginning , politics and religion were in accord , and they have not ceased to be so since . '' de tocqueville , alexis , democracy in america , edited and translated by harvey mansfield and delba winthrop , chicago : university of chicago press , 2000 . . see also . 1905 french law on the separation of the churches and the state antidisestablishmentarianism baptists in the history of separation of church and state caesaropapism christian reconstructionism donatism east waynesville baptist church freedom of religion by country institutional theory islamic republic kulturkampf nonsectarian norwegian humanist association principled distance secularization sociology of religion state atheism state religion theocracy women 's rights . references . further reading . feldman , noah . '' religion and the earthly city '' , social research , winter 2009 , vol . 76 issue 4 , pp . & nbsp ; 989–1000 tomas jeffersons journal taylor , charles . '' the polysemy of the secular '' , social research , winter 2009 , vol . 76 issue 4 , pp . & nbsp ; 1143–66 temple , william , abp . christianity and the state . london : macmillan and co . , 1928 . whitman , james q . '' separating church and state : the atlantic divide '' , historical reflections , winter 2008 , vol . 34 issue 3 , pp . & nbsp ; 86–104 mcgowan , barry , '' how to separate church & state : a manual from the trenches '' , hufton mueller , llc . ( june 2012 ) . stone , geoffrey r . , '' the world of the framers : a christian nation ? '' , ucla law review , 56 ( october 2008 ) , 1–26 . external links . about : how to separate church & state by barry mcgowan religiousliberty.tv current and historical information about church-state separation history of the separation of church and state in america churches are not exempt from state licenses by richard r . hammar campaign activities by richard r . hammar geoffrey r . stone , the world of the framers : a christian nation ? , 56 ucla l . rev . 1 ( 2008 ) .