MacOS version history

development . development outside apple . after apple removed steve jobs from management in 1985 , he left the company and attempted to create the '' next big thing '' , with funding from ross perot and himself . the result was the next computer . as the first workstation to include a digital signal processor ( dsp ) and a high-capacity optical disc drive , next hardware was advanced for its time , but was expensive relative to the rapidly commoditizing workstation market and marred by design problems . the hardware was phased out in 1993 ; however , the company 's object-oriented operating system nextstep had a more lasting legacy . nextstep was based on the mach kernel developed at cmu ( carnegie mellon university ) a practical guide to linux commands , editors , and shell programming , 3rd edition , by mark g . sobell , page 2 and bsd , an implementation of unix dating back to the 1970s . it featured an object-oriented programming framework based on the objective-c language . this environment is known today in the mac world as cocoa . it also supported the innovative enterprise objects framework database access layer and webobjects application server development environment , among other notable features . all but abandoning the idea of an operating system , next managed to maintain a business selling webobjects and consulting services , but was never a commercial success . nextstep underwent an evolution into openstep which separated the object layers from the operating system below , allowing it to run with less modification on other platforms . openstep was , for a short time , adopted by sun microsystems . however , by this point , a number of other companies — notably apple , ibm , microsoft , and even sun itself — were claiming they would soon be releasing similar object-oriented operating systems and development tools of their own . ( some of these efforts , such as taligent , did not fully come to fruition ; others , like java , gained widespread adoption . ) on february 4 , 1997 , apple computer acquired next for 427 million , and used openstep as the basis for mac os x , as it was called at the time . traces of the next software heritage can still be seen in macos . for example , in the cocoa development environment , the objective-c library classes have '' ns '' prefixes , and the history section of the manual page for the defaults command in macos straightforwardly states that the command '' first appeared in nextstep . '' . internal development . meanwhile , apple was facing commercial difficulties of its own . the decade-old classic mac os had reached the limits of its single-user , co-operative multitasking architecture , and its once-innovative user interface was looking increasingly outdated . a massive development effort to replace it , known as copland , was started in 1994 , but was generally perceived outside apple to be a hopeless case due to political infighting and conflicting goals . by 1996 , copland was nowhere near ready for release , and the project was eventually cancelled . some elements of copland were incorporated into mac os 8 , released on july 26 , 1997 . after considering the purchase of beos — a multimedia-enabled , multi-tasking os designed for hardware similar to apple 's , the company decided instead to acquire next and use openstep as the basis for their new os . avie tevanian took over os development , and steve jobs was brought on as a consultant . at first , the plan was to develop a new operating system based almost entirely on an updated version of openstep , with the addition of a virtual machine subsystem — known as the blue box — for running '' classic '' macintosh applications . the result was known by the code name rhapsody , slated for release in late 1998 . apple expected that developers would port their software to the considerably more powerful openstep libraries once they learned of its power and flexibility . instead , several major developers such as adobe told apple that this would never occur , and that they would rather leave the platform entirely . this '' rejection '' of apple 's plan was largely the result of a string of previous broken promises from apple ; after watching one '' next os '' after another disappear and apple 's market share dwindle , developers were not interested in doing much work on the platform at all , let alone a re-write . changed direction under jobs . apple 's financial losses continued and the board of directors lost confidence in ceo gil amelio , asking him to resign . the board asked steve jobs to lead the company on an interim basis , essentially giving him carte blanche to make changes to return the company to profitability . when jobs announced at the world wide developer 's conference that what developers really wanted was a modern version of the mac os , and apple was going to deliver it , he was met with thunderous applause . over the next two years , major effort was applied to porting the original macintosh apis to unix libraries known as carbon . mac os applications could be ported to carbon without the need for a complete re-write , making them operate as native applications on the new operating system . meanwhile , applications written using the older toolkits would be supported using the '' classic '' mac os 9 environment . support for c , c++ , objective-c , java , and python were added , furthering developer comfort with the new platform . during this time , the lower layers of the operating system ( the mach kernel and the bsd layers on top of it a practical guide to llinux commands , editors , and shell programming , 3rd edition by mark g . sobell , page 2 ) were re-packaged and released under the apple public source license . they became known as darwin . the darwin kernel provides a stable and flexible operating system , which takes advantage of the contributions of programmers and independent open-source projects outside apple ; however , it sees little use outside the macintosh community . during this period , the java programming language had increased in popularity , and an effort was started to improve mac java support . this consisted of porting a high-speed java virtual machine to the platform , and exposing macos-specific '' cocoa '' apis to the java language . the first release of the new os — mac os x server 1.0 — used a modified version of the mac os gui , but all client versions starting with mac os x developer preview 3 used a new theme known as aqua . aqua was a substantial departure from the mac os 9 interface , which had evolved with little change from that of the original macintosh operating system : it incorporated full color scalable graphics , anti-aliasing of text and graphics , simulated shading and highlights , transparency and shadows , and animation . a key new feature was the dock , an application launcher which took advantage of these capabilities . despite this , mac os x maintained a substantial degree of consistency with the traditional mac os interface and apple 's own apple human interface guidelines , with its pull-down menu at the top of the screen , familiar keyboard shortcuts , and support for a single-button mouse . the development of aqua was delayed somewhat by the switch from openstep 's display postscript engine to one developed in-house that was free of any license restrictions , known as quartz . releases . with the exception of mac os x server 1.0 and the original public beta , the first several macos versions were named after big cats . prior to its release , version 10.0 was code named '' cheetah '' internally at apple , and version 10.1 was code named internally as '' puma '' . after the code name '' jaguar '' for version 10.2 received publicity in the media , apple began openly using the names to promote the operating system : 10.3 was marketed as '' panther '' , 10.4 as '' tiger '' , 10.5 as '' leopard '' , 10.6 as '' snow leopard '' , 10.7 as '' lion '' , and 10.8 as '' mountain lion '' . '' panther '' , '' tiger '' , and '' leopard '' were registered as trademarks , and apple registered '' lynx '' and '' cougar '' , but these were allowed to lapse , trademark 78257226 for panther , 78269988 for tiger , 78270003 for leopard , 78271630 for cougar and 78271639 for lynx , all registered in 2004 by apple computer , inc . with apple instead using the name of iconic locations in california for subsequent releases : os x mavericks is named after mavericks , a popular surfing destination ; os x yosemite is named after yosemite national park ; os x el capitan is named for the el capitan rock formation in yosemite national park ; macos sierra is named for the sierra nevada ( u.s . ) ; and macos high sierra is named for the area around the high sierra camps . public beta : '' kodiak '' . on september 13 , 2000 , apple released a 29.95 '' preview '' version of mac os x ( internally codenamed kodiak ) in order to gain feedback from users . it marked the first public availability of the aqua interface , and apple made many changes to the ui based on customer feedback . mac os x public beta expired and ceased to function in spring 2001 . . version 10.0 : '' cheetah '' . on march 24 , 2001 , apple released mac os x 10.0 ( internally codenamed cheetah ) . although the version is now called cheetah by users , rare evidences can be found to prove that it was called so internally . for instance , a q & a was created in 2005 which mentions it the initial version was slow , incomplete , and had very few applications available at the time of its launch , mostly from independent developers . while many critics suggested that the operating system was not ready for mainstream adoption , they recognized the importance of its initial launch as a base on which to improve . simply releasing mac os x was received by the macintosh community as a great accomplishment , for attempts to completely overhaul the mac os had been underway since 1996 , and delayed by countless setbacks . following some bug fixes , kernel panics became much less frequent . version 10.1 : '' puma '' . mac os x 10.1 ( internally codenamed puma ) was released on september 25 , 2001 . it has better performance and provided missing features , such as dvd playback . apple released 10.1 as a free upgrade cd for 10.0 users . apple released a upgrade cd for mac os 9 . on january 7 , 2002 , apple announced that mac os x was to be the default operating system for all macintosh products by the end of that month . . version 10.2 : '' jaguar '' . on august 23 , 2002 , apple followed up with mac os x 10.2 jaguar , the first release to use its code name as part of the branding . the headline of the press release mention '' jaguar '' , while the codename was not mentioned for earlier versions . see apple.com , '' jaguar '' press release , compared to mac os x 10.0 press release and mac os x 10.1 press release it brought great raw performance improvements , a sleeker look , and many powerful user-interface enhancements ( over 150 , according to apple ) , including quartz extreme for compositing graphics directly on an ati radeon or nvidia geforce2 mx agp-based video card with at least 16 mb of vram , a system-wide repository for contact information in the new address book , and an instant messaging client named ichat . the happy mac which had appeared during the mac os startup sequence for almost 18 years was replaced with a large grey apple logo with the introduction of mac os x 10.2 . version 10.3 : '' panther '' . mac os x panther was released on october 24 , 2003 . in addition to providing much improved performance , it also incorporated the most extensive update yet to the user interface . panther included as many or more new features as jaguar had the year before , including an updated finder , incorporating a brushed-metal interface , fast user switching , exposé ( window manager ) , filevault , safari , ichat av ( which added videoconferencing features to ichat ) , improved portable document format ( pdf ) rendering and much greater microsoft windows interoperability . support for some early g3 computers such as the power macintosh and powerbook was discontinued . version 10.4 : '' tiger '' . mac os x tiger was released on april 29 , 2005 . apple stated that tiger contained more than 200 new features . as with panther , certain older machines were no longer supported ; tiger requires a mac with a built-in firewire port . among the new features , tiger introduced spotlight , dashboard , smart folders , updated mail program with smart mailboxes , quicktime 7 , safari 2 , automator , voiceover , core image and core video . the initial release of the apple tv used a modified version of tiger with a different graphical interface and fewer applications and services . on january 10 , 2006 , apple released the first intel-based macs along with the 10.4.4 update to tiger . this operating system functioned identically on the powerpc-based macs and the new intel-based machines , with the exception of the intel release dropping support for the classic environment . only powerpc macs can be booted from retail copies of the tiger client dvd , but there is a universal dvd of tiger server 10.4.7 ( 8k1079 ) that can boot both powerpc and intel macs . version 10.5 : '' leopard '' . mac os x leopard was released on october 26 , 2007 . it was called by apple '' the largest update of mac os x '' . leopard supports both powerpc- and x86-based macintosh computers ; support for the g3 processor was dropped and the g4 processor required a minimum clock rate of 867 & nbsp ; mhz , and at least 512 mb of ram to be installed . the single dvd works for all supported macs ( including 64-bit machines ) . new features include a new look , an updated finder , time machine , spaces , boot camp pre-installed , full support for 64-bit applications ( including graphical applications ) , new features in mail and ichat , and a number of new security features . leopard is an open brand unix 03 registered product on the intel platform . it was also the first bsd-based os to receive unix 03 certification . leopard dropped support for the classic environment and all classic applications , and was the final version of mac os x to support the powerpc architecture . version 10.6 : '' snow leopard '' . mac os x snow leopard was released on august 28 , 2009 , the last version to be available on disc . rather than delivering big changes to the appearance and end user functionality like the previous releases of , the development of snow leopard was deliberately focused on '' under the hood '' changes , increasing the performance , efficiency , and stability of the operating system . for most users , the most noticeable changes are these : the disk space that the operating system frees up after a clean installation compared to mac os x leopard , a more responsive finder rewritten in cocoa , faster time machine backups , more reliable and user friendly disk ejects , a more powerful version of the preview application , as well as a faster safari web browser . an update introduced support for the mac app store , apple 's digital distribution platform for macos applications and subsequent macos upgrades . snow leopard only supports machines with intel cpus , requires at least 1 gb of ram , and drops default support for applications built for the powerpc architecture ( rosetta can be installed as an additional component to retain support for powerpc-only applications ) . . version 10.7 : '' lion '' . mac os x lion was released on july 20 , 2011 . it brought developments made in apple 's ios , such as an easily navigable display of installed applications ( launchpad ) and ( a greater use of ) multi-touch gestures , to the mac . this release removed rosetta , making it incapable of running powerpc applications . it dropped support for 32-bit intel processors and requires 2gb of memory . changes made to the gui ( graphical user interface ) include the launchpad ( similar to the home screen of ios devices ) , auto-hiding scrollbars that only appear when they are being used , and mission control , which unifies exposé , spaces , dashboard , and full-screen applications within a single interface . apple also made changes to applications : they resume in the same state as they were before they were closed ( similar to ios ) . documents auto-save by default . version 10.8 : '' mountain lion '' . os x mountain lion was released on july 25 , 2012 . it incorporates some features seen in ios 5 , which include game center , support for imessage in the new messages messaging application , and reminders as a to-do list app separate from ical ( which is renamed as calendar , like the ios app ) . it also includes support for storing iwork documents in icloud . 2gb of memory is required . notification center , which makes its debut in mountain lion , is a desktop version similar to the one in ios 5.0 and higher . application pop-ups are now concentrated on the corner of the screen , and the center itself is pulled from the right side of the screen . mountain lion also includes more chinese features , including support for baidu as an option for safari search engine . notification center is added , providing an overview of alerts from applications . notes is added , as an application separate from mail , synching with its ios counterpart through the icloud service . messages , an instant messaging software application , replaces ichat . . version 10.9 : '' mavericks '' . os x mavericks was released on october 22 , 2013 , as a free update through the mac app store worldwide . it placed emphasis on battery life , finder enhancements , other enhancements for power users , and continued icloud integration , as well as bringing more of apple 's ios apps to the os x platform . ibooks and apple maps applications were added . mavericks requires 2gb of memory to operate . it is the first version named under apple 's then-new theme of places in california , dubbed mavericks after the surfing location . unlike previous versions of os x , which had progressively decreasing prices since 10.6 , 10.9 was available at no charge to all users of compatible systems running snow leopard ( 10.6 ) or later , beginning apple 's policy of free upgrades for life on its operating system and business software . . version 10.10 : '' yosemite '' . os x yosemite was released to the general public on october 16 , 2014 , as a free update through the mac app store worldwide . it featured a major overhaul of user interface , replaced skeuomorphism with flat graphic design and blurred translucency effects , following the aesthetic introduced with ios 7 . it introduced features called continuity and handoff , which allow for tighter integration between paired os x and ios devices : the user can handle phone calls or text messages on either their mac or their iphone , and edit the same pages document on either their mac or their ipad . a later update of the os included photos as a replacement for iphoto and aperture . version 10.11 : '' el capitan '' . os x el capitan was revealed on june 8 , 2015 , during the wwdc keynote speech . it was made available as a public beta in july and was made available publicly on september 30 , 2015 . apple described this release as containing '' refinements to the mac experience '' and '' improvements to system performance '' rather than new features . refinements include public transport built into the maps application , gui improvements to the notes application , as well as adopting san francisco as the system font . metal api , an application enhancing software , had debuted in this operating system , being available to '' all macs since 2012 '' . . version 10.12 : '' sierra '' . macos sierra was announced on june 13 , 2016 , during the wwdc keynote speech . the update brought siri to macos , featuring several mac-specific features , like searching for files . it also allowed websites to support apple pay as a method of transferring payment , using either a nearby ios device or touch id to authenticate . icloud also received several improvements , such as the ability to store a user 's desktop and documents folders on icloud so they could be synced with other macs on the same apple id . it was released publicly on september 20 , 2016 . . version 10.13 : '' high sierra '' . macos high sierra was announced on june 5 , 2017 , during the wwdc keynote speech . it was released on september 25 , 2017 . the release includes many under-the-hood improvements , including a switch to apple file system , the introduction of metal 2 , support for hevc video , and improvements to vr support . in addition , numerous changes were made to standard applications including photos , safari , notes , and spotlight . . version 10.14 : '' mojave '' . macos mojave was announced on june 4 , 2018 , during the wwdc keynote speech . it was released on september 24 , 2018 . some of the key new features were the dark mode , desktop stacks and dynamic desktop , which changes the desktop background image to correspond to the user 's current time of day . . version 10.15 : '' catalina '' . macos catalina was announced on june 3 , 2019 , during the wwdc keynote speech . it was released on october 7 , 2019 . it primarily focuses on updates to built-in apps , such as replacing itunes with separate music , podcasts , and tv apps , redesigned reminders and books apps , and a new find my app . it also features sidecar , which allows the user to use an ipad as a second screen for their computer , or even simulate a graphics tablet with an apple pencil . it is the first version of macos not to support 32-bit applications . the dashboard application was also removed in the update . how to find 32-bit applications . version 11 : '' big sur '' . macos big sur was announced on june 22 , 2020 , during the wwdc keynote speech . it was released november 12 , 2020 . the major version number is changed , for the first time since '' mac os x '' was released , making it macos 11 . it brings arm support , new icons , and gui changes to the system . . timeline of macintosh operating systems . timeline of macos versions .