1939 in literature

events . early – the pocket books mass-market paperback imprint is launched in the united states . the first of the nationally distributed titles is james hilton 's lost horizon . january american literary magazine the kenyon review is founded and edited by john crowe ransom . the american pulp science fiction magazine startling stories appears , edited by mort weisinger . it includes the black flame by stanley g . weinbaum as lead novel . eando binder 's story '' i , robot '' appears in the u.s . science fiction magazine amazing stories . the criterion , a british literary quarterly , is founded and edited by t . s . eliot . w . h . auden and christopher isherwood set sail from england for the united states . january/february – poetry london , founded and edited by tambimuttu ( with dylan thomas and others ) , is first published . february 6 – raymond chandler 's california private detective philip marlowe is introduced in his first full-length work of crime fiction , the big sleep , which reworks elements from earlier short stories . it is published by alfred a . knopf in the united states . march – isaac asimov 's first published short story , '' marooned off vesta '' , appears in astounding science-fiction magazine . march 4 – bbc television broadcasts one of the first specially written television plays , condemned to be shot by r . e . j . brooke ( perhaps the actor reginald brooke ) , live from its london studios at alexandra palace . the production notably uses a camera as the first-person view by the play 's unseen central character . march 31 – the 20th century fox releases a film version of the hound of the baskervilles , first of a sherlock holmes film series starring basil rathbone as sherlock holmes and nigel bruce as dr watson . april 13 – the united artists film version of wuthering heights , starring merle oberon and laurence olivier , is released . may – jorge luis borges ' first short story in his later characteristic style , '' pierre menard , autor del quijote '' , is published in the buenos aires literary magazine sur . may 4 – james joyce 's last work , finnegans wake , is published in full by faber and faber in london . may 15 – russian writer isaac babel is arrested by the nkvd at his dacha as part of the great purge in the soviet union , and incarcerated in the lubyanka building in moscow . c . august – ernest vincent wright publishes his lipogrammatic novel gadsby , '' a story of over 50,000 words without using the letter ' e ' '' , in los angeles a few months before his death on october 7 . august mikhail bulgakov , while secretly working on the master and margarita , prepares the propaganda play batumi , to romanticize events in joseph stalin 's youth . the project is shelved by stalin himself , once bulgakov announces he will interview witnesses personally . robert a . heinlein 's first published short story , '' life-line '' , appears in astounding science-fiction . before september – after a pledge drive led by renaud de jouvenel and lucien lévy-bruhl , the romanian poet benjamin fondane is naturalized french and in september conscripted into the french army , to serve in the phony war . september 2 – jean-paul sartre is conscripted into the french army , where he will serve as a meteorologist . september 3 – yorkshire-born novelist and playwright j . b . priestley reads the first installment of his novel let the people sing , a celebration of local democracy specially written for radio , on bbc home service radio in the uk , the day war is declared . september 18 – the polish painter , playwright and novelist stanisław ignacy witkiewicz ( born 1885 ) commits suicide after the soviet invasion of poland . september/october – famous fantastic mysteries , a pulp magazine reprinting american science fiction and fantasy , begins publication in new york . fall – frank herbert lies about his age to get his first job as a local newspaper reporter . november – the teenage brendan behan is arrested in liverpool for possessing explosives . november 8 – lindsay and crouse 's stage adaptation of clarence day 's life with father opens at the empire theatre ( 42nd street ) in new york . running until 12 july 1947 , it becomes the all-time longest-running non-musical play in broadway theatre . november/december – captain marvel makes his first appearance , in whiz comics 2 ( cover date february 1940 ) . new books . —from finnegans wake . fiction . eric ambler – the mask of dimitrios sholem asch – the nazarene william attaway – let me breathe thunder h . e . bates – my uncle silas ( short stories ) arna wendell bontemps – drums at dusk pearl s . buck – the patriot karel čapek ( posthumously ) – život a dílo skladatele foltýna ( life and work of the composer foltýn , translated as the cheat , unfinished ) joyce carey – mister johnson john dickson carr the black spectacles the problem of the wire cage the reader is warned ( as carter dickson ) drop to his death ( with john rhode ) aimé césaire – '' cahier d'un retour au pays natal '' ( in volontés , august ) raymond chandler – the big sleep james hadley chase – no orchids for miss blandish agatha christie murder is easy the regatta mystery and other stories ten little niggers jeffrey dell – nobody ordered wolves pierre drieu la rochelle – gilles john fante – ask the dust william faulkner – if i forget thee jerusalem ( the wild palms/old man ) vardis fisher – children of god zona gale – magna konstantine gamsakhurdia – the right hand of the grand master ( დიდოსტატის კონსტანტინეს მარჯვენა ) henry green – party going yaroslav halan – the mountains are smoking ernest hemingway – the snows of kilimanjaro rayner heppenstall – the blaze of noon zora neale hurston – moses , man of the mountain aldous huxley – after many a summer christopher isherwood – goodbye to berlin james joyce – finnegans wake arthur koestler – the gladiators richard llewellyn – how green was my valley h . p . lovecraft – the outsider and others henry miller – tropic of capricorn christopher morley – kitty foyle ian niall ( as john mcneillie ) – wigtown ploughman brian o'nolan – at swim-two-birds john o'hara – files on parade juan carlos onetti – el pozo ( the pit ) george orwell – coming up for air elliot paul – the mysterious mickey finn ellery queen – the dragon 's teeth katherine anne porter – pale horse , pale rider clayton rawson – the footprints on the ceiling seymour reit- the friendly ghost jean rhys – good morning , midnight dorothy l . sayers – in the teeth of the evidence pierre schaeffer – chlothar nicole ( clotaire nicole ) john steinbeck – the grapes of wrath rex stout – some buried caesar jan struther – mrs . miniver ( short stories ) phoebe atwood taylor spring harrowing cold steal ( as alice tilton ) dalton trumbo – johnny got his gun s . s . van dine – the winter murder case simon vestdijk – sint sebastiaan ( first book chronologically in the anton wachter cycle ) elio vittorini – conversations in sicily ( conversazione in sicilia ) nathanael west – the day of the locust ernest vincent wright – gadsby francis brett young – the city of gold marguerite yourcenar – coup de grâce . children and young people . ludwig bemelmans – madeline ( first in an eponymous series of seven books ) enid blyton – the enchanted wood edgar rice burroughs – tarzan the magnificent lavinia r . davis – hobby horse hill hardie gramatky – little toot carolyn haywood – '' b '' is for betsy ( first in betsy series ) robert lawson – ben and me : an astonishing life of benjamin franklin by his good mouse amos hilda lewis – the ship that flew lucy maud montgomery – anne of ingleside violet needham – the black riders ( first in the stormy petrel series ) carola oman – alfred , king of the english arthur ransome – we did n't mean to go to sea marjorie kinnan rawlings – the yearling joan g . robinson – a stands for angel felix salten – bambis kinder , eine familie in walde ( bambi 's children ) alison uttley – a traveller in time laura ingalls wilder – by the shores of silver lake ursula moray williams – adventures of the little wooden horse . drama . philip barry – the philadelphia story bertolt brecht life of galileo ( leben des galilei ; completed ) mother courage and her children ( mutter courage und ihre kinder ; written ) mikhail bulgakov – batumi ( left unfinished ) t . s . eliot – the family reunion jean giraudoux – ondine ian hay – little ladyship frank harvey – saloon bar lillian hellman – the little foxes n.c . hunter – grouse in june george s . kaufman and moss hart – the man who came to dinner joseph kesselring – arsenic and old lace clare boothe luce – margin of error barré lyndon – the man in half moon street j . b . priestley – johnson over jordan william saroyan – the time of your life . poetry . w . h . auden journey to a war ( with diary entries and nonfiction prose by christopher isherwood ; march 16 ) '' september 1 , 1939 '' ( in the new republic ( u.s . ) october 18 ) aimé césaire – cahier d'un retour au pays natal ( notebook on a return to the native land ) t . s . eliot – old possum 's book of practical cats josé gorostiza – muerte sin fin ( death without end ) javier del granado – rosas pálidas ( pale roses ) changampuzha krishna pillai – rahtapuspangal christopher smart – jubilate agno ( as rejoice in the lamb : a song from bedlam , edited by w . f . stead ; completed by 1763 ) . non-fiction . adrian bell – men and the fields lord david cecil – the young melbourne and the story of his marriage with caroline lamb savitri devi – a warning to the hindus norbert elias – the civilizing process ( über den prozeß der zivilisation ) mary lascelles – jane austen and her art erwin panofsky – studies in iconology ed ricketts – between pacific tides antoine de saint-exupéry – wind , sand and stars ( terre des hommes ) ronald syme – the roman revolution bill w . and dr . bob – the big book gamel woolsey – death 's other kingdom . births . january 10 – jared carter , american poet and author january 12 – jacques hamelink , dutch poet , novelist and literary critic , best known for short stories january 29 – germaine greer , australian-born feminism author february 19 – erin pizzey , english novelist and founder of world 's first domestic violence shelter february 25 – gerald murnane , australian novelist march 15 – alicia freilich , venezuelan novelist march 25 – toni cade bambara , african-american writer ( died 1995 ) april 10 – penny vincenzi , née hannaford , english novelist ( died 2018 ) april 12 – alan ayckbourn , english dramatist april 13 – seamus heaney , irish poet ( died 2013 ) april 22 – jason miller , american playwright and actor ( died 2001 ) may 4 – amos oz , né klausner , israeli author ( died 2018 ) june 5 – margaret drabble , english novelist june 14 – penelope farmer , english children 's writer june 15 – brian jacques , english writer ( died 2011 ) july 2 – ferdinand mount , english journalist and novelist august 1 – robert james waller , american novelist ( died 2017 ) september 6 – dan cragg , american science-fiction author september 9 – ed victor , american-born literary agent ( died 2017 ) october 6 – melvyn bragg , english novelist , critic and broadcast presenter october 7 – clive james , australian writer , humorist and television personality ( died 2019 ) october 8 – harvey pekar , american memoirist and graphic-novel scriptwriter ( died 2010 ) october 9 – john pilger , australian-born journalist and documentary filmmaker october 28 – giulio angioni , italian writer and anthropologist ( died 2017 ) october 29 – malay roy choudhury , bengali poet , novelist and creator of the indian hungry generation literary and cultural movement november 17 – auberon waugh , english journalist and novelist ( died 2001 ) november 18 – margaret atwood , canadian novelist and poet november 25 – shelagh delaney , english dramatist ( died 2011 ) december 3 – lee israel , american biographer and literary forger ( died 2014 ) december 11 – thomas mcguane , american writer december 18 – michael moorcock , english science fiction writer . deaths . january 8 – caton theodorian , romanian dramatist and novelist ( born 1871 ) january 28 – w . b . yeats , irish poet ( born 1865 ) obituary . '' w . b . yeats dead '' . the new york times , 30 january 1939 . retrieved on 21 may 2007 . february 2 – amanda mckittrick ros , irish novelist and poet noted for her purple prose ( born 1860 ) february 18 – okamoto kanoko ( 岡本 かの子 , ohnuki kano ) , japanese tanka poet ( born 1889 ) february 22 – antonio machado , spanish poet ( born 1875 ) march 7 – ludwig fulda , german poet and playwright ( born 1862 ) march 23 – richard halliburton , american travel writer ( born 1900 ) april 11 – s . s . van dine ( willard huntington wright ) , american crime novelist and art critic ( born 1888 ) may 23 – margarete böhme , german novelist ( born 1867 ) may 27 – joseph roth , austrian novelist ( born 1894 ) june 13 – volter kilpi , finnish novelist ( born 1874 ) june 14 – vladislav khodasevich , russian poet and critic ( born 1886 ) june 26 – ford madox ford ( ford hermann hueffer ) , english novelist ( born 1873 ) july 5 – mrs . o . f . walton , english writer of christian children 's books ( born 1849 ) july 8 – havelock ellis , english sexual psychologist and writer ( born 1859 ) august 7 – leonard merrick , english novelist ( born 1864 ) august 20 – agnes giberne , english children 's writer ( born 1845 ) august 23 – robin hyde ( iris guiver wilkinson ) , south african-born new zealand poet and novelist ( born 1906 ) september 6 – arthur rackham , english book illustrator ( born 1867 ) september 19 – ethel m . dell , english romantic novelist ( born 1881 ) october 23 – zane grey , american western novelist ( born 1872 ) december 2 – llewelyn powys , english novelist and autobiographer ( born 1884 ) unknown dates solomon cleaver , canadian storyteller and novelist ( born 1855 ) mary frances dowdall , english novelist and non-fiction writer ( born 1876 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : eleanor doorly , the radium woman james tait black memorial prize for fiction : aldous huxley after many a summer james tait black memorial prize for biography : david c . douglas , english scholars newbery medal for children 's literature : elizabeth enright , thimble summer nobel prize in literature : frans eemil sillanpää pulitzer prize for drama : robert e . sherwood , abe lincoln in illinois pulitzer prize for poetry : john gould fletcher , selected poems pulitzer prize for the novel : marjorie kinnan rawlings , the yearling . references .