Grace in Christianity

old and new testaments of the christian bible . '' grace '' is the english translation of the greek χάρις ( charis ) meaning '' that which brings delight , joy , happiness , or good fortune . '' roetzel , calvin j . , phd . the harpercollins bible dictionary , paul j . achtemeier , general editor . harpercollins , 1996 . p.386-387 . old testament . the septuagint translates as χάρις the hebrew word חֵ֖ן ( ẖen ) as found in genesis 6:8 to describe why god saved noah from the flood . the old testament use of the word includes the concept that those showing favor do gracious deeds , or acts of grace , such as being kind to the poor and showing generosity . descriptions of god 's graciousness abound in the torah/pentateuch , for example in deuteronomy 7:8 , numbers 6:24–27 . in the psalms examples of god 's grace include teaching the law ( psalm 119:29 ) and answering prayers ( psalm 27:7 ) . another example of god 's grace appears in psalm 85 , a prayer for restoration , forgiveness , and the grace and mercy of god to bring about new life following the exile . roman catholicism . in the definition of the catechism of the catholic church , '' grace is favour , the free and undeserved help that god gives us to respond to his call to become children of god , adoptive sons , partakers of the divine nature and of eternal life '' . grace is a participation in the life of god , which is poured unearned into human beings , whom it heals of sin and sanctifies . the means by which god grants grace are many . catholic bishops ' conferences of england & wales , ireland and scotland , one bread one body , p . 7 they include the entirety of revealed truth , the sacraments and the hierarchical ministry . george joyce , '' the church '' in the catholic encyclopedia among the principal means of grace are the sacraments ( especially the eucharist ) , prayers and good works . matthew bunson , 2009 catholic almanac ( our sunday visitor 2008 , , p . 143 richard brennan , the means of grace ( benziger brothers 1894 ) , p . 25 the sacramentals also are means of grace . brennan ( 1894 ) , p . 337 the sacraments themselves , not the persons who administer or those who receive them , are '' the means of grace '' , merriam-webster 's encyclopedia of world religions ( merriam-webster 1999 , , p . 386 although lack of the required dispositions on the part of the recipient will block the effectiveness of the sacrament . the sacraments '' bear fruit in those who receive them with the required dispositions '' ( catechism of the catholic church , 1131 ) . the catholic church holds that '' by grace alone , in faith in christ 's saving work and not because of any merit on our part , we are accepted by god and receive the holy spirit , who renews our hearts while equipping and calling us to good works . '' deal w . hudson , '' grace alone '' both the council of orange ( 529 ) and the council of trent affirmed that we are '' justified gratuitously , because none of the things that precede justification , whether faith or works , merit the grace of justification '' . the council of trent declared that the free will of man , moved and excited by god , can by its consent co-operate with god , who excites and invites its action ; and that it can thereby dispose and prepare itself to obtain the grace of justification . the will can resist grace if it chooses . it is not like a lifeless thing , which remains purely passive . weakened and diminished by adam 's fall , free will is yet not destroyed in the race ( sess . vi , cap . i and v ) . joint declaration on the doctrine of justification affirms : : we confess together that all persons depend completely on the saving grace of god for their salvation . justification takes place solely by god 's grace . when catholics say that persons '' cooperate '' in preparing for and accepting justification by consenting to god 's justifying action , they see such personal consent as itself an effect of grace , not as an action arising from innate human abilities . . sanctifying and actual grace . according to a commonly accepted categorization , made by st . thomas aquinas in his summa theologica , grace can be given either to make the person receiving it pleasing to god ( gratia gratum faciens ) – so that the person is sanctified and justified – or else to help the receiver lead someone else to god ( gratia gratis data ) . for example , in when a man is ordained a priest , the church teaches that he receives the power to confect the eucharist ( to celebrate mass ) and to forgive sins in the sacrament of reconciliation . this power does not sanctify the priest per se , but rather the people who benefit from these sacraments . the former type of grace , gratia gratum faciens , in turn , can be described as sanctifying ( or habitual ) grace – when it refers to the divine life which , according to the church , infuses a person 's soul once he is justified ; or else as actual grace – when it refers to those punctual ( not habitual ) helps that are directed to the production of sanctifying grace where it does not already exist , or its maintenance and increase it where it is already present . according to the catechism of the catholic church , he strongly affirmed that humans had free will and were able to choose good as well as evil . augustine , drawing on the exaggerated statements of the followers of pelagius rather than on pelagius ' own writings , began a debate that was to have long-reaching effects on subsequent developments of the doctrine in western christianity . pelagianism was repudiated by the council of carthage in 418 , largely at augustine 's insistence . but what pelagius taught was likely what has come to be called semi-pelagianism . in semi-pelagian thought , both god and the human person always participate in the salvation process . humans make free will choices , which are aided by god through creation , natural grace , '' supernatural '' grace , god 's restrictions on demonic influences . god continually brings the human person to real choices , which god also aids , in the process of spiritual growth and salvation . semi-pelagianism is similar to synergism , which is the traditional patristic doctrine . john cassian , in continuity with patristic doctrine , taught that though grace is required for persons to save themselves at the beginning , there is no such thing as total depravity , but there remains a moral or noetic ability within humans that is unaffected by original sin , and that persons must work together ( synergism ) with divine grace to be saved . cassian , inst . 12 , conf . 3 , conf . 13 this position is held by the eastern orthodox church and by many reformed protestants , pomazansky , protopresbyter michael . orthodox dogmatic theology . platina ca : st . herman of alaska brotherhood , 1984 . lccn 84-051294 pp.257–261 . kallistos ( timothy ware ) . the orthodox church . london : penguin books , 1963 . pp.226ff . and in the catholic church has been especially associated with the society of jesus . robert a . maryks , saint cicero and the jesuits ( ashgate publishing 2008 , p . 130 orlando o . espín , james b . nickoloff , an introductory dictionary of theology and religious studies ( liturgical press 2007 , p . 664 . catholic versus protestant . in 1547 , the council of trent , which sought to address and condemn protestant objections , aimed to purge the catholic church of controversial movements and establish an orthodox roman catholic teaching on grace and justification , as distinguished from the protestant teachings on those concepts . it taught that justification and sanctification are elements of the same process . '' controversies on grace '' ; '' sanctifying grace '' . the catholic encyclopedia . vol . 6 . new york : robert appleton company , 1909 . the grace of justification is bestowed through the merit of christ 's passion , without any merits on the part of the person justified , who is enabled to cooperate only through the grace of god the grace of justification may be lost through mortal sin , but can also be restored by the sacrament of penance . the sacraments are , together with revealed truth , the principal means of the grace , a treasury of grace , that christ has merited by his life and death and has given to the church . this does not mean that other groups of christians have no treasury of grace at their disposal , jeffrey t . vanderwilt , communion with non-catholic christians ( liturgical press , 2003 , , p . 180 for , as the second vatican council declared , '' many elements of sanctification and of truth are found outside of ( the catholic church 's ) visible structure '' . . jansenists versus jesuits . at about the same time that calvinists and arminians were debating the meaning of grace in protestantism , in catholicism a similar debate was taking place between the jansenism and the jesuits . cornelius jansen 's 1640 work augustinus sought to refocus catholic theology on the themes of original sin , human depravity , the necessity of divine grace , and predestination , as he found them in the works of st augustine . the jansenists , like the puritans , believed themselves to be members of a gathered church called out of worldly society , and banded together in institutions like the port-royal convents seeking to lead lives of greater spiritual intensity . blaise pascal attacked what he called moral laxity in the casuistry of the jesuits . jansenist theology remained a minority party within catholicism , and during the second half of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries it was condemned as a heresy for its similarities to calvinism , though its style remained influential in ascetic circles . grace and merit . citing the council of trent , the catechism of the catholic church states : '' with regard to god , there is no strict right to any merit on the part of man . between god and us there is an immeasurable inequality , for we have received everything from him , our creator . the merit of man before god in the christian life arises from the fact that god has freely chosen to associate man with the work of his grace . the fatherly action of god is first on his own initiative , and then follows man 's free acting through his collaboration , so that the merit of good works is to be attributed in the first place to the grace of god , then to the faithful . man 's merit , moreover , itself is due to god , for his good actions proceed in christ , from the predispositions and assistance given by the holy spirit . the charity of christ is the source in us of all our merits before god . grace , by uniting us to christ in active love , ensures the supernatural quality of our acts and consequently their merit before god and before men . the saints have always had a lively awareness that their merits were pure grace . '' . eastern christianity . in the eastern orthodox church , grace is identified with the uncreated energies of god . among eastern christians generally , grace is considered to be the partaking of the divine nature described in 2 peter 1:4 . fr . tadros malaty , the divine grace pdf the holy mysteries ( latin , '' sacraments ) are seen as a means of partaking of divine grace because god works through his church , not just because specific legalistic rules are followed ; and grace is the working of god himself , not a created substance of any kind that can be treated like a commodity . gregory ( grabbe ) , archbishop . the sacramental life : an orthodox christian perspective . liberty tn : st . john of kronstadt press , 1986 orthodox theologians reject augustine 's formulation of original sin and actively oppose the content and implications of john calvin 's conceptions of total depravity and irresistible grace , characteristic of reformed protestantism , as well as the thomism and scholastic theology which would become official roman catholic pedagogy until the second vatican council . eastern christians typically view scholasticism and similarly discursive , systematic theology as rationalism corruptions of the theology of the cappadocian and early desert fathers that led the western church astray into heresy . timothy ware . the orthodox church , revised edition penguin books , 1992 . pp.239ff . orthodoxy teaches that it is possible and necessary for the human will to cooperate with divine grace for the individual to be saved , or healed from the disease of sin . this cooperation is called synergism ( see also semipelagianism and monergism ) , so that humans may become deified in conformity to the divine likeness – a process called theosis – by merging with the uncreated energies of god ( revealed to the senses as the tabor light of transfiguration ) , notably through a method of prayer called hesychasm . pomazansky , protopresbyter michael . orthodox dogmatic theology . platina ca : st . herman of alaska brotherhood , 1984 . lccn 84-051294 pp.257–261 kallistos ( timothy ware ) . the orthodox church . london : penguin books , 1963 . pp.226ff . . protestant reformation . the protestant reformation reacted against the concepts of grace and merit as they were understood in late medieval catholic theology . luther and lutheran theology . martin luther 's posting of his ninety-five theses to the church door in wittenberg in 1517 was a direct consequence of the perfunctory sacramentalism and treasury doctrines of the medieval church . the act was precipitated by the arrival of johann tetzel , authorized by the vatican to sell indulgences . the effectiveness of these indulgences was predicated on the doctrine of the treasury of grace proclaimed by pope clement vi . the theory was that merit earned by acts of piety could augment the believer 's store of sanctifying grace . gifts to the church were acts of piety . the church , moreover , had a treasury full of grace above and beyond what was needed to get its faithful into heaven . the church was willing to part with some of its surplus in exchange for earthly gold . martin luther 's anger against this practice , which seemed to him to involve the purchase of salvation , began a swing of the pendulum back towards the pauline vision of grace , as opposed to james 's . luther taught that men were helpless and without a plea before god 's justice , and their acts of piety were utterly inadequate before his infinite holiness . were god only just , and not merciful , everyone would go to hell , because everyone , even the best of us , deserves to go to hell . our inability to achieve salvation by our own effort suggests that even our best intention is somehow tainted by our sinful nature . this doctrine is sometimes called total depravity , a term derived from calvinism and its relatives . it is by faith alone ( sola fide ) and by grace alone ( sola gratia ) that men are saved . good works are something the believers should undertake out of gratitude towards their savior ; but they are not sufficient for salvation and can not earn anyone salvation ; there is no room for the notion of '' merit '' in luther 's doctrine of redemption . ( there may , however , be degrees of reward for the redeemed in heaven . ) only the unearned , unmerited grace of god can save anyone . no one can have a claim of entitlement to god 's grace , and it is only by his generosity that salvation is even possible . as opposed to the treasury of grace from which believers can make withdrawals , in lutheranism salvation becomes a declaration of spiritual bankruptcy , in which penitents acknowledge the inadequacy of their own resources and trust only in god to save them . accepting augustine 's concern for legal justification as the base metaphor for salvation , the believers are not so much made righteous in lutheranism as they are considered covered by christ 's righteousness . acknowledging that they have no power to make themselves righteous , the penalty for their sins is discharged because jesus has already paid for it with his blood . his righteousness is credited to those who believe in and thus belong to him . calvin and reformed theology . calvin and luther believed free will does not co-operate with god 's grace which , according to them , can not be rejected ( see monergism ) . the lutheran augsburg confession says of baptism , '' lutherans teach that it is necessary to salvation and that by baptism the grace of god is offered and that children are to be baptized , who by baptism , being offered to god , are received into god 's favor . '' john macarthur , jr . the salvation of babies who die—part 1 . 1986 . accessed september 7 , 2009 . the french reformer john calvin expanded and further developed these augustinian themes in his systematic institutes of the christian religion in 1536 . the logical structure of calvinism is often expressed as an acronym . these five categories do not comprise calvinism in its entirety . they simply encapsulate its central , definitive doctrines . matthew j . slick . '' the five points of calvinism . '' september 7 , 2009 total depravity ( also known as total inability , which is inexorably tied to a strong doctrine of original sin as having enslaved the human will completely ) unconditional election limited atonement ( also known as definite atonement or particular redemption ) irresistible grace perseverance of the saints ( colloquially known as '' once saved , always saved '' or , as interpreted a distinct way among reformed or strict baptists as well as non-calvinist general baptists , eternal security ) the notion that god has foreordained who will be saved is generally called predestination . the concept of predestination peculiar to calvinism , '' double-predestination '' , ( in conjunction with limited atonement ) is the most controversial expression of the doctrine . according to reformed theology , the '' good news '' of the gospel of christ is that god has freely granted the gift of salvation to those the holy spirit causes to believe ; what he freely grants to some ( the '' elect '' individuals ) , he withholds from others ( the '' reprobate '' individuals ) . calvin sought to provide assurance to the faithful that god would actually save them . his teaching implied what came to be known as the doctrine of the perseverance of the saints , the notion that god would actually save those who were his elect . the actual status and ultimate state of any man 's soul were unknown except to god . when assurance of election was rigorously pressed as an experience to be sought , especially by the puritans , this led to a legalism as rigid as the one protestantism sought to reject , as men were eager to demonstrate that they were among the chosen by the conspicuous works-righteousness of their lives . the relatively radical positions of reformed theology provoked a strong reaction from both roman catholics and lutherans . in 1618 james arminius departed from calvin 's theology and put forth a contrary position that sought to reaffirm man 's free will and responsibility in salvation , as opposed to the immutable , hidden , eternal decrees of calvinism . arminius taught that god 's grace was preveniently offered to all , and that all people have the real option to resist the call of the gospel . it is possible for a believer to backslide and abandon the faith , losing the salvation that believer truly once possessed . these positions came to be known as arminianism . with respect to the calvinist reformed churches , they were firmly rejected by the synod of dort ( 1618–1619 ) , and arminian pastors were expelled from the netherlands . wesley and arminian theology . later , john wesley also rejected the calvinist doctrine of predestination . his most comprehensive pronouncement on the subject was his sermon '' free grace '' , preached at bristol in 1740 . in wesley 's position , the believer who repents and accepts christ is not '' making himself righteous '' by an act of his own will , such as would alter his dependency on the grace of god for his salvation . faith and repentance , rather , are the believer 's trust in god that he will make them righteous . wesley appealed to prevenient grace as a solution to the problem , stating that god makes the initial move in salvation , but human beings are free to respond or reject god 's graceful initiative . john wesley believed that god provides three kinds of divine grace : prevenient grace is innate from birth . '' prevenient '' means '' comes before . '' wesley did not believe that humanity was totally '' depraved . '' he believed everyone is born with a modicum of divine grace – just enough to enable the individual to recognize and accept god 's justifying grace . justifying grace today is what is referred to as '' conversion '' or being '' born again . '' god 's justifying grace brings '' new life in christ . '' wesley believed that people have freedom of choice – to accept or to reject god 's justifying grace . wesley defined his term justifying grace as '' the grace or love of god , whence cometh our salvation , is free in all , and free for all . '' sustaining grace . wesley believed that , after accepting god 's grace , a person is to move on in god 's sustaining grace toward perfection . wesley did not believe in the '' eternal security of the believer . '' he believed people can make wrong ( sinful ) choices that will cause them to '' fall from grace '' or '' backslide . '' he said it is insufficient to claim god 's salvation and then stagnate , return to sinning deliberately , or not produce any evidence ( fruit ) of following christ . wesley taught that christian believers are to participate in what wesley called '' the means of grace '' and to continue to grow in the christian life , assisted by god 's sustaining grace . '' god 's preparing , accepting , and sustaining grace . '' official united methodist publication . sept , 7 , 2009 . wesley 's opposition to calvinism cracknell , kenneth , and susan j . white . an introduction to world methodism . cambridge university press , 2005 . p.100 was more successful than arminius ' , especially in the united states where arminianism would become the dominant school of soteriology of evangelical protestantism , largely because it was spread through popular preaching in a series of great awakenings . the churches of new england , with roots in puritan calvinism , tended to begin to reject their calvinist roots , accepting wesley 's expression of arminianism , or overthrowing their historical doctrine entirely to depart into socinianism or liberal theology . john wesley was never a student of the influential dutch theologian jacobus arminius ( 1560–1609 ) . the latter 's work was not a direct influence on wesley . yet , he chose the term '' arminianism '' to distinguish the kind of evangelicalism his followers were to espouse from that of their calvinist theological opponents . many have considered the most accurate term for wesleyan theology to be '' evangelical arminianism . '' it remains the standard teaching of methodism churches , and the doctrine of prevenient grace remains one of methodism 's most important doctrines . . the protestant reformation and ecclesiology . protestantism in all three major schools of theology – lutheran , calvinist , and arminian – emphasize god 's initiative in the work of salvation , which is achieved by grace alone through faith alone , in either stream of thinking – although these terms are understood differently , according to the differences in systems . the protestant teachings on grace suggest a question , however : what is the role of the church in the work of grace ? such reformation churches taught that salvation is not ordinarily found outside of the visible church ; but with the increasing emphasis on an experience of conversion as being necessary to salvation , sola fide began to be taken as implying that the individual 's relationship with jesus is intensely individual ; we stand alone before god . since protestants accept that men are saved only and decisively by their belief in christ 's atonement , they often rank preaching that message more than sacraments which apply the promises of the gospel to them as members of the church . the sermon replaces the eucharist as the central act of christian worship . the church 's authority comes from the message it preaches , practically to the exclusion of the sacraments . this is often reflected in the arrangement of the pulpit and altar at the front the church ; as preaching becomes more important , the pulpit moves from the side to the center , while the altar for the eucharist shrinks to the size of a small coffee table or is eliminated entirely . classical calvinism teaches that the sacraments are '' signs and seals of the covenant of grace '' and '' effectual means of salvation '' , and lutheranism teaches that new life , faith , and union with christ are granted by the holy spirit working through the sacraments . however , for a large portion of the protestant world , the sacraments largely lost the importance that luther ( and to a slightly lesser degree , calvin ) attributed to them . this happened under the influence of ideas of the anabaptists which were ideas also seen in the donatists in north africa in 311 a.d . , jack hoad , the baptist , london , grace publications , 1986 , page 32 . and these ideas then spread to calvinists through the congregationalist and baptist movements , and to lutherans through pietism ( although much of lutheranism recoiled against the pietist movement after the mid-19th century ) . where the sacraments are de-emphasized , they become '' ordinances '' , acts of worship which are required by scripture , but whose effect is limited to the voluntary effect they have on the worshipper 's soul . this belief finds expression in the baptist and anabaptist practice of believers baptism , given not to infants as a mark of membership in a christian community , but to adult believers after they have achieved the age of reason and have professed their faith . these ordinances are never considered works-righteousness . the ritual as interpreted in light of such ideas does not at all bring about salvation , nor does its performance bring about the forgiveness of sins ; the forgiveness which the believer has received by faith is merely pictured , not effectively applied , by baptism ; salvation and participation in christ is memorialized ( '' this do in remembrance of me '' in the lord 's supper and baptism picturing a christian 's rebirth as death to sin and alive in christ ) , not imparted , by the eucharist . the church to the baptists becomes an assembly of true believers in christ jesus who gather together for worship and fellowship and remembering what christ did for them . churches of christ . the church of christ believes that the grace of god that saves is the plan of salvation , rather than salvation itself . this plan includes two parts , 1 ) the perfect life , death , burial , and resurrection of jesus the christ , 2 ) the gospel/new testament/the faith . concerning ephesians 2:8 which states : '' for by grace are ye saved through faith ; and that not of yourselves : it is the gift of god '' , it is noted that the word '' it '' is a pronoun and refers back to a noun . as the word '' saved '' is a verb , '' it '' does not refer to '' saved '' but to grace , giving the definition of grace as '' the gift of god '' . furthermore , as the book of james distinguishes between a dead faith ( a faith without works ) and a living faith ( a faith accompanied by works of obedience ) , it is believed that god 's gift operates through an individuals living faith resulting in that individual being saved . grace is contrasted with the law of moses ( romans 6:14 ; hebrews 10:4 ; john 1:17 ) and the church of christ believes that paul 's contrast between work and faith is as described under the efforts to resolve the tension section , a contrast between works of the old covenant and obedient faith under the new covenant . grace saves ( eph . 2:5 ) ; justifies ( rom . 3:24 ; titus 3:7 ) . grace can not be added to ( gal . 5:4 ) . grace teaches ( titus 2:11 ) ; can be preached ( eph . 3:8 ) . grace calls us ( 2 tim . 1:9 ; gal . 1:15 ) . grace is brought by revelation ( 1 pet . 1:13 ) . grace and truth came by jesus christ ( john 1:17 ) grace is sufficient for us ( 2 cor . 12:9 ) the galatians were removed from the calling of the gospel ( gal . 1:6,7 ; 2 thess . 2:14 ) unto another gospel ( another message ) which verse 7 says is not a gospel at all but a perversion . the church of christ believes that grace provides the following plan , which , if followed , results in salvation : one must hear the gospel/word ( rom . 10:17 ) . believe the gospel ( mark 16:15–16 ) . repent of their past sins ( acts 2:38 ) . confess their faith in christ before men ( matt . 10:32 ; rom . 10:9–10 ) . be immersed in water into christ for the remission of those sins ( 1 pet . 3:21 ; romans 6:3–18 ; john 3:3,5 ; 1 john 5:6,8 ; acts 2:38 ; mark 16:16 ; etc . ) live faithfully even to the point of death ( rev . 2:10 ; rom . 11:17–22 ; james 5:19–20 ) . see also . salvation ( christianity ) sacrament charism merit a good man is hard to find ( short story ) . references . further reading . orthodox . timothy ware , the inner kingdom : the collected works ( st . vladimir 's seminary , 2000 ) the way of a pilgrim and a pilgrim continues on his way , olga savin , trans . ( shambhala , 2001 ) . roman catholic . catholic answers , grace : what it is and what it does catholic teaching on sin & grace ( center for learning , 1997 ) , george hayward joyce , the catholic doctrine of grace ( newman , 1950 ) , '' grace . '' the catholic encyclopedia . vol . 6 . new york : robert appleton company , 1909 . stephen j . duffy , the graced horizon : nature and grace in modern catholic thought ( hpac , 1992 ) , vincent nguyen , the pauline theology of grace from the catholic perspective , . protestant . dietrich bonhoeffer , the cost of discipleship , fuller and booth , trans . ( touchstone , 1995 ) . john calvin , '' institutes of the christian religion , book 2 chapter 4 '' randy maddox , responsible grace ( kingswood , 1994 ) alister mcgrath , iustitia dei : a history of the christian doctrine of justification ( cambridge , 1998 ) glen pettigrove , '' forgiveness and grace '' , in forgiveness and love ( oxford university press , 2012 ) 124–150 . r . c . sproul , grace unknown : the heart of reformed theology ( baker book house , 1999 ) ulasien , paul , the power of a grace perspective ( infinity , 2011 ) , philip yancey , what 's so amazing about grace ? ( zondervan , 1997 ) paul f . m . zahl , grace in practice : a theology of everyday life ( eerdmans , 2007 )