William Barrington, 2nd Viscount Barrington

background . barrington was the eldest son of john barrington , 1st viscount barrington , by his wife anne , daughter of sir william daines . the hon . daines barrington , rear-admiral the hon . samuel barrington and the right reverend the hon . shute barrington , bishop of durham , were his younger brothers . he received a private education under a tutor at dalston , robert graham , whose family later established a political dynasty . historic manuscripts commission , egmont diary , vol.3 , p.268 sent to be further educated at geneva , switzerland in 1735 he spent three years at the alpine university ; having inherited the estates and title in 1734 , he spent some time travelling on the grand tour . after coming of age in january 1738 , he returned home , arriving in england that february . shute barrington , political life , p.3 . early political career . as barrington 's title was in the peerage of ireland it did not entitle him to a seat in the house of lords . in march 1740 he was returned to the house of commons as member of parliament for berwick-upon-tweed ( a seat his father had represented from 1714 to 1723 ) . joining the opposition benches , barrington took his seat in 1741 for walpole 's dismissal , voting down a bill for manning the fleet on the grounds it would increase the 'court whigs ' influence on the coast . with the exception of lord carteret , the energetic foreign minister , barrington , having deserted the whigs found his new allies pitiable reformers . none of the corruption went punished , as the promised 'new broom ' failed to materialise . the hanoverian ascendancy was magnified by the military exploits of allies hanoverian legion that lionised carteret 's performance and the king 's role in the warfare , but at considerable expense to the treasury . barrington was among the opposition peers consulted for a new ministry in 1744 between the cobhamites and the incumbent pelhamites , removing carteret , now earl granville , and his tory friends from office . in february he had voted down two bills , one to suspend habeas corpus , on the grounds that the ministry had not proven the rumours of an impending french invasion . tory opposition led by pitt stormed out of the chamber in protest at barrington 's speech . a decisive move came when he identified with lord cobham . grenville was impressed by the young mp ; refusing the offer of a 'lord of trade ' the future peer could do '' whatever he pleases '' . grenville papers , vol.1 , p.34 . grenvillite whig : a war departmental career . a critical year was 1744 for the young aspiring minister : perhaps the pressure of jacobitism , the return of the army from flanders , and the whiff of jacobite conspiracy forced a change of allegiance . for on 23 january in the first of such votes , barrington elucidated his principled support for a standing army . the following month he voted with the treasury money bill . he steered a flagship policy national militia bill through parliament that excluded catholics and quakers . he reformed the process of charitable parochial relief , rather than requiring its total abolition , although by 1782 he took a pittite view of reform . having taken his seat in the irish house of lords in 1745 , still only twenty-eight year old , he was appointed one of the lords commissioners of the admiralty , later being forced to write a vindication of his conduct of affairs during the war of jenkins ' ear in which large sums went missing from the treasury . in 1746 barrington was one of the 'managers ' of the impeachment of the highland general lord lovat , and lord of the admiralty in february 1746 . owen , pelhams , p.293 but with the conflict brought to a successful conclusion in 1748 , barrington seconded a motion that required the king to demobilise 16,000 hanoverian soldiers in peacetime . barrington was also responsible for the introduction of the concept of half-pay to the navy , as a means of effecting semi-retirement for laid off officers . his commons bill enumerated 20,000 sailors for redundancy . this 'tory ' bill was vigorously opposed by lord egmont , and the pelhamites defeated it in the commons . a quarantine bill was drafted to prevent the spread of infectious diseases in the fleet , as well as to blockade its importation onto the mainland . barrington 's subsequent paper on the plague helped to establish a house of recovery for the sick at gray 's inn , which was extended to the dying and suffering in london . secretary at war . on pelham 's death in march 1754 , the duke of newcastle was in line to succeed as first lord of the treasury . on becoming member of parliament for plymouth , barrington applied directly for a treasury bench seat , on the recommendation of henry fox . pelham had already gone to the palace to 'kiss hands ' . on the understanding of a treasury seat for the public economist , barrington succeeded sir thomas robinson as the master of the great wardrobe in 1755 , when he was granted a seat as privy counsellor . at newcastle house in september barrington was informed the arrangement was squared with the king , but cumberland , the commander-in-chief at windsor , did not know of it . newcastle to hardwicke , 26 september 1755 , bl , add 32859 , ff.219-21 . he was appointed as secretary at war in the duke of newcastle cabinet . the supremacy of cabinet government over wardrobe , treasury over commander-in-chief in the realm of the patronage of political appointments can be dated from newcastle 's office tenure . barrington held the post for the next six years throughout the seven years ' war , despite the byzantine logistics , and notorious corruption at the war office owing to his scrupulous attitude towards corrupt practices revealed in his letters . these are kept in the huntington library , california shute ; barrington , p.19 shortly after the new ministry had come to office , minorca fell . barrington ordered the 7th regiment to reinforce the gibraltar garrison on 21 march 1756 . the cabinet insisted the rock must be held as a strategic naval base ; barrington 's experience told him this , switching the governor 's detachment , a battalion onto byng 's flagship . letters from viscount barrington to lord st philips , governor of gibraltar , 21 and 28 march 1756 - for the contradictory orders ; shute barrington , p.23 in the event the garrison could not spare the men : facing the threat of an attack by the toulon fleet , barrington was clear in a subsequent letter that gibraltar must not be left undefended . but byng 's subsequent disgrace and execution left barrington 's loyalties in doubt . he had shown no disobedience to his majesty the king , when general fowke was tried at court martial for allegedly abandoning his post . cumberland was disgusted at the loss of port mahon , its naval base , and the shame brought upon the military 's discipline and reputation , adding to the secretary 's political problems ; barrington consequently clung to newcastle 's patronage at least in part for self-preservation . modern historians have laid the blame at barrington 's door for the confusion that ensued from the contradictory orders ; but much of the contention has derived from his belated conversion to toryism , and embracing of a pittite bluewater policy with all its attenuated risks . meanwhile , the prime minister insisted on quizzing granby on the battlefield with young barrington in tow learning how to disappoint generals for the future . during the seven years war , his brothers , admiral sir samuel barrington and major-general john barrington , who led the assault expeditionary force that captured guadeloupe , a french colony , were both active in the caribbean . white-spunner , horse guards , p.238 barrington remained a staunch friend and ally of newcastle throughout , always grateful for the confidence , but never afraid to differ from the duke '' to whom i owe more compliance than to any man living , because he is the only subject , to whom i have a real obligation . i must do his grace the justice . '' barrington to general conway , 8 june 1759 ; shute barrington , p.17 , 49 the previous october he had advised field marshall ligioner , by now a viscount , that his brother was over-promoted '' i again deprecate colonel barrington being so near the command ; and i entreat of your lordship to recommend some other major-general to his majesty , in case mr boscawen should be excused . '' barrington to ligonier , 14 october 1758 in the light of his compassion , the story of colonel monro 's arabian horse seemed typical of the man 's discreet delicacy , nursing his gifted steed back to health , but putting its ownership into trust . barrington was always careful to avoid accusations of taking sweeteners or inducements for corrupt practices ; sufficiently astute to defer on matters of ethical credibility to others . barrington to sir hector monro , 16 may 1764 the cost of the war was ruinous ; and barrington refused to accede to the duke 's demand to buy the election of 1761 . mauduit , considerations on the war ; shute , p.100 . tory george iii : barrington and a new administration . on 12 march 1761 he was transferred to the office of chancellor of the exchequer , just ten days before the dissolution of parliament . in 1762 the tory prime minister proposed barrington treasurer of the navy , which he accepted , but remained close to the duke , who declined to oppose the new ministry . senior cabinet ministers may have met in autumn 1762 at beckett , his ancestral seat . for he was probably influential in the reconciliation between newcastle and cumberland , long embittered rivals , because in a letter to barrington on 11 july he had signed off '' your affectionate friend '' . barrington papers mss ; ilchester papers , letters to henry fox , p.116 moreover , he strongly advised his whig friend to join with the tories . shute barrington , p.71 barrington 's membership of bute 's ministry , in spite of his friendship with newcastle , who was at the height of his powers , was , he claimed , on the basis of being a principled '' servant of the crown '' ; for the main achievement of bute 's time in office was the peace of paris in april 1763 . on principle he would not oppose the ministry from within , and yet would not resign to suit his friend , mentor and patron . '' lord bute answered , he knew i was a man of honour , . '' , barrington claimed in his paper shute barrington , p.73 bute suggested enlarging the government with a foxite coalition ; but barrington , who long been a friend of charles james fox felt '' a coolness between us '' . the duke of devonshire 's resignation , he feared , would destabilise the administration . 3 november 1762 , paper transcribed ; shute barrington , p.75 and so it did precipitating in newcastle 's words , '' such a clamour arising against the ministry '' . newcastle to barrington , 9 november 1762 , shute , ibid , p.79 at a meeting at newcastle house , london , on 11 november the duke pressed barrington to end his support , knowing the ministry would fall , which it did in april 1763 . yet while in office , the viscount never visited claremont , upheld bipartisan principles , and remained on friendly terms with bute , grenville , egremont and halifax . on 17 july 1765 barrington returned to london to seek his former position of secretary at war from the king whom he told : '' that a man like me , solely attached to himself , must not expect many court friends '' , 20 july 1765 , barrington paper to george iii ; shute barrington , p.95 at st james 's palace as department ghq , at once abandoned by general ligonier , who preferred the esprit de corps of knightsbridge . white-spunner , horse guards , p.224 barrington told charles gould , the advocate-general that he was the '' guardian '' of the interests of '' the poor , though deserving officer '' . letter to c.gould , 8 february 1766 , life , p.131-7 he told the king that he '' detested faction '' and '' . would never have anything to do with it '' . it was two days before he informed the prime minister that he had 'kissed hands ' with the sovereign . on 26 july barrington , the prospect of joining a tory chatham ministry looming over the horizon , played his royal hand again to stay in government . yorke told the pelhamite hardwicke that he stayed '' by virtue of his pliability '' . it became barrington 's political hallmark that his pledged allegiance was to the army and the king only ; while cumberland was commander-in-chief he would share in any political decisions . barrington remained in the party , yet a country whig/tory for all that with independently minded ideas distinct from london whiggery . one particular dispute that rankled was the outstanding furore with the most distinguished soldier of his generation , lord ligonier . i have not time to answer your lordship 's letter of sunday , which i received last night : perhaps it is better i should not particularly answer it , as i wish always to keep my temper especially with those who are older and wiser than myself.it certainly does not extend to make a secretary at war give the king advice , which he thinks wrong . i told your lordship very explicitly at our first outset , that i never would . letter from barrington to lord ligonier , july 19 , 1758 ; shute barrington , p.42 disliked by the commander-in-chief lord ligonier , eyed warily from the guards barracks at knightsbridge , barrington immediately had to deal with a number of crises : the weavers and corn riots prompted the life guards out onto the streets , the present riotous assemblings on account of high price of corn made it necessary for the magistrates to call in a military force to their assistance , wrote mr secretary . the wilkes riots of 1768/9 also called on the army to quench the rioters anger deployed , protesting at their champion 's exclusion , the household cavalry were deployed in parliament square to protect the buildings . white-spunner , p.253 , 255 . the problem of the colonies . barrington took his share of the blame for the loss of the american colonies , and was not allowed to forget it . in 1765 the rockingham whigs in the cabinet wanted to repeal the stamp act , but barrington was among the minority who insisted the americans should pay their way . watson , p.115 this hard line approach to complex legal problems characterised the ministry , the non-importation embargo for instance begun by the americans in 1768/9 was bankrupting the east india company ; the dumping of china tea just one expression of the violence to follow . schama , hist . of britain , p.465 so when john wilkes , petitioned to be allowed to take his seat in the commons , barrington and the paymaster of the forces , richard rigby led the cabinet in throwing him out . watson , p.136 in 1775 barrington ordered a reluctant general burgoyne to be put in command of the british forces in the northern american theatre of war . hibbert , redcoats , p.52 the two men shared a belief in the same bluewater strategy . barrington was in charge of the army , but strategic deployment of the royal navy was the only way to defeat the rebels . blockade and strangulation of colonial trade should be coupled to a large standing army , he declared . but it should not pursue ' a wild goose chase ' of americans around the countryside . burgoyne 's defeat at saratoga ended in disgrace and recall to england . hibbert , p.82 even barrington was not altogether convinced of burgoyne 's abilities to resist corruption , and the practice of commission purchases , an issue he helped straighten with the firm . . after a series of favours of which the army does not furnish a precedent , and to which with all his amiable and valuable qualities as a man he had not the least claim as a soldier.has lieutenant-colonel burgoyne a right to every douceur , which general elliot may expect ? or can he demand more than his bargain ? barrington to burgoyne , october 27 , 1759 - needless to say purchasing continued until abolished by the cardwell reforms 1861 . barrington wished young officers who wanted preferment to buy , or await promotion by seniority . burgoyne 's friend and mentor , barrington retained office but only until december 1778 , when the rockingham whigs resumed majority control in the commons . in 1759 burgoyne had threatened him ; barrington responded '' with the house of commons , in case i am , what you call partial against you.the least courtly letter that was ever written to a secretary at war . '' barrington raised more regiments and increased the places at old chelsea hospital for wounded men . wages improved slightly , and more compassion was shown after battle ; developments that dovetailed with the career of marquis of granby . hospital board surgeon mates were introduced , and an inspector of infirmaries was appointed overseer . ending the practice of in commendam holding every second corps in reserve because it was ruinous to finances exemplified his public policy credentials of saving graces , but critics thought it left england dangerously exposed to invasion from the continent . barrington to hon col blayney , 9 july 1760 but more aptly was his fear of domestic unruliness and disorder . perennial riots was an habitual occurrence on london streets : london is of all places in the island most attentively to be watched , he warned . if an insurrection in london should be attended with the least success , or even to continue unquelled for any time . , shute , life , p.153-7 like north , barrington hated the american revolution . it made him sick with worry . he told the king it is '' more disagreeable to me '' . memorandum ( 1782 ) , barrington mss . he had been a minister for thirty years , was weary , tired of the work , and wanted to retire , aged sixty . the king 's minister , virtually his whole career , he realised that the sovereign 's word was his bond . king george iii wanted him to quit the commons but remain a minister ; but the correct constitutional position for any minister was in parliament , particularly for a secretary at war , a second non-cabinet rank . but the war caused these decisions to be pushed to one side , ignored and delayed . on 29 october 1777 , barrington again applied for the chiltern hundreds . burgoyne 's catastrophic defeat was the catalyst : finally after a protracted and agonising wait , he could no longer hold his own counsel '' or oppose them , without affecting my honour and duty '' . he was allowed to receive the chiltern hundreds on 24 may 1778 , but was compelled to remain at the war office until christmas . semi-retirement . for four months in 1782 barrington was joint postmaster-general . the death of his predecessor threw open a vacancy at the cabinet table . barrington was the most qualified candidate , who had to forego a generous pension from 9 january to qualify . lord north 's defeat however ushered in the whiggish friends of america to conclude the paris treaty , forcing barrington to resign in april . shelburne had always opposed the king 's attempts to prevent american colonial independence ; and so withheld his civil list pension of £2000 which had been settled on him '' unsolicited '' by the king . shute , life , p.184 barrington appealed directly to george iii who guaranteed it was '' renewed and continued '' for public service until his death . rockingham to barrington , 21 april 1782 , rockingham mss . . family . lord barrington married mary , daughter of henry lovell and widow of the hon . samuel grimston , in 1740 . there were no surviving children from the marriage . she died in september 1764 . barrington remained a widower until his death at his country estate , beckett hall at shrivenham in berkshire ( now oxfordshire ) , in february 1793 , aged 76 . he was buried in st . andrew 's parish church , shrivenham . his nephew william barrington succeeded in the viscountcy . legacy . namesake of barrington , nova scotia . ancestry .