SAM Colombia

history . during the 40s , a group of entrepreneurs began to promote the idea of providing the city with an air transportation system that would connect it with the rest of the country and the world . the axis medellín-puerto berrío was sufficiently dynamic that the idea was discussed in entrepreneurial circles of both cities and in october 1945 , at the 3rd notary public ’ s office , a deed incorporating sociedad aeronáutica de medellín s.a . was recorded . thanks to this entrepreneurial spirit medellín became a city with an airline , although it was still on paper . it was in the minds of its first partners and promoters , the eventual founders : luis coulson , gilberto escobar , julián restrepo , joaquín londoño , and gustavo correa who , from the beginning of 1946 began to bring their dream to fruition . a corporation was created with 15,000 shares , at 10 pesos each . subscription totalled col . 150,000 , of which col . 50,000 was from 5,000 publicly purchased shares , and the remaining 10,000 shares purchased by the board of directors . the promoters gained a valuable ally in the person of captain denis powelson , expert in the aircraft world market , enthusiast , in love with the country and an explorer of its infinite possibilities . the company had originally intended to acquire small aircraft , but the concept changed and grew : there would be long-range aircraft to secure the cargo market to and from miami . the dc-3 , type c-47 aircraft arrived in october 1946 . sam was no longer the dream of a few and became a community reality . the first aircraft of the airline departed from las playas airport in medellín heading to miami in the midst of much celebration . it was the hk 500 , piloted by powelson himself with a three and a half ton cargo capacity . in the second year of activities , sam ’ s wings grew and began to embrace the world of the nearest colombian cities with flights to bogotá , bucaramanga , planeta rica and barranquilla . the airline grew quickly . industrial and commercial activity increased to the point that in 1950 the fleet comprised 18 cargo aircraft and the destinations were now far afield . sam ’ s aircraft flew to and from panama ; san juan de puerto rico ; lima and talara in peru ; kingston in jamaica ; caracas and maracaibo in venezuela ; la habana in cuba ; managua in nicaragua ; quito in ecuador ; curaçao ; guatemala ; mexico ; santiago de chile ; and manaus in brazil . having proved its efficiency in air transportation and establishing the routes that put an end to the isolation of medellín and colombia , in 1958 sam decided to begin carrying passengers . passenger air service began with one dc-3 and a c-46 , and one of the early milestones was san andres , where it was the first airline to provide service to the island . two years later the first douglas dc-4 was added to the fleet with a capacity of 65 passengers , but it was in 1970 that sam became notable for inaugurating the jet-prop era in colombia . by then , the domestic and international airline , through its routes had become truly colombian which was reflected in its ownership . the santo domingo group had provided broader capital to enable accelerated modernisation and expanded market share . with the introduction to service by sam of the lockheed l-188 electra four-engined turboprop , expansion into central america was made possible and passenger services began to nicaragua , el salvador , guatemala and costa rica and regular freight schedules were operated to miami . the company then modernised with the boeing 727 . subsequently , the fleet was made up of british aerospace rj-100 , and de havilland canada twin otter , aircraft . with these modern aircraft sam united the most important cities of the country , as well as several regional destinations , as well as a number of international destinations . but there were problems with the rj-100 engines , which were paralyzed on the ground and the company had to use avianca planes to cover its flights , and the aircraft were finally returned to the manufacturer british aerospace . cessna 208 caravans were purchased . avianca 's fokker 50 and md-83 were also assigned . on may 2002 , sam along with avianca and aces , joined the summa alliance . however , in the following year aces was dissolved , to this was added the purchase of avianca by the synergy group and the change of its image , for which the colors of sam disappeared . sam closed its operations in october 4 , 2010 . . destinations . fleet . final fleet . by the time it ceased operations the company 's fleet consisted exclusively of 15 fokker 100 in avianca 's former livery . before sam 's merger with avianca , sam operated fokker 100 aircraft in avianca livery with a sign that read '' operated by sam '' on the fuselage . after avianca fully absorbed sam as a company , the '' operated by sam '' sign was removed from all aircraft and continued operating sam 's old destinations as avianca destinations . as avianca began its fleet renovation , fokker 100 aircraft were progressively retired and returned to fokker services and other companies . sam never operated the airbus a318 , since this aircraft type was integrated into avianca when sam had already completely disappeared . as of may 2010 the sam colombia fleet consisted of the following aircraft : sam colombia fleet . accidents and incidents . on december 8 , 1959 , a curtiss c-46 commando , en route from san andrés to cartagena , disappeared . all 42 passengers and 3 crew were presumed killed . accident database , planecrashinfo.com from may 30 to june 2 , 1973 , a lockheed l-188 electra registered hk-1274 , flying from cali to medellin with a stopover in pereira was diverted from its route making stops in aruba , guayaquil , lima , mendoza , asunción , and buenos aires , had been hijacked by two paraguayan former football players for economic reasons . on may 19 , 1993 , sam colombia flight 501 , a boeing 727-100 , en route from panama city , panama , to medellín , hit mt . paramo de frontino at 12,300 & nbsp ; ft . while on approach to josé maría córdova international airport . the aircraft descended into mountainous terrain before actually reaching the abejorral non-directional beacon . the vhf omnidirectional range/distance measuring equipment ( vhf/dme ) had been sabotaged by terrorists and was not in service . all 132 passengers ( including a group of panamanian dentists and doctors on their way to a convention ) were killed . accident database , planecrashinfo.com . in other areas . sam was the main sponsor of the atlético nacional football team between 1988 and 1994 , so the logo was on the front of the jersey during football competitions of those years , including the copa libertadores 1989 . references . external links . avianca