Mette-Marit, Crown Princess of Norway

background and education . mette-marit tjessem høiby was born in kristiansand in the southern part of norway , the daughter of sven o . høiby , who had been unemployed for some time but who had previously worked as a journalist for a local paper , and marit tjessem , a former bank clerk . her parents divorced , and her father later married professional stripper renate barsgård . she has a sister and two older brothers , including per høiby , chief executive of the pr agency first house . her stepbrother , trond berntsen by her mother 's 1994 marriage to rolf berntsen died in the 2011 norway attacks . mette-marit grew up in kristiansand , spending many weekends and holidays in the nearby valley of setesdal and on the coast , where she learned to sail . during her youth , she was active in the local slettheia youth club , where she was also an activity leader . as a teenager , she played volleyball , qualifying as a referee and coach . after starting at oddernes upper secondary school in kristiansand , mette-marit spent six months at wangaratta high school located in north east victoria in australia as an exchange student with the exchange organisation , youth for understanding . later , she attended kristiansand katedralskole , where she passed her final examinations in 1994 . she then spent several months working for the norwegian-british chamber of commerce at norway house in cockspur street , london . when her assignment in london ended , mette-marit relocated to norway . by her own admission , mette-marit experienced a rebellious phase before she met crown prince haakon magnus . as a part-time student , she took six years , longer than usual , to complete her high school education before going on to take preparatory college courses at agder college . she then worked on and off as a waitress at the restaurant engebret cafè in oslo . in the late 1990s , mette-marit attended the quart festival , norway 's largest music festival , in her hometown of kristiansand . she met crown prince haakon at a garden party during the quart festival season . years later , after becoming a single mother she met the prince again at another party related to the festival . since becoming crown princess , mette-marit has taken several university-level courses . in 2012 , she obtained a master 's degree in executive management . most of her ancestors were cotters and small farmers . . engagement and marriage . when the engagement between crown prince haakon and mette-marit was announced , public and media reaction was negative , with many norwegians being '' horrified '' and feeling that the crown prince 's choice of partner was questionable ; her lack of education , previous relationships with convicted felons and her socialization in a milieu '' where drugs were readily available '' were often cited by critics . at the time of their engagement , mette-marit was a single mother to a son named marius borg høiby , born 13 january 1997 from her relationship with convicted felon marius ' far var ikke med , bt morten borg . her son caused a possible security risk in 2012 to the royal family by posting photos of the family 's whereabouts on the internet . mette-marit is reported to be a social media user and it has been rumoured that the royal family may not follow the instruction to refrain from revealing personal information on social media . marius borg høiby , who holds no title or special role , withdrew from public life in 2017 when he moved to the united states to attend an unspecified college . in 2018 it became known that he had falsely used the title '' prince '' when working as an intern abroad , despite not holding any such title . her first official appearance as the intended bride of the crown prince was at the nobel peace prize ceremony at oslo city hall on 10 december 2000 , following the announcement of the couple 's engagement on 1 december . at the press conference , haakon said that he and mette-marit had been together for about one year . haakon gave mette-marit the same engagement ring that his grandfather king olav v and his father king harald v had given to their fiancées . the couple married on 25 august 2001 at the oslo cathedral . upon her marriage , she acquired the title , her royal highness the crown princess of norway . they now live outside oslo at skaugum estate . the couple has two children together : princess ingrid alexandra , born 21 january 2004 and prince sverre magnus , born 3 december 2005 . public life and further education . during 2002 and 2003 , the crown princess undertook development studies at the school of oriental and african studies at the university of london , apparently without graduating . she was also accepted as an intern at norad , the norwegian government 's development organization . mette-marit attended lectures at the faculties of arts and social sciences at the university of oslo , but did not graduate . crown princess mette-marit is the patron of the norwegian red cross and several other organizations . in 2010 , crown princess mette-marit was named young global leader under the world economic forum , and in 2012 she became a member of the international foundation board of the global shapers community . in 2015 , crown princess mette-marit and kate roberts , senior vice-president of population services international , established maverick collective . on 26 april 2017 , the crown princess was appointed as ambassador for norwegian literature in the international arena . crown prince haakon and crown princess mette-marit established the crown prince and crown princess 's foundation . the purpose of the foundation is to identify and support projects for young people in norway with the objective of strengthening youth leadership and integration . in december 2008 , she received the annual petter dass prize , which recognises a person who helps to unite people and god . in october 2018 , she was diagnosed with pulmonary fibrosis , which will limit her official programmes . mette-marit , who has dealt with '' health challenges on a regular basis '' ( such as pneumonia , several instances of norovirus , low blood pressure , along with some falls , concussions , a neck injury and a herniated disc ) , will undergo treatment at oslo university hospital . . controversies . in 2012 she attracted controversy for assisting a norwegian couple with ties to the royal family in procuring surrogacy in india , despite the fact that surrogacy is banned in norway ; she was criticized by women 's rights groups of participating in human trafficking that exploits women in developing countries . menneskehandel med diplomatpass , klassekampen , 10 december 2012 the next year , the practice was also banned in india as a form of human trafficking and harmful to women and children . in 2019 she attracted controversy for her friendship with the american convicted sex offender jeffrey epstein ; she met him several times between 2011 and 2013 , after his conviction on charges of sex trafficking of minors in 2008 and release from prison . deres kongelige lukkethet , dagbladet skurrende slottssignaler , dagsavisen her friendship with epstein was revealed by norwegian media in the context of the scandal involving prince andrew , duke of york who in that year resigned from all public roles over his longstanding ties to epstein . . titles , styles and honours . titles . 19 august 1973 – 25 august 2001 : miss mette-marit tjessem høiby 25 august 2001 – present : her royal highness the crown princess of norway mette-marit has been crown prince of norway since her marriage . arms . file : coat of arms of princes and of princesses of norway.svg coat of arms of norway coat of arms file : royal monogram of princess metta-merit of norway.svg monogram . honours and medals . . national honours and medals . : knight grand cross with collar of the order of st . olav : dame of the royal family decoration of king harald v : recipient of the orders , decorations , and medals of norway : recipient of the royal house centenary medal : recipient of the king harald v silver jubilee medal . foreign honours . : grand decoration of honour in gold with sash of the order of honour for services to the republic of austria : grand cross of the order of the southern cross : grand cross of the order of stara planina : knight of the order of the elephant : member 1st class of the order of the cross of terra mariana estonian state decorations , kroonprintsess mette marit - website of the president of estonia ( estonian ) : member 1st class of the order of the white star : commander grand cross of the order of the white rose : grand cross 1st class of the order of merit of the federal republic of germany : grand cross of the order of the falcon : grand cross of the order of merit of the italian republic : paulownia dame grand cordon of the order of the precious crown : grand cross of the order of vytautas the great : dame grand cross of the order of adolphe of nassau : dame grand cross of the order of orange-nassau : recipient of the king willem-alexander inauguration medal : grand cross of the order of merit of the republic of poland : grand cross of the order of prince henry : dame grand cross of the order of isabella the catholic royal decree 655/2006 , boe no . 126 , 27 may 2006 , p . 20011 : commander grand cross of the royal order of the polar star . references . external links . official biography in english