Altamaha River

course . the altamaha river originates at the confluence of the oconee and ocmulgee rivers , near lumber city . at its source , the river forms the border between jeff davis county to the south and montgomery county to the north . it is reportedly the third-largest contributor of fresh water to the atlantic ocean from north america . altamaha river , the new georgia encyclopedia including its longest tributary ( the ocmulgee ) in length calculations , as is standard usgs practice , its length of places it seventh on the list of u.s . rivers entirely within one state , behind only four alaskan rivers , the sacramento-pit river in california , and the trinity river in texas . usgs and world facts and figures ( john wiley and sons ) . the beginning of the colorado river ( texas ) is just within new mexico . the long mobile-alabama-coosa river system , mostly in alabama , originates a short distance within georgia . the altamaha river traverses a broad area of low population density with few significant towns or cities along its course . some cities are along its upper tributaries , such as the fall line cities of milledgeville on the oconee and macon on the ocmulgee . bullard creek wildlife management area occupies the southern floodplain of the river 's first few miles , after which the river marks the boundary between toombs county to the north and appling county to the south . on the north side , toombs county gives way to tattnall county , in which the ohoopee river joins the altamaha . the big hammock wildlife management area and big hammock natural area are located along the altamaha at the ohoopee confluence . big hammock natural area is a national natural landmark site , noted for its ecological biodiversity and many rare plant species , including georgia plume . below big hammock , the tributary beards creek joins the altamaha from the north , after which the river marks the border between long county to the north and wayne county to the south . the altamaha passes through griffin ridge wildlife management area before flowing by doctortown , near jesup . a wide and swampy floodplain surrounds the river in this area . several miles below doctortown , wayne county gives way to mcintosh county on the north side of the river . from this point to the river 's mouth , numerous wildlife management areas line the river . the sansaville wildlife management area lies on the south side of the river , while the altamaha wildlife management area lies on the north and extends down to the river 's mouth at altmaha sound . wolf island national wildlife refuge occupies wolf island on the atlantic coast , north of altamaha sound . in its last several miles , the altamaha river marks the boundary between mcintosh county on the north and glynn county on the south . the town of darien lies just north of the altamaha river 's mouth . several miles to the south lies the larger city of brunswick . st . simons island lies on the south side of the altamaha estuary . course info mainly from and topozone.com the estuary of the altamaha river , where fresh and salt water mix , is about in size , one of the largest intact , relatively undegraded estuaries on the atlantic coast . the altamaha river delta has been designated as a site of regional importance altamaha river delta whsrn.org , whsrn to shorebirds by the western hemisphere shorebird reserve network . whsrn : a strategy for saving shorebirds , western hemisphere shorebird reserve network . natural history . although used in the 19th century as a route for commerce between central georgia and the coast , the river is nearly entirely still in its natural state , and was designated a bioreserve by the nature conservancy in 1991 . the altamaha river flows through a flood plain up to five miles ( 8 & nbsp ; km ) wide , consisting of some of the last remaining hardwood bottomlands and cypress swamps in the american south . as the river approaches the atlantic ocean , it becomes a broad estuary . at least 120 species of rare or endangered plants and animals live in the altamaha river watershed , including 11 species of pearly mussels , seven of which are endemic to the altamaha . the river basin also supports the only known example of old-growth longleaf pine and black oak forest in the united states . other notable species include shortnose sturgeon , atlantic sturgeon , west indian manatee , eastern indigo snake ( drymarchon couperi ) , greenfly orchid , and georgia plume . the unusual franklinia ( franklinia alatamaha ) , now extinct in the wild , was found by john bartram along the altamaha river in 1765 . bartram sent seeds from the trees to england and planted some in his garden in philadelphia , where some still live . history . according to the usgs , variant and historical names of the altamaha river include a-lot-amaha , alatahama , alatamaha , allamah , frederica river , rio al tama , rio de talaje , and talaxe river . in prehistoric times , the timucua people occupied northern florida and a portion of georgia reaching as far north as the altamaha river . the utinahica tribe lived along the river and the spanish mission of santa isabel de utinahica was established around 1610 near the source of the altamaha . along the coast of spanish florida , the altamaha river marked the boundary between the guale and mocama missionary provinces . fort caroline , built by the french in 1564 and probably the oldest european fortified settlement in north america , was likely constructed near the mouth of the altamaha river . historian fletcher crowe noted : “ this fort is older than st . augustine , considered to be the oldest continuously inhabited city in america . '' it was long believed the legendary fort was located near today 's city of jacksonville , but detailed archival research in france on fort caroline and the early history of ‘ la floride française ’ has proved that wrong , suggesting the altamaha mouth location as highly likely . the site still remains to be excavated by archaeologists . in 1565 , spanish soldiers under pedro menéndez marched into fort caroline and slaughtered some 143 men and women who were living there at the time . science daily , 23 feb . 2014 in the later 17th century , a group of yamasee indians under chief altamaha took up residence near the mouth of the altamaha . the altamaha river marked the western border of the colony of georgia until the american revolution , so was the western border of the english settlement in north america . it also marked the boundary between the spanish missionary provinces of guale and mocama . the name comes from a yamasee chief named altamaha . for centuries , riverboats used the altamaha as the main transportation route to reach those towns and the plantations founded along the river . the altamaha was also an active transportation corridor for the georgia timber trade throughout the 19th century , when timber rafts were constructed to deliver logs to the ports of brunswick and darien , where they were loaded onto timber schooners and transported to international markets like liverpool , rio de janeiro , and havana . rivermen assigned colorful names to the various features and hazards along their route down the atamaha . among the many '' riverman monikers '' was old hell lake , where the river marks the border between long county to the north and wayne county to the south , and is a particularly troublesome bend , with associated dangerous currents , where a pilot and crew might lose '' their wages , their timber , and occasionally their lives '' the timber rafts had a maximum width of about forty feet ( 12 m ) , that being the widest that could pass between the pilings of railroad bridges . maximum length was about 250 feet ( 76 m ) , that being the longest that could navigate the narrows , several miles of the river that were not only very narrow but also very crooked . each raft had two oars forty to fifty feet long , one in the bow , the other at the stern . the oars were for steering , not propelling , the raft . the minimum raft crew was two men , the pilot who usually manned the stern oar , and his bow hand . rafts usually had a lean-to shack for shelter and a mound of dirt for a hearth to warm by and cook on . in oliver goldsmith 's 1770 poem '' the deserted village '' , he laments the depopulation of english villages , and he paints an unhappy picture of the lands to which the former inhabitants have fled , mentioning the altamaha by name : ah , no . to distant climes , a dreary scene , where half the convex world intrudes between , through torrid tracts with fainting steps they go , where wild altama murmurs to their woe . far different there from all that charm 'd before , the various terrors of that horrid shore ; those blazing suns that dart a downward ray , and fiercely shed intolerable day ; those matted woods where birds forget to sing , but silent bats in drowsy clusters cling ; those poisonous fields with rank luxuriance crowned , where the dark scorpion gathers death around ; where at each step the stranger fears to wake the rattling terrors of the vengeful snake ; where crouching tigers wait their hapless prey , and savage men , more murderous still than they ; while oft in whirls the mad tornado flies , mingling the ravaged landscape with the skies . . industry . the 1,759-megawatt plant hatch nuclear power plant sits on the southern bank of the altamaha river in appling county . a rayonier paper mill that manufactures cellulose fibers used in plastics and absorbent materials for diapers , tampons , and other products is located on the southern bank of the altamaha river in wayne county . rayonier . preservation and restoration . in january of 2021 ingka investments , part of the parent company of ikea , acquired 10,840 acres ( 4,386 hectares ) near the altamaha river basin from the conservation fund . the legal agreement is to protect the land from fragmentation , restore the longleaf pine forest , and safe-guard the habitat of the gopher tortoise . ” . see also . list of rivers in georgia ( u.s . state ) altamaha-ha south atlantic-gulf water resource region . references . external links . altamaha riverkeeper altamaha river partnership www.altamahariver.net watershed land use map janisse ray and nancy marshall , '' james holland , riverkeeper : environmental protection along the altamaha '' , southern spaces , 11 august 2011 .