Nuclear isomer

nuclei of nuclear isomers . the nucleus of a nuclear isomer occupies a higher energy state than the non-excited nucleus existing in the ground state . in an excited state , one or more of the protons or neutrons in a nucleus occupy a nuclear orbital of higher energy than an available nuclear orbital . these states are analogous to excited states of electrons in atoms . when excited atomic states decay , energy is released by fluorescence . in electronic transitions , this process usually involves emission of light near the visible range . the amount of energy released is related to bond-dissociation energy or ionization energy and is usually in the range of a few to few tens of ev per bond . however , a much stronger type of binding energy , the nuclear binding energy , is involved in nuclear processes . due to this , most nuclear excited states decay by gamma ray emission . for example , a well-known nuclear isomer used in various medical procedures is , which decays with a half-life of about 6 hours by emitting a gamma ray of 140 & nbsp ; kev of energy ; this is close to the energy of medical diagnostic x-rays . nuclear isomers have long half-lives because their gamma decay is '' forbidden '' from the large change in nuclear spin needed to emit a gamma ray . for example , has a spin of 9 and must gamma-decay to with a spin of 1 . similarly , has a spin of 1/2 and must gamma-decay to with a spin of 9/2 . while most metastable isomers decay through gamma-ray emission , they can also decay through internal conversion . during internal conversion , energy of nuclear de-excitation is not emitted as a gamma ray , but is instead used to accelerate one of the inner electrons of the atom . these excited electrons then leave at a high speed . this occurs because inner atomic electrons penetrate the nucleus where they are subject to the intense electric fields created when the protons of the nucleus re-arrange in a different way . in nuclei that are far from stability in energy , even more decay modes are known . metastable isomers . metastable isomers can be produced through nuclear fusion or other nuclear reactions . a nucleus produced this way generally starts its existence in an excited state that relaxes through the emission of one or more gamma rays or conversion electrons . sometimes the de-excitation does not completely proceed rapidly to the nuclear ground state . this usually occurs when the formation of an intermediate excited state has a spin far different from that of the ground state . gamma-ray emission is hindered if the spin of the post-emission state differs greatly from that of the emitting state , especially if the excitation energy is low . the excited state in this situation is a good candidate to be metastable if there are no other states of intermediate spin with excitation energies less than that of the metastable state . metastable isomers of a particular isotope are usually designated with an '' m '' . this designation is placed after the mass number of the atom ; for example , cobalt-58m1 is abbreviated , where 27 is the atomic number of cobalt . for isotopes with more than one metastable isomer , '' indices '' are placed after the designation , and the labeling becomes m1 , m2 , m3 , and so on . increasing indices , m1 , m2 , etc . , correlate with increasing levels of excitation energy stored in each of the isomeric states ( e.g . , hafnium-178m2 , or . a different kind of metastable nuclear state ( isomer ) is the fission isomer or shape isomer . most actinide nuclei in their ground states are not spherical , but rather prolate spheroidal , with an axis of symmetry longer than the other axes , similar to an american football or rugby ball . this geometry can result in quantum-mechanical states where the distribution of protons and neutrons is so much further from spherical geometry that de-excitation to the nuclear ground state is strongly hindered . in general , these states either de-excite to the ground state far more slowly than a '' usual '' excited state , or they undergo spontaneous fission with half-life of the order of nanoseconds or microseconds—a very short time , but many orders of magnitude longer than the half-life of a more usual nuclear excited state . fission isomers may be denoted with a postscript or superscript '' f '' rather than '' m '' , so that a fission isomer , e.g . of plutonium-240 , can be denoted as plutonium-240f or . nearly stable isomers . most nuclear excited states are very unstable and '' immediately '' radiate away the extra energy after existing on the order of 10 −12 & nbsp ; seconds . as a result , the characterization '' nuclear isomer '' is usually applied only to configurations with half-lives of 10 −9 & nbsp ; seconds or longer . quantum mechanics predicts that certain atomic species should possess isomers with unusually long lifetimes even by this stricter standard and have interesting properties . some nuclear isomers are so long-lived that they are relatively stable and can be produced and observed in quantity . the most stable nuclear isomer occurring in nature is , which is present in all tantalum samples at about 1 part in 8,300 . its half-life is at least 10 15 years , markedly longer than the age of the universe . the low excitation energy of the isomeric state causes both gamma de-excitation to the ground state ( which itself is radioactive by beta decay , with a half-life of only 8 hours ) and direct beta decay to hafnium or tungsten to be suppressed due to spin mismatches . the origin of this isomer is mysterious , though it is believed to have been formed in supernovae ( as are most other heavy elements ) . were it to relax to its ground state , it would release a photon with a photon energy of 75 & nbsp ; kev . it was first reported in 1988 by c . b . collins that can be forced to release its energy by weaker x-rays . this way of de-excitation had never been observed ; however , the de-excitation of by resonant photo-excitation of intermediate high levels of this nucleus ( e & nbsp ; ~ & nbsp ; 1 & nbsp ; mev ) was found in 1999 by belic and co-workers in the stuttgart nuclear physics group . is another reasonably stable nuclear isomer . it possesses a half-life of 31 years and the highest excitation energy of any comparably long-lived isomer . one gram of pure contains approximately 1.33 gigajoules of energy , the equivalent of exploding about of tnt . in the natural decay of , the energy is released as gamma rays with a total energy of 2.45 & nbsp ; mev . as with , there are disputed reports that can be stimulated into releasing its energy . due to this , the substance is being studied as a possible source for gamma-ray lasers . these reports indicate that the energy is released very quickly , so that can produce extremely high powers ( on the order of exawatts ) . other isomers have also been investigated as possible media for induced gamma emission . holmium 's nuclear isomer has a half-life of 1,200 years , which is nearly the longest half-life of any holmium radionuclide . only , with a half-life of 4,570 years , is more stable . has a remarkably low-lying metastable isomer , estimated at only 8.28 & nbsp ; ± & nbsp ; 0.17 & nbsp ; ev above the ground state . after years of failure and one notable false alarm , this decay was directly observed in 2016 , based on its internal conversion decay . this direct detection allowed for a first measurement of the isomer 's lifetime under internal-conversion decay , the determination of the isomer 's magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole moment via spectroscopy of the electronic shell and an improved measurement of the excitation energy . due to its low energy , the isomer is expected to allow for direct nuclear laser spectroscopy and the development of a nuclear clock of unprecedented accuracy . . high-spin suppression of decay . the most common mechanism for suppression of gamma decay of excited nuclei , and thus the existence of a metastable isomer , is lack of a decay route for the excited state that will change nuclear angular momentum along any given direction by the most common amount of 1 quantum unit ħ in the spin angular momentum . this change is necessary to emit a gamma photon , which has a spin of 1 unit in this system . integral changes of 2 and more units in angular momentum are possible , but the emitted photons carry off the additional angular momentum . changes of more than 1 unit are known as forbidden transitions . each additional unit of spin change larger than 1 that the emitted gamma ray must carry inhibits decay rate by about 5 orders of magnitude . leon van dommelen , quantum mechanics for engineers ( chapter 14 ) . the highest known spin change of 8 units occurs in the decay of 180m ta , which suppresses its decay by a factor of 10 35 from that associated with 1 unit . instead of a natural gamma-decay half-life of 10 −12 seconds , it has a half-life of more than 10 23 seconds , or at least 3 & nbsp ; × & nbsp ; 10 15 years , and thus has yet to be observed to decay . gamma emission is impossible when the nucleus begins in a zero-spin state , as such an emission would not conserve angular momentum . applications . hafnium isomers ( mainly 178m2 hf ) have been considered as weapons that could be used to circumvent the nuclear non-proliferation treaty , since it is claimed that they can be induced gamma emission . this claim is generally discounted . darpa had a program to investigate this use of both nuclear isomers . the potential to trigger an abrupt release of energy from nuclear isotopes , a prerequisite to their use in such weapons , is disputed . nonetheless a 12-member hafnium isomer production panel ( hipp ) was created in 2003 to assess means of mass-producing the isotope . technetium isomers ( with a half-life of 6.01 & nbsp ; hours ) and ( with a half-life of 61 & nbsp ; days ) are used in medical and industrial applications . nuclear batteries . nuclear battery use small amounts ( milligrams and microcuries ) of radioisotopes with high energy densities . in one betavoltaic device design , radioactive material sits atop a device with adjacent layers of p-type and n-type silicon . ionizing radiation directly penetrates the junction and creates electron–hole pairs . nuclear isomers could replace other isotopes , and with further development , it may be possible to turn them on and off by triggering decay as needed . current candidates for such use include silver-108 , holmium-166 , lutetium-177 , and americium-242 . as of 2004 , the only successfully triggered isomer was tantalum-180m , which required more photon energy to trigger than was released . an isotope such as 177 lu releases gamma rays by decay through a series of internal energy levels within the nucleus , and it is thought that by learning the triggering cross sections with sufficient accuracy , it may be possible to create energy stores that are 10 6 times more concentrated than high explosive or other traditional chemical energy storage . . decay processes . an isomeric transition ( it ) is the decay of a nuclear isomer to a lower-energy nuclear state . the actual process has two types ( modes ) : gamma ray emission ( emission of a high-energy photon ) , internal conversion ( the energy is used to eject one of the atom 's electrons ) . isomers may decay into other elements , though the rate of decay may differ between isomers . for example , 177m lu can beta-decay to 177 hf with a half-life of 160.4 & nbsp ; d , or it can undergo isomeric transition to 177 lu with a half-life of 160.4 & nbsp ; d , which then beta-decays to 177 hf with a half-life of 6.68 & nbsp ; d . the emission of a gamma ray from an excited nuclear state allows the nucleus to lose energy and reach a lower-energy state , sometimes its ground state . in certain cases , the excited nuclear state following a nuclear reaction or other type of radioactive decay can become a metastable nuclear excited state . some nuclei are able to stay in this metastable excited state for minutes , hours , days , or occasionally far longer . the process of isomeric transition is similar to gamma emission from any excited nuclear state , but differs by involving excited metastable states of nuclei with longer half-lives . as with other excited states , the nucleus can be left in an isomeric state following the emission of an alpha particle , beta particle , or some other type of particle . the gamma ray may transfer its energy directly to one of the most tightly bound electrons , causing that electron to be ejected from the atom , a process termed the photoelectric effect . this should not be confused with the internal conversion process , in which no gamma-ray photon is produced as an intermediate particle . see also . induced gamma emission isomeric shift . references . external links . research group which presented initial claims of hafnium nuclear isomer de-excitation control . – the center for quantum electronics , the university of texas at dallas . jason defense advisory group report on high energy nuclear materials mentioned in the washington post story above login required ? confidence for hafnium isomer triggering in 2006 . – the center for quantum electronics , the university of texas at dallas . reprints of articles about nuclear isomers in peer reviewed journals . – the center for quantum electronics , the university of texas at dallas .