Mr. Holland's Opus

plot . in 1965 , 30-year-old glenn holland is a successful and talented musician and composer from portland , oregon . he retires and takes a position as a music teacher at john f . kennedy high school so that he can spend more time with his young wife iris and work on his symphony . the film covers his 30 year teaching career , set amongst the changes in american society . holland at first struggles in his new job , but learns how to connect with his students by using rock and roll and other popular music to convince them that music is a fun and worthwile pursuit . he becomes a popular teacher at the school and rises to the task of creating a school marching band with help from the football coach , bill meister , and they become lifelong friends . holland persuades principal helen jacobs to maintain funding for the school 's arts programs , despite a shrinking budget and the objections of vice principal gene wolters . the time holland devotes to his classes , the marching band , orchestra , productions and mentoring both struggling and talented students leaves him little time to work on his symphony , or to spend with his family . when his son , coltrane , is found to be deaf , he is severely disappointed that he will never be able to share his love of music . he fails to learn american sign language properly , leaving him unable to communicate with his son and creating a rift between him and iris , who has to raise coltrane mostly by herself . as the years progress , holland grows closer to his students at kennedy high and more distant from his own son . an argument with his teenage son finally makes holland realise the error of his ways and he learns to communicate with his son and repairs his relationship with his wife . in 1995 , principal wolters shuts down the school 's arts programs , citing further cuts from the education board and the need to prioritize reading , writing and math . holland makes an impassioned plea to the board , to no avail , and becomes despondent believing that his teaching career has amounted to nothing . on his last day , holland 's wife and son help him clear out his office and take him to the auditorium . it is packed full of ex-pupils who greet him with a standing ovation . gertrude lang , a struggling clarinetist and now governor of oregon , gives a speech praising mr . holland , that his legacy is more than just the symphony ; it is all the people he has helped and influenced over 30 years . she joins ex-members of the school 's orchestra , who have been practicing the symphony , on stage . mr . holland conducts them in its premiere performance . cast . richard dreyfuss as glenn holland , a composer who becomes a music teacher at john f . kennedy high school . glenne headly as iris holland , the wife of glenn . jay thomas as bill meister , the gym teacher and coach of john f . kennedy high school 's football team who befriends glenn . olympia dukakis as principal helen jacobs , the principal of john f . kennedy high school , who retires in 1972 . william h . macy as vice principal gene wolters , the vice-principal of john f . kennedy high school who later becomes principal in 1972 . jean louisa kelly as rowena morgan , a vocalist student of glenn . joanna gleason as gertrude lang , a former student of glenn and clarinet player who is now the governor of oregon . alicia witt as younger gertrude lang damon whitaker as bobby tidd , a student of glenn . forest whitaker as adult bobby tidd ( uncredited ) terrence howard as louis russ , a high school football player and a student of glenn who plays the bass drum . alexandra boyd as sarah olmstead , a drama teacher . anthony natale as coltrane '' cole '' holland ( age 28 ) , the son of glenn and iris who is 90 % deaf . joseph anderson as coltrane '' cole '' holland ( age 15 ) nicholas john renner as coltrane '' cole '' holland ( age 6 ) beth maitland as deaf school principal , the principal of a deaf school that cole is enrolled in . kathryn arnett as ms . swedlin , one of glenn 's students . kelly m . casey , the teacher of a deaf school that cole is enrolled in . ted roisum , a doctor who analyzes cole when he glenn and iris find signs that he is deaf . denis biasi as stadler balthazar getty as younger stadler ( uncredited ) . production . the movie was written by patrick sheane duncan , directed by stephen herek , and was filmed in and around portland , oregon , with many exterior and interior scenes taking place at ulysses s . grant high school . other scenes were filmed in portland 's st . johns neighborhood and hollywood district . archival footage . stock footage seen in the film includes : martin luther king jr . 's speech robert and john f . kennedy woodstock vietnam war richard nixon 's resignation speech the rocky horror picture show saturday night fever stop making sense murder of john lennon disco demolition night at comiskey park . music . the film features an orchestral score by michael kamen and many pieces of classical music . kamen also wrote an american symphony ( '' mr . holland 's opus '' ) , the work on which mr . holland is shown working throughout the movie . kamen 's arrangement won the 1997 grammy for best instrumental arrangement . soundtrack releases . two soundtrack albums were released for this film in january 1996 . one is the original motion picture score , and includes all of the original music written for the film by michael kamen . the second album is a collection of popular music featured in the film : '' visions of a sunset '' – shawn stockman ( of boyz ii men ) '' 1-2-3 '' – len barry '' a lover 's concerto '' – the toys '' keep on running '' – spencer davis group '' uptight ( everything 's alright ) '' – stevie wonder '' imagine '' – john lennon '' the pretender '' – jackson browne '' someone to watch over me '' – julia fordham '' i got a woman '' – ray charles '' beautiful boy ( darling boy ) '' – john lennon '' cole 's song '' – julian lennon and tim renwick an american symphony ( '' mr . holland 's opus '' ) – london metropolitan orchestra and michael kamen . reception . box office . in the united states , gross domestic takings totaled us 82,569,971 . international takings are estimated at us 23,700,000 , for a gross worldwide takings of 106,269,971 . rental totals reached 36,550,000 in the us . although the film is included among 1995 box-office releases ( it ranks as the 14th-most successful film of that year ) , it was only released in a few theatres in new york and los angeles on december 29 , 1995 , because disney felt , accurately , that richard dreyfuss ' performance had a good chance of getting an oscar nomination if it beat that year 's in-theatre deadline . critical . the film holds a 75 % '' fresh '' rating from 28 reviews at rotten tomatoes . the site 's consensus states : '' a feel-good story brought to life by a terrific ensemble cast , mr . holland 's opus plucks the heartstrings without shame -- and with undeniable skill . '' mr . holland 's opus at rotten tomatoes cinemascore reported that audiences gave the film a rare '' a+ '' grade . the new york times film review cited dreyfuss for '' a warm and really touching performance '' ; variety also called his performance '' quite effective and surprisingly restrained '' . variety further noted the '' nostalgic aura '' that permeates the film , '' which encourages viewers to think fondly of — and pay tribute to — the one teacher in their lives who made a difference '' . roger ebert gave the film 3 1/2 out of 4 stars , commending its starring and supporting casts and agreeing with the film 's message of the ability of high school teachers to inspire their students , as well as the importance of cultural offerings on the curriculum . writer patrick sheane duncan was nominated for the golden globe award for best screenplay at the 53rd golden globe awards . dreyfuss was nominated for the academy award for best actor and the golden globe award for best actor – motion picture drama . accolades . the film is recognized by american film institute in this list : 2006 : afi 's 100 years.100 cheers – nominated . the mr . holland 's opus foundation . inspired by the motion picture , its composer , michael kamen , founded the mr . holland 's opus foundation in 1996 as his commitment to the future of music education . mr . holland 's opus foundation . see also . list of films featuring the deaf and hard of hearing . references . external links . the mr . holland 's opus foundation