Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn

early life . yosef yitzchak schneersohn was born in lyubavichi , mogilev governorate , russian empire ( present-day smolensk oblast , russia ) , the only son of rabbi sholom dovber schneersohn ( the rebbe rashab ) , the fifth rebbe of chabad . he was appointed as his father 's personal secretary at the age of fifteen ; in that year , he represented his father in the conference of communal leaders in kovno . the following year ( 1896 ) , he participated in the vilna conference , where rabbis and community leaders discussed issues such as : genuine jewish education ; permission for jewish children not to attend public school on shabbat ; the creation of a united jewish organization for the purpose of strengthening judaism . he participated in this conference again in 1908 . the four worlds , rabbi yosef yitzchak schneersohn , kehot , 2006 , pp . 87–90 . on 13 elul 5657 ( 1897 ) , at the age of seventeen , he married his third cousin , nechama dina schneersohn , daughter of rabbi avraham schneerson of chișinău , son of rabbi yisroel noach of nizhyn , son of rabbi menachem mendel schneersohn , the tzemach tzedek . in 1898 , he was appointed head of the tomchei temimim yeshiva network . in 1901 , with financial support from yaakov and eliezer poliakoff he opened spinning and weaving mills in dubrovno and mahilyow and established a yeshiva in bukhara . encyclopedia of hasidism , entry : schneersohn , joseph isaac . naftali lowenthal . aronson , london 1996 . as he matured , he campaigned for the rights of jews by appearing before the czarist authorities in saint petersburg and moscow . during the russo-japanese war of 1904 he sought relief for jewish conscripts in the russian army by sending them kosher food and supplies in the russian far east . in 1905 , he participated in organizing a fund to provide passover needs for troops in the far east . with rising anti-semitism and pogroms against jews , in 1906 , he travelled with other prominent rabbis to seek help from western european governments , especially germany and the netherlands , and persuaded bankers there to use their influence to stop pogroms . he was arrested four times between 1902 and 1911 by the czarist police because of his activism , but was released each time . becoming rebbe . upon the death of his father , rabbi sholom dovber schneersohn ( '' rashab '' ) , in 1920 , yosef yitzchak became the sixth rebbe of chabad-lubavitch . it was an age of great social and political upheaval following the russian revolution of 1917 . the victorious anti-religious bolsheviks were intent on uprooting and suppressing all religious life in the new bolshevist russia . battling the bolsheviks . following the takeover of russia by the communists , they created a special '' jewish affairs section '' run by jews known as the yevsektsiya , which instigated anti-religious activities meant to strip orthodox jews of their religious way of life . as rebbe of a russia-based jewish movement , rabbi schneersohn was vehemently outspoken against the atheism communist regime and its goal of forcibly eradicating religion throughout the land . he purposely directed his followers to set up religious schools , going against the dictates of the marxist-leninist '' dictatorship of the proletariat '' . in 1921 , he established a branch of tomchei temimim in warsaw . in 1924 , he was forced by the cheka ( russian secret police ) to leave rostov due to the yevsektsiya 's slander , and settled in leningrad . in this time he labored to strengthen torah observance through activities involving rabbis , torah schools for children , yeshivot , shochet , senior torah-instructors and the opening of mikveh ; he established a special committee to help manual workers be able to observe shabbat . he established agudas chasidei chabad in usa and canada . in 1927 , he established a number of yeshivot in bukhara . he was primarily responsible for the maintenance of the now-clandestine chabad yeshiva system , which had ten branches throughout russia by this time . he was under continual surveillance by agents of the nkvd . imprisonment and release . in 1927 , he was arrested and imprisoned in the bolshoy dom in leningrad . he was accused of counter-revolutionary activities , and sentenced to death . a worldwide storm of outrage and pressure from western governments and the international red cross forced the communist regime to commute the death sentence and instead on 3 tammuz it banished him to kostroma for an original sentence of three years . yekaterina peshkova , a prominent russian human rights activist , helped from inside as well . this was also commuted following political pressure from the outside , and he was finally allowed to leave russia for riga in latvia , where he lived from 1928 until 1929 . rabbi yosef yitzchak 's release from soviet imprisonment is celebrated each year by the chabad community . schneerson , menachem m . '' yud-beis tammuz 5738 . '' sichos in english : 5738 . volume 1 . vaad lehafotzas sichos ( sichos in english ) . 1978 . sichosinenglish.org . accessed 28 april 2014 . after his release , rabbi yosef yitzchak then went to the holy land where he saw holy gravesites , local yeshivas and torah centers , der morgen journal , 18 september 1929 . and met with rabbis and community leaders from 7–22 august 1929 , der morgen journal , 18 september 1929 . leaving just prior to the massacre by arabs of nearly 70 jews living in hebron on 24 august . 1929 : first visit to the united states . following his trip to the holy land , he turned his attention to the united states , arriving in manhattan on 17 september 1929 ( 12 elul 5689 ) on the french passenger liner france . brooklyn daily eagle , 17 september 1929 , p . 8 ; forward , 18 september 1929 , pp . 1 , 12 . rabbi schneersohn was greeted by some 600 people , with security provided by over 100 new york city police officers . brooklyn daily eagle , 17 september 1929 , p.2 . '' may the almighty bless this great country that has been a refuge for our jewish people , '' he said at his arrival . brooklyn daily eagle , 18 september 1929 , p.18 . the purpose of his visit was to assess the educational and religious state of american jewry , and raise awareness of the plight of soviet jews . hailed as '' one of the greatest jews of our age , '' joint statement of the union of orthodox rabbis of the united states and canada and of the rabbinical board of new york , cited in brooklyn daily eagle , 18 september 1929 , p . 18 . he was honored at a 28 october banquet in manhattan by orthodox , conservative and reform jewish leaders . jewish daily bulletin , 28 october 1929 , p . 3 . while in the united states , rabbi schneersohn also traveled ( among places other than new york ) to philadelphia , jewish exponent , 20 december 1929 ; philadelphia city news , 27 dec . 1929 . baltimore , baltimore sun , 13 january 1930 . detroit , detroit jewish news , 18 april 1930 , p . 6 . boston , jewish daily bulletin , 15 june 1930 , p . 2 . and chicago . the sentinel ( chicago ) , 14 feb . 1930 , p.5 . on 10 july , he met president herbert hoover at the white house . the sentinel ( chicago ) , 25 july 1930 , p . 11 . as the republican presidential candidate , hoover had lobbied for his release . lubavitch followers in america begged their rebbe to leave russia and stay in america , but rabbi schneersohn declined , saying that america was an irreligious place where even rabbis shaved off their beards . he left the united states to return to riga , latvia , on 17 july 1930 . jewish daily bulletin , 18 july 1930 , p . 4 . from 1934 until the early part of world war ii , he lived in warsaw , poland . 1940 : settling in the united states . following nazi germany 's attack against poland in 1939 , rabbi schneersohn refused to leave warsaw . the government of the united states of america , which was still neutral , used its diplomatic relations to convince nazi germany to rescue schneersohn from the war zone in german-occupied poland . rigg , bryan mark , rescued from the reich : how one of hitler 's soldiers saved the lubavitcher rebbe ( yale university press 2006 ) he remained in the city during the bombardments and its capitulation to nazi germany . he gave the full support of his organizations to assist as many jews as possible to flee the invading armies . with the intercession of the united states department of state in washington , dc and with the lobbying of many jewish leaders , such as jacob rutstein , on behalf of the rebbe ( and , reputedly , also with the help of admiral wilhelm canaris , altein , r , zaklikofsky , e , jacobson , i : '' out of the inferno : the efforts that led to the rescue of rabbi yosef yitzchak schneersohn of lubavitch from war torn europe in 1939–40 '' , p . 160 . merkos l'inyonei chinuch , 2002 the head of the abwehr ) , he was finally granted diplomatic immunity and given safe passage to go via berlin to riga , latvia ( where the rebbe was a citizen and which was still free ) and then on to new york city , where he arrived on 19 march 1940 . see video . major ernst bloch , a decorated german army officer of jewish descent , was put in command of a group which included sgt . klaus schenk , a '' half-jew '' and pvt . johannes hamburger , a '' quarter-jew '' assigned to locate the rebbe in poland and escort him safely to freedom . they were a few of up to 150,000 jews and people of jewish descent who were classified as mischlinge ( '' mixed-breeds '' , i.e . , germans with one or two jewish grandparents ) by the nazi government , but served in the german armed forces during world war ii . rigg , bryan mark , hitler 's jewish soldiers : the untold story of nazi racial laws and men of jewish descent in the german military ( university press of kansas ed . 2009 ) they wound up saving not only the rebbe , but also over a dozen hasidic jews in the rebbe 's family or associated with him . ironically , without the rescue of rebbe schneersohn , the rescue of his son-in-law and the next rebbe menachem mendel schneerson would not have happened . working with the government and the contacts schneersohn had with the us state department , chabad was able to save menachem mendel from vichy france in 1941 before the borders were closed down . friedman , menachem , and heilman , samuel , the rebbe : the life and afterlife of menachem mendel schneerson , princeton , 2010 ; bryan mark rigg , the rabbi saved by hitler 's soldiers , kansas , 2016 . when rabbi schneersohn came to america ( he was the first major chasidic leader to move permanently to the united states '' schneerson , yoseph yitzchak '' , in moshe d . sherman , orthodox judaism in america : a biographical dictionary and sourcebook ( westport , cn : greenwood press , 1996 ) , p . 189 . ) two of his chassidim came to him , and said not to start up all the activities in which lubavitch had engaged in europe , because '' america is different . '' to avoid disappointment , they advised him not even to try . rabbi schneersohn wrote , '' out of my eyes came boiling tears '' , and undeterred , the next day he started the first lubavitcher yeshiva in america , declaring that '' america is no different . '' see video . in 1949 , rabbi schneersohn became a u.s . citizen , with his son-in-law rabbi menachem mendel assisting to coordinate the event . a special dispensation was arranged wherein the federal judge came to '' 770 '' to officiate at rabbi yosef yitzchak 's citizenship proceedings , rather than the rebbe travel to a courthouse for the proceedings . uniquely , the event was recorded on color motion film . in 1950 , schneersohn died in his home in brooklyn and many members , even the next rebbe menachem mendel schneerson , declared him the messiah . this caused a lot of problems for the chabad community just like it would when rabbi menachem mendel schneerson died in 1994 , and many in the community declared him the messiah . in 1951 , rabbi menachem mendel schneerson took over the leadership of chabad and became the next rebbe of chabad . when this happened , many stopped declaring rebbe schneersohn the messiah and focused on building out the community under the new rebbe schneerson ( note : the confusion on names results from the fact that rebbe schneerson was the second cousin and son-in-law of rebbe schneersohn ) . the previous rebbe accepts us citizenship - program one hundred twenty eight - living torah . chabad.org . 1949-03-17 ; '' out of the inferno , '' reviewed by efraim zuroff , the jerusalem post , 15 december 2002 ; bryan mark rigg , the rabbi saved by hitler 's soldiers , kansas , 2016 . following the sixth chabad rebbe 's escape from nazi occupied poland and his settlement in new york city , rabbi yosef yitzchok issued a call for repentance , stating l'alter l'tshuva , l'alter l'geula ( '' speedy repentance brings a speedy redemption '' ) . this campaign was opposed by rabbis avraham kalmanowitz and aaron kotler of the vaad hatzalah . in return , rabbi yosef yitzchok was critical of the efforts of rabbis kalmanowitz and kotler based on the suspicion that kalmanowitz and kotler were discriminating in their use of funds , placing their yeshivas before all else , and that the mizrachi and agudas harabonim withdrew their support of the vaad after they discovered this fact . rigg , bryan mark . rescued from the reich . cambridge university press . 2005 . . launch of lubavitch activities in the united states . during the last decade of rabbi schneersohn 's life , from 1940 to 1950 , he settled in the crown heights section of brooklyn in new york city . rabbi schneersohn was already physically weak and ill from his suffering at the hands of the communists and the nazis and from multiple health issues including multiple sclerosis , he died in 1950 , and was buried at montefiore cemetery in queens , new york city . he had no sons , and his younger son-in-law , rabbi menachem mendel schneerson ( '' the rebbe '' ) succeeded him as lubavitcher rebbe , while the older son-in-law , rabbi shemaryahu gurary continued to run the chabad yeshiva network tomchei temimim . after rabbi schneersohn 's passing , his gravesite , known as '' the ohel '' , became a central point of focus for his successor rabbi menachem mendel schneerson , who would visit it regularly for many hours of prayer , meditation , and supplication for jews all over the world . after his successor 's passing and burial next to his father-in-law , philanthropist joseph gutnick of melbourne , australia , established the ohel chabad-lubavitch center on francis lewis boulevard in queens , which is located adjacent to the joint grave site . book collection . during his life in smolensk , rabbi schneersohn set up a collection of his family 's religious books and writings . it includes texts dating back to the 16th century . after world war i , the bolsheviks found part of the collection and moved it to the russian state library . another part of the collection was confiscated by soviet troops in nazi germany during world war ii and moved to russia 's military archive . in 1994 , seven books were loaned to the u.s . library of congress for 60 days through an inter-library exchange program . the books were given to the chabad-lubavitch library which helped to prolong the use of the books twice , in 1995 and 1996 , before they finally refused to return them to russia in 2000 . they proposed an exchange for the opportunity to keep the books indefinitely , but russia refused . in 2004 , the chabad-lubavitch filed a lawsuit against russia , claiming the remaining books . in 2010 , an american court granted their claim , which russia ignored as invalid . in retaliation , in 2011 russia put a ban on lending works to american museums . in 2014 , united states federal judge royce c . lamberth imposed fines of 50,000 a day for russia refusing to return the schneersohn collection of more than 12,000 books and 50,000 religious papers . since rabbi schneersohn had no heirs , russia claims the collection is a national treasure of the russian people . this dispute is related to the deteriorating ties between moscow and the u.s . over the ongoing 2014 russian military intervention in ukraine . a russian court ruled that the library of congress should pay fines of 50,000 a day for refusing to return the books . . published works . hebrew and yiddish . sefer hamaamarim – 5680–5689 , 8 vol . sefer hamaamarim – 5692–5693 . sefer hamaamarim – 5696–5711 , 15 vol . sefer hamaamarim – kuntresim , 3 vol . sefer hamaamarim – yiddish sefer hasichot – 5680–5691 , 2 vol . sefer hasichot – 5696–5710 , 8 vol . likkutei dibburim , 4 vol . kuntres torat hachasidut kuntres limud hachasidut admur hatzemach tzedek u'tenuat hahaskalah kitzurim l'biurei hazohar sefer hakitzurim – shaarei orah kitzurim l'kuntres hatefillah sefer hazichronot , 2 vol . moreh shiur b'limudei yom yom – chumash , tehillim , tanya seder haselichot maamar v'ha'ish moshe anav , 5698 igrot kodesh , 14 vol . klalei chinuch vehadracha . hebrew translations . likkutei dibburim , 5 vol . sefer hasichot – 5700–5705 , 3 vol . sefer hazichronot , 2 vol . english translations . lubavitcher rabbi 's memoirs the tzemach tzedek and the haskala movement on learning chasidut on the teachings of chasidut some aspects of chabad chasidism chasidic discourses , 2 vol . likkutei dibburim , 6 vol . the principles of education and guidance the heroic struggle the four worlds oneness in creation . cd/video . america is no different . in film . rabbi yosef yitzchak 's escape from poland was the subject of a 2011 israeli documentary film ha'rabi ve'hakatzin ha'germani ( the chabad rebbe and the german officer ) . the chabad rebbe and the german officer . israelfilmcenter.org . accessed 16 january 2014 . the chabad rebbe and the german officer . jmtfilms.com . accessed 16 january 2014 .