Armistead Maupin

early life . maupin was born in washington , d.c . , to diana jane ( barton ) and armistead jones maupin . his great-great-grandfather , congressman lawrence o'bryan branch , was from north carolina and was a railroad executive and a confederate general during the american civil war . his father , armistead jones maupin , founded maupin , taylor & ellis , one of the largest law firms in north carolina . maupin was raised in raleigh . – in the independent of raleigh , north carolina , june 1988 – autobiographical memoir maupin attended ravenscroft school and graduated from needham broughton high school in 1962 . he attended the university of north carolina at chapel hill where he wrote for the daily tar heel . a conversation with author armistead maupin – on kuow-fm radio , 2007-06-19 . career . maupin worked at wral-tv in raleigh , a station managed by future u.s . senator jesse helms . helms nominated maupin for a patriotic award , which maupin won . maupin said he was a typical conservative and segregationist at this time and admired helms , as a hero figure '' . maupin later changed his opinion and condemned helms at a pride parade on the steps of the north carolina state capitol . maupin is a veteran of the united states navy and served several tours of duty including one in the vietnam war . maupin worked at a charleston newspaper and the san francisco bureau of the associated press in 1971 . – in guest informant , 1998–1999 . maupin recalls his first experiences of san francisco . he said he had '' no sense of it being a gay mecca '' and called it '' this amazing city that embraced me , that had made me aware of my true self '' , and '' what really floored me was that the straight folks in san francisco were so civilised about homosexuality . '' ( in the new york times interview ) in 1974 , he began what would become the tales of the city series as a serial in a marin county-based newspaper , the pacific sun , moving to the san francisco chronicle after the sun san francisco edition folded . in 1978 , maupin publicly accused san francisco police inspector dave toschi of faking one of the zodiac killer 's taunting letters to the media , seriously and irreparably damaging toschi 's career and reputation . maupin claimed to have noticed a similarity between anonymous fan mail toschi had sent him after maupin based one of his tales of the city characters on him , and a zodiac letter received by the san francisco chronicle on april 24 , 1978 . although the usps crime lab cleared toschi of being the zodiac letter 's author , toschi was removed from the case and his chances of succeeding charles gain as chief of the san francisco pd were destroyed . the incident is portrayed in the 2007 david fincher film zodiac . works . tales of the city . tales of the city is a series of novels , the first portions of which were published initially as a newspaper serial starting on august 8 , 1974 , in a marin county newspaper , the pacific sun , picked up in 1976 by the san francisco chronicle , and later reworked into the series of books published by harpercollins ( then harper and row ) . the first of maupin 's novels , entitled tales of the city , was published in 1978 . five more followed in the 1980s , ending with the last book , sure of you , in 1989 . a seventh novel published in 2007 , michael tolliver lives , continues the story of some of the characters . it was followed by an eighth volume , mary ann in autumn , published in 2010 and a ninth and final volume , the days of anna madrigal , in 2014 . in babycakes , published in 1983 , maupin was one of the first writers to address the subject of aids . of the autobiographical nature of the characters , he says '' i 've always been all of the characters in one way or another . '' the tales of the city books have been translated into ten languages , and there are more than six million copies in print . several of the books have been adapted and broadcast on bbc radio 4 . . television miniseries . the first three books in the series have also been adapted into three television miniseries starring olympia dukakis and laura linney . the first airing was on pbs ; subsequent miniseries appeared on showtime . tv guide , january 1994 . article by maupin about the difficult process of getting the tales series into tv production . additionally , a miniseries has been made for netflix that premiered june 7 , 2019 . musical projects . he collaborated on anna madrigal remembers , a musical work written by jake heggie and performed by choir chanticleer and mezzo-soprano frederica von stade on august 6 , 1999 , for which maupin provided a new libretto . he also participated in a concert series with the seattle men 's chorus entitled tunes from tales ( music for mouse ) , which included readings from his books and music from the era . in may 2011 , a theatrical musical version of tales of the city had its premiere at american conservatory theater in san francisco . the musical has a score and lyrics by jake shears and john garden of the rock band scissor sisters , and a book by jeff whitty . it was directed by jason moore . . maybe the moon and the night listener . maupin wrote two novels , maybe the moon and the night listener , which are not part of tales , though both books occasionally glance in that direction . maybe the moon is a story maupin describes as '' partly autobiographical '' , despite the main character being a female heterosexual jewish dwarf . the character was also based on his friend tamara de treaux , who played the title character in the 1982 film e.t . the extra-terrestrial . – san francisco focus magazine ] , october 1992 . interview with maupin about his friendship with tamara de treaux . the night listener is a roman à clef , inspired by maupin 's experiences concerning the anthony godby johnson hoax . audio interview about the night listener – on whyy-fm , october 3 , 2000 – a story featuring the fictional characters in noone at night he says he wanted to create a psychological thriller , while being able to put autobiographical elements in it . the issues he addresses include the ending of his relationship with his life partner and his relationship with his father . the book very lightly references the tales world via gabriel noone 's assistant , who is one of dede halcyon-day 's twins from tales . it was serialized on the internet , on salon.com , prior to its print publication . the night listener was adapted into a movie that was screened at the sundance film festival in late january 2006 and released by miramax the following august . . michael tolliver lives . prior to the 2007 release of michael tolliver lives , maupin had been quoted on his website as saying that another tales of the city novel was unlikely . although maupin originally stated that this novel was '' not a sequel to tales of the city and it 's certainly not book 7 in the series , '' he later conceded that '' i 've stopped denying that this is book seven in tales of the city , as it clearly is . i suppose i did n't want people to be thrown by the change in the format , as this is a first person novel unlike the third person format of the tales of the city books and it 's about one character who interrelates with other characters . having said that , it is still very much a continuation of the saga and i think i realised it was very much time for me to come back to this territory . '' the novel is written from the first-person perspective of tales character michael 'mouse ' tolliver , now in his fifties and living as an hiv-positive man . '' armistead maupin talks ! '' – advocate.com it also features appearances by familiar tales characters , such as anna madrigal . '' sex and the city '' – interview in the observer maupin said : '' i was interested in pursuing the life of an aging gay man , and michael was the perfect vehicle . however , as soon as i started writing , i found that , one by one , all the other characters stepped forward and asked to be present . it felt natural , so i went with it . '' he calls it '' a smaller , more personal novel than i 've written in the past . '' the book was released on june 12 , 2007 , which was declared 'michael tolliver day ' by the mayor of san francisco . '' reader , he married him '' – review in the guardian mary ann in autumn was published november 12 , 2010 by harper/harpercollins , continuing the series . it was reviewed by joseph salvatore in the new york times sunday book reviews on november 14 . it was followed in january 2014 by the days of anna madrigal , which maupin says will be the final novel in the series . . personal life . maupin said he knew he was gay since childhood , but did not have sex until he was 26 and decided to come out in 1974 . for armistead maupin , there are still tales to tell – interview in the st . louis post-dispatch . he agreed to be identified as a homosexual in a '' ten most eligible bachelors '' article in san francisco magazine . – michael tolliver 's coming out letter , a response in the book to his parents ' participation in anita bryant 's anti-gay save our children campaign . maupin used the letter to serve the same purpose for his own parents , who followed the tales serial . maupin married christopher turner , a website producer and photographer , after seeing turner on a dating website . maupin and turner were married in vancouver , british columbia , canada , on february 18 , 2007 . maupin 's former partner of 12 years , terry anderson , was once a gay rights activist , remarks for the closing ceremonies of the gay games iv , yankee stadium , june 25 , 1994 . on gaygames.org . at the national aids memorial grove , located in san francisco 's golden gate park who co-authored the screenplay for the night listener . he lived with maupin in san francisco and new zealand . christopher isherwood was a mentor , friend , and influence as a writer . – armistead maupin interviews christopher isherwood for the village voice , volume 30 , number 16 maupin is the cousin of english singer sarah jane morris . he is an atheist . maupin has recorded his writings as audiobooks . in 2012 , maupin purchased the home of shoe designers lynne and dennis comeau in tesuque , new mexico . '' santa fe new mexican '' , october 14 , 2012 . maupin 's life and work are the subject of the documentary the untold tales of armistead maupin . the untold tales of armistead maupin . bibliography . tales of the city . . other novels . . memoir . . compilations . contains tales of the city , more tales of the city , and further tales of the city . contains babycakes , significant others , and sure of you . awards . 2007 , barbary coast award , presented by litquake literary festival , san francisco 2006 , best gay read award , presented by the big gay read literature festival , in the uk 2001 , gay , lesbian & bisexual book award 1999 , capital award , presented by glaad media awards 1997 bill whitehead award for lifetime achievement ( publishing triangle ) . references . further reading . gale , patrick . armistead maupin . bath , somerset , england : absolute press , 1999 . external links . armistead maupin official website armistead maupin at random house australia – maupin 's previous website , archived on the wayback machine ; most material is not on the new website armistead maupin interviewed