MPEG-7

introduction . mpeg-7 is intended to provide complementary functionality to the previous mpeg standards , representing information about the content , not the content itself ( '' the bits about the bits '' ) . this functionality is the standardization of multimedia content descriptions . mpeg-7 can be used independently of the other mpeg standards - the description might even be attached to an analog movie . the representation that is defined within mpeg-4 , i.e . the representation of audio-visual data in terms of objects , is however very well suited to what will be built on the mpeg-7 standard . this representation is basic to the process of categorization . in addition , mpeg-7 descriptions could be used to improve the functionality of previous mpeg standards.with these tools , we can build an mpeg-7 description and deploy it . according to the requirements document,1 “ a description consists of a description scheme ( structure ) and the set of descriptor values ( instantiations ) that describe the data . ” a descriptor value is “ an instantiation of a descriptor for a given data set ( or subset thereof ) . ” the descriptor is the syntatic and semantic definition of the content . extraction algorithms are inside the scope of the standard because their standardization isn ’ t required to allow interoperability . parts . the mpeg-7 ( iso/iec 15938 ) consists of different parts . each part covers a certain aspect of the whole specification . relation between description and content . an mpeg-7 architecture requirement is that description must be separate from the audiovisual content . on the other hand , there must be a relation between the content and description . thus the description is multiplexed with the content itself . on the right side you can see this relation between description and content . mpeg-7 tools . mpeg-7 uses the following tools : descriptor ( d ) : it is a representation of a feature defined syntactically and semantically . it could be that a unique object was described by several descriptors . description schemes ( ds ) : specify the structure and semantics of the relations between its components , these components can be descriptors ( d ) or description schemes ( ds ) . description definition language ( ddl ) : it is based on xml language used to define the structural relations between descriptors . it allows the creation and modification of description schemes and also the creation of new descriptors ( d ) . system tools : these tools deal with binarization , synchronization , transport and storage of descriptors . it also deals with intellectual property protection . on the right side you can see the relation between mpeg-7 tools . mpeg-7 applications . there are many applications and application domains which will benefit from the mpeg-7 standard . a few application examples are : digital library : image/video catalogue , musical dictionary . multimedia directory services : e.g . yellow pages . broadcast media selection : radio channel , tv channel . multimedia editing : personalized electronic news service , media authoring . security services : traffic control , production chains . e-business : searching process of products . cultural services : art-galleries , museums . educational applications . biomedical applications . artificial_intelligence that leverage low-level multimedia semantics via knowledge representation and reasoning . . software and demonstrators for mpeg-7 . caliph & emir : annotation and retrieval of images based on mpeg-7 ( gpl ) . creates mpeg-7 xml files . lux , mathias . '' caliph & emir : mpeg-7 photo annotation and retrieval . '' proceedings of the 17th acm international conference on multimedia . acm , 2009 . c implementation : open source implementation of the mpeg-7 descriptors in c . frameline 47 video notation : frameline 47 from versatile delivery systems . the first commercial mpeg-7 application , frameline 47 uses an advanced content schema based on mpeg-7 so as to be able to notate entire video files , or segments and groups of segments from within that video file according to the mpeg-7 convention ( commercial tool ) eptascape ads200 uses a real-time mpeg 7 encoder on an analog camera video signal to identify interesting events , especially in surveillance applications , check the demos to see mpeg-7 in action ( commercial tool ) ibm videoannex annotation tool : creating mpeg-7 documents for video streams describing structure and giving keywords from a controlled vocabulary ( binary release , restrictive license ) ifinder medienanalyse- und retrievalsystem : metadata extraction and search engine based on mpeg-7 ( commercial tool ) mpeg-7 audio encoder : creating mpeg-7 documents for audio documents describing low level audio characteristics ( binary & source release , java , gpl ) mpeg-7 visual descriptor extraction : software to extract mpeg-7 visual descriptors from images and image regions . xm feature extraction web service : the functionalities of the experimentation model ( xm ) are made available via web service interface to enable automatic mpeg-7 low-level visual description characterization of images . tu berlin mpeg-7 audio analyzer ( web-demo ) : creating mpeg-7 documents ( xml ) for audio documents ( wav , mp3 ) . all 17 mpeg-7 low level audio descriptors are implemented ( commercial ) tu berlin mpeg-7 spoken content demonstrator ( web-demo ) : creating mpeg-7 documents ( xml ) with spokencontent description from an input speech signal ( wav , mp3 ) ( commercial ) mp7jrs c++ library complete mpeg-7 implementation of part 3 , 4 and 5 ( visual , audio and mds ) by joanneum research institute for information and communication technologies - audiovisual media group . bilvideo-7 : mpeg-7 compatible , distributed video indexing and retrieval system , supporting complex , multimodal , composite queries ; developed by bilkent university multimedia database group ( bilmdg ) . unisay : sophisticated post-production file analysis and audio processing based on mpeg-7 . see also . exif id3 metadata standards mpeg-4 part 11 – scene description and application engine multimedia information retrieval query by humming . limitations . the mpeg-7 standard was originally written in xml schema ( xsd ) , which constitutes semi-structured data . for example , the running time of a movie annotated using mpeg-7 in xml is machine-readable data , so software agents will know that the number expressing the running time is a positive integer , but such data is not machine-interpretable ( can not be understood by agents ) , because it does not convey semantics ( meaning ) , known as the “ semantic gap . ” to address this issue , there were many attempts to map the mpeg-7 xml schema to the web ontology language ( owl ) , which is a structured data equivalent of the terms of the mpeg-7 standard ( mpeg-7ontos , comm , swinto , etc . ) . however , these mappings did not really bridge the “ semantic gap , ” because low-level video features alone are inadequate for representing video semantics . in other words , annotating an automatically extracted video feature , such as color distribution , does not provide the meaning of the actual visual content . . compare . material exchange format ( mxf ) , a container format for professional digital video and audio media defined by smpte . references . b.s . manjunath ( editor ) , philippe salembier ( editor ) , and thomas sikora ( editor ) : introduction to mpeg-7 : multimedia content description interface . wiley & sons , april 2002 - harald kosch : distributed multimedia database technologies supported by mpeg-7 and mpeg-21 . crc press , january 2004 - giorgos stamou ( editor ) and stefanos kollias ( editor ) : multimedia content and the semantic web : standards , methods and tools . wiley & sons , may 2005 - hyoung-gook kim , nicolas moreau , and thomas sikora : mpeg-7 audio and beyond : audio content indexing and retrieval . wiley & sons , october 2005 - . external links . mpeg-7 overview mpeg-7/-21 community portal