Charlie Christian

early life . christian was born in bonham , texas . his family moved to oklahoma city , oklahoma , when he was a small child . his parents were musicians . he had two brothers , edward , born in 1906 , and clarence , born in 1911 . all three sons were taught music by their father , clarence henry christian . clarence henry was struck blind by fever , and in order to support the family he and the boys worked as buskers , on what the christians called '' busts . '' he would have them lead him into the better neighborhoods , where they would perform for cash or goods . when charles was old enough to go along , he first entertained by dancing . goins , wayne ; mckinney , craig . a biography of charlie christian : jazz guitar 's king of swing . p . 7 . later he learned to play the guitar , inheriting his father 's instruments upon his death when charles was 12 . lee , amy ( 1940 ) . '' charlie christian tried to play hot tenor ! '' metronome . he attended douglass school in oklahoma city , where he was further encouraged in music by an instructor , zelia n . breaux . charles wanted to play tenor saxophone in the school band , but she insisted he try trumpet instead . as he believed playing the trumpet would disfigure his lip , he quit to pursue his interest in baseball , at which he excelled . goins , wayne ; mckinney , craig . a biography of charlie christian : jazz guitar 's king of swing . pp . 12–15 . in a 1978 interview with charlie christian biographer craig mckinney , clarence christian said that in the 1920s and '30s edward christian led a band in oklahoma city as a pianist and had a shaky relationship with the trumpeter james simpson . around 1931 , he took the guitarist '' bigfoot '' ralph hamilton and began secretly schooling the younger charles in jazz . they taught him to solo on three songs , '' rose room '' , '' tea for two '' , and '' sweet georgia brown '' . when the time was right they took him out to one of the many after-hours jam sessions along '' deep deuce '' , northeast second street , in oklahoma city . '' let charles play one , '' they told edward . '' ah , nobody wants to hear them old blues , '' edward replied . after some encouragement , he allowed charles to play . '' what do you want to play ? '' he asked . all three songs were big in the early 1930s , and edward was surprised that charles knew them . after two encores , charles had played all three , and deep deuce was in an uproar . he coolly dismissed himself from the jam session , and his mother had heard about it before he got home . goins , wayne ; mckinney , craig . a biography of charlie christian : jazz guitar 's king of swing . pp . 18–20 , 137 , 399 . charles fathered a daughter , billie jean christian ( december 23 , 1932 – july 19 , 2004 ) by margretta lorraine downey of oklahoma city . charles soon was performing locally and on the road throughout the midwest , as far away as north dakota and minnesota . by 1936 he was playing electric guitar and had become a regional attraction . he jammed with many of the big-name performers traveling through oklahoma city , including teddy wilson and art tatum . mary lou williams , the pianist for andy kirk ( musician ) , told the record producer john hammond . . national fame . in 1939 , christian auditioned for john hammond , who recommended him to the bandleader benny goodman . goodman was the fourth white bandleader to feature black musicians in his live band : the first was jimmy durante , for whom the clarinetist achille baquet played and recorded in durante 's original new orleans jazz band ( 1918–1920 ) ; the second was the violinist arthur hand , who led the california ramblers , which , from 1922 to 1925 , included the trumpeter bill moore , who was billed as the hot hawaiian ; the third was ben bernie , whose band from 1925 to 1928 also featured moore . goodman became the fourth by bringing in teddy wilson on piano in 1935 and lionel hampton on vibraphone in 1936 . goodman hired christian to play with the newly formed goodman sextet in september 1939 . leonard feather : ( 1960 ) . the encyclopedia of jazz . horizon press . it has been claimed that goodman was initially uninterested in hiring christian because the electric guitar was a relatively new instrument . goodman had been exposed to the instrument with floyd smith and leonard ware , among others , none of whom had the ability of christian . there is a report that goodman unsuccessfully tried to buy out floyd smith 's contract from andy kirk . however , goodman was so impressed by christian 's playing that he hired him instead . there are several versions of the first meeting of christian and goodman on august 16 , 1939 . the encounter that afternoon at the recording studio had not gone well . christian recalled in a 1940 article in metronome magazine , '' i guess neither one of us liked what i played , '' but hammond decided to try again & mdash ; without consulting goodman . ( christian says goodman invited him to the show that evening . ) amy lee , amy ( 1940 ) . '' charlie christian tried to play hot tenor ! '' metronome . he installed christian on the bandstand for that night 's set at the victor hugo restaurant in los angeles . displeased at the surprise , goodman called “ rose room ” , a tune he assumed christian would be unfamiliar with . unknown to goodman , christian had been reared on the tune , and he came in with his first chorus of about twenty , all of them different , all unlike anything goodman had heard before . that version of '' rose room '' lasted forty minutes . by its end , christian was in the band . in the course of a few days , christian went from making 2.50 a night to 150 a week . christian was placed in goodman 's new sextet , which included lionel hampton , fletcher henderson , artie bernstein and nick fatool . by february 1940 christian dominated the jazz and swing guitar polls and was elected to the metronome all stars . in the spring of 1940 goodman let most of his entourage go in a reorganization . he retained christian , and in the fall of that year goodman led a sextet with christian , count basie , longtime duke ellington trumpeter cootie williams , former artie shaw tenor saxophonist georgie auld and later drummer dave tough . this all-star band dominated the jazz polls in 1941 , including another election to the metronome all stars for christian . johnny guarnieri , who replaced henderson in the first sextet , filled the piano chair in basie 's absence . in 1966 , 24 years after his death , christian was inducted into the down beat down beat . in 1989 the oklahoma jazz hall of fame created its first seven inductions , which included christian . . style and influences . christian 's solos are frequently described as '' horn-like '' , and in that sense he was more influenced by horn players such as lester young and herschel evans goins , wayne ; mckinney , craig . a biography of charlie christian : jazz guitar 's king of swing . pp . 369 , 373-374 . than by early acoustic guitarists like eddie lang and the jazz- and bluesman lonnie johnson , although they both had contributed to the expansion of the guitar 's role from the rhythm section to a solo instrument . christian stated he wanted his guitar to sound like a tenor saxophone . lee , amy ( 1940 ) , '' charlie christian wanted to play hot tenor ! '' metronome . the french gypsy jazz guitarist django reinhardt had little influence on him , but christian was obviously familiar with some of his recordings . feather , leonard . '' inside jazz '' . the guitarist mary osborne recalled hearing him play django 's solo on '' st . louis blues '' note for note , but then following it with his own ideas . by 1939 there had already been electric guitar soloists—leonard ware ; george barnes ; eddie durham , who had recorded with count basie ; floyd smith , who recorded '' floyd 's guitar blues '' with andy kirk in march 1939 , using an amplified lap steel guitar ; and the texas swing pioneer eldon shamblin , who was playing with bob wills . christian paved the way for the modern electric guitar sound that was followed by other pioneers , including t-bone walker , eddie cochran , cliff gallup , scotty moore , franny beecher , b.b . king , chuck berry , carlos santana and jimi hendrix . for this reason christian was inducted in 1990 into the rock and roll hall of fame . christian 's exposure was so great in the brief period he played with goodman that he influenced not only guitarists but other musicians as well . the influence he had on '' dizzy '' gillespie , charlie parker , thelonious monk and don byas can be heard on their early bop recordings '' blue ' n ' boogie '' and '' salt peanuts '' . other musicians , such as the trumpeter miles davis , cited christian as an early influence . indeed , christian 's '' new '' sound influenced jazz as a whole . he reigned supreme in the jazz guitar polls up to two years after his death . goins , wayne ; mckinney , craig . a biography of charlie christian : jazz guitar 's king of swing . pp . 327–328 . black sabbath 's first manager jim simpson describes the band 's first song , '' a song for jim '' as an “ absolute charlie christian takeoff . ” popoff , martin ( 2011 ) . black sabbath faq . backbeat books . . bebop and minton 's playhouse . christian was an important contributor to the music that became known as bop , or bebop . some of the participants in those early after-hours affairs at minton 's playhouse , where bebop was born , credit christian with the name bebop , citing his humming of phrases as the onomatopoetic origin of the term . feather , leonard ( 1960 ) . the new edition of the encyclopedia of jazz . horizon press : new york . private recordings made in september 1939 in minneapolis , minnesota , by jerry newhouse , a goodman aficionado , capture the newly hired christian while on the road with goodman and feature goodman 's tenor sax player jerry jerome and then-local bassist oscar pettiford . taking multiple solos , christian shows much the same improvisational skills later captured on the minton 's and monroe 's recordings in 1941 , suggesting that he had already matured as a musician . the minneapolis recordings include '' stardust '' , '' tea for two '' , and '' i 've got rhythm '' , the latter a favorite of bop composers and jammers . further examples of christian 's bebop playing can be heard in a series of recordings made at minton 's playhouse , an after-hours club located in the hotel cecil , at 210 west 118th street in harlem , by jerry newman , a student at columbia university , on a portable disk recorder in 1941 , in which christian was accompanied by joe guy on trumpet , ken kersey on piano and kenny clarke on drums . christian 's use of tension ( music ) , a technique employed by lester young , count basie and later bop musicians , is also present on '' stompin ' at the savoy '' , included among the newman recordings . the collection also includes recordings made in 1941 at clark monroe 's uptown house , another late-night jazz haunt in harlem , with oran page . other recordings include the tenor sax player don byas . the minton 's recordings were long rumored to feature '' dizzy '' gillespie and thelonious monk , but that has since been proved untrue , although both were regulars at the jam sessions , with monk a regular in the minton 's house band . kenny clarke claimed that '' epistrophy '' and '' rhythm-a-ning '' were compositions by christian , which christian played with clarke and thelonious monk at minton 's jam sessions . the '' rhythm-a-ning '' line is heard on '' down on teddy hill '' and behind the introduction on '' guy 's got to go '' from the newman recordings . it is also a line from mary lou williams 's '' walkin ' and swingin ' '' . clarke said christian first showed him the chords to '' epistrophy '' on a ukulele . broadbent , peter . charlie christian , solo flight : the story of the seminal electric guitarist . these recordings have been packaged under a number of different titles , including after hours and the immortal charlie christian . while the recording quality of many of these sessions is poor , they show christian stretching out much longer than he could on the benny goodman sides . on the minton 's and monroe 's recordings , christian can be heard taking multiple choruses on a single tune , playing long stretches of melodic ideas with ease . spring , howard ( 1980 ) . the improvisational style of charlie christian . christian was just as adept with understatement as well . his work on the goodman sextet sides '' soft winds '' , '' till tom special '' , and '' a smo-o-o-oth one '' show his use of few well-placed melodic notes . his work on the sextet 's recordings of the ballads '' stardust '' , '' memories of you '' , '' poor butterfly '' , '' i surrender dear '' and '' on the alamo '' and his work on '' profoundly blue '' with the edmond hall celeste quartet ( 1941 ) show hints of what was later called cool jazz . '' jazz '' . world book encyclopedia . although credited for very few , christian composed many of the original tunes recorded by the benny goodman sextet . albertson , chris . liner notes . columbia g 30779 . . health and death . in the late 1930s christian contracted tuberculosis , goins , wayne ; mckinney , craig . a biography of charlie christian : jazz guitar 's king of swing . p . 344 . and in early 1940 he was hospitalized for a short period in which the goodman group was on hiatus because of goodman 's back trouble . goodman was hospitalized in the summer of 1940 after a brief stay at santa catalina island , california , where the band stayed when they were on the west coast . christian returned home to oklahoma city in late july 1940 and returned to new york city in september 1940 . in early 1941 , christian resumed his hectic lifestyle , heading to harlem for late-night jam sessions after finishing gigs with the goodman sextet and orchestra in new york city . in june 1941 he was admitted to seaview , a sanitorium on staten island in new york city . he was reported to be making progress , and down beat magazine reported in february 1942 that he and cootie williams were starting a band . goins , wayne ; mckinney , craig . a biography of charlie christian : jazz guitar 's king of swing . p . 327 . after a visit to the hospital that same month by the tap dancer and drummer marion joseph '' taps '' miller , christian declined in health . he died march 2 , 1942 , at the age of 25 . he was buried in an unmarked grave in bonham , texas . a texas state historical commission marker and headstone were placed in gates hill cemetery in 1994 . the location of the historical marker and headstone was disputed , and in march 2013 , fannin county , texas , recognized that the marker was in the wrong spot and that christian is buried under the concrete slab . . instruments . epiphone deluxe guitar ( an acoustic archtop guitar ) , 1934-1937 broadbent , peter , charlie christian : solo flight , , ashley mark , 2003 , p.48 gibson es-150 guitar ( sunburst finish , with dot inlays on the fingerboard ) , and eh-150 amplifier , 1937 or 1939 - april 1940 gibson es-250 guitar ( custom built by gibson with a natural finish , a super 400 tailpiece , and bowtie inlays on the fingerboard ) , april 1940 - february 1941 . this instrument was re-discovered in 2002 . gibson es-250 guitar ( custom built by gibson with a natural finish , an gibson l-7c , and custom inlays on the fingerboard ) , february 1941 - march 1942 gibson l-5 guitar ( custom built by gibson with a “ charlie christian pickup ” instead of a p-90 ) . this guitar was delivered to christian just prior to his death in march 1942 . it was later owned by tony mottola . the bar-style pickup used on the es-150 and es-250 became known as the “ charlie christian pickup ” . discography . christian never recorded as a leader . compilations have been released of his sessions as a sideman in which he is a featured soloist , of practice and warm-up recordings for these sessions , and some lower-quality recordings of christian 's own groups performing in nightclubs , by amateur technicians . with benny goodman charlie christian with the benny goodman sextet and orchestra ( columbia ) solo flight : the genius of charlie christian ( columbia , 1972 ) the genius of the electric guitar ( columbia , 1939–1941 recordings ) solo flight , with the benny goodman sextet ( vintage jazz classics , 2003 ) electric , with the benny goodman sextet and the charlie christian quartet ( uptown , 2011 ) with lionel hampton the complete rca victor recordings , 1937–1949 ( bluebird , 1995 ) with others guitar wizard ( lejazz , 1993 ) . filmography . 2005 solo flight : the genius of charlie christian 2007 charlie christian- the life & music of the legendary jazz guitarist ( grossman guitar workshop ) . notes . references . broadbent , peter ( 2002 ) . charlie christian , solo flight : the story of the seminal electric guitarist . hal leonard . centlivre , kevin ( 1994 ) . '' interview with jerry jerome '' centlivre , kevin ( 1999 ) . '' revisiting charlie christian '' . feather , leonard ( reprint , 1977 ) . inside jazz . da capo . goins , wayne e . ; mckinney , craig ( 2005 ) . a biography of charlie christian , jazz guitar 's king of swing . lee , amy ( 1940 ) '' charlie christian tried to play hot tenor ! '' metronome . mckinney , craig . charles christian : musician . savage , william w . , jr . ( 1983 ) . singing cowboys and all that jazz : a short history of popular music in oklahoma . norman : university of oklahoma press , pp . & nbsp ; 48–51 . spring , howard ( 1980 ) . the improvisational style of charlie christian . york university . valdes , leo ( 1997 ) . solo flight : the charlie christian newsletter leo valdes . external links . charlie christian , style analysis and solo examples deep deuce history and photos charlie christian , a biography by c.j shearn gates hill cemetery