Tom Van Flandern

biography . tom van flandern was the first child of robert f . van flandern , a police officer , and anna mary haley . his father left the family when tom was 5 . his mother died when he was 16 ; he and his siblings then lived with their grandmother , margery jobe , until he went to college . he graduated from saint ignatius high school in cleveland . while there , he helped start the cleveland branch of operation moonwatch , an amateur science program initiated by the smithsonian astrophysical observatory to track satellites . cleveland plain dealer october 8 , 1957 '' moonwatch team here gets set '' page 5 the pharos-tribune and logansport press august 9 , 1959 '' still keeping watch '' logansport , in page 19 he also helped found a moonwatchers team while studying at xavier university ; xavier university news november 5 , 1960 mike rogers '' satellite spies situate tracking station on logan '' page 1 this team broke a tracking record in 1961 . kingsport news may 17 , 1961 '' reports activity '' page 10 the anderson herald may 17 , 1961 '' cincy moonwatchers report on satellites '' page 2 van flandern graduated from xavier university with a b.s . in mathematics ( cum laude ) in 1962 and was awarded a teaching fellowship at georgetown university . xavier university news may 4 , 1962 '' tom van flandern given fellowship '' page 9 he attended yale university on a scholarship sponsored by the u.s . naval observatory ( usno ) , joining usno in 1963 . in 1969 , he received a ph.d . in astronomy from yale after completing his thesis on occultation . van flandern worked at the usno until 1983 , first becoming chief of the research branch usno staff directory for nautical almanac office , december 1976 and later becoming chief of the celestial mechanics branch of the nautical almanac office . usno staff directory for nautical almanac office , november 1977 his espousal of highly non-mainstream beliefs , particularly the exploded planet hypothesis , eventually led to his separation from the usno . he later said , '' this forced me to the 'fringes , ' areas of astronomy not accepted as credible by experts of the field '' . gonzo science , jim richardson , alan richardson , p . 62 , 2004 . following his separation from the usno , van flandern started a business organizing eclipse viewing expeditions , and promoting his non-mainstream views in a newsletter and web site . shortly after his death in 2009 , the asteroid 52266 & nbsp ; van flandern was named in his honor because of his prediction and analysis of lunar occultations at the u.s . naval observatory and publications of papers on the dynamics of minor-planet moon . he married barbara ann weber ( 1942-2018 ) in 1963 in kentucky , and they had 3 sons , michael , brian , and kevin , and a daughter , connie . the couple moved to sequim , washington from the east coast in 2005 to be closer to their children and grandchildren . barbara ann ( weber ) flandern , peninsula daily news , legacy.com tom van flandern died of colon cancer in seattle , washington . . mainstream scientific work . during the mid-1970s , van flandern believed that lunar observations gave evidence of variation in newton 's gravitational constant ( g ) , consistent with a speculative idea that had been put forward by paul dirac . in 1974 , his essay '' a determination of the rate of change of g '' was awarded second place by the gravity research foundation . however , in later years , with new data available , van flandern himself admitted his findings were flawed , and the conclusions were contradicted by more accurate findings based on radio measurements with the viking landers . dark matter , missing planets , new comets , van flandern 1993 . van flandern and henry fliegel developed a compact algorithm to calculate a julian date from a gregorian date that would fit on a single ibm card . they described this in a letter to the editor of a computing magazine in 1968 . this was available for use in business applications . with kenneth pulkkinen , he published '' low precision formulae for planetary positions '' , in the astrophysical journal supplement in 1979 . the paper set a record for the number of reprints requested from that journal . . non-mainstream science and beliefs . van flandern described in his book '' dark matter , missing planets , new comets '' , van flandern ( 1993 ) how he had become increasingly dissatisfied with the mainstream view of science by the early 1980s . he wrote : :events in my life caused me to start questioning my goals and the correctness of everything i had learned . in matters of religion , medicine , biology , physics , and other fields , i came to discover that reality differed seriously from what i had been taught . in his book , on blogs , lectures , newsletter and web site , van flandern focused on problems in cosmology and physics . he alleged that when experimental evidence is incompatible with mainstream scientific theories , mainstream scientists refuse to acknowledge this to avoid jeopardizing their funding . . minor-planet satellites . following claims by david dunham in 1978 to have detected minor-planet moon ( notably 532 herculina ) by examining the light patterns during stellar occultations , van flandern and others began to report similar observations . van flandern , t . c . , tedesco , e . f . & binzel , r . p . in asteroids ( ed . gehrels , t . ) 443–465 ( univ . ariz . press , tucson , 1979 ) . his non-mainstream 1978 prediction that some asteroids have natural satellites , which was almost universally rejected , was proven correct when the galileo spacecraft photographed dactyl , a satellite of 243 & nbsp ; ida , during its flyby in 1993 . . exploding planets . in 1976 , while van flandern was employed by the usno , he began to promote the belief that major planets sometimes explode . according to van flandern 's article on the exploded planet hypothesis '' the third planetary explosion mechanism relies on one other hypothesis not yet widely accepted , but holds out the potential for an indefinitely large reservoir of energy for exploding even massive planets and stars . if gravitational fields are continually regenerated , as in lesage particle models of gravity xvi , then all masses are continually absorbing energy from this universal flux . '' van flandern also speculated that the origin of the human species may well have been on the planet mars , which he believed was once a moon of a now-exploded '' planet v '' . le sage 's theory of gravitation and the speed of gravity . van flandern supported georges-louis le sage 's theory of gravitation , according to which gravity is the result of a flux of invisible '' ultra-mundane corpuscles '' impinging on all objects from all directions at superluminal speeds . he gave public lectures in which he claimed that these particles could be used as a limitless source of free energy , and to provide superluminal propulsion for spacecraft . an editor gave a summary of van flandern 's talk at the infinite energy conference and wrote '' van flandern gave a talk entitled 'on a complete theory of gravity and free energy ' . for the free energy enthusiast , the implications of gravity being particulate and perhaps blockable are obvious . block or deflect the c-gravitons raining down from the sky and up you go into space . turn off the blocking shield and recover the energy you 've gained , for free , as you fall back to earth . '' in 1998 van flandern wrote a paper asserting that astronomical observations imply that gravity propagates at least twenty billion times faster than light , or even infinitely fast . gerald e . marsh , charles nissim-sabat and steve carlip demonstrated that van flandern 's argument was fallacious . . face on mars . van flandern was a prominent advocate of the belief that certain geological features seen on mars , especially the '' cydonia face '' , are not of natural origin , but were produced by intelligent extra-terrestrial life , probably the inhabitants of a major planet once located where the asteroid belt presently exists , and which van flandern believed had exploded 3.2 million years ago . the claimed artificiality of the '' face '' was also the topic of a chapter of his 1993 book . . rejection of big bang cosmology . van flandern was a vocal opponent of the big bang model in cosmology , and supported instead a static universe . in 2008 he was an organizer of a conference of individuals who oppose the big bang cosmological models . name '' aas '' / >