East Riding of Yorkshire

renewable energy . the uk government has set a target to generate 10 % of the uk 's electricity from renewable energy sources by 2010 . the energy white paper ( 2003 ) sets out the government 's aspiration to double that figure to 20 % by 2020 . it has additionally signed up to the legally binding kyoto protocol , which requires a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 12.5 % of 1990 levels by 2008–12 and a reduction of co2 emissions by 20 % of 1990 levels by 2010 . regional and local authorities are required to contribute to the delivery of these national targets . the east riding has an above-average potential to generate renewable electricity for local authorities in the region due its large wind energy potential . the east riding of yorkshire is set a target of 41 & nbsp ; mw by 2010 , and a target for 2021 of 148 & nbsp ; mw for installed grid-connected renewable energy . there are operational wind farms at lissett in holderness and out newton to the north of the humber estuary . there are single turbines at the waste water treatment works at saltend and at loftsome bridge water treatment works near barmby on the marsh . in addition , several other wind developments have either been given or are applying for permission . by late february 2009 there was existing developed capacity or planning approval for 140 & nbsp ; mw of renewable energy from wind farm developments . the overall renewable energy target for 2010 and 2021 has therefore already been exceeded by wind energy proposals alone , assuming some of these schemes will be operational by 2010 . the east riding has also exceeded 148 & nbsp ; mw , when other renewable energy types such as biomass are included in the calculation . the humber estuary is to be used for trials of a tidal stream generator . if successful , it will be used to develop larger models which could be deployed in a 100-unit '' renewable power station '' capable of powering 70,000 homes . . education . image : hull university - geograph.org.uk - 745377.jpg thumb the derwent building at the university of hull . the east riding local education authority supports 150 schools : 131 primary schools and 19 secondary schools . the total net spending per head of population on education rose from £578.08 in 2006/07 to £632.88 in 2007/08 . in 2009 primary school test results showed a slide down the national performance table for the east riding authority , dropping eight places in the national league table to 28th after other education authorities improved more in the tests . at secondary level the authority slipped seven places to 39th out of 149 authorities , despite producing the best set of general certificate of secondary education ( gcse ) results since the inception of the east riding of yorkshire council in 1996 . the percentage of students achieving five or more good gcses , at grades a –c including maths and english , rose to 52.5 per cent , from 50.8 per cent in 2007 . this is above the national average of 47.6 per cent . bishop burton is the location of bishop burton college , a further education and higher education college specialising in agriculture and equine studies . beverley grammar school , which was founded around 700 ad , is widely renowned for being the oldest continuously operating state school in england . furthermore , hull is home to several schools , including the private hymers college , and a university . the university of hull was founded as a university college in 1927 and received full university status in 1954 ; it is home to the hull york medical school , and has seen large scale expansion in recent years to cater for the ever-growing number of students . public services . both the east riding and hull are still covered by the humberside police area and the humberside fire and rescue service . piped water is supplied by yorkshire water who also maintain the sewerage system . about 1 % of the population use water from private supplies . they are usually in the more remote parts of the east riding . the majority are bore holes but they can be wells or natural springs . nhs east riding of yorkshire provides health services such as district nursing , health visiting , school nursing , intermediate care and therapy services . it works with local gp practices , pharmacists , dentists , optometrists and ambulance services to provide a primary healthcare service . hull and east yorkshire hospitals nhs trust provides hospitals at castle hill hospital , hull royal infirmary and beverley 's westwood hospital . scarborough and north east yorkshire healthcare nhs trust runs bridlington hospital and also provides health care from the alfred bean hospital at driffield and the malton community hospital which are run by the local primary care trusts ( nhs east riding and nhs north yorkshire and york ) . small cottage and community hospitals provide a range of services at hornsea cottage hospital and withernsea community hospital . there are ten household waste recycling sites across the east riding . in the financial year 2004/05 of municipal waste was collected by east riding and by hull . between 2003/04 and 2004/05 the amount of waste collected in hull increased by 1.77 % and in the east riding by 4.80 % . target 45+ is a joint sustainable waste-management strategy developed in partnership by hull city council and the east riding of yorkshire council . the overall aim is to achieve 45 % recycling or composting by 2010 and then go beyond this . at the outset it was anticipated that recycling rates in the east riding by the end of 2005/06 would be 22.4 % and in hull the rate would be 17.4 % . the waste recycling group is a company working in partnership with the hull city and east riding of yorkshire councils to deal with waste . the company has plans to build an energy from waste plant at saltend to deal with of rubbish and put waste to a productive use by providing power for the equivalent of 20,000 & nbsp ; houses . the east riding of yorkshire is notably high for recycling rates . the county was marked first in england for household waste recycling , composting and re-use rate in 2017 . figures highlight that 65.4 % of household waste in the county was recycled or composted , ahead of second-place rochford district who were marked at 63.9 % . . sport and leisure . hull is the main centre for national-level sport in the region . hull city a.f.c . play in the efl league one , the third tier of the english football league system , after relegation from the efl championship in the 2019–20 season . bridlington town a.f.c . play in the northern counties east league premier division . there are two professional rugby league teams based in hull : hull f.c . and hull kingston rovers who play in the super league . bridlington rugby union football club plays at dukes park in bridlington . the hull pirates ice hockey team were founded in 2015 and play in the national ice hockey league 's national league . horse racing is catered for at beverley racecourse on the westwood to the west of beverley . what the organisers claim is the world 's oldest horse race , the kiplingcotes derby , has been held annually in the east riding since 1519 . there are more than a dozen golf clubs in the riding including the cliff-top course at flamborough . the royal yorkshire yacht club is based at bridlington , and flying and gliding take place from pocklington airfield and eddsfield airfield . . media . the region is covered by bbc yorkshire and lincolnshire based in hull and itv yorkshire , broadcast from leeds . local analogue radio stations include bbc radio humberside , bbc radio york , capital yorkshire , viking fm and greatest hits radio yorkshire . a local digital audio broadcasting multiplex is based around humberside . the county also has four community radio stations great driffield radio , which covers great driffield and the surrounding villages , seaside fm , which serves the holderness area on 105.3 & nbsp ; fm & nbsp ; mhz , vixen 101 which serves market weighton and pocklington and 107.8 beverley fm which serves beverley and the surrounding areas . newspapers include the hull daily mail , owned by reach plc . an east riding mail was launched in march 2006 as a sister paper to this . other newspapers in the area include the bridlington free press , the goole times , the holderness gazette , and the driffield & wolds weekly . the beverley guardian and the driffield times & post used to serve the area but closed in 2016 . . see also . custos rotulorum of the east riding of yorkshire – keepers of the rolls grade i listed buildings in the east riding of yorkshire grade i listed churches in the east riding of yorkshire grade ii listed buildings in the east riding of yorkshire high sheriff of the east riding of yorkshire lord lieutenant of the east riding of yorkshire . references . bibliography . . external links . map of the historic east riding of yorkshire on wikishire data observatory – east riding of yorkshire council official tourism information for east yorkshire bridlington information east riding of yorkshire council many photographs of the east riding of yorkshire east riding online east riding of yorkshire : assessment of archaeological resource in aggregate areas information on the east riding of yorkshire : i 'm from yorkshire