1932 in literature

events . march – captain w . e . johns ' english character biggles ( james bigglesworth ) is introduced as a world war i pilot in the short story '' the white fokker '' , in the first , april issue of popular flying magazine , edited by johns . the first biggles collection , the camels are coming , ensues in april . april 23 – to mark shakespeare 's birthday : the royal shakespeare company 's new theatre opens at stratford-upon-avon . the folger shakespeare library opens in washington , d.c . april 26 – the 32-year-old american poet hart crane , in a state of alcoholic depression , throws himself overboard from the orizaba between mexico and new york ; his body is never recovered . may – the first issue appears of the english journal of literary criticism scrutiny ( journal ) , edited by f . r . leavis . june 28 – alice hargreaves , the inspiration for alice 's adventures in wonderland , meets the publisher peter llewelyn davies , the inspiration for peter pan , at a lewis carroll centenary exhibition in a london bookshop . july – w . b . yeats leases riversdale house in the dublin suburb of rathfarnham and publishes words for music perhaps , and other poems . summer the open air theatre , regent 's park , is established as a regular venue in london by sydney carroll and robert atkins . the first performances at the minack theatre , an open-air venue on the coast of cornwall ( england ) , include the tempest . october 3 – the times newspaper of london introduces the times new roman typeface devised by stanley morison . november 16 – compton mackenzie is prosecuted under the official secrets act in the u.k . for material in his greek memories . october – nineteen irish writers led by yeats and george bernard shaw form an academy of irish letters that opposes the censorship of publications board . december e . v . knox replaces sir owen seaman as editor of punch magazine . shortly after publication , the first copies of graham greene 's novel stamboul train , published by heinemann in london , are withdrawn and the text altered after a threat of libel action by j . b . priestley . unknown dates samuel beckett 's first novel , dream of fair to middling women , is written in paris and rejected by several publishers . serialisation of the first three volumes of mikhail sholokhov 's novel and quiet flows the don ( « тихий дон » ) concludes in the soviet magazine october . the new poetry ( thơ mới ) period begins in vietnamese literature , marked by an article and a poem from phan khôi . aussie : the australian soldiers ' magazine ceases publication . carter , david ( 2008 ) . '' '' 'esprit de nation ' and popular modernity : aussie magazine 1920–1931 '' '' . history australia . 5:3 : 74.1–74.22 . una dillon founds dillons booksellers in london . . new books . fiction . laura adams armer – waterless mountain henry bellamann – the richest woman in town phyllis bentley – inheritance lord berners ( as adela quebec ) – the girls of radcliff hall ( privately circulated roman à clef ) hermann broch – the sleepwalkers ( die schlafwandler , trilogy completed ) john buchan – the gap in the curtain pearl s . buck – sons edgar rice burroughs – tarzan triumphant erskine caldwell – tobacco road morley callaghan – a broken journey john dickson carr poison in jest the waxworks murder louis-ferdinand céline – journey to the end of the night ( voyage au bout de la nuit ) agatha christie peril at end house the thirteen problems colette – the pure and the impure ( le pur et l'impur ) john creasey – seven times seven a . j . cronin – three loves clemence dane – re-enter sir john catherine isabella dodd – paul and perdita john dos passos – 1919 hans fallada – little man , what now ? ( kleiner mann , was nun ? ) william faulkner – light in august lion feuchtwanger – josephus rudolph fisher – the conjure man dies : a mystery tale of dark harlem elena fortún – celia en el colegio gilbert frankau – christopher strong lewis grassic gibbon – sunset song stella gibbons – cold comfort farm jean giono – blue boy ellen glasgow – the sheltered life graham greene – stamboul train ernst haffner – blood brothers ( blutsbrüder ) hermann hesse – journey to the east ( die morgenlandfahrt ) pamela hinkson – the ladies ' road soeman hs – mentjahari pentjoeri anak perawan aldous huxley – brave new world francis iles ( anthony berkeley cox ) – before the fact irmgard keun – the artificial silk girl ( das kunstseidene mädchen ) marie belloc lowndes – jenny newstead w . somerset maugham – the narrow corner nancy mitford – christmas pudding abdul muis – pertemuan jodoh vladimir nabokov glory laughter in the dark beverley nichols – evensong charles nordhoff and james norman hall – mutiny on the bounty max nomad – rebels and renegades seán ó faoláin – midsummer night madness and other stories edith philips – the good quaker in french legend anthony powell – venusberg john cowper powys – a glastonbury romance ellery queen the greek coffin mystery the egyptian cross mystery sax rohmer – the mask of fu manchu joseph roth – radetzky march ( radetzkymarsch ) damon runyon – guys and dolls rafael sabatini – the black swan dorothy l . sayers – have his carcase israel joshua singer – yoshe kalb j . slauerhoff – het verboden rijk ( the forbidden kingdom , serial publication concludes and first book publication ) eleanor smith – ballerina thorne smith – topper takes a trip lesbia soravilla – el dolor de-vivir john steinbeck – the pastures of heaven julia strachey – cheerful weather for the wedding thomas sigismund stribling – the store margareta suber – charlie phoebe atwood taylor – death lights a candle wallace thurman – infants of the spring g . e . trevelyan – appius and virginia sigrid undset burning bush the son avenger maxence van der meersch – the house on the dune hugh walpole – the fortress evelyn waugh – black mischief charles williams – the greater trumps s . fowler wright beyond the rim the new gods lead ( short stories ) francis brett young – the house under the water . children and young people . laura adams armer – waterless mountain w . e . johns – the camels are coming arthur ransome – peter duck alison uttley – moonshine and magic laura ingalls wilder – little house in the big woods ruth plumly thompson – the purple prince of oz ( 26th in the oz series overall and the 12th written by her ) . drama . s . n . behrman – biography elias canetti – hochzeit ( wedding ) noël coward – design for living walter c . hackett – road house ian hay – orders are orders anthony kimmins – while parents sleep edward knoblock – evensong ferdinand kwasi fiawoo – toko atolia george s . kaufman and edna ferber – dinner at eight w . somerset maugham – for services rendered ahmed shawqi – amirat el-andalus ( the andalusian princess ) john van druten behold , we live somebody knows ödön von horváth – kasimir und karoline . poetry . w . h . auden – the orators cecil day-lewis – from feathers to iron an '' objectivist 's '' anthology boris pasternak – the second birth . non-fiction . adrian bell – the cherry tree henri bergson – the two sources of morality and religion ( les deux sources de la morale et de la religion ) emil brunner – the divine imperative : a study in christian ethics ( gebot und die ordnungen ) f . j . harvey darton – the story of english children 's books in england : five centuries of social life bernard devoto – mark twain 's america annabel jackson – a victorian childhood t . s . eliot – selected essays , 1917–1932 j . b . s . haldane – the causes of evolution hugh kingsmill – frank harris f . r . leavis – new bearings in english poetry q . d . leavis – fiction and the reading public maxwell house haggadah beverley nichols – down the garden path walter b . pitkin – life begins at forty e . c . titchmarsh – the theory of functions florence white – good things in england ( food ) s . fowler wright – the life of sir walter scott . births . image : gay talese by david shankbone.jpg thumb gay talese january 2 – jean little , canadian children 's fiction author ( died 2020 ) january 5 – umberto eco , italian novelist and semiotician ( died 2016 ) january 18 – robert anton wilson , american novelist and playwright ( died 2007 ) january 19 – george macbeth , scottish poet and novelist ( died 1992 ) february 7 – gay talese , american literary journalist february 15 – troy kennedy martin , scottish scriptwriter ( died 2009 ) february 16 – aharon appelfeld , israeli novelist and poet february 20 – adrian cristobal , filipino journalist , playwright and author ( died 2007 ) march 4 – ryszard kapuściński , polish journalist , traveller , poet and writer ( died 2007 ) march 18 – john updike , american novelist and poet ( died 2009 ) march 31 – john jakes , american historical novelist april 10 – adrian henri , english poet ( died 2000 ) may 7 – jenny joseph , english poet ( died 2018 ) may 8 – julieta campos , cuban-mexican author and translator ( died 2007 ) may 24 – arnold wesker , english dramatist ( died 2016 ) june 5 – christy brown , irish autobiographer and poet ( died 1981 ) june 6 – sara banerji , english author and sculptor june 18 – geoffrey hill , english poet ( died 2016 ) july 17 – karla kuskin , american children 's writer and illustrator ( died 2009 ) july 18 – yevgeny yevtushenko , russian poet and writer ( died 2017 ) august 16 – christopher okigbo , nigerian poet ( died 1967 ) august 17 – v . s . naipaul , trinidad-born novelist ( died 2018 ) august 27 – antonia fraser , english biographer , novelist and historian september 7 – malcolm bradbury , english novelist ( died 2000 ) september 9 – alice thomas ellis , english novelist , essayist and cookery book author ( died 2005 ) october 24 – adrian mitchell , english poet , playwright and fiction writer ( died 2008 ) october 27 – sylvia plath , american poet ( suicide 1963 ) october 31 – katherine paterson , chinese-american author . deaths . january 12 – ella hepworth dixon , english writer , novelist and editor ( born 1857 ) january 21 – lytton strachey , english biographer ( cancer , born 1880 ) january 28 – f . m . mayor , english novelist ( born 1872 ) february 4 – mona caird , english novelist , essayist and feminist ( born 1854 ) february 10 – edgar wallace , english crime writer ( diabetes , born 1875 ) february 15 – minnie maddern fiske , american actress and playwright ( born 1865 ) march 16 – harold monro , british poet and poetry bookshop proprietor ( alcohol-related , born 1879 ) april 20 – giuseppe peano , italian mathematician and philosopher ( born 1858 ) april 23 evelyn everett-green , english novelist and children 's writer ( born 1856 ) laura kieler , norwegian novelist and dramatic inspiration ( born 1849 ) april 26 – hart crane , american poet ( suicide , born 1899 ) may 22 – augusta , lady gregory , irish dramatist ( born 1852 ) june 17 – sir john quick , australian politician and author ( born 1852 ) july 6 – kenneth grahame , scottish-born children 's and short-story writer ( born 1859 ) july 20 – rené bazin , french novelist ( born 1853 ) july 22 – j . meade falkner , english novelist and poet ( born 1858 ) august 29 – raymond knister , canadian writer ( drowned , born 1899 ) september 5 – paul bern , german-american screenwriter ( suicide , born 1889 ) october 5 – christopher brennan , australian poet ( born 1870 ) october 14 – ahmed shawqi , egyptian poet ( born 1868 ) november 13 – catherine isabella dodd , english education writer and novelist ( born 1860 ) november 17 – charles w . chesnutt , american writer ( born 1858 ) november 23 – henry s . whitehead , american genre novelist ( gastric ailment , born 1882 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : helen de guerry simpson , boomerang james tait black memorial prize for biography : stephen gwynn , the life of mary kingsley newbery medal for children 's literature : laura adams armer , waterless mountain nobel prize in literature : john galsworthy prix goncourt : guy mazeline , les loups pulitzer prize for drama : george s . kaufman , morrie ryskind , ira gershwin , of thee i sing pulitzer prize for poetry : george dillon , the flowering stone pulitzer prize for the novel : pearl s . buck , the good earth . references .