Richard Ford

early life . ford was born in jackson , mississippi , the only son of parker carrol and edna ford . parker was a traveling salesman for faultless starch , a kansas city company . of his mother , ford said , '' her ambition was to be , first , in love with my father and , second , to be a full-time mother . '' when ford was eight years old , his father had a severe heart failure , and thereafter ford spent as much time with his grandfather , a former prizefighter and hotel owner in little rock , arkansas , as he did with his parents in mississippi . guagliardo 2001 , p.xiii . ford 's father died of a second heart attack in 1960 . in jackson , ford lived across the street from the home of author eudora welty . ford 's grandfather had worked for a railroad . at the age of 19 , before deciding to attend college , ford began work on the missouri pacific train line as a locomotive engineer 's assistant , learning the work while doing the job . ford received a b.a . degree from michigan state university . having enrolled to study hotel management , he switched to english . after graduating , he taught junior high school in flint , michigan , and enlisted in the united states marine corps but was discharged after contracting hepatitis . at university he met kristina hensley , his future wife ; they married in 1968 . despite mild dyslexia , ford developed a serious interest in literature . he has stated in interviews that his dyslexia may have helped him as a reader , as it forced him to read books slowly and thoughtfully . ford briefly attended law school but quit and participated with the creative writing program at the university of california , irvine , to pursue a master of fine arts degree , which he received in 1970 . ford chose this course simply because '' they admitted me . i remember getting the application for iowa , and thinking they 'd never have let me in . i 'm sure i was right about that , too . but , typical of me , i did n't know who was teaching at irvine . i did n't know it was important to know such things . i was n't the most curious of young men , even though i give myself credit for not letting that deter me . '' actually , oakley hall and e . l . doctorow were teaching there , and ford has acknowledged that they influenced him . this citation is now only available in its via the web archive . it was originally cited here : in 1971 , he was selected for a three-year appointment in the university of michigan society of fellows . . early career . ford published his first novel , a piece of my heart , the story of two unlikely drifters whose paths cross on an island in the mississippi river , during 1976 , and followed it with the ultimate good luck during 1981 . during the interim he briefly taught at williams college and princeton university . despite good notices the books sold little , and ford retired from fiction writing to become a writer for the new york magazine inside sports . '' i realized , '' ford said , '' there was probably a wide gulf between what i could do and what would succeed with readers . i felt that i 'd had a chance to write two novels , and neither of them had really created much stir , so maybe i should find real employment , and earn my keep . '' during 1982 , the magazine was terminated , and when sports illustrated did not hire ford , he resumed writing fiction , composing the sportswriter , a novel about a failed novelist turned sportswriter who undergoes an emotional crisis after the death of his son . the novel became ford 's first well-known publication , named one of time magazine 's five best books of 1986 and a finalist for the pen/faulkner award for fiction . ford followed the success immediately with rock springs ( 1987 ) , a story collection mostly set in montana , includes some of his most popular stories . reviewers and literary critics associated the stories in rock springs with the aesthetic style known as '' dirty realism '' . this term referred to a group of authors during the 1970s and 1980s that included raymond carver and tobias wolff—- two writers with whom ford was well acquainted—- along with ann beattie , frederick barthelme , larry brown , and jayne anne phillips , among others . those applying this label refer to carver 's lower-middle-class subjects or the protagonists ford portrays in rock springs . however , many of the characters of the novels about frank bascombe ( the sportswriter , independence day , the lay of the land , and let me be frank with you ) , notably the protagonist himself , enjoy degrees of material affluence and cultural capital not normally associated with dirty realism . mid-career and acclaim . his 1990 novel wildlife , a story of a montana golf professional turned firefighter , met with mixed reviews and middling sales , but by the end of the 1990s ford was well known . he was increasingly sought after as an editor and contributor to various projects . ford edited the 1990 the best american series , the 1992 granta book of the american short story , the fall 1996 '' fiction issue '' of ploughshares , and the 1998 granta book of the american long story . in the latter volume 's '' introduction , '' ford stipulated that he preferred the designation '' long story '' instead of term '' novella . '' for the publishing project library of america , ford edited a two-volume edition of the selected works of the mississippi writer eudora welty , which was published during 1998 . during 1995 , ford published the novel independence day , a sequel to the sportswriter , featuring the continued story of its protagonist , frank bascombe . reviews were positive , and the novel became the first to win both the pen/faulkner award and the pulitzer prize for fiction . during the same year , ford was chosen as winner of the rea award for the short story , for outstanding achievement for that genre . he ended the 1990s with a well-received collection of short stories , women with men , published during 1997 . the paris review termed him a '' master '' of the short story genre . . later life and writings . ford lived for many years in new orleans in the french quarter , on lower bourbon street , and then in the garden district of the same city , where his wife , kristina , was the executive director of the city planning commission . he now lives in maine in east boothbay . during the intervening years , ford lived in other locations , usually in the united states , as he pursued a peripatetic teaching career . he obtained a teaching appointment at bowdoin college during 2005 but kept the job for only one semester . during 2008 ford was an adjunct professor of the oscar wilde centre with the school of english at trinity college , dublin , ireland , teaching in the masters programme in creative writing . starting december 29 , 2010 , ford assumed the job of senior fiction professor at the university of mississippi during the autumn of 2011 , replacing barry hannah , who died during march 2010 . during the autumn of 2012 , he became the emmanuel roman and barrie sardoff roman professor of the humanities and professor of writing at the columbia university school of the arts . as the new century commenced , he published another story collection , a multitude of sins ( 2002 ) , followed by the novels the lay of the land , the third bascombe novel published during 2006 , and canada , published during may 2012 . according to ford , the lay of the land completed his series of bascombe novels , but canada was a stand-alone novel . however , during april 2013 , ford read from a new frank bascombe story without revealing to the audience whether it was part of a longer work . by 2014 , it was confirmed that the story was to appear in the book let me be frank with you , published during november of that year . the latter is a work consisting of four interconnected novellas ( or '' long stories '' : i 'm here , everything could be worse , the new normal and deaths of others ) , all narrated by frank bascombe . richard ford , lyceum agency , 2014 let me be frank with you was a finalist for the 2015 pulitzer prize in fiction . it did not win the prize , but the selection committee praised the book for its '' unflinching series of narratives , set in the aftermath of hurricane sandy , insightfully portraying a society in decline . '' '' the 2015 pulitzer prize finalist in fiction '' , the pulitzer prizes . also , as he did in the preceding decade , ford continued to assist with various editing projects . during 2007 , he edited the new granta book of the american short story , and in 2011 he edited blue collar , white collar , no collar : stories of work . during may 2017 , ford published a memoir , between them : remembering my parents . in 2018 , wildlife was adapted into a wildlife ( film ) by director paul dano and screenwriter zoe kazan . it was released to widespread critical acclaim . critical opinion . ford 's writing demonstrates '' a meticulous concern for the nuances of language . and the rhythms of phrases and sentences '' . ford has described his sense of language as '' a source of pleasure in itself—- all of its corporeal qualities , its syncopations , moods , sounds , the way things look on the page '' . besides this '' devotion to language '' is what he terms '' the fabric of affection that holds people close enough together to survive . '' guagliardo 2001 , p.vii . comparisons have been drawn between ford 's work and the writings of john updike , william faulkner , ernest hemingway and walker percy . ford resists such comparisons , commenting , '' you ca n't write . on the strength of influence . you can only write a good story or a good novel by yourself . '' guagliardo 2001 , p . xi . ford 's works of fiction '' dramatize the breakdown of such cultural institutions as marriage , family , and community , '' and his '' marginalized protagonists often typify the rootlessness and nameless longing . pervasive in a highly mobile , present-oriented society in which individuals , having lost a sense of the past , relentlessly pursue their own elusive identities in the here and now . '' guagliardo 2000 , p . xiv . ford '' looks to art , rather than religion , to provide consolation and redemption in a chaotic time . '' guagliardo 2000 , p . xvi . . controversies . ford once sent alice hoffman a copy of one of her books with bullet holes in it after she angered him by unfavorably reviewing the sportswriter . in 2004 , ford spat on colson whitehead when encountering him at a party two years after whitehead published a negative review of a multitude of sins , resulting in speculation that the incident may have been racially motivated rather than a matter of critical differences . thirteen years later after spitting in his colleague 's face , ford remained unrepentant , writing in esquire in 2017 , '' as of today , i don ’ t feel any different about mr . whitehead , or his review , or my response . '' . awards and honors . 1995 rea award for the short story , for outstanding achievement in that genre 1996 pen/faulkner award , for independence day 1996 pulitzer prize for fiction , for independence day 2001 pen/malamud award , for excellence in short fiction 2005 st . louis literary award from the saint louis university library associates 2008 kenyon review award for literary achievement 2013 prix femina étranger , for canada 2013 andrew carnegie medal for excellence in fiction , for canada 2015 fitzgerald award for achievement in american literature part of the f . scott fitzgerald literary festival 2015 pulitzer prize for fiction , finalist , for let me be frank with you 2016 princess of asturias award in literature 2018 park kyong-ni prize 2019 library of congress prize for american fiction . bibliography . novels . a piece of my heart ( 1976 ) the ultimate good luck ( 1981 ) the sportswriter ( 1986 ) wildlife ( 1990 ) independence day ( 1995 ) the lay of the land ( 2006 ) canada ( 2012 ) be mine ( tbc ) . story collections . rock springs ( 1987 ) women with men : three stories ( 1997 ) a multitude of sins ( 2002 ) vintage ford ( 2004 ) let me be frank with you ( 2014 ) — collects 4 novellas : i 'm here ; everything could be worse ; the new normal ; and deaths of others michael schaub . '' frankly , bascombe 's return has some problems '' , 2014-11-06 . retrieved 2015-01-06 . sorry for your trouble ( 2020 ) . memoir . between them : remembering my parents ( 2017 ) . screenplays . bright angel ( 1990 ) . as contributor or editor . the granta book of the american short story ( 1992 ) the granta book of the american long story ( 1999 ) the essential tales of chekhov ( 1999 ) foreword to alec soth , niagara ( göttingen , germany : steidl , 2006 ) the new granta book of the american short story ( 2007 ) blue collar , white collar , no collar : stories of work ( 2011 ) foreword to maude schuyler clay , mississippi history ( göttingen , germany : steidl , 2015 ) . references . works cited . elinor walker , richard ford ( new york , ny ; twayne publishers , 2000 ) huey guagliardo , perspectives on richard ford : redeemed by affection ( jackson , ms : university press of mississippi , 2000 ) huey guagliardo , ed . , conversations with richard ford ( jackson , ms : university press of mississippi , 2001 ) brian duffy , morality , identity and narrative in the fiction of richard ford , ( new york , ny ; amsterdam ; rodopi , 2008 ) joseph m . armengol , richard ford and the fiction of masculinities ( new york , ny : peter lang , 2010 ) ian mcguire , richard ford and the ends of realism ( iowa city , ia : university of iowa press , 2015 ) . external links . ; work '' nobody 's everyman '' , bookforum ( apr/may 2009 ) leaving for kenosha , the new yorker ( 2008 ) how was it to be dead ? , the new yorker ( 2006 ) ; profiles bibliography , university of mississippi profile , ploughshares overview of ford 's recent career , and critique of short stories in the walrus magazine ; interviews interview on the 7th avenue project radio show richard ford discusses his frank bascombe novels , his approach to fiction and his life . – transcript of interview with ramona koval , the book show , abc radio national 31 december 2007 interview for public radio in maine ( 2006 ) , maine humanities council interview ( 1996 ) , salon.com interview on writer 's voice ( 2006 ) with radio host , francesca rheannon interview ( 2002 ) , identitytheory.com interview ( 2006 ) , the new yorker interview ( 2006 ) , nerve.com interview , book reading , and discussion video streams and mp3 download ( 2006 ) , university of pennsylvania interview february 2007 ; pulitzer prize-winning author talks with robert birnbaum about his latest frank bascombe novel , the lay of the land richard ford : shooting for the stars . video interview by louisiana channel 2012 . interview ( 2016 ) , the ringer ( website ) ; archival collections guide to the ultimate good luck galley proofs . special collections and archives , the uc irvine libraries , irvine , california . richard ford collection owned by the university of mississippi department of archives and special collections .