Radish

history . varieties of radish are now broadly distributed around the world , but almost no archeological records are available to help determine their early history and domestication . however , scientists have tentatively located the origin of raphanus sativus in southeast asia , as this is the only region where truly wild forms have been discovered . india , central china , and central asia appear to have been secondary centers where differing forms were developed . radishes enter the historical record in . greek and roman agriculture of the gave details of small , large , round , long , mild , and sharp varieties . the radish seems to have been one of the first columbian exchange . a german botanist reported radishes of and roughly in length in 1544 , although the only variety of that size today is the japanese sakurajima radish . the large , mild , and white east asian form was developed in china , though it is mostly associated in the west with the japanese daikon , owing to japanese agricultural development and larger exports . description . radishes are annual or biennial brassicaceae crops grown for their swollen tap roots which can be globular , tapering , or cylindrical . the root skin colour ranges from white through pink , red , purple , yellow , and green to black , but the flesh is usually white . the roots obtain their color from anthocyanins . red varieties use the anthocyanin pelargonidin as a pigment , and purple cultivars obtain their color from cyanidin . smaller types have a few leaves about long with round roots up to in diameter or more slender , long roots up to long . both of these are normally eaten raw in salads . a longer root form , including oriental radishes , daikon or mooli , and winter radishes , grows up to long with foliage about high with a spread of . the flesh of radishes harvested timely is crisp and sweet , but becomes bitter and tough if the vegetable is left in the ground too long . leaves are arranged in a rosette . they have a lyrate shape , meaning they are divided pinnately with an enlarged terminal lobe and smaller lateral lobes . the white flowers are borne on a raceme inflorescence . the fruits are small pods which can be eaten when young . the radish is a ploidy species , and has 18 chromosomes ( 2n 18 ) . it is estimated that the radish genome contains between 526 and 574 mb . . subspecies . . cultivation . radishes are a fast-growing , annual , cool-season crop . the seed germinates in three to four days in moist conditions with soil temperatures between . best quality roots are obtained under moderate day lengths with air temperatures in the range . under average conditions , the crop matures in 3–4 weeks , but in colder weather , 6–7 weeks may be required . radishes grow best in full sun in light , sandy loams , with a soil ph 6.5 to 7.0 , but for late-season crops , a clayey-loam is ideal . soils that bake dry and form a crust in dry weather are unsuitable and can impair germination . hosted by the university of north texas government documents department documents a to z digitization project website . retrieved on 2014-07-29 . peterson , cass . '' radishes : easy to sprout , hard to grow right '' . the new york times , may 2 , 1999 . retrieved february 5 , 2018 . harvesting periods can be extended by making repeat plantings , spaced a week or two apart . in warmer climates , radishes are normally planted in the autumn . the depth at which seeds are planted affects the size of the root , from deep recommended for small radishes to for large radishes . during the growing period , the crop needs to be thinned and weeds controlled , and irrigation may be required . radishes are a common garden crop in many parts of the world , and the fast harvest cycle makes them particularly suitable for children 's gardens . after harvesting , radishes can be stored without loss of quality for two or three days at room temperature , and about two months at with a relative humidity of 90–95 % . . companion plant . radishes can be useful as companion plants for many other crops , probably because their pungent odour deters such insect pests as aphids , cucumber beetles , tomato hornworms , coreidae , and ants . they can also function as a trap crop , luring insect pests away from the main crop . cucumbers and radishes seem to thrive when grown in close association with each other , and radishes also grow well with chervil , lettuce , peas , and tropaeolum . however , they react adversely to growing in close association with hyssop . . pests . as a fast-growing plant , diseases are not generally a problem with radishes , but some insect pests can be a nuisance . the larvae of flea beetles ( delia radicum ) live in the soil , but the adult beetles cause damage to the crop , biting small '' shot holes '' in the leaves , especially of seedlings . the swede midge ( contarinia nasturtii ) attacks the foliage and growing tip of the plant and causes distortion , multiple ( or no ) growing tips , and swollen or crinkled leaves and stems . the larvae of the delia radicum sometimes attack the roots . the foliage droops and becomes discoloured , and small , white maggots tunnel through the root , making it unattractive or inedible . . varieties . broadly speaking , radishes can be categorized into four main types according to the seasons when they are grown and a variety of shapes , lengths , colors , and sizes , such as red , pink , white , gray-black , or yellow radishes , with round or elongated roots that can grow longer than a parsnip . spring or summer radishes . sometimes referred to as european radishes or spring radishes if they are planted in cooler weather , summer radishes are generally small and have a relatively short three- to four-week cultivation time . the 'april cross ' is a giant white radish hybrid that bolts very slowly . 'bunny tail ' is an heirloom variety from italy , where it is known as rosso tondo a piccola punta bianca . it is slightly oblong , mostly red , with a white tip . 'cherry belle ' is a bright red-skinned round variety with a white interior . it is familiar in north american supermarkets . 'champion ' is round and red-skinned like the 'cherry belle ' , but with slightly larger roots , up to , and a milder flavor . 'red king ' has a mild flavor , with good resistance to club root , a problem that can arise from poor drainage . 'sicily giant ' is a large heirloom variety from sicily . it can reach up to 5 & nbsp ; cm ( 2 & nbsp ; in ) in diameter . 'snow belle ' is an all-white variety of radish , similar in shape to the 'cherry belle' . 'white icicle ' or 'icicle ' is a white carrot-shaped variety , around long , dating back to the 16th century . it slices easily , and has better than average resistance to pithiness . 'french breakfast ' is an elongated , red-skinned radish with a white splash at the root end . it is typically slightly milder than other summer varieties , but is among the quickest to turn pithy . 'plum purple ' , a purple-fuchsia radish , tends to stay crisp longer than average . 'gala ' and 'roodbol ' are two varieties popular in the netherlands in a breakfast dish , thinly sliced on buttered bread . 'easter egg ' is not an actual variety , but a mix of varieties with different skin colors , typically including white , pink , red , and purple radishes . sold in markets or seed packets under the name , the seed mixes can extend harvesting duration from a single planting , as different varieties may mature at different times . . winter varieties . 'black spanish ' or 'black spanish round ' occur in both round and elongated forms , and are sometimes simply called the black radish ( raphanus sativus l . var . niger ( m . ) s.k . or l . ssp . niger ( m . ) . d.c . var . albus d.c ) or known by the french name gros noir d'hiver . it dates in europe to 1548 , and was a common garden variety in england and france during the early 19th century . it has a rough , black skin with hot-flavored , white flesh , is round or irregularly pear shaped , and grows to around in diameter . daikon refers to a wide variety of winter oilseed radishes from asia . while the japanese name daikon has been adopted in english , it is also sometimes called the japanese radish , chinese radish , oriental radish or mooli ( in india and south asia ) . mcaffee warns that this site attempted to exploit a browser vulnerability . daikon commonly have elongated white roots , although many varieties of daikon exist . one well-known variety is 'april cross ' , with smooth white roots . the new york times describes 'masato red ' and 'masato green ' varieties as extremely long , well-suited for fall planting and winter storage . the sakurajima radish is a hot-flavored variety which is typically grown to around , but which can grow to when left in the ground . ( 2002-02-10 . ) '' 29 & nbsp ; kg radish wins contest . '' kyodo news , via highbeam.com ( fee for full access . ) retrieved on 2007-09-28 . korean radish , also called mu , is a variety of white radish with firm crunchy texture . although mu is also a generic term for radishes in korean ( as daikon is a generic term for radishes in japanese ) , the word is usually used in its narrow sense , referring to joseon radish , joseonmu ) . in korean cuisine context , the word joseon is often used in contrast to wae , to distinguish korean varieties from japanese ones . the longer , thinner , and waterier japanese daikon cultivated mainly for takuan is referred to as wae radish , waemu ) in korea . korean radishes are generally shorter , stouter , and sturdier than daikon , and have pale green shade halfway down from the top . they also have stronger flavour , denser flesh and softer leaves . the greens of korean radishes are called mucheong and used as vegetable in various dishes . seed pod varieties . the seeds of radishes grow in siliques ( widely referred to as '' pods '' ) , following flowering that happens when left to grow past their normal harvesting period . the seeds are edible , and are sometimes used as a crunchy , sharp addition to salads . some varieties are grown specifically for their seeds or seed pods , rather than their roots . the rat-tailed radish , an old european variety thought to have come from east asia centuries ago , has long , thin , curly pods which can exceed in length . in the 17th century , the pods were often pickled and served with meat . the 'münchen bier ' variety supplies seed pods that are sometimes served raw as an accompaniment to beer in germany . . production . using 2003-4 data , several sources report annual world production of radishes to be about 7 million tonnes , produced mainly by china , japan , and south korea , and representing roughly 2 % of global vegetable production . . nutritional value . in a reference serving , raw radishes provide of food energy and have a moderate amount of vitamin c ( 18 % of daily value ) , with other essential nutrients in low content ( table ) . a raw radish is 95 % water , 3 % carbohydrates , 1 % protein , and has negligible fat . uses . cooking . the most commonly eaten portion is the napiform taproot , although the entire plant is edible and the tops can be used as a leaf vegetable . the seed can also be sprouted and eaten raw in a similar way to a mung bean . the root of the radish is usually eaten raw , although tougher specimens can be steamed . the raw flesh has a crisp texture and a pungent , peppery flavor , caused by glucosinolates and the enzyme myrosinase , which combine when chewed to form allyl isothiocyanates , also present in mustard , horseradish , and wasabi . radishes are mostly used in salads , but also appear in many european dishes . radish leaves are sometimes used in recipes , like potato soup or as a sauteed side dish . they are also found blended with fruit juices in some recipes . in mexican cuisine , sliced radishes are used in combination with shredded lettuce as garnish for traditional dishes such as tostadas , sopes , enchiladas and posole stew . in indian cuisine the seed pods are called '' moongra '' or '' mogri '' and can be used in many dishes . radish greens are usually discarded , but are edible and nutritious , and can be prepared in a variety of ways . . other uses . the seeds of radishes can be pressed to extract vegetable oil . wild radish seeds contain up to 48 % oil , and while not suitable for human consumption , this oil is a potential source of biofuel . the daikon grows well in cool climates and , apart from its industrial use , can be used as a cover crop , grown to increase soil fertility , to scavenge nutrients , suppress weeds , help alleviate soil compaction , and prevent winter erosion of the soil . '' radi '' , a spiral-cut radish that is sprinkled with salt and occasionally chives , and eaten with the fingers , is traditionally served with beer at the bavarian oktoberfest . . culture . the daikon varieties of radish are important parts of east , southeast , and south asian cuisine . in japan and korea , radish dolls are sometimes made as children 's toys . daikon is also one of the plants that make up the japanese festival of seven herbs ( nanakusa no sekku ) on the seventh day after the new year . citizens of oaxaca , mexico , celebrate the night of the radishes ( noche de los rábanos ) on december 23 as a part of christmas celebrations . this folk art competition uses a large type of radish up to long and weighing up to . great skill and ingenuity are used to carve these into religious and popular figures , buildings , and other objects , and they are displayed in the town square . . gallery . file : daikon , nara prefecture , japan.jpg daikon file : gegeolmu ( korean radish ) . jpg gegeol radish file : korean radish ( mu ) . jpg korean radish file : chinese radish p1150393.jpg watermelon radish file : raphanus sativus-1.jpg white and red file : pannier de radis noir , roses et blancs.jpg black , white and red file : raphanus sativus-2-xavier cottage-yercaud-salem-india.jpg sliced red file : colourful radishes.jpg multiple colors file : csiro scienceimage 2779 radishes.jpg dark red file : raphanus sativus var . sativus radish ハツカダイコン廿日大根、二十日大根 dscf6410.jpg harvesting red