Transformers (toy line)

conception . the transformers toy line was created from toy molds mostly produced by japanese company takara in the toy lines car-robots ( diaclone ) and micro change ( microman ) . other toy molds from other companies such as bandai were used as well . in 1984 , hasbro bought the distribution rights to the molds and rebranded them as the transformers for distribution in north america . they approached marvel comics to create a backstory with names and short descriptions for each character , most of which were written by bob budiansky . the designs for the original 28 figures were made by kojin ono , takashi matsuda , hideaki yoke , hiroyuki obara , and satoshi koizumi . hasbro would go on to buy the entire toy line from takara , giving them sole ownership of the transformers toy-line , branding rights , and copyrights , while in exchange , takara was given the rights to produce the toys and the rights to distribute them in the japanese market . transformers toy lines . the following transformers toy series were released in the united states and japan : the transformers ( 1984–1990 usa ) ( 1984–1993 , uk/canada ) ( 1985–1992 , japan ) - retroactively called '' generation one '' or '' g1 '' since then . these are considered the first transformers . tatakae ! chō robot seimeitai transformer ( fight ! super robot lifeform transformers ) ( 1985–1986 , japan ) fight ! super robot lifeform transformers 2010 ( 1986–1987 , japan ) transformers : the headmasters ( 1987–1988 , japan ) transformers : super-god masterforce ( super-god masterforce ) ( 1988–1989 , japan ) transformers : victory ( 1989 , japan ) transformers : zone ( 1990 , japan ) fight ! super robot lifeform transformers : return of convoy ( 1991 , japan ) - also known as '' transformers : the battlestars '' or '' battlestars : return of convoy '' fight ! super robot lifeform transformers : operation combination ( 1992 , japan ) transformers : generation 2 ( 1992–1995 usa ) ( 1994–1995 uk/canada ) /transformers : g-2 ( 1995 , japan ) beast wars ( 1996–1999 ) ( 1997–1998 ; 1999–2000 , japan ) ( released as beasties in canada ) beast wars super lifeform transformers ( 1997–1998 , japan ) super lifeform transformers beast wars metals ( 1999–2000 , japan ) machine wars : transformers ( 1997 ) - a limited release kb toys exclusive beast wars ii ( 1998 , japan ) - a.k.a . '' beast wars second '' animorphs ( 1999 ) - a line related to the animorphs book and tv series beast wars neo ( 1999 , japan ) beast machines ( 1999-2000 ) /super lifeform transformers beast wars returns ( 2004–2005 , japan ) transformers : robots in disguise ( 2001–2002 ) /transformers : car robots ( 2001 - 2002 , japan ) 1-2-3 transformers ( 2001–2002 ) transformers : micromaster collection ( 2002–2004 , japan ) transformers collection ( 2002–2006 japan ) transformers : armada/super robot lifeform transformers : micron densetsu ( micron legend ) ( 2002–2003 ) transformers : expanded universe ( 2002 ) transformers commemorative series ( 2002–2005 ; 2009 ) smallest transformers ( 2003–2004 , japan ) - a.k.a . '' world 's smallest transformers '' transformers : go-bots ( 2003–2005 ) /kid 's transformers rescue heroes go-bots ( 2003 , japan ) transformers : dinobots ( 2003 ) transformers : universe ( 2003–2007 ) transformers : energon ( 2004–2005 ) /transformers : super link ( 2003–2004 , japan ) transformers : alternators ( 2003–2007 ) transformers : binaltech ( 2003–2008 japan ) transformers : binaltech asterisk ( 2005 , japan ) transformers : masterpiece ( 2003–present ) transformers : robotmasters ( 2004–2005 , japan ) transformers : cybertron ( 2005–2006 ) /transformers : galaxy force ( 2004–2005 , japan ) transformers : hybrid style ( 2005–2006 , japan ) transformers : timelines ( 2005–2016 ) star wars transformers ( 2006–2008 ) - later merged with transformers : crossovers transformers : kiss players ( 2006–2007 , japan ) beast wars 10th anniversary ( 2006 ) beast wars reborn ( 2006 , japan ) transformers classics ( 2006–2007 ) transformers : titanium series ( 2006–2009 ) transformers ( 2007 live-action film ) ( 2007 ) beast wars telemocha series ( 2007 , japan ) transformers : encore ( 2007–2009 , japan ) transformers : music label ( 2007–2008 , japan ) transformers : sports label ( 2007 , japan ) transformers animated ( 2008–2009 ; 2010–present , japan ) transtech - this toy line was to follow beast machines , but was canceled . the characters , however , went on to appear in convention comics and stories beginning in 2008 . henkei ! henkei ! transformers ( 2008–2010 , japan ) shattered glass ( 2008–2016 ) transformers universe ( 2008–2009 ) transformers : crossovers ( 2008–2011 ) transformers : disney label ( 2009–2010 , japan ) transformers : alternity ( 2009–2011 , japan ) transformers : chrono label ( was scheduled for a 2009 release , but has been delayed and remains yet-to-be released , japan ) transformers : revenge of the fallen ( 2009 ) transformers : device label ( 2009–2010 , japan ) transformers/transformers : autobot alliance/transformers : reveal the shield ( 2010–2011 ) transformers : power core combiners ( 2010–2011 ) transformers : generations ( 2010–present ) /transformers : united ( 2010–2012 , japan ) fall of cybertron ( 2012 ) thrilling 30 ( 2014 ) /transformers : legends ( 2014–present , japan ) combiner wars ( 2015-2016 ) /unite warriors ( 2015-2016 , japan ) titans return ( 2016–2017 ) power of the primes ( 2017-2018 ) war for cybertron : siege ( 2018-2020 ) war for cybertron : earthrise ( 2020–2021 ) war for cybertron : kingdom ( 2021-present ) transformers : studio series ( 2018–present ) transformers : studio series '86 ( 2021-present ) transformers generations selects ( 2019–present , usa and japan ) transformers : dark of the moon ( 2011 ) transformers : prime ( 2011-2014 ) transformers : rescue bots ( 2011–present ) transformers : age of extinction ( 2014 ) transformers : robots in disguise ( 2015 ) ( 2015–2018 ) transformers : the last knight ( 2017 ) transformers : cyberverse ( 2018–present ) transformers : botbots ( 2018–present ) nezha : transformers ( 2020 ) many transformers come with tech specs ( short for technical specifications ) printed on the back of the box that they are sold in . the owner of the new transformer is encouraged to cut out the tech specs and save it . this card has information on the transformer , and will usually include the character 's name , picture , indication of allegiance ( autobot , decepticon or other ) , function , a quote , a description of the character , and numerical values of the character 's various attributes . although only the numbers can be truly deemed '' technical specifications '' , the entire card is usually referred to as the transformer 's tech specs . each specification is rated by a value from 1 to 10 , 1 being the lowest , and 10 being the highest . teams have teamwork ratings instead of ranks . unlike the other ratings , teamwork seems to be split along faction lines , with autobots typically holding higher teamwork ratings than decepticons . a second unique spec value , cooperation , replaced the firepower rating used on individuals ' cards . the traditional order ( as above ) was also abandoned for the micromaster team specifications . the values started becoming inconsistent and skewed in generation 2 and beast wars , when hasbro apparently thought no child will ever want a toy that is described as anything less than perfect . thus it became rarer and rarer to see any low numbers . most characters ' numbers hardly ever dipped below 8 , the go-bot version of optimus prime was the first character to have all values at 10 , a trend that would repeat for most '' leader '' characters . when even more powerful versions of the optimus primal toy ( such as optimal optimus ) were introduced , hasbro even invented a '' 10+ '' rating in an attempt to keep increasing the power levels . with the transformers : cybertron line a few characters even got '' unknown '' and '' infinity '' ratings . the specifications portion of the tech specs which came with earlier g1 transformers were obfuscated with interference patterns which made them difficult to read without a decoder which was included in the box for each transformer . the decoder consisted of simple red plastic which rendered the interference patterns invisible . related to tech specs were marvel 's transformer universe comics , where the entry for each transformer contained an expanded bio based on the one printed on the tech specs . however , numerical tech specs were not included . transformers : generation one ( 1984–1990 usa , 1984–1993 uk/canada ) . the first transformers toys were created from two different transforming robot toy lines from takara , the car-robots and micro change , from the diaclone and microman series , respectively . hasbro acquired the rights to sell them in the united states but , instead of selling them under their original names , they were rebranded as '' the transformers '' . the first two years consisted primarily of reusing the car-robots/micro change molds . the earliest toys had some parts made of die-cast metal , which were eventually phased out . the line was released as '' the transformers '' in the united states , canada and the uk in 1984 ( one year after the gobots ) but takara was still marketing diaclone at least during 1984 . hence in japan '' the transformers '' did not debut under that brand till 1985 , when the line was also rolled out to the majority of the rest of the world between takara and hasbro . hasbro europe still will not accept , however , that the range was released in the uk in 1984 , not even with evidence such as argos 1984 catalogues containing the range , the uk comic launching in september 1984 or even the 1984 transformers product catalogue produced by '' hasbro industries ( uk ) ltd , wokingham '' . it is thought that hasbro europe as it now stands did not come into existence till 1985 , hence no records of transformers sales in 1984 . uk transformers toys were sold in boxes identical to those of their american counterparts until around 1998/9 when the range started to have uk exclusives . the 1984 and 1985 toy lines contained several figures of note . megatron , the decepticon leader , originally transformed into a realistic walther p38 pistol with stock and barrel extensions and scope . the megatron toy was delayed till 1985 for release in the uk . the constructicons were the first '' gestalt '' team in the transformers line , but were different from most subsequent gestalt teams in that they consisted of six members instead of five . the autobot jetfire was repainted from a macross toy , specifically the vf-1 valkyrie , and the character was renamed skyfire in the animated television series program for copyright reasons . in 1986 the transformers animated movie had been released , and during the run of the movie , through a pamphlet that came with certain figures , you could order certain transformers through the mail , such as optimus prime among other toys . the toys came in a standard brown mailer box , with items , booklet , and a limited edition movie certificate and sticker . the 1986 line featured another significant change in that many , if not the majority , of the toys were conceived as futuristic vehicles and bore little resemblance to present-day machinery . this was due to changes in the movie and television series , which leaped ahead twenty years to the year 2005 . many have speculated that this change might have been what signaled the beginning of the end for the transformers , as part of the novelty of the first lines was the realistic vehicles that turned into robots . for the 1987 and 1988 lines , hasbro introduced even more radical ideas through new sub-groups . the headmasters and targetmasters came with partners who transformed into the figure 's head or weapon , respectively . powermasters , including the new version of fan favorite optimus prime , came with partners that transformed into engines . each line would see various permutations over the two-year span , including smaller headmasters , double targetmasters , and a powermaster with two engines . the most controversial line of this period was the pretenders . pretenders consisted of a transformer contained inside an action figure shell who could '' pretend '' to be either a human or a monster . complaints with this line were numerous , including the lack of articulation of the figures ( the shells could only move their arms ) , the simple transformation of the robots within , and their increasing lack of resemblance to any sort of modern recognizable vehicle . still , despite the complaints , the pretender line continued through all but the final year of generation one , with variations such as beast pretenders , monster pretenders , classic pretenders , mega pretenders and ultra pretenders , each with variations on the theme or increasing levels of complexity . also during this time , micromasters were introduced , and would become one of the last sub-groups of generation one . micromasters were tiny transformers created to compete with the micro machines , a hugely popular toy line of the time . while many of the figures had simple transformations and little detail due to their small size , the line eventually expanded to feature micromaster transports and bases , in which micromasters came with larger vehicles or bases that transformed . in 1989 , the entire line became limited to pretenders and micromasters . for the first time , the transformers received a new design for their title logo . but many also regarded this as a time of a dearth in creativity and the lowest point in the toy line 's history . the year 1990 saw the last american burst with the release of more micromaster characters and the introduction of the action masters , non-transforming action figures who came with transforming companions . larger action master sets came with transforming vehicles and bases . the action master line was criticized for its perceived desperation for a gimmick , although it had a few defenders . the line predictably faded and would be the last transformers output in the us until 1992 . while transformers ended poorly for the us market , the same can not be said for the uk , canada , and japan markets as they went on to produce their own continuing series between 1991 and 1993 , despite the uk market in particular missing a substantial amount of figures prominent in the comics and animated series throughout the line 's run . each country produced their own continuity . the uk and canada continued with new action master figures and introduced the turbo masters and predators . japan continued with the micromasters concept . the 1992 and 1993 european and canadian releases make up what is often called '' generation 1.5 '' , much to the annoyance of many uk fans . these toys are similar in design to the generation 2 transformers , having lightpipe eyes , and pastel colors . the 1993 european figures used the g2 faction symbols which hasbro uk designed because their licence on the g1 symbols had expired . the 1993 figures were repackaged for european g2 release in 1994 , and three subgroup molds got used in the us g2 line . the term generation 1 is a retronym ; the series was simply known as '' transformers '' until the release of the generation 2 series . however , the term has become semi-official , as both hasbro and takara have referred to this era as '' generation 1 '' . new characters are still occasionally added to the line , primarily by e-hobby . ( examples : sunstorm , hauler , detritus , and the like . ) large-scale production of new characters in this line ended with the onset of generation 2 . transformers fans often are very upheld with the g1 community . this has led to controversy among fans who consider g1 to be the only '' pure '' form of transformers . the line was later commemorated as a sub-series of the transformers : universe line . transformers : generation two ( 1992–1994 usa , 1994–1995 uk/canada ) . in 1992 , hasbro relaunched the transformers franchise with the generation 2 line , with production again largely being done by takara . the subgroups concept was done away with for the first year , but there were no new molds or characters . generation 2 re-used the molds for many of the characters from the 1984 and 1985 line , but with mostly different color schemes and finishes , as well as different weapons and accessories . megatron 's figure was released later on . as noted previously , megatron 's original alternate mode , or '' transformation identity '' , was a handgun with attachments , but in generation two , this was changed to a tank due to safety and security concerns . most of the 1994 figures were re-releases or recolors of european g1 releases . unfortunately for both takara and hasbro , generation two sales dropped off quickly after two years , and hasbro abandoned it . there were toys planned that never saw release . most of these were g1 combiner team recolors or recolors of recent figures . four unreleased molds were released in the machine wars line , and four more resurfaced in the robots in disguise series . the line was later commemorated as a sub-series of the transformers : universe line . beast wars and beast machines ( 1996–2001 ) . with the failure of the generation 2 series , hasbro and takara decided the franchise needed an overhaul . they went in a new direction and a new beginning . while there had been transformers that change into robotic animals , the premise of the new line was that all figures would transform into animals with realistic appearances . the beast wars toy line was launched in the autumn of 1995 , and mainframe entertainment produced a computer-generated imagery , or cgi , animated series program to tie in with the new toy line . a fresh idea coupled with a tv series program with strong stories assured this series the success hasbro and takara needed , as this series was a giant hit in international markets as well as in takara 's home market , japan . hasbro 's original plan for the beast wars was to have optimus prime , renamed optimus primal , and megatron be reformatted versions of their 1980s selves . this was shown in the toy 's tech specs , and in the comic packaged with the basic optimus primal/megatron two-pack . hasbro also wanted the '' mutant heads '' found on all of the deluxe sized first year toys as battle helmets , but mainframe scrapped the idea as it would have required three animation models for each character instead of two . another designed feature for the 1995/1996 toys was carried over from generation 2 , transparent '' light pipe '' eyes . however , most toys had those parts cast in opaque plastic . the beast wars line was also the first appearance of '' flip changer '' basics , where flipping a part of the animal mode ( usually the head or tail ) would transform the entire toy , and moving the part back would transform the toy back to beast mode . like other features , this was only used in the 1995/1996 basics and their repaints . beast wars : transformers had to be renamed in some countries , particularly canada , because of concern over the word '' war '' in the title . so , in some countries , it was released under the title beasties . long-time transformers fans noticed the prominence of the words '' beast wars '' over '' transformers '' , the latter appearing in small type under the former . the transformers ' fan base splintered into two groups as a direct result , with the one enjoying beast wars for what it was and the other refusing to accept it as official canon in the transformers mythology . the success of beast wars and the change in storyline resulted in its second phase : beast machines . like beast wars , the name transformers was used only as a secondary title . while still a success , the storyline and direction borne by beast machines was questioned and criticized by the most ardent fans who knew the previous history of the transformers . also , there was a clamor for a return to the original idea of the transformers , that of their being protean robots with nearly humanlike artificial intelligences who transformed into vehicles or devices . the line was later commemorated as sub-series of the transformers : titanium and transformers : universe lines . robots in disguise ( 2001–2002 ) . while beast machines was still running in canada , japan 's takara made a bid to return to the familiar vehicle-transforming robots concept . in 2000 , car robots was released . this line was brought by hasbro to america as the robots in disguise series , and featured the autobots facing off against the predacons . this series is usually regarded by most as filler while hasbro contemplated the next direction for transformers . however most fans of transformers recognise that most if not all of the toys released from this line were of excellent quality ( with the optimus prime and ultra magnus figures gaining considerable praise ) , combining the ball-joint articulation with detailed , well painted alternate modes . once again optimus prime and megatron were re-engineered , with prime now a fire truck and megatron a six changer , whose modes included a dragon , bat , jet , land-craft and a giant hand . another g1 character to get a new toy for this line was ultra magnus , who could combine with optimus prime to form omega prime . other combiners were created for the series too , such as landfill and rail racer . bruticus , a combiner from g1 was also repaint and introduced into the series , with a coinciding toy re-release . the combaticons that formed bruticus were the first of the decepticons to be introduced into the show along with scourge , who as a toy was a black repaint of g2 laser prime . these were not the only toys to be re-released for this series , with many from past lines being repainted and packaged in rid boxes . robots in disguise was responsible for introducing a lot of concepts that would be re-used often in the next incarnations of transformers . also of note , megatron 's toy was repainted and re-released ( retooled to allow 4 new altmodes ) under the name galvatron , beginning a tradition of repaints that would follow through with armada and subsequent toy lines . the line was later commemorated as a sub-series of the transformers : universe line . transformers : armada ( 2002–2003 ) . in 2003 , transformers : armada launched a pivotal new era in the toy line . after several lines of toys produced by one company or the other , hasbro and takara united to produce what was purported to be a single , identical line of transformers for release worldwide . in tandem with this new endeavor , armada signaled a new continuity in its accompanying animated series and a new focus in both the show and the toys on mini-cons , a new faction of transformers . the mini-cons were much smaller robots ( not much larger than humans ) who were neutral in the autobot/decepticon fight , but due to their incredible power and abilities , were sought by both factions . the lowest priced toys in the armada line were three-packs of mini-cons . each larger price point consisted of an autobot or decepticon who came with a mini-con partner . mini-cons could be used to unlock a variety of features on each larger robot , such as firing weapons , electronic lights and sounds , or alternate modes . some three-pack mini-cons combined into other forms or had additional features . according to the storyline , mini-cons also enhanced the power of other transformers , giving incentive to collect as many of them as possible . other items of note in the armada line : the armada line featured the first commercially available figure of unicron , who is a legendary character from generation 1 , and the main villain of the transformers : the movie . unicron is a robot who transforms into an entire planet . the mini-cons often mimicked features associated with generation 1 sub-groups such as the headmasters and targetmasters , transforming into weapons and , in three cases , a transformer 's head . the line was later commemorated as a sub-series of the transformers : universe line . transformers : universe ( 2002–present ) . a catch-all line initially filled with mostly redecos and repackages of older toys . this line was revitalized in 2008 with new molds and the introduction of various sub-series from previous popular transformers lines like classics . transformers : energon ( 2003–2005 ) . after the successful armada toy line , hasbro/takara introduced transformers : energon . the accompanying television series program was a direct continuation of the events of transformers : armada and featured many of the same characters in new forms . this was reflected in the toy line , as characters such as hot shot , jetfire , optimus prime and megatron were all released with entirely new molds . transformers : energon introduced several new concepts to the toy line . two new sub-groups , the omnicons and terrorcons , joined the fray , representing smaller factions of the autobots and decepticons respectively . the smaller toys in these sub-groups came with energon weapons that could be used by the larger autobots and decepticons , along with energon chips that could be fastened to the larger figures to enhance their power . energon weapons and chips came in a variety of colors of translucent plastic . many autobot figures in the line were able to combine with a partner to form a larger robot through the '' powerlinx '' process . the decepticons were designed instead with alternative '' attack modes '' . while no longer the focus of the line , there were several mini-con releases in energon as well . other items of note in the energon line : energon contains perhaps the most homages to generation 1 transformers in any subsequent line , with toys featuring similarities to classic figures such as omega supreme , skids , wheeljack , galvatron and ravage . many larger figures in the line came with no weapons , to fit with the concept that omnicons and terrorcons provided energy and weaponry for them . fittingly , then , the smaller robots were often armed to the hilt with weaponry . in a break from tradition , energon optimus prime 's large mode resembled a configuration similar to voltron or to the super sentai action figures . this design was unpopular with many fans due to design issues with the toy . the small robot 's body was large in proportion to his arms and legs which made the figure appear fat , earning it the nickname '' fatimus prime '' or '' obese-imus prime '' . the 4 vehicles that combined with the robot were small , lacking the intricate detail that made other toys in the line popular . fans were also angered by early releases of this toy in which the head was molded with a mouth rather than the traditional face plate design . later releases of the toy eliminated the visible mouth feature . transformers : cybertron ( 2005–2007 ) . transformers : cybertron , named galaxy force in japan , was a follow-up to the successful armada and energon lines . the companion anime series program was not originally conceived or produced as a continuation of the armada/energon storyline , and it was only later that it was retconned to be a continuation . thus , several inconsistencies exist . once again , a new feature was introduced for the line—cyber keys , which activated special functions on the figures in a manner similar to the mini-cons in armada . each figure came with a cyber key regardless of size , but there were several cyber keys crucial to the plot of the anime series which only came with certain figures . again , many of the same characters were included but with entirely new figures from new molds . also of note in the cybertron line : primus , the creator of the transformers conceived by simon furman for the uk transformers comic , received action figure treatment in the cybertron line . he transformed into the planet cybertron itself . for the first time since rodimus prime in generation one , cybertron featured a prime other than optimus — vector prime , said to be one of the first 13 transformers ever created . by this time , hasbro/takara was using a higher ratio of repaints consisting of figures from the armada and energon lines . in addition , by the end of its run , cybertron was competing with several other simultaneous lines , including universe , alternators and titanium . many of the repaints taken from the armada line had remolded parts retro-fitted to the original designs so their mini-con features would now use a planet key instead . the line was later commemorated as a sub-series of the transformers : universe line . transformers : kiss players ( 2006 ) . the transformers : kiss players was a japan-only line of transformers toys , manga , and audio dramas released in 2006 . kiss players is set in an alternate transformers universe where the transformers are powered by the kisses of young girls . the toys themselves come packaged with small , scale figurines of the girls who power them . the toy line was openly admitted to be aimed at a specific part of the market — adults , rather than children . the comic that accompanied the kiss players was an unashamed reflection of this , with several images which were considered by some to be very sexually themed . kiss players continued the theme of the metaphysical power potential of human beings empowering transformers . previous examples were the japanese series programs masterforce and car robots . takara 's official transformers : kiss players website . transformers : classics ( 2006 ) . transfomers : classics was a filler line for hasbro , to fill the gap between the end of cybertron and the 2007 movie line . it mostly consisted of '' classic '' generation one characters , with contemporary re-designs and updated alternate modes . the line was later commemorated as a sub-series of the transformers : universe line , where it had the nickname of '' classics 2.0 '' . transformers film ( 2007 ) . the transformers ( film ) premiered in the u.s . on july 3 , 2007 , a joint collaboration among dreamworks skg , paramount pictures and hasbro . the feature was directed by michael bay from a screenplay written by alex kurtzman and roberto orci . it was a new story , set apart from the previous incarnations of the cartoon ( s ) and comic ( s ) . a new origin and characters were introduced . steven spielberg , who with jeffrey katzenberg and david geffen had established dreamworks skg , was the main executive producer of the film , with lorenzo di bonaventura , tom desanto and don murphy serving as co-executive producers . in practice , this meant that they were the primary financial sponsors of the film . shia labeouf portrays the lead human character , sam witwicky , in the film with josh duhamel , tyrese gibson , and megan fox in supporting roles . peter cullen reprises his role as the voice of optimus prime . megatron 's voice is provided by hugo weaving . it was expected that the release of a new movie would involve the production and release of associated toys from takara and hasbro . images surfaced , on-line , of some toy prototypes , notably starscream and a new decepticon who was to be named blackout , along with packaged samples of movie preview '' protoform '' optimus prime and starscream toys . similarly , fans found preliminary artwork of multiple characters , although it was not known at the time how close these were to the final designs . the designs were significantly different from those of the generation 1 characters with the same names . reactions varied widely : some fans objected strongly to the designs , occasionally going so far as to threaten a boycott if the designs were not changed to be more traditional , while others liked them . the issue became a divisive one , as detractors accused supporters of lacking respect for the franchise 's history , while supporters accused detractors of being '' stuck in the past '' , and not accepting change . in the '' transformers '' film , the robots had more of an alien feel to them to fit the theme of an alien invasion . the robots ( stated by optimus prime ) in the film are actual sentient organisms and not just giant , mindless , and mechanical machines . the robots can also speak their own alien language sounding like what seems to be based on different pitches and frequencies . alongside that , they gave them more alien features that probably was n't mentioned in the comics or t.v . series such as a highly advanced exoskeleton , force field , and a special '' alien meteoroid '' mode which they transform into individually and arrive on earth in . the exoskeleton is a '' self-regenerating metal '' in which the aliens are composed of ( stated in the film ) that is the equivalent of living skin that heals itself . even though the transformers were heavily modified for the film for a more alien '' feel '' , they still kept some key features from the g1 look to stay true to the character 's origins . examples : optimus ' faceplate and primary colors , and megatron 's arm cannon . megatron 's head also resembles a helmet-like shape . also , as a new feature , most figures include advanced '' automorph technology '' , which is designed to create quicker and easier conversion , which means moving one part of the vehicle or robot causes other parts to move , creating a final shift to battle mode ; this was successful because the transformation was more complex in the movie line than in any other transformers toy line . transformers animated ( 2008 ) . the transformers animated series was broadcast internationally in 2008 except in japan , where it aired in 2010 . this new series uses a very different art-style from the previous series . the autobots and decepticons , while fighting in space for possession of the allspark , crash-landed onto a futuristic earth and resume their battle after laying dormant for years . in addition to the decepticons , the autobots have to face the human villains as well . classic characters such as optimus prime , bumblebee , prowl , starscream , megatron , jazz and ultra magnus appear in this series . originally , transformers : animated was to be called '' transformers : heroes '' , but its name was changed to avoid confusion with the transformers live-action film . the line was released alongside a sub-series of the transformers : universe line for its legends size figures . star wars transformers ( 2006 ) . this line features robot versions of various star wars characters . confirmed figures are darth vader , luke skywalker , boba fett , commander cody and jango fett . darth vader turns into his custom tie fighter while luke skywalker turns into an x-wing . jango fett and boba fett become slave i , and commander cody turns into a turbo tank . there is combiner of millennium falcon of two characters , han solo and chewbacca and primus/unicron-like death star that transforms into a giant darth vader . there are more star wars characters into transformers like general grievous and obi-wan kenobi . this line was later revived and merged into the transformers : crossovers toy line , many more transformers included characters from star wars : the clone wars like ahsoka tano who transforms into her jedi starfighter , and captain rex who transforms into an at-te . star wars transformers transformers wiki . transformers : crossovers ( 2008 ) . this is a new line which features robot versions of various marvel comics superheroes ( and later more of the star wars transformers figures once it merged with this line ) . confirmed figures are iron man , spider-man , wolverine , venom and hulk . hulk turns into a tank while iron man turns into a jet . spider-man becomes a helicopter , wolverine turns into a 4wd , venom turns into a turbocharged retro car . they are not to be confused with the marvel megamorphs toy line , which also featured transformable mecha piloted by the superheroes . eventually , the star wars transformers figure joined the line with reissues of previous figures , as well as all new molds . transformers : disney label ( 2009 ) . a japanese exclusive , this is a new line of transformers toys shaped from disney characters that were first introduced in 2009 . originally revealed in the november 2008 issue of figure oh ! magazine in japan , it was a collaboration project between takara tomy and the walt disney company . the first line of the toy series is the mickey mouse transformer which was modeled after optimus prime with the same colors as its transformer counterpart and can transform into a cartoonish trailer truck like the original version . the toy was released on february 26 , 2009 following with the black and white version a month later on march 26 , 2009 . a figure of donald duck based on both bumblebee and herbie , and a second repaint of the mickey mouse trailer in halloween colors , are also planned for release . in 2010 , a transformer version of buzz lightyear was released to celebrate the release of toy story 3 . this figure transforms into his spaceship ( similar to the box packaging of the original buzz lightyear toy ) , with his head transforming into a miniature buzz lightyear pilot figure . transformers cereal . ralston marketed many breakfast cereals based on cartoons in the 80s and 90s . one of these was transformers . the transformers chocolate flavored cereal was a chocolate-flavored concoction , not unlike cocoa puffs , manufactured by the ralston corporation . however , the cereal was sold only in some parts of the united states and was short lived . the cereal box had optimus prime on its cover . the box claims the cereal had '' more taste than meets the eye '' and also had the ability to '' transform ordinary milk into chocolate flavored milk '' . there also was a mail-away offer for a jazz toy . the few boxes that still exist are collectables , transformers cereal box wanted cerealbits ( one of which went for 349 on ebay ) . transformers events . the official international transformers convention is botcon , but other fan events include auto assembly and transforce in the uk and past transformers only events have included botcon japan , botcon europe and '' otfcc '' . the first larger transformers convention in the nordic countries is called '' the ntfa mini-con '' , with official support from hasbro nordic , and was held by members of the ntfa - the nordic transfans association , for the first time on november 3–4 , 2007 . the second ntfa convention with official support from hasbro nordic , now renamed '' nordcon '' ( to avoid copyright problems with the name '' mini-con '' ) was held in aalborg , denmark from 19 june to 20 june 2010 . it featured simon furman as a guest of honour . in 2011 , nordcon and auto assembly joined forces to create a new convention called auto assembly europe , which first took place in uppsala , sweden , in november 2011 . a transformers hall of fame was created in 2010 . initial inaugurees presented at botcon 2010 ceremonies included bob budiansky , peter cullen , hideaki yoke , ōno kōjin , and the characters optimus prime , bumblebee , megatron , starscream , and dinobot . . transformers video games . references . external links . - takara-tomy 's official transformers web site transformers.com - official transformers web site