Oz (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)

appearances . television . oz 's most outstanding trait is his detached , ironic approach to life , masking a deeply philosophical interior and a very calm , devoted , gentle nature . buffy the vampire slayer , season three , episode 18 , '' earshot '' he is also the lead guitarist for the band dingoes ate my baby ( a reference to the death of azaria chamberlain ) , which performs frequently at the bronze . a high school senior , one year above willow and the rest of the group , he is highly intelligent and '' tests well '' , but his only real ambition lies in music . he notices willow in her eskimo costume at a dance at the bronze , and seems to be interested in her at first sight ; but does not meet her directly until several episodes later . they have several dates , on one of which he witnesses a vampire being dusted by buffy for the first time , and is unsurprised upon learning vampires exist and merely remarks that '' it explains a lot '' . after this he becomes a member of the scooby gang , helping with research and fighting . in the episode '' phases '' oz learns he has become a werewolf , turning into a monster on the three nights around a full moon , having been bitten on his finger by his cousin jordy . on his third night as a wolf , oz is nearly killed by werewolf hunter gib cain for his pelt , but is saved by buffy and the scooby gang , with whose help he quickly finds a way to minimize the danger posed by the wolf : he locks himself into a cage for the appropriate nights , watched over by the scoobies in shifts . the revelation that oz is a werewolf does not dissuade willow from dating him , and they become a couple . even though he is intelligent , several incompletes in his senior year require that he repeat it , putting him in the same graduating year as the rest of the gang . during this year , his relationship with willow goes through rough water as he and cordelia catch xander and willow kissing . they break up , but get back together again after oz confesses he misses her ( '' amends '' ) . in the episode '' graduation day , part one , '' oz and willow make love before the impending confrontation with the evil mayor wilkins . after graduation , he attends uc sunnydale together with buffy and willow , and is seen taking 'introduction to psychology ' by maggie walsh along with them . unlike the other two , he does not have a dorm room , but stays in a house off campus along with the rest of the band , buffy the vampire slayer , season four , episode 1 , '' the freshman '' and now locks himself up into a cage in a crypt at a local cemetery . oz makes one appearance on angel to deliver the ring of amarra , and plays a crucial role in the plot of that episode ( '' in the dark '' ) . he was rumored to be a recurring character in the unproduced sixth season before the show 's cancellation at the end of season five . while appearing to the outside world to have come to terms with his lycanthropy rather easily , evidence arises he indeed is fearful of his werewolf side ( '' fear , itself '' ) , and especially of hurting others with it . writer david fury in the monster book ( 2000 ) by c . golden , s.r . bisette and t.e . sniegoski , new york : pocket books , page 51 . '' . the fears are personalized : oz fears hurting willow . '' moreover , he starts to see that he and his wolf side may not be as separate as he 'd like to think . when he meets a female werewolf , veruca , a seductive uc sunnydale student who sings in a band , they are immediately drawn to each other , and unbeknownst to him , they meet as wolves in the woods and have sex on the first night of the full moon . veruca , who , unlike oz , is conscious of her state and believes they are '' the wolf all the time , '' tries to convince oz that they belong together . unlike oz , veruca sees nothing wrong with killing humans when she is a werewolf as she feels that that is her true identity . instead of telling the others about veruca , he convinces her to join him in his cage on the next night they are due to turn into werewolves . they have sex again and are found the next morning lying together naked by willow , who is devastated . willow considers using magic to hurt veruca , but changes her mind at the last minute . veruca , who watched willow , then attacks her . during the attack , veruca transforms into a werewolf and tries to kill willow , but oz , also in werewolf form , protects willow and kills veruca . buffy the vampire slayer season four , episode 6 , wild at heart after he kills veruca , he nearly attacks willow , but buffy stops him in time . oz realizes that veruca was correct , and tells willow that he is , indeed , '' the wolf all the time '' and needs to leave in order to try to better understand his own nature . some months later , oz returns to sunnydale , having made progress with his lycanthropy through techniques learned in tibet . buffy the vampire slayer , season four , episode 19 , new moon rising he no longer uncontrollably changes into a werewolf during a full moon , and can now control his transformations , and shows willow this when he takes her outside and shows her that the moon is full and he has not changed . however , when experiencing the powerful negative emotion of jealousy evoked by the discovery that tara maclay has replaced him in willow 's affections , he does change , and is seized by the initiative and locked in their cells until buffy , helped by riley finn , sets him free . the knowledge that willow now loves tara makes oz leave sunnydale for good , though he and willow each affirm the depth and permanence of their connection . he is last seen in willow 's dream in the episode '' restless . '' . literature . in 2007 , joss whedon launched a canonical buffy continuation in comic format , buffy the vampire slayer season eight . the series follows buffy and her allies some time after the events of the television series finale . oz initially features in a minor dream sequence in whedon 's premiere story arc , '' the long way home '' arc amid a collage of friends and family , but is not featured in any principal role until the 2009 story arc '' retreat '' , written by jane espenson . the story sees buffy and her army of slayers magically transport themselves to oz 's sanctuary in tibet to escape the pursuit of her masked enemy , the mysterious '' twilight '' . there , they hope to learn from oz how to suppress their magical abilities , as he did , and therefore to avoid twilight 's detection . oz introduces buffy , willow and friends to his wife bayarmaa , who is also a werewolf , and his young son , kelden . oz and a number of other werewolves assist the rendered-powerless slayers when twilight 's armed forces attack , though oz subsequently remains with his family when buffy and her company depart once again . oz also appears in buffy expanded universe materials ; the details offered in these appearances would later be contradicted by canonical stories , such as espenson 's arc for season eight . in addition to supporting roles in a number of novels and comic books , oz is central to the comic book trade paperback oz ( 2001 ) and the novel oz : into the wild ( 2002 ) . both of these appearances are written by christopher golden . into the wild is set during oz 's quest to control his wolf-side , set after the television episode '' wild at heart '' . golden 's frequent writing partner nancy holder also wrote the 2005 novel queen of the slayers , set after the events of the season seven finale . in queen of the slayers , forces conspire to kill buffy for destroying the hellmouth in sunnydale . when buffy encounters oz , he is the leader of a pack of werewolves who can completely control their wolf forms ; oz assists in the final battle of the book , set during a full moon . dingoes ate my baby . oz plays guitar in a rock band named dingoes ate my baby . the name alludes to the widespread news coverage of the death of nine-week-old azaria chamberlain in australia in 1980 . still a vestige of human frailty , '' theage.com.au , july 10 , 2004 . retrieved july 1 , 2011 the only band member mentioned by name , other than oz , is lead singer devon macleish ( played by jason hall ) . devon is a friend of oz and he also briefly dated both cordelia chase and harmony kendall . willow has the band 's poster on her dorm room wall beginning in season 4 episode 2 . buffyverse appearances . the band is first mentioned in the unaired buffy pilot with a title card date of 05/03/96 . xander says , '' they don ’ t know any actual chords yet , but they have really big amps . '' they did not appear on the show until the second season , in '' inca mummy girl , '' october 6 , 1997 . dingoes continued to appear throughout seasons 3 and 4 until oz left sunnydale . a poster of theirs is seen once afterward , in the episode superstar . most of their performances took place at the bronze , sunnydale 's local nightclub . music . the music of dingoes ate my baby was actually composed and performed by four star mary . most of the songs that were used on the show featured on their 1998 album , thrown to the wolves . the band is featured on buffy the vampire slayer : the album . they also made a one-time appearance as themselves in '' restless '' . they provided the music along with christophe beck to the joss whedon-written song , '' giles ' epiphany '' . concept and creation . oz originated as a temporary cast member for the show . he was based on a student with whom buffy-creator joss whedon attended college , as whedon mentions in his commentary on '' innocence '' in the season two dvd boxed set . in the writers ' original plans oz was to be killed early in season two by a vampire , presumably angelus , before this dubious honor went to jenny calendar . the plan changed , as shown in '' phases '' when oz 's plot is expanded as he becomes a werewolf . on the season 4 featurette : oz revelations : a full moon , the writers related oz 's inner werewolf to the dark urges every person encompasses . even oz , being a stoic and calm persona , still had a strong and violent force inside , which became increasingly harder to control . in several episodes during season four , oz can be seen wearing a sheepskin jacket , alluding to the aesopian fable , origin of the well-known phrase '' a wolf in sheep 's clothing '' . references .