Carnatic music

origins , sources and history . like all art forms in indian culture , indian classical music is believed to be a divine art form which originated from the devas and devis ( hindu gods and goddesses ) , moorthy2001 , p17 and is venerated as symbolic of . ancient treatises also describe the connection of the origin of the swaras , or notes , to the sounds of animals and birds and man 's effort to simulate these sounds through a keen sense of observation and perception . the sama veda , which is believed to have laid the foundation for indian classical music , consists of hymns from the rigveda , set to musical tunes which would be sung using three to seven musical notes during vedic yajnas . the yajur-veda , which mainly consists of sacrificial formulae , mentions the veena as an accompaniment to vocal recitations . references to indian classical music are made in many ancient texts , including epics like the ramayana and mahabharata . the yajnavalkya smriti mentions वीणावादन तत्त्वज्ञः श्रुतीजातिविशारदः ताळज्ञश्चाप्रयासेन मोक्षमार्गं नियच्छति ( vīṇāvādana tattvajñaḥ śrutijātiviśāradaḥ tālajñaścāprayāsena mokṣamārgaṃ niyacchati , '' the one who is well versed in veena , one who has the knowledge of srutis and one who is adept in tala , attains liberation ( moksha ) without doubt '' ) . yjs 3.115 . carnatic music is based as it is today on musical concepts ( including swara , raga , and tala ) that were described in detail in several ancient works , particularly the bharata 's natya shastra and silappadhikaram by ilango adigal . owing to persian and islamic influences in north india from the 12th century onwards , indian classical music began to diverge into two distinct styles — hindustani music and carnatic music . commentaries and other works , such as sharngadeva 's sangita ratnakara , further elaborated on the musical concepts found in indian classical music . moorthy2001 , p18 by the 16th and 17th centuries , there was a clear demarcation between carnatic and hindustani music ; carnatic music remained relatively unaffected by persian and arabic influences . it was at this time that carnatic music flourished in vijayanagara , while the vijayanagar empire reached its greatest extent . purandara dasa , who is known as the '' father ( pitamaha ) of carnatic music '' , formulated the system that is commonly used for the teaching of carnatic music . theory of music , vasanthamadhavi p.183 venkatamakhin invented and authored the formula for the melakarta system of raga classification in his sanskrit work , the chaturdandi prakasika ( 1660 ad ) . govindacharya is known for expanding the melakarta system into the sampoorna raga scheme – the system that is in common use today . in the 18th and 19th centuries , carnatic music was mainly patronised by the local kings of the kingdom of mysore , kingdom of travancore , and the thanjavur maratha kingdom . some of the royalty of the kingdoms of mysore and travancore were themselves noted composers and proficient in playing musical instruments , such as the veena , rudra veena , violin , ghatam , flute , mridangam , nagaswara and swarabhat . pranesh2003 , p54-55 , p92 , p162-163 , p225-226 some famous court-musicians proficient in music were veene sheshanna ( 1852–1926 ) pranesh2003 , p108 and veene subbanna ( 1861–1939 ) , pranesh2003 , p128 among others . during the late 19th century , the city of chennai ( then known as madras ) emerged as the locus for carnatic music . with the dissolution of the erstwhile princely states and the indian independence movement reaching its conclusion in 1947 , carnatic music went through a radical shift in patronage into an art of the masses with ticketed performances organised by private institutions called sabhās . nature . the main emphasis in carnatic music is on vocal music ; most compositions are written to be sung , and even when played on instruments , they are meant to be performed in a singing style ( known as gāyaki ) . like hindustani music , carnatic music rests on two main elements : , the modes or melodic formulæ , and , the rhythmic cycles . today , carnatic music is presented by musicians in concerts or recordings , either vocally or through instruments . carnatic music itself developed around musical works or compositions of phenomenal composers ( see below ) . important elements . śruti . śruti commonly refers to musical pitch . it is the approximate equivalent of a tonic ( or less precisely a key ) in western music ; it is the note from which all the others are derived . it is also used in the sense of graded pitches in an octave . while there are an infinite number of sounds falling within a scale ( or raga ) in carnatic music , the number that can be distinguished by auditory perception is twenty-two ( although over the years , several of them have converged ) . in this sense , while sruti is determined by auditory perception , it is also an expression in the listener 's mind . . swara . swara refers to a type of musical sound that is a single note , which defines a relative ( higher or lower ) position of a note , rather than a defined frequency . swaras also refer to the solfege of carnatic music , which consist of seven notes , '' sa-ri-ga-ma-pa-da-ni '' ( compare with the hindustani sargam : sa-re-ga-ma-pa-dha-ni or western do-re-mi-fa-so-la-ti ) . these names are abbreviations of the longer names shadja , rishabha , gandhara , madhyama , panchama , dhaivata and nishada . unlike other music systems , every member of the solfege ( called a swara ) has three variants . the exceptions are the drone notes , shadja and panchama ( also known as the tonic and the dominant ) , which have only one form ; and madhyama ( the subdominant ) , which has two forms . a 7th century stone inscription in kudumiyan malai s . santhanlingam , kudumiyan malai , tamil nadu government archeology department publication , 1981 in tamil nadu shows vowel changes to solfege symbols with ra , ri , ru etc . to denote the higher quarter-tones . in one scale , or raga , there is usually only one variant of each note present . the exceptions exist in '' light '' ragas , in which , for artistic effect , there may be two , one ascending ( in the arohanam ) and another descending ( in the avarohanam ) . raga system . a raga in carnatic music prescribes a set of rules for building a melody – very similar to the western concept of mode . it specifies rules for movements up ( aarohanam ) and down ( avarohanam ) , the scale of which notes should figure more and which notes should be used more sparingly , which notes may be sung with gamaka ( ornamentation ) , which phrases should be used or avoided , and so on . in effect , it is a series of obligatory musical events which must be observed , either absolutely or with a particular frequency . in carnatic music , the sampoorna ragas ( those with all seven notes in their scales ) are classified into a system called the melakarta , which groups them according to the kinds of notes that they have . there are seventy-two melakarta ragas , thirty six of whose madhyama ( subdominant ) is shuddha ( perfect fourth from the tonic ) , the remaining thirty-six of whose madhyama ( subdominant ) is prati ( an augmented fourth from the tonic ) . the ragas are grouped into sets of six , called chakras ( '' wheels '' , though actually segments in the conventional representation ) grouped according to the supertonic and mediant scale degrees . there is a system known as the katapayadi sankhya to determine the names of melakarta ragas . ragas may be divided into two classes : janaka ragas ( i.e . melakarta or parent ragas ) and janya ragas ( descendant ragas of a particular janaka raga ) . janya ragas are themselves subclassified into various categories . tala system . tala refers to a fixed time cycle or metre , set for a particular composition , which is built from groupings of beats . talas have cycles of a defined number of beats and rarely change within a song . they have specific components , which in combinations can give rise to the variety to exist ( over 108 ) , allowing different compositions to have different rhythms . carnatic music singers usually keep the beat by moving their hands up and down in specified patterns , and using their fingers simultaneously to keep time . tala is formed with three basic parts ( called angas ) which are laghu , dhrtam , and anudhrtam , though complex talas may have other parts like plutam , guru , and kaakapaadam . there are seven basic tala groups which can be formed from the laghu , dhrtam , and anudhrtam : ata tala dhruva tala eka tala jhampa tala matya tala rupaka tala triputa tala a laghu has five variants ( called jaathis ) based on the counting pattern . five jaathis times seven tala groups gives thirty-five basic talas , although use of other angas results in a total of 108 talas . improvisation . improvisation in raga is the soul of indian classical music – an essential aspect . '' manodharma sangeetam '' or '' kalpana sangeetam '' ( '' music of imagination '' ) as it is known in carnatic music , embraces several varieties of improvisation . arnold2000 , p17 the main traditional forms of improvisation in carnatic music consist of the following : nettlrussells1998 , pp . 219–220 . alapana niraval pallavi ragam swarakalpana tanam tani avartanam . raga alapana . an alapana , sometimes also called ragam , is the exposition of a raga or tone – a slow improvisation with no rhythm , where the raga acts as the basis of embellishment . in performing alapana , performers consider each raga as an object that has beginnings and endings and consists somehow of sequences of thought . the performer will explore the ragam and touch on its various nuances , singing in the lower octaves first , then gradually moving up to higher octaves , while giving a hint of the song to be performed . theoretically , this ought to be the easiest type of improvisation , since the rules are so few , but in fact , it takes much skill to sing a pleasing , comprehensive ( in the sense of giving a '' feel for the ragam '' ) and , most importantly , original raga alapana . niraval . niraval , usually performed by the more advanced performers , consists of singing one or two lines of text of a song repeatedly , but with a series of melodic improvised elaborations . although niraval consists of extempore melodic variations , generally , the original patterns of duration are maintained ; randel2003 , p562 each word in the lines of text stay set within their original place ( idam ) in the tala cycle . nettlrussells1998 , p232 the lines are then also played at different levels of speed which can include double speed , triple speed , quadruple speed and even sextuple speed . the improvised elaborations are made with a view of outlining the raga , the tempo , and the theme of the composition . kalpanaswaram . kalpanaswaram , also known as swarakalpana , consists of improvising melodic and rhythmic passages using swaras ( solfa syllables ) . nettlrussell1998 , p219 like niraval , nettlrussell1998 , p232 kalpanaswaras are sung to end on a particular swara in the raga of the melody and at a specific place ( idam ) in the tala cycle . nettlrussell1998 , p221 kalpanaswaras have a somewhat predictable rhythmical structure ; solisnettl2009 , p188 the swaras are sung to end on the samam ( the first beat of the rhythmical cycle ) . the swaras can also be sung at the same speed or double the speed of the melody that is being sung , though some artists sing triple-speed phrases too . kalpanaswaram is the most elementary type of improvisation , usually taught before any other form of improvisation . tanam . tanam is one of the most important forms of improvisation , and is integral to ragam tanam pallavi . originally developed for the veena , it consists of expanding the raga with syllables like tha , nam , thom , aa , nom , na , etc . ragam tanam pallavi . ragam , tanam , and pallavi are the principal long form in concerts , and is a composite form of improvisation . as the name suggests , it consists of raga alapana , tanam , and a pallavi line . set to a slow-paced tala , the pallavi line is often composed by the performer . through niraval , the performer manipulates the pallavi line in complex melodic and rhythmic ways . the niraval is followed by kalpanaswarams . tani avartanam . tani avartanam refers to the extended solo that is played by the percussionists in a concert , arnold2000 , 158 and is usually played after the main composition in a concert . the percussionist displays the full range of his skills and rhythmic imagination during the solo , which may take from two to twenty minutes . . compositions . in contrast to hindustani music of the northern part of india , carnatic music is taught and learned through compositions , which encode many intricate musical details , also providing scope for free improvisation . nearly every rendition of a carnatic music composition is different and unique as it embodies elements of the composer 's vision , as well as the musician 's interpretation . a carnatic composition really has two elements , one being the musical element , the other being what is conveyed in the composition . it is probably because of this fact that most carnatic music compositions are composed for singing . in addition to the rich musical experience , each composition brings out the knowledge and personality of the composer , and hence the words are as important as the musical element itself . this poses a special challenge for the musicians because rendering this music does not involve just playing or singing the correct musical notes ; the musicians are expected to understand what was conveyed by the composer in various languages , and sing musical phrases that act to create the effect that was intended by the composer in his/her composition . there are many types/forms of compositions . geethams and swarajatis ( which have their own peculiar composition structures ) are principally meant to serve as basic learning exercises . compositions more commonly associated with indian classical dance and bhakthi have also been increasingly used in the carnatic music repertoire . the performance of the sanskrit sloka , tamil viruttam and telugu padyamu or sisapadya forms are particularly unique . though these forms consist of lyric-based verses , musicians improvise raga phrases in free rhythm , like an alapana , so both the sound value , and the meaning of the text , guide the musician through elaborate melodic improvisations . forms such as the divya prabandha , thevaram and ugabhoga are often performed similarly , however , these forms can also have a set melody and rhythm like the devaranama , javali , padam , thillana and thiruppugazh forms . the most common and significant forms in carnatic music are the varnam and the kriti ( or kirtanam ) . varnam . varnams are short metric pieces which encapsulate the main features and requirements of a raga . nettl2005 , p189 the features and rules of the raga ( also known as the sanchaaraas of a raga ) include how each note of the raga should be stressed , the scale of the raga , and so on . all varnams consist of lyrics , bradnock1992 , p631 as well as swara passages , including a pallavi , an anupallavi , muktayi swaras , a charanam , and chitta swara . known for their complex structure , varnams are a fundamental form in carnatic music . varnams are practised as vocal exercises in multiple speeds by performers of carnatic music , to help develop voice culture , and maintain proper pitch and control of rhythm . in carnatic music concerts , varnams are often performed by musicians as the opening item – acting as a warm up for the musicians , gupta2006 , p68 and as a means of grabbing the attention of the audience . . kriti . carnatic songs ( kritis ) are varied in structure and style , but generally consist of three units : pallavi . this is the equivalent of a refrain in western music , with 1 or 2 & nbsp ; lines . anupallavi . this is the second verse , also as 2 lines . charana . the final ( and longest ) verse that wraps up the song . the charanam usually borrows patterns from the anupallavi . there can be multiple charanas . this kind of song is called a keerthanam or a kriti . there are other possible structures for a kriti , which may in addition include swara passages named chittaswara . a chittaswara consists only of notes , and has no words . still others have a verse at the end of the charana , called the madhyamakāla . it is sung immediately after the charana , but at double speed . prominent composers . there are many composers in carnatic music . purandara dasa ( 1484–1564 ) is referred to as the pitamaha ( the father or grandfather ) of carnatic music as he formulated the basic lessons in teaching carnatic music , and in honour of his significant contribution to carnatic music . he structured graded exercises known as swaravalis and alankaras , and at the same time , introduced the raga mayamalavagowla as the first scale to be learnt by beginners . he also composed gitas ( simple songs ) for novice students . the contemporaries tyagaraja ( 1767– 1847 ) , muthuswami dikshitar , ( 1776–1835 ) and syama sastri , ( 1762–1827 ) are regarded as the trinity of carnatic music because of the quality of syama sastri 's compositions , the varieties of compositions of muthuswami dikshitar , and tyagaraja 's prolific output in composing kritis . prominent composers prior to the trinity of carnatic music include sripadaraja , vyasatirtha , kanakadasa , vadiraja tirtha , arunachala kavi , annamacharya , narayana teertha , vijaya dasa , jagannatha dasa , gopala dasa , bhadrachala ramadas , sadasiva brahmendra and oottukkadu venkata kavi . other composers are swathi thirunal , gopalakrishna bharathi , neelakanta sivan , patnam subramania iyer , mysore vasudevachar , koteeswara iyer , muthiah bhagavathar , subramania bharathiyar , kalyani varadarajan , and papanasam sivan . the compositions of these composers are rendered frequently by artists of today . composers of carnatic music were often inspired by religious devotion and were usually scholars proficient in one or more of the languages kannada , malayalam , sanskrit , tamil , or telugu . they usually included a signature , called a mudra , in their compositions . for example , all songs by tyagaraja ( who composed in telugu ) have the word tyagaraja in them , all songs by muthuswami dikshitar ( who composed in sanskrit ) have the words guruguha in them ; songs by syama sastri ( who composed in telugu ) have the words syama krishna in them ; all songs by purandaradasa ( who composed in kannada ) have the words purandara vittala ; while gopalakrishna bharathi ( who composed in tamil ) used the signature gopalakrishnan in his compositions . papanasam sivan , who has been hailed as the tamil tyagaraja of carnatic music , composed in tamil and sanskrit , and used the signature ramadasan in his compositions . learning . carnatic music is traditionally taught according to the system formulated by purandara dasa . this involves sarali swaras ( graded exercises ) , alankaras ( exercises based on the seven talas ) , geetams or simple songs , and swarajatis . after the student has reached a certain standard , varnams are taught and later , the student learns kritis . it typically takes several years of learning before a student is adept enough to perform at a concert . the learning texts and exercises are more or less uniform across all the south indian states . the learning structure is arranged in increasing order of complexity . the lessons start with the learning of the sarali varisai ( solfege set to a particular raga ) . carnatic music was traditionally taught in the gurukula system , where the student lived with and learnt the art from his guru ( perceptor ) . from the late 20th century onwards , with changes in lifestyles and need for young music aspirants to simultaneously pursue a parallel academic career , this system has found few takers . musicians often take great pride in letting people know about their guru parampara , or the hierarchy of disciples from some prominent ancient musician or composer , to which they belong . people whose disciple-hierarchies are often referred to are tyagaraja , muthuswami dikshitar , syama sastri , swathi thirunal and papanasam sivan , among others . in modern times , it is common for students to visit their gurus daily or weekly to learn music . though new technology has made learning easier with the availability of quick-learn media such as learning exercises recorded on audio cassettes and cds , these are discouraged by most gurus who emphasize that face-to-face learning is best for students . notations . notation is not a new concept in indian music . however , carnatic music continued to be transmitted orally for centuries without being written down . the disadvantage with this system was that if one wanted to learn about a kriti composed , for example , by purandara dasa , it involved the difficult task of finding a person from purandara dasa 's lineage of students . written notation of carnatic music was revived in the late 17th century and early 18th century , which coincided with rule of shahaji ii in tanjore . copies of shahaji 's musical manuscripts are still available at the saraswati mahal library in tanjore and they give us an idea of the music and its form . they contain snippets of solfege to be used when performing the mentioned ragas . melody . unlike classical western music , carnatic music is notated almost exclusively in tonic sol-fa notation using either a roman or indic script to represent the solfa names . past attempts to use the staff notation have mostly failed . indian music makes use of hundreds of ragas , many more than the musical mode in western music . it becomes difficult to write carnatic music using the staff notation without the use of too many accidentals . furthermore , the staff notation requires that the song be played in a certain key . the notions of key and absolute pitch are deeply rooted in western music , whereas the carnatic notation does not specify the key and prefers to use scale degrees ( relative pitch ) to denote notes . the singer is free to choose the actual pitch of the tonic note . in the more precise forms of carnatic notation , there are symbols placed above the notes indicating how the notes should be played or sung ; however , informally this practice is not followed . to show the length of a note , several devices are used . if the duration of note is to be doubled , the letter is either capitalized ( if using roman script ) or lengthened by a diacritic ( in indian languages ) . for a duration of three , the letter is capitalized ( or diacriticized ) and followed by a comma . for a length of four , the letter is capitalized ( or diacriticized ) and then followed by a semicolon . in this way any duration can be indicated using a series of semicolons and commas . however , a simpler notation has evolved which does not use semicolons and capitalization , but rather indicates all extensions of notes using a corresponding number of commas . thus , sā quadrupled in length would be denoted as '' s , , , '' . rhythm . the notation is divided into columns , depending on the structure of the tāḷaṃ . the division between a laghu and a dhrutam is indicated by a। , called a ḍaṇḍā , and so is the division between two dhrutams or a dhrutam and an anudhrutam . the end of a cycle is marked by a॥ , called a double ḍaṇḍā , and looks like a caesura . performance . carnatic music is usually performed by a small ensemble of musicians , who sit on an elevated stage . this usually consists of , at least , a principal performer , a melodic accompaniment , a rhythm accompaniment , and a drone . performances can be musical or musical-dramatic . musical recitals are either vocal , or purely instrumental in nature , while musical-dramatic recitals refer to harikatha . but , irrespective of what type of recital it is , what is featured are compositions which form the core of this genre of music . instrumentation . the tanpura is the traditional drone instrument used in concerts . however , tamburas are increasingly being replaced by sruti boxes , and now more commonly , the electronic tanpura . the drone itself is an integral part of performances and furnishes stability – the equivalent of harmony in western music . in a vocal recital , a concert team may have one or more vocalists as the principal performer ( s ) . instruments , such as the saraswati veena and/or venu flute , can be occasionally found as an accompaniment , but usually , a vocalist is supported by a violin player ( who sits on his/her left ) . the rhythm accompanist is usually a mridangam player ( who sits on the other side , facing the violin player ) . however , other percussion instruments such as the ghatam , kanjira and morsing frequently also accompany the main percussion instrument and play in an almost contrapuntal fashion along with the beats . the objective of the accompanying instruments is far more than following the melody and keeping the beats . the accompaniments form an integral part of every composition presented , and they closely follow and augment the melodic phrases outlined by the lead singer . the vocalist and the violinist take turns while elaborating or while exhibiting creativity in sections like raga , niraval and kalpanaswaram . unlike hindustani music concerts , where an accompanying tabla player can keep beats without following the musical phrases at times , in carnatic music , the accompanists have to follow the intricacies of the composition since there are percussion elements such as eduppu in several compositions . some concerts feature a good bit of interaction with the lead musicians and accompanists exchanging notes , and accompanying musicians predicting the lead musician 's musical phrases . contemporary concert content . a contemporary carnatic music concert ( called a kutcheri ) usually lasts about three hours , and comprises a number of varied compositions . carnatic songs are composed in a particular raga , which means that they do not deviate from the notes in the raga . each composition is set with specific notes and beats , but performers improvise extensively . improvisation occurs in the melody of the composition as well as in using the notes to expound the beauty of the raga . concerts usually begin with a varnam or an invocatory item which will act as the opening piece . the varnam is composed with an emphasis on swaras of the raga , but will also have lyrics , the saahityam . it is lively and fast to get the audience 's attention . an invocatory item may usually follow the varnam . after the varnam and/or invocatory item , the artist sings longer compositions called kirtanas ( commonly referred to as kritis ) . each kriti sticks to one specific raga , although some are composed with more than one raga ; these are known as ragamalika ( a garland of ragas ) . after singing the opening kriti , usually , the performer sings the kalpanaswaram of the raga to the beat . the performer must improvise a string of swaras in any octave according to the rules of the raga and return to beginning of the cycle of beats smoothly , joining the swaras with a phrase selected from the kriti . the violin performs these alternately with the main performer . in very long strings of swara , the performers must calculate their notes accurately to ensure that they stick to the raga , have no awkward pauses or lapses in the beat of the song , and create a complex pattern of notes that a knowledgeable audience can follow . performers then begin the main compositions with a section called alapana exploring the raga . in this , they use the sounds aa , ri , na , ta , etc . instead of swaras to slowly elaborate the notes and flow of the raga . this begins slowly and builds to a crescendo , and finally establishes a complicated exposition of the raga that shows the performer 's skill . all of this is done without any rhythmic accompaniment , or beat . then the melodic accompaniment ( violin or veena ) , expounds the raga . experienced listeners can identify many ragas after they hear just a few notes . with the raga thus established , the song begins , usually with lyrics . in this , the accompaniment ( usually violin , sometimes veena ) performs along with the main performer and the percussion ( such as a mridangam ) . in the next stage of the song , they may sing niraval or kalpanaswaram again . in most concerts , the main item will at least have a section at the end of the item , for the percussion to perform solo ( called the tani avartanam ) . the percussion artists perform complex patterns of rhythm and display their skill . if multiple percussion instruments are employed , they engage in a rhythmic dialogue until the main performer picks up the melody once again . some experienced artists may follow the main piece with a ragam thanam pallavi mid-concert , if they do not use it as the main item . following the main composition , the concert continues with shorter and lighter songs . some of the types of songs performed towards the end of the concerts are tillanas and thukkadas – bits of popular kritis or compositions requested by the audience . every concert that is the last of the day ends with a mangalam , a thankful prayer and conclusion to the musical event . audience . the audience of a typical concert will have some understanding of carnatic music . it is also typical to see the audience tapping out the tala in sync with the artist 's performance . as and when the artist exhibits creativity , the audience acknowledge it by clapping their hands . with experienced artists , towards the middle of the concert , requests start flowing in . the artist usually sings the requests , and it helps in exhibiting the artist 's broad knowledge of the several thousand kritis that are in existence . festivals . various music festivals featuring carnatic music performances are held in india , and throughout the world . with the city of chennai ( then known as madras ) emerging as the locus for carnatic music during the 19th century , its musicians founded the tyagaraja aradhana festival in 1846 . the aradhana festival is an annual death-anniversary celebration of the prolific carnatic music composer , tyagaraja . held in the city of thiruvayaru , thousands of musicians attend the festival to perform his compositions . since its inception , other festivals were started in a similar manner throughout india and abroad , such as the chembai sangeetholsavam in the indian city of guruvayur , and the aradhana in the us city of cleveland . the city of chennai also holds a six-week-long grand '' music season '' , which has been described as the world 's largest cultural event . the music season was started in 1927 , to mark the opening of the madras music academy . it used to be a traditional month-long carnatic music festival , but since then it has also diversified into dance and drama , as well as non-carnatic art forms . some concert organisers also feature their own carnatic music festivals during the season . thousands of performances are held by hundreds of musicians across various venues in the city . the karnataka ganakala parishat is an annual conference of carnatic music , held in february every year , which has lectures and demonstrations in the morning , and performances in the afternoons and evenings . see also . list of carnatic composers list of carnatic instrumentalists trinity of carnatic music . notes . references . kassebaum , gayatri rajapur . ‘ karnatak raga ’ ( 2000 ) . in nettl , b . ( 2009 ) . in viswanathan , t . & cormack , jody ( 1998 ) . in . bibliography . . external links .