Hari Seldon

fictional biography . galactic empire first minister and psychohistorian hari seldon was born in the 10th month of the 11,988th & nbsp ; year of the galactic era ( ge ) ( -79 & nbsp ; foundation era ( fe ) ) and died 12,069 & nbsp ; ge ( 1 & nbsp ; fe ) . according to the encyclopedia galactica ( asimov 's fictitious encyclopedia often cited in his future history novels ) , '' it is thought that seldon 's birthdate , which some consider doubtful , may have been adjusted to match that of cleon 's '' the last galactic emperor of the entun dynasty ( prelude to foundation , p . & nbsp ; 3 ) . in asimov 's saga , the galactic era begins when the galactic empire is founded at an unknown date roughly 11,000 & nbsp ; years in the future : the timeline can be deduced from some hints asimov dropped in his other science fiction works , including the robot and empire series . he was born on the planet helicon in the arcturus sector where his father worked as a tobacco grower in a hydroponics plant . he shows incredible mathematical abilities at a very early age . he also learns martial arts on helicon that later help him on trantor , the principal art being heliconian twisting ( a form seemingly equal parts jujutsu , krav maga , and submission wrestling ) . helicon is said to be '' less notable for its mathematics , and more for its martial arts '' ( prelude to foundation ) . seldon is awarded a ph.d . in mathematics for his work on turbulence at the university of helicon . there he becomes an assistant professor specializing in the mathematical analysis of social structures . seldon is the subject of a biography by gaal dornick . seldon is emperor cleon i 's second and last first minister , the first being eto demerzel/r . daneel olivaw . he is deposed as first minister after cleon i 's assassination . . foundation . using psychohistory , seldon mathematically determines what he calls the seldon plan—a plan to determine the right time and place to set up a new society , one that would replace the collapsing galactic empire by sheer force of social pressure , but over only a thousand-year time span , rather than the ten-to-thirty-thousand-year time span that would normally have been required , and thus reduce the human suffering from living in a time of barbarism . the foundation is placed on terminus , a resource-poor planet entirely populated by scientists and their families . the planet—or so seldon claimed—was originally occupied to create the encyclopedia galactica , a vast compilation of the knowledge of a dying galactic empire . in reality , terminus had a much larger role in his plan , which he had to conceal from its inhabitants at first . prelude to foundation . seldon visits trantor to attend the decennial mathematics convention . he presents a paper which indicates that one could theoretically predict the galactic empire 's future . he is able to show that galactic society can be represented in a simulation simpler than itself ( in a finite number of iterations before the onset of chaotic noise smears discerning sets of events ) . he does so using a technique invented that past century . at first , seldon has no idea how this could be done in practice , and he is fairly confident that no one could actually fulfill the possibility . shortly after his presentation , he becomes a lightning rod for political forces who want to use psychohistory for their own purposes . the rest of the novel tells of his flight , which lasts for approximately a year and which takes him through the complex and variegated world of trantor . during his flight to escape the various political factions , he discovers how psychohistory can be made a practical science . it is in this novel that he meets his future wife dors venabili , future adopted son raych seldon , and future partner yugo amaryl . forward the foundation . this novel is told as a sequence of short stories , as was the case with the original trilogy . they take place at intervals a decade or more apart , and tell the story of hari 's life , starting about ten years after prelude and ending with his death . the stories contrast his increasingly successful professional life with his increasingly unsuccessful personal life . seldon becomes involved in politics when eto demerzel becomes a target for a smear campaign conducted by laskin joranum . he eventually takes demerzel 's place as first minister , despite his reluctance to divide his attention between government and the development of psychohistory . his career comes to an end when cleon i is assassinated by his gardener ( a random event seldon could not have predicted ) and the seizure of power by a military junta . seldon eventually causes the fall of the junta by dropping subtle false hints about what psychohistory foresees , leading to the junta making unpopular decisions . however , an agent of the junta inside seldon 's team , having deduced that dors is a robot , builds a device that ultimately kills her , leaving seldon heartbroken . years later , seldon discovers that his granddaughter wanda has telepathic abilities and begins searching for others like her but fails . raych eventually decides to move his family to the planet santanni , but wanda chooses to remain with her elderly grandfather . however , just after they arrive a rebellion breaks out on the planet and raych is killed in the fighting . his wife and child are lost when their ship disappears . seldon eventually finds stettin palver , another telepath who becomes wanda 's husband and the pair are eventually instrumental in creating the second foundation . seldon mentions two indigenous species of helicon : the lamec and the greti . the first is a hardworking animal , while the latter is dangerous as indicated by the native helicon saying '' if you ride a greti , you find you ca n't get off ; for then it will eat you . '' the saying is similar to the age-old chinese proverb '' he who rides the tiger finds it difficult to dismount '' , and the words lamec and greti are anagrams of camel and tiger , respectively . in his old age , he gains the nickname raven for his dire predictions of the future . contemporary influence . historian ian morris has discussed the applicability and inspiration of hari seldon to statistics and prediction . hari seldon 's name is cited in an article in the economist discussing the use of statistics in epidemiology , the process through which societies change collective political thinking , and '' a general computer model of society . '' seldon is also quite often named in research as a metaphorical literary reference point . there is speculation in forbes that seldon 's psychohistory is being manifested in today 's emergence of big data . in fact , the fictional character of seldon has even been labeled as a '' paradigmatic figure '' in big data research . in 2019 , the term seldonian algorithm was chosen to honor the character in new artificial intelligence techniques intended to avoid undesirable behaviors in decision-making systems . people who credit to hari seldon for the career choices that they made include economist and new york times columnist paul krugman and us politician newt gingrich . french politician jean-luc mélenchon also cites seldon as one of his metapolitics sources of inspiration . . notes . references .