Marcel Moyse

paris conservatoire . marcel moyse moved to paris in 1904 to live with his uncle , joseph moyse . by living with his uncle , marcel observed firsthand the life of the average professional musician . joseph played in the cello section of the lamourreux orchestra , or concerts lamoureux , a highly respected musical institution founded in 1881 by charles lamoureux . marcel depended on his uncle to interpret parisian life and to guide him in determining his place in it . joseph established a plan for his nephew , designed to bring him socially and intellectually up to speed . in the first month marcel could do what he pleased : attend concerts , visit museums , stroll the streets . marcel had told his uncle that he wanted to be a sculptor , so joseph enrolled him in a drawing class at the ecole boule , however joseph also intended to find him a flute teacher . mccutchan , pg . 47 with the help of alfred moyse , joseph purchased a new flute for marcel and immediately assigned him several daily practice sessions of forty-five minutes each , interspersed with fifteen minutes of reading from his extensive personal library . mccutchan , pg . 46 along with this extensive study on flute , joseph took marcel to rehearsals and concerts in order to give marcel an insight of what was possible for the future . in may 1904 , joseph presented marcel to adolphe hennebains . hennebains remarked favorably on the boy 's abilities and accepted him as a pupil , a decision that brought marcel one giant step closer to the conservatoire . mccutchan , pg . 46 after just a few months of studying with hennebains , moyse made swift progress with him and was invited to audit paul taffanel 's class at the paris conservatoire . mccutchan , pg . 55 taffanel was looked upon highly and although by the time moyse had him as a teacher , taffanel was sixty and retired from playing , moyse 's time with taffanel was invaluable . mccutchan , pg . 56 moyse immediately grasped the standard repertoire required for admittance into the conservatoire . under the guidance of hennebains and with the approval of taffanel , moyse auditioned for and won a place in the flute class at the paris conservatoire in the fall of 1905 . mccutchan , pg . 57 in 1906 with only one year of conservatoire training , moyse performed the newly written exam piece , nocturne et allegro scherzando by philippe gaubert . if moyse was nervous , he did not betray it in his performance , with the stretching melody of the nocturne and the skipping , whimsical turns of the scherzo were perfect vehicles for his expressive tone and nimble technique . at the age of seventeen , moyse accepted a first prize and was deemed ready for a professional career . mccutchan , pg . 67 moyse had become one of a handful of flutists in the history of the conservatoire to qualify for a first prize in one year , but his playing lacked polish , and he knew it . soon after leaving the school he approached hennebains for more lessons , but his former teacher turned him down , saying the eighteen-year-old was already an accomplished artist . so moyse went to philippe gaubert , who then played with the opéra and the société des concerts . gaubert , who had been impressed by moyse 's performance of his concours solo , was pleased to accept him as a private student , every friday at five o'clock in the evening . mccutchan , pg . 72 moyse remained with gaubert for about four years . '' gaubert was an instinctive musician , '' moyse recalled . '' he played as naturally as someone walks , stepping out with his left foot , then his right , avoiding all obstacles . the musical instinct of gaubert was like an instinct of the body -- music without thinking about it . '' mccutchan , pg . 74 . career . diligent practice , additional study , and a growing number of performing opportunities in the 1906-07 season absorbed moyse completely . after having studied in lucien capet 's chamber music class , he continued independently to work through the repertoire for solo violin and eventually added cello literature to his practice sessions , '' to try to develop a rich sound , as my uncle had on his cello . '' mccutchan , pg . 74 in 1913 , moyse toured the united states with operatic soprano nellie melba in her private train . soon after , world war i arrived and moyse was rejected by the army because of recurring pneumonia . this was a very difficult time in his life , particularly as moyse was slowly trying to rebuild his health . from the years 1916 to 1918 , nadia boulanger invited moyse to play at her classes on musical analysis . moyse was principal flute soloist in paris 's opéra comique and simultaneously , in order to prove himself , applied for the solo flute position at the paris opera . although offered the position , he turned it down as it would interfere with his frequent visits home to st . amour . moyse 's career continued to flourish , and he became first flutist with the orchestra of the orchestre de la société des concerts du conservatoire . wye , pg . 4 in 1931 , moyse was teaching in geneva when the flutist of the orchestre de la suisse romande , marcel welsch , committed suicide . welsch was scheduled to play bach 's brandenburg concerto no . 5 with the orchestra ; it was blanche honegger who suggested moyse as a replacement . this was the beginning of the famous moyse trio : marcel-the founder and director-playing flute ; blanche , playing violin and viola ; and his son louis , playing both flute and piano . from its conception in 1934 , the moyse trio performed and recorded for the next 20 years . wye , pg . 5 in 1932 , moyse succeeded philippe gaubert as professor at the paris conservatoire and in addition , was appointed professor at the geneva conservatoire from 1933 to 1949 , which entailed a weekly trip to geneva . geneva being fairly close to st . armour , meant more frequent visits to the village where he was born and which he loved . he never failed to visit his adoptive mother when he passed by st . armour . wye , pg . 5 by 1936 , he was on top of the world . he became a chevalier of the legion of honour for his artistic contributions as a musician , and he traveled widely , performing in most of the major european cities , which included several performances and recordings in london . in 1938 , he was invited to play at the tanglewood festival held in the united states for two weeks ; both blanche and louis went with him as the trio also had been invited by arturo toscanini to play on the nbc radio in new york . wye , pg . 5 . the end of an era . in moyse 's last years , he was troubled by various medical problems which necessitated many operations and hospitalizations . marcel moyse died on november 1 , 1984 , at the age of 95 , and was cremated in brattleboro , vermont . his ashes were buried in the cemetery of st . armour church in jura , france , in august , 1985 . wye , pg . 7 the end of his life marked the close of an era . generations of both distinguished and less distinguished flute players have been profoundly influenced by his playing and his teaching . there were several tributes to moyse in remembrance , notably the memorial concert held at the queen elizabeth hall in london on january 6 , 1985 , and shortly after a concert '' in memory of marcel moyse '' held in brattleboro , vermont on february 3 , 1985 . on moyse 's centenary in 1989 , there was the '' marcel moyse centennial celebration '' which took place from the 17th-20th of the may in marlboro and brattleboro , vermont . at the same time , a '' flute celebration '' was presented in london which paid tribute to the great flutist and teacher on his birth date , the 17th of may . there were many memorials and remembrances to moyse in the world 's flute press , and a flourishing marcel moyse society was formed in the u.s.a . wye , pg . 8 . publications . études et éxercises technique ( 1921 ) exercises journaliers ( 1922 ) 24 études de virtuosité d'après czerny ( 1927 ) mécanisme-chromatisme pour flûte ( 1927 ) ; éditions alphonse leduc école de l'articulation ( 1927 ) ; éditions alphonse leduc 25 études mélodique ( var ) ( 1928 ) 12 études de grande virtuosité d'après chopin ( 1928 ) ; éditions alphonse leduc 20 études d'après kreutzer ( 1928 ) 100 études faciles et progressives d'après cramer ( 1928 ) ; 2 volumes 24 petites études mélodique ( var ) ( 1928 ) 48 études de virtuosité ; 1er cahier ; éditions alphonse leduc ( 1933 ) 48 études de virtuosité ; 2e cahier ; éditions alphonse leduc ( 1935 ) de la sonorité ( 1934 ) 25 études journalier ( op-53 ) soussman gammes et arpèges ( scales and arpeggios ) ; éditions alphonse leduc le débutant flûtiste ( 1935 ) 24 caprices-études : boehm op . 26 ( 1938 ) tone development through interpretation 20 exercises et études sur les grandes liaisons . recordings . the complete works of the great flutist – a five cd box set of restored and remastered recordings including his own and andersen studies , flute solos and chamber music . note this is not definitive flute fantastique : fantasie brillante for flute and piano on bizet 's carmen : carnival of the animals : the swan : mélodie for flute and piano : madrigal for flute and piano : souvenir de gand : fantasie mélancolique , op . 1 : suite for orchestra no . 2 in b minor , bwv 1067 : polonaise : suite for orchestra no . 2 in b minor , bwv 1067 : badinerie : andante pastorale et scherzettino : syrinx : andante pastorale et scherzettino : fantasie pastorale hongroise for flute and piano , op . 26 : l'arlésienne : suite no . 1 : 2nd movement , menuet : variations de concert sur le carnaval de venise : orfeo ed euridice : les champs-elysées : by the brook : quartet for strings no . 1 in d major , op . 11 : 2nd movement , andante cantabile : fantaisie for flute and piano marcel plays mozart – flute and harp concerto , concerto 's in d and g , and js bach 's flute piano and violin sonata marcel moyse and marlboro alumni – very rare cd in which moyse conducts mozarts seranade no . 10 in bflat ( grand partita ) for 13 winds . see also . louis moyse . notes . references . marcel moyse society . '' about marcel moyse '' . accessed december 3 , 2014 . mccutchan , ann . marcel moyse : voice of the flute . portland , or : amadeus press , 1994 . dorgeuille , claude . the french flute school london : bingham , 1986 . edward blakeman . '' moyse , marcel . '' grove music online . oxford music online.he played principal flute in various paris orchestras , notably the opéra-comique from 1913 to 1938 , appeared widely as a soloist and made many recordings oxford university press , accessed november 17 , 2014 , wye , trevor . marcel moyse , an extraordinary man : a musical biography . iowa : winzer press , 1993 . archives . the marcel moyse papers are housed in the music division of the new york public library for the performing arts in new york city . the collection includes : rare photographs ; letters to moyse from well-known musicians such as gaubert , ibert , rampal ; manuscripts of unpublished study books ; audio and videotapes of lessons and master classes . external links . marcel moyse on flutehistory.com marcel moyse society