John Edwards

post-senate activities . the day after his concession speech , he announced his wife elizabeth had been diagnosed with breast cancer . edwards told interviewer larry king that he doubted he would return to practice as a trial lawyer and showed no interest in succeeding terry mcauliffe as the democratic national committee chairman . in february 2005 , edwards headlined the '' 100 club '' dinner , a major fundraiser for the new hampshire democratic party . that same month , edwards was appointed as director of the center on poverty , work and opportunity at the university of north carolina at chapel hill for studying ways to move people out of poverty . that fall , edwards toured ten major universities in order to promote '' opportunity rocks ! '' , a program aimed at getting youth involved to fight poverty . on march 21 , 2005 , edwards recorded his first podcast with his wife . several months later , in august , edwards delivered an address to a potential key supporter in the iowa caucus , the afl-cio in waterloo , iowa . in the following month , edwards sent an email to his supporters and announced that he opposed the nomination of judge john g . roberts to become chief justice of the united states . he was also opposed to the nomination of justice samuel alito as an associate justice and judge charles pickering 's appointment to the federal bench . during the summer and fall of 2005 , he visited homeless shelters and job training centers and spoke at events organized by acorn , the naacp and the seiu . he spoke in favor of an expansion of the earned income tax credit ; in favor of a crackdown on predatory lending ; an increase in the capital gains tax rate ; housing vouchers for minority group ( to integrate upper-income neighborhoods ) ; and a program modeled on the works progress administration to rehabilitate the gulf coast following hurricane katrina . in greene county , north carolina , he unveiled the pilot program for college for everyone , an educational measure he promised during his presidential campaign , in which prospective college students would receive a scholarship for their first year in exchange for ten hours of work a week . the college for everyone program was canceled in july 2008 . edwards was co-chair of a council on foreign relations task force on russia-united states relations alongside republican jack kemp , a former congressman , cabinet official and vice presidential nominee . the task force issued its report in march 2006 . on july 12 , the international herald tribune published a related op-ed by edwards and kemp . edwards , john . ( december 31 , 1969 ) we need to be tough with russia – . international herald tribune . retrieved on june 3 , 2011 . in october 2005 , edwards joined the wall street investment firm fortress investment group as a senior adviser and consultant , a position for which a close aide reported he received an annual salary of 500,000 . fortress owned a major stake in green tree servicing llc , which rose to prominence in the 1990s selling subprime loans to mobile-home owners and now services subprime loans originated by others , but in an interview edwards said he was unaware of this . subprime loans allow buyers with poor credit histories to be funded , but they charge higher rates because of the risk , and sometimes carry hidden fees and increased charges over time . in august 2007 , the wall street journal reported that a portion of the edwards family 's assets were invested in fortress investment group , which had , in turn , invested a portion of its assets in subprime mortgage lenders , some of which had foreclosed on the homes of hurricane katrina victims . upon learning of fortress 's investments , edwards divested funds and stated that he would try to help the affected families . edwards later helped set up an acorn-administered '' louisiana home rescue fund '' seeded with 100,000 , much of it from his pocket , to provide loans and grants to the families who were foreclosed on by fortress-owned lenders . edwards is now a personal injury lawyer in pitt county , north carolina . . political campaigns . electoral history . north carolina united states senate election , 1998 ( democratic primary ) john edwards – 277,468 ( 51.39 % ) d.g . martin – 149,049 ( 27.59 % ) ella butler scarborough – 55,486 ( 10.28 % ) north carolina united states senate election , 1998 john edwards ( d ) – 1,029,237 ( 51.15 % ) lauch faircloth ( r ) ( inc . ) – 945,943 ( 47.01 % ) barbara howe ( lib . ) – 36,963 ( 1.84 % ) 2004 democratic presidential primaries john kerry – 9,930,497 ( 60.98 % ) john edwards – 3,162,337 ( 19.42 % ) howard dean – 903,460 ( 5.55 % ) dennis kucinich – 620,242 ( 3.81 % ) wesley clark – 547,369 ( 3.36 % ) al sharpton – 380,865 ( 2.34 % ) joe lieberman – 280,940 ( 1.73 % ) 2004 united states presidential election george w . bush/dick cheney ( r ) ( inc . ) – 62,040,610 ( 50.7 % ) and 286 electoral votes ( 31 states carried ) john kerry/john edwards ( d ) – 59,028,111 ( 48.3 % ) and 251 electoral votes ( 19 states and d.c . carried ) john ewards ( d ) – 1 electoral vote ( faithless elector ) 2008 democratic presidential primaries barack obama – 17,869,542 ( 48.2 % ) hillary clinton – 17,717,698 ( 47.8 % ) john edwards – 1,006,289 ( 2.65 % ) . 2004 presidential campaign . in 2000 , edwards unofficially began his presidential campaign when he began to seek speaking engagements in iowa , the site of the nation 's iowa caucuses . on january 2 , 2003 , edwards began fundraising without officially campaigning by forming an exploratory committee . on september 15 , 2003 , edwards fulfilled a promise he made a year earlier as a guest on the daily show with jon stewart to unofficially announce his intention to seek the 2004 democratic presidential nomination . the next morning , edwards made the announcement officially from his hometown . he declined to run for reelection to the senate in order to focus on his presidential run . edwards 's campaign was chaired by north carolina democratic activist ed turlington . as edwards had been building support essentially since his election to the senate , he led the initial campaign fundraising , amassing over 7 million during the first quarter of 2003 – more than half of which came from individuals associated with the legal profession , particularly edwards 's fellow trial lawyers , their families , and employees . hill news , may 7 , 2003 edwards 's stump speech spoke of '' two americas '' , with one composed of the wealthy and privileged , and the other of the hard-working common man , causing the media to often characterize edwards as a populist . edwards struggled to gain substantial support , but his poll numbers began to rise steadily weeks before the iowa caucuses . in these he had a surprising second-place finish with the support of 32 % of delegates , behind only john kerry 's 39 % and ahead of former front-runner howard dean at 18 % . one week later in the new hampshire primary , edwards finished in fourth place behind kerry , dean and wesley clark , with 12 % . during the february 3 primaries , edwards won the south carolina primary , south carolina democratic delegation 2004 . thegreenpapers.com . retrieved on june 3 , 2011 . lost to clark in oklahoma , and lost to kerry in the other states . edwards garnered the second-largest number of second-place finishes , again falling behind clark . left dean withdrew from the contest , leaving edwards the only major challenger to kerry . in the wisconsin primary on february 17 , edwards finished second to kerry with 34 % of the vote . he largely avoided attacking kerry until a february 29 , 2004 , debate in new york , in which he characterized him as a '' washington insider '' and mocked kerry 's plan to form a committee to examine trade agreements . in the super tuesday primaries on march 2 , kerry finished well ahead in nine of the ten states voting , and edwards 's campaign ended . in georgia , edwards finished only slightly behind kerry but , failing to win a single state , chose to withdraw from the race . he announced his official withdrawal at a press conference in raleigh , north carolina , on march 3 . edwards 's withdrawal made major media outlets relatively early on the evening of super tuesday , at about 6:30 & nbsp ; pm cst , before polls had closed in california and before caucuses in minnesota had even begun . it is thought that the withdrawal influenced many people in minnesota to vote for other candidates , which may partially account for the strong minnesota finish of dennis kucinich . edwards did win the presidential straw poll conducted by the independence party of minnesota . after withdrawing from the race , he went on to win the april 17 democratic caucuses in his home state of north carolina , north carolina democratic delegation 2004 . thegreenpapers.com . retrieved on june 3 , 2011 . making him the only democratic candidate besides kerry to win nominating contests in two states in 2004 . 2004 vice presidential nomination . on july 6 , 2004 , kerry announced that edwards would be his running mate ; the decision was widely hailed in public opinion polls and by democratic leaders . though many democrats supported edwards 's nomination , others criticized the selection for edwards 's perceived lack of experience . in the vice presidential debate , dick cheney told edwards they had never met because of edwards 's frequent absences from the senate , but that was later proven to be incorrect . videotape later surfaced of cheney and edwards shaking hands off-camera during a taping of meet the press on april 8 , 2001 . on february 1 , 2001 , cheney thanked edwards by name and sat with him during a senate prayer breakfast . however , george w . bush 's campaign spokesman steve schmidt described the event as an '' inconsequential meeting '' . on january 8 , 2003 , they met when john edwards accompanied then-senator elizabeth dole to her swearing-in while cheney was president of the senate . kerry 's campaign advisor bob shrum later reported in time magazine that kerry said he wished he had never picked edwards , and the two have since stopped speaking to each other . edwards said in his concession speech , '' you can be disappointed , but you can not walk away . this fight has just begun . '' . 2008 presidential campaign . image : john edwards pittsburgh 2007.jpg thumb right john edwards campaigning in pittsburgh , pennsylvania on labor day in 2007 on december 28 , 2006 , john edwards officially announced his candidacy for president in the 2008 election from the yard of a home in new orleans , louisiana , that was being rebuilt after hurricane katrina destroyed it . edwards stated that his main goals were eliminating poverty , fighting global warming , providing universal health care , and withdrawing troops from iraq . national polls had edwards placing third among the democratic field beginning in january 2007 , behind senator hillary clinton and senator barack obama . by july 2007 , the edwards campaign had raised 23 million from nearly 100,000 donors , placing him behind obama and clinton in fundraising . edwards was first to boycott a fox news-sponsored presidential debate in march 2007 . fox news boss hits edwards ' boycott cbs news , march 9 , 2007 hillary clinton , bill richardson , and barack obama followed suit . image : edwardsraittbrownecoyote.jpg thumb john edwards with bonnie raitt , jackson browne , and peter coyote at a campaign event in manchester , new hampshire on january 3 , 2008 , in the iowa caucuses , the first contest of the nomination process , edwards placed second with 29.75 % of the vote to obama ( 37.58 % ) , with clinton coming in third with 29.47 % of the vote . online casino strategies . iowacaucusresults.com . retrieved on june 3 , 2011 . on january 8 , edwards placed a distant third in the new hampshire democratic primary with just under 17 % ( 48,818 votes ) . on january 26 , edwards again placed third in the primary in south carolina – his birth state – which he had carried in 2004 , and he placed third in the non-binding january 29 vote in florida . image : john edwards in new orleans 2008.jpg left thumb at the musicians ' village in new orleans , edwards announced the suspension of his campaign . on january 30 , 2008 , following his primary and caucus losses , edwards announced that he was suspending his campaign for the presidency . he did not initially endorse either clinton or obama , saying they both had pledged to carry forward his central campaign theme of ending poverty in america . in april 2008 , he stated that he would not accept the 2008 vice presidential slot if asked . on may 14 , 2008 , edwards officially endorsed senator obama at a rally in grand rapids , michigan . on june 15 , 2008 , edwards stepped back from his initial outright denial of interest in the position of vice president , saying , '' i 'd take anything he asks me to think about seriously , but obviously this is something that i 've done and it 's not a job i 'm seeking . '' on june 20 , 2008 , the associated press reported that according to a member of the congressional black caucus , the names of edwards and sam nunn were on obama 's vice presidential shortlist . ultimately , then-senator joe biden of delaware was tapped to become obama 's running mate . personal life . family . while at unc , he met elizabeth anania . they married in 1977 and had four children ( wade in 1979 , cate in 1982 , emma claire in 1998 , and jack in 2000 ) . edwards also has a child out of wedlock , born in 2008 , named frances quinn hunter , conceived with his former mistress rielle hunter . edwards denied being the father for over two years before finally admitting to it in 2010 . wade was killed in a car accident when strong winds swept his jeep off a north carolina highway in 1996 . three weeks before his death , he was honored by first lady hillary clinton at the white house as one of the 10 finalists in an essay contest sponsored by the national endowment for the humanities and the voice of america for an essay he wrote on entering the voting booth with his father . wade , accompanied by his parents and sister , went on to meet north carolina sen . jesse helms , who later entered wade 's essay and his obituary into the congressional record . edwards and his wife began the wade edwards foundation in their son 's memory ; the purpose of the non-profit organization is '' to reward , encourage , and inspire young people in the pursuit of excellence . '' the foundation funded the wade edwards learning lab at wade 's high school , needham b . broughton high school in raleigh , along with scholarship competitions and essay awards . on november 3 , 2004 , elizabeth edwards revealed that she had been diagnosed with breast cancer . she was treated by chemotherapy and radiotherapy , and continued to work within the democratic party and her husband 's one america committee . on march 22 , 2007 , during his campaign for the 2008 democratic nomination for the presidency , edwards and his wife announced that her cancer had returned ; she was diagnosed with stage iv breast cancer , with newly discovered metastasis to the bone and possibly to her lung . they said that the cancer was '' no longer curable , but is completely treatable '' and that they planned to continue campaigning together with an occasional break when she required treatment . in june 2010 , elizabeth published a book called resilience . her book is about the struggles of her marriage and how she was affected by her husband 's affair . in the book , elizabeth talks about how long she was in the dark about the affair and how many times her husband , john , lied about the details of the affair . she never addresses john 's mistress by name but calls her a '' parasitic groupie '' and claims that she is pathetic . elizabeth also opens up about how she tried to forgive her husband after she first learned of the affair but struggled to find forgiveness when he continued to lie . after edwards ' january 21 , 2010 , admission that he fathered a child with his mistress , elizabeth legally separated from him and intended to file for divorce after a mandatory one-year waiting period . on december 7 , 2010 , elizabeth died of metastatic breast cancer , aged 61 . . residence . in washington . d.c . he lived in embassy row , 2215 30th street . hungarian rhapsody , mary mewborn , washington life . in 2004 , he sold his house to the hungarian embassy to the united states . five hostages , lawrence wright , july 6 , 2015 , the new yorker . campaign releases edwards 's earnings , michael moss and kate zernike , july 10 , 2004 , the new york times . . extramarital affair . in october 2007 , the national enquirer began a series of reports alleging an adultery between edwards and former campaign worker rielle hunter . by july 2008 , several news media outlets speculated that edwards ' chances for the vice presidency as well as other positions such as the attorney general were harmed by the allegations , which now included that he fathered a child with hunter and had visited her and the baby girl at the beverly hilton hotel in beverly hills , california . however , the story was not widely covered by the press for some time , until , after initially denying the allegations , edwards admitted the affair . on january 21 , 2010 , john edwards issued a press release to admit that he fathered hunter 's child . in an august 8 , 2008 , statement , and an interview with bob woodruff of abc news , edwards admitted the affair with hunter in 2006 , but denied being the father of her child . he acknowledged that he had been dishonest in denying the entire enquirer story , admitting that some of it was true , but said that the affair ended long before the time of the child 's conception . he further said he was willing to take a paternity test , but hunter responded that she would not be party to a dna test '' now or in the future '' . lois romano and howard kurtz , '' edwards 's ex-lover rejects idea of dna test : hunter requests privacy for herself , her child '' , the washington post , august 10 , 2008 initially , campaign aide andrew young claimed that he , not edwards , was the child 's father . young later renounced that statement , instead alleging that edwards always knew he was the child 's father and had pleaded with him to falsely accept responsibility . young further claimed to have set up private meetings between edwards and hunter , and that edwards once calmed an anxious hunter by promising her that after his wife died he would marry her in a rooftop ceremony in new york with an appearance by the dave matthews band . young also maintains that edwards asked him to '' get a doctor to fake the dna results . and to steal a diaper from the baby so he could secretly do a dna test to find out if this was indeed his child . '' on february 2 , 2010 , young released a book detailing the affair . young also began working with aaron sorkin on a movie about the affair based on the book the politician . on february 23 , 2012 , an orange county , nc , judge ruled that young and his wife could not publicize the movie . the judge also ruled that an alleged '' sex tape '' of edwards and hunter be destroyed by the court . the judge also allowed only the materials already in the public domain to be used for public purposes . all other photos and materials not yet released can be used for family purposes only . in response to the scandal involving edwards ' extramarital affair and attempts to cover it up , he has stated '' i am a sinner , but not a criminal . '' in may 2009 , newspapers reported that edwards ' campaign was being investigated for conversion of campaign money to personal use related to the affair . edwards said that the campaign was complying with the inquiry . the relevant us attorney refused to comment . in the same month , george stephanopoulos of abc news reported that members of edwards ' staff had told him that they had planned a '' doomsday strategy '' to derail edwards ' campaign if he got close to the nomination . joe trippi , a senior advisor to the campaign , said the report was '' complete bullshit '' . in august 2009 , rielle hunter appeared before the grand jury investigating this matter . on march 15 , 2010 , hunter broke her silence during an interview with gq magazine and provided new details about the affair . in march 2011 , voicemail messages allegedly left by john edwards were obtained , which young says prove that edwards arranged the cover-up of his affair with hunter . reports surfaced in late 2011 in the national enquirer and radaronline.com that edwards asked his former mistress to move into his north carolina home , where he had once lived with his wife . rielle hunter announced her breakup with edwards on the same day she released a book about their relationship in 2012 . on february 9 , 2016 , hunter spoke on steve harvey in her first televised interview in almost five years . hunter , then 51 , said that the couple were actually still together up until february 2015 . indictment and trial . on may 24 , 2011 , abc news and the new york times reported that the u.s department of justice 's public integrity section had conducted a two-year investigation into whether edwards had used more than 1 million in political donations to hide his affair and planned to pursue criminal charges for alleged violations of campaign finance laws . on june 3 , 2011 , edwards was indicted and charged with four counts of illegal campaign contributions and one count of false statements . hill , james . ( may 24 , 2011 ) john edwards : us green-lights prosecution for alleged campaign law violations tied to affair cover-up – abc news . abcnews.go.com . retrieved on june 3 , 2011 . on june 3 , 2011 , edwards was indicted by a federal grand jury in north carolina on six felony charges , including four counts of collecting illegal campaign contributions , one count of conspiracy , and one count of making false statements . indictment of edwards . famousdockets.com . retrieved 7/8/2011 after postponing the start of the trial while edwards was treated for a heart condition in february 2012 , judge catherine eagles of the u.s . district court for the middle district of north carolina scheduled jury selection to begin on april 12 , 2012 . edwards 's trial began on april 23 , 2012 , as he faced up to 30 years in prison and a 1.5 million fine . in a related development , on march 13 , 2012 , the federal election commission ruled that edwards ' campaign must repay 2.1 million in matching federal funds . edwards 's lawyers claimed the money was used , and that the campaign did not receive all the funds to which it was entitled , but the commission rejected the arguments . twelve jurors and four alternates were seated , and opening arguments began april 23 , 2012 . closing arguments took place may 17 , and the case went to the jury the next day . on may 31 , 2012 , edwards was found not guilty on count 3 , illegal use of campaign funding ( contributions from rachel lambert mellon ) , while mistrials were declared on all other counts against him . on june 13 , 2012 , the justice department announced that it dropped the charges and would not attempt to retry edwards . . return to law practice . edwards returned to the practice of law after his political career ended . together with attorneys david kirby and william bystrynski , he founded the law firm edwards kirby in raleigh . his daughter cate is the managing attorney of the san diego office of the firm . vidant health and pitt county , north carolina , was the venue for edwards ' 2014 return to the malpractice arena . . bibliography . four trials ( with john auchard ) ( new york : simon and schuster , 2003 ) home : the blueprints of our lives ( new york : collins , 2006 ) ending poverty in america : how to restore the american dream , co-editor ( new press , 2007 ) . see also . list of federal political sex scandals in the united states two americas 2008 united states presidential election 2008 democratic party presidential candidates opinion polling for the democratic party ( united states ) presidential primaries , 2008 democratic presidential debates , 2008 . references . external links . edwards kirby law firm edwards 's law firm , in raleigh nc john edwards for president official campaign website john edwards '08 blog official campaign blog ; record ; speeches and statements july 27 , 2004 , democratic national convention speech : transcript text october 5 , 2004 , vice presidential debate : transcript text , audio and video january 18 , 2008 , presidential campaign speech in los angeles , video - -