Treaty of Paris (1763)

exchange of territories . during the war , great britain had conquered the french colonies of canada , guadeloupe , saint lucia , martinique , dominica , grenada , saint vincent and the grenadines , and tobago , the french '' factories '' ( trading posts ) in india , the slavery station at gorée , the sénégal river and its settlements , and the spanish colonies of manila ( in the philippines ) and havana ( in cuba ) . france had captured minorca and british trading posts in sumatra , while spain had captured the border fortress of almeida in portugal , and colonia del sacramento in south america . in the treaty , most of the territories were restored to their original owners , but britain was allowed to keep considerable gains . france and spain restored all their conquests to britain and portugal . britain restored manila and havana to spain , and guadeloupe , martinique , saint lucia , gorée , and the indian factories to france . in return , france recognized the sovereignty of britain over canada , dominica , grenada , saint vincent and the grenadines , and tobago . '' his most christian majesty cedes and guaranties to his said britannick majesty , in full right , canada , with all its dependencies , as well as the island of cape breton , and all the other islands and coasts in the gulph and river of st . lawrence , and in general , every thing that depends on the said countries , lands , islands , and coasts , with the sovereignty , property , possession , and all rights acquired by treaty , or otherwise , which the most christian king and the crown of france have had till now over the said countries , lands , islands , places , coasts , and their inhabitants '' – article iv of the france also ceded the eastern half of french louisiana to britain ; that is , the area from the mississippi river to the appalachian mountains . '' ( … ) it is agreed , that … the confines between the dominions of his britannick majesty and those of his most christian majesty , in that part of the world , shall be fixed irrevocably by a line drawn along the middle of the river mississippi , from its source to the river iberville , and from hence , by a line drawn along the middle of this river , and the lakes maurepas and pontchartrain to the sea ; and for this purpose , the most christian king cedes in full right , and guaranties to his britannick majesty the river and port of mobile , and every thing which he possesses , or ought to possess , on the left side of the river mississippi , except the town of new orleans and the island in which it is situated , which shall remain to france , ( … ) '' — article vii of the ) but retained a logwood-cutting colony there . britain confirmed the right of its new subjects to practise catholicism . france lost all of its territory in mainland north america except for the louisiana ( new france ) west of the mississippi river . france retained fishing rights off newfoundland and the two small islands of saint pierre and miquelon , where its fishermen could dry their catch . in turn , france gained the return of its sugar colony , guadeloupe , which it considered more valuable than canada . voltaire had notoriously dismissed acadia as quelques arpents de neige ( a few acres of snow ) . louisiana question . the treaty of paris is frequently noted as france giving louisiana to spain . however , the agreement to transfer had occurred with the treaty of fontainebleau ( 1762 ) , but it was not publicly announced until 1764 . the treaty of paris gave britain the east side of the mississippi ( including baton rouge , louisiana , which was to be part of the british territory of west florida ) . new orleans , on the east side , remained in french hands ( albeit temporarily ) . the mississippi river corridor in what is now louisiana was later reunited following the louisiana purchase in 1803 and the adams–onís treaty in 1819 . the 1763 treaty states in article vii : . canada question . british perspective . the war was fought all over the world , but the british began the war over french possessions in north america . monod p 197–98 after a long debate of the relative merits of guadeloupe , which produced £6 million a year in sugar , and canada , which was expensive to keep , great britain decided to keep canada for strategic reasons and to return guadeloupe to france . the war had weakened france , but it was still a european power . british prime minister lord bute wanted a peace that would not push france towards a second war . gough p 95 although the protestant british worried about having so many roman catholic subjects , great britain wanted neither to antagonize france by expulsion or forced conversion nor french settlers to leave canada to strengthen other french settlements in north america . calloway p 113–14 . french perspective . unlike lord bute , the french foreign minister , the duke of choiseul , expected a return to war . however , france needed peace to rebuild . france preferred to keep its caribbean possessions with their profitable sugar trade , rather than the vast canadian lands , which had been a financial burden on france . french diplomats believed that without france to keep the americans in check , the colonists might attempt to revolt . in canada , france wanted open emigration for those , such as nobility , who would not swear allegiance to the british crown . calloway p 114 finally , france required protection for roman catholics in north america . text relating castle . article iv stated : . dunkirk question . during the negotiations that led to the treaty , a major issue of dispute between britain and france had been over the status of the fortifications of the french coastal settlement of dunkirk . the british had long feared that it would be used as a staging post to launch a french invasion of britain . under the 1713 treaty of utrecht , the british had forced france to concede extreme limits on those fortifications . the 1748 treaty of aix-la-chapelle had allowed more generous terms , dull p.5 and france constructed greater defences for the town . the 1763 treaty had britain force france to accept the 1713 conditions and to demolish the fortifications that had been constructed since then . dull p.194–243 that would be a continuing source of resentment to france , which would eventually have that clause overturned in the 1783 treaty of paris , which brought an end to the american revolutionary war . reactions . when lord bute became the british prime minister in 1762 , he pushed for a resolution to the war with france and spain since he feared that great britain could not govern all of its newly-acquired territories . in what winston churchill would later term a policy of '' appeasement , '' bute returned some colonies to spain and france in the negotiations . despite a desire for peace , many in the british parliament opposed the return of any gains made during the war . notable among the opposition was former prime minister william pitt , the elder , who warned that the terms of the treaty would lead to further conflicts once france and spain had time to rebuild and later said , '' the peace was insecure because it restored the enemy to her former greatness . the peace was inadequate , because the places gained were no equivalent for the places surrendered . '' the treaty passed by 319 votes to 65 . the treaty of paris took no consideration of great britain 's battered continental ally , frederick ii of prussia , who was forced to negotiate peace terms separately in the treaty of hubertusburg . for decades after the signing of the treaty of paris , frederick ii decried it as a british betrayal . the american colonists were disappointed by the protection of roman catholicism in the treaty of paris because of their own strong protestant faith . monod p . 201 some have called it one reason for the breakdown of american–british relations that led to the american revolution . . effects on french canada . the article provided for unrestrained emigration for 18 months from canada . however , passage on british ships was expensive . a total of 1,600 people left new france by that clause but only 270 french canadians . some have claimed that to be part of british policy to limit emigration . article iv of the treaty allowed roman catholicism to be practiced in canada . conklin p 34 george iii agreed to allow catholicism within the laws of great britain . british laws then included various test acts to prevent governmental , judicial and bureaucratic appointments from going to roman catholics . roman catholics were believed to be agents of the jacobite pretenders to the throne , who normally resided in france and were supported by the french regime . this was relaxed in quebec to some degree , but top positions such as governorships were still held by anglicans . article iv has also been cited as the basis for quebec often having its unique set of laws that are different from the rest of canada . there was a general constitutional principle in the united kingdom to allow colonies taken through conquest to continue their own laws . conklin p 35 that was limited by royal prerogative , and the monarch could still choose to change the accepted laws in a conquered colony . however , the treaty eliminated that power because by a different constitutional principle since terms of a treaty were considered paramount . in practice , roman catholics could become jurors in inferior courts in quebec and argue based on principles of french law . calloway p 120 however , the judge was british , and his opinion on french law could be limited or hostile . if the case was appealed to a superior court , neither french law nor roman catholic jurors were allowed . calloway p 121 many french residents of what are now canada 's maritime provinces , called acadians , were deported during the great expulsion ( 1755–63 ) . after the signing of the peace treaty guaranteed some rights to roman catholics , some acadians returned to canada . however , they were no longer welcome in english nova scotia . price , p 136 they were forced into new brunswick , which is a bilingual province today as a result of that relocation . price p 136–137 much land previously owned by france was now owned by britain , and the french people of quebec felt greatly betrayed at the french concession . commander-in-chief of the british jeffrey amherst noted that , '' many of the canadians consider their colony to be of utmost consequence to france & can not be convinced . that their country has been conceded to great britain . '' calloway p 113 . see also . france in the seven years ' war great britain in the seven years ' war royal proclamation of 1763 list of treaties . references . further reading . . external links . treaty of paris profile and videos – chickasaw.tv the treaty of paris and its consequences entry on the treaty of paris from the canadian encyclopedia treaty of paris at the avalon project of the yale law school