Footrot Flats

history . footrot flats was initially rejected for syndication by both the new zealand herald and the auckland star . it was first accepted in 1976 by mike robson , editor of wellington 's the evening post . the strip appeared in hundreds of newspapers in australasia and also gained an international following , especially in denmark . the strip 's leading human character , wal footrot , is based on murray ball 's cousin arthur waugh , who was a sheep shearer around the time of the strip 's inception and went on to own a 2,100-hectare farm situated east of pahiatua in the southeastern north island of new zealand . ball cited different reasons for quitting the strip , including the death of his own dog , and his displeasure with the direction of new zealand politics . among the strip 's fans were peanuts creator charles schulz and garfield creator jim davis . . main characters . thumb ; '' the dog '' : the main character of the series , a border collie , he considers himself tough and brave , but is quite soft and sometimes cowardly . his real name , chosen by wal 's aunt dolly , has never been revealed . he despises this '' refined , aristocratic name '' and goes to great lengths to censor it . wal always calls him '' dog '' , gaining his loyal devotion . the dog was born on october 13 at aunt dolly 's holiday home for cats and raised by a persian cat named ninky poo before being given to wal . he is a competent sheepdog and is often put to work to guard things or get rid of rats or pigs , but has a considerable independent streak . he is fond of rabbits , afraid of hares and dislikes seeing trees being cut down . he has several alter egos : '' the scarlet manuka '' who attempts to 'liberate ' cricket balls , '' mitey iron paw '' , and '' the grey ghost of the forest '' . the dog has claimed to have the following commendations : v.c . ( very cute ) , d.s.o . ( does n't steal offal ) , and b.a.r ( what sheep do ) , along with the alias of '00dog ' ( licensed to be kind but fair ) . he usually attempts to act as a 'chaperone ' on wal 's dates with '' cheeky '' hobson , leading to disaster for wal . ; wallace cadwallader '' wal '' footrot : wallace footrot was born on 26 january in northern manawatu . he was educated at apiti primary school and later foxton agricultural high , where he excelled at tractor reversing and rooster imitations . wallace established an outstanding relationship with muscovy ducks , but unfortunately failed completely with geese . indeed , he seemed to have an uncanny knack of irritating them . wallace took a full part in all school activities . he displayed a promising right cross during his time in the front row of the 2nd xv , but was unable to transfer this ability to the boxing ring . he rather let the side down during the inter-school championships by throwing in the sponge , which knocked the referee 's glasses crooked . he was disqualified . on leaving school , he acquired of swamp between the ureweras and the sea . he is unmarried , although he has an interest in darlene '' cheeky '' hobson , who works as a hairdresser in raupo . wal plays rugby union for raupo , where he is a hooker and dreams of representing new zealand 's national team , the all blacks . the raupo xv often play against the mill team , whose star player is wal 's sleazy neighbour , 'spit ' murphy , who also competes for cheeky 's affections . ; socrates '' cooch '' windgrass : wal 's neighbour and best friend . cooch has compassion for all living creatures and nature , and thus has a natural affinity with animals . but he is no vegetarian . his family owns 1,000 acres of swamp , tussock , scrub , forest and mudflat . a cabbage tree grows through his verandah floor , while a puriri tree has pushed his house crooked . cooch owns the dog 's girlfriend jess and a pet magpie called pew . cooch never drives a tractor , preferring to plod along on his clydesdales . he helps wal with fencing , shearing and other farm jobs . he is unmarried but has a crush on his cousin kathy . murray ball describes cooch as 'eccentric , not an idiot ! ' , having based the character on two people he knows . ; dolores monrovia godwit '' aunt dolly '' footrot : wal 's aunt ( by marriage ) . she was born in cambridge , waikato , and was the second daughter of englishman edward george bogg and new zealander fiona godwit symington . she was educated at lady hinema sacks-grenville school for young ladies and was a prefect , captain of hockey , lacrosse , and boxing . she married beneath her station to arch ' '' toey '' footrot , a barber and unlicensed bookie , who was wal 's father 's older brother . unfortunately , toey ran off to australia with '' a dumb but decorative darts stall owner with masses of black hair '' . aunt dolly 's first cat was archibald ii . she owns a cat home ( where dog was born ) on prince phillip drive in tauranga . she is conservatism , reveres the british monarchy , always addresses people by their proper names , and she disapproves of wal 's relationship with cheeky hobson . beneath her strictness she has a kind heart and takes to mothering abandoned lambs in the winter . dog despises her for giving him his name . ; darlene '' cheeky '' hobson : wal 's girlfriend . she is the proprietor of la parisienne hairdressing salon in raupo . cheeky is despised by the dog , who is always looking for ways to come between her and wal . she has two younger sisters , belinda ( book 10 ) and avril ( books 14 and 24 ) , also both disliked by the dog . near the end of the strip 's run , cheeky and wal become engaged , much to the dismay of the dog and aunt dolly , but at the last minute cheeky dumps wal to move to los angeles with a male stripper . she is first mentioned in wal 's mini-biography at the start of book 1 ( september 1978 ) , but does not appear until book 3 ( july 1980 ) . ; horse : a large , fierce and practically invulnerable tomcat , based on a cat that lived on murray ball 's farm . he is a menace to the dog and the other characters , resisting attempts to be tamed . he has a girlfriend ( fred , first mentioned in book 9 , first appears in book 11 ) who has tattooed ears , lives with a biker gang and loves leather . he occasionally fathers kittens . horse '' spoke '' infrequently in the earlier comics , but subsequently communicated via actions and yowls . horse has saved the dog and jess from the local rat population at the murphy farm . book 7 is dedicated to the real horse and begins with an elegy , followed by a eulogy penned by murray ball to commemorate the irascible cat 's passing . first appearance : book 2 ( august 1979 ) . ; janice '' pongo '' footrot : wal 's niece , daughter of rex footrot . she ages during the books . she starts off as a stereotypical little girl , dressing up the dog , putting him in a pram and playing dolls ; however , she slowly turns into a strong feminist . despite being a '' town '' girl and attending boarding school , she is unafraid of wildlife and assists with mustering and other farm work . she insists her nickname pongo derives from her ping pong skills , not because she ponged as a baby . first appearance : book 3 ( july 1980 ) . ; prince charles : a very spoiled welsh corgi owned by aunt dolly . has a higher view on life from listening to aunt dolly and living indoors . often there are '' class '' clashes between him and dog . he sometimes lusts after jess but is even more fond of fine canine cuisine . in book 12 , he is asked to '' service '' a female corgi named penelope penrose iv , but fails to rise to the occasion , leaving major to do the job at night . the dog usually has to explain to prince charles the rougher aspects of farm life , like livestock mating and maggots eating mutton without gravy . prince charles is territorial when on his own turf . first appearance : book 4 ( april 1981 ) . ; rangi wiremu waka jones : a local boy who often appears on the farm to give wal a hand , he also plays with pongo when she visits during holidays . despite his short stature , he is a skilled rugby player , often getting the better of wal . rangi 's father is an abattoir slaughterman and his mother teaches at raupo school . in his first appearance , rangi considers skinning the dog to make a fur coat . as a testimony to murray ball 's skill as an artist , the character of rangi grew up over the years , appearing slightly older in each book from being a little kid to a teenager . first appearance : book 4 ( april 1981 ) . the characters are invariably known by their nicknames , such as cooch , pongo , rangi , and aunt dolly . however , aunt dolly never uses the nicknames and always addresses them by their proper names . minor characters . ; jess : cooch 's dog . she is the dog 's girlfriend and co-parent . despite frequently being confined to the '' bitch 's box '' when '' on heat '' , she has had several litters of puppies with the dog . the dog 's tail tale contains the story of their meeting as puppies , although jess 's letter at the start of book 5 gives a different account of the first time they saw each other . first appearance : book 1 ( september 1978 ) . ; major : wal 's first dog . a pig-hunting dog , he is stern and tough . he has some fondness for dog , saving him from the murphys ' dogs . first appearance : book 1 . ; cecil the ram : an aged stud ram , who lacks zest for the task of servicing wal 's ewes . he soon rediscovers his libido when wal sharpens the butchery knife . as the books progress , cecil 's appearance becomes increasingly decrepit . first appearance : book 2 ( august 1979 ) . ; rex '' chicken '' footrot : wal 's younger brother and pongo 's father , he lives in town and is a potter . he has a young son named mad mick , who rarely visits the farm . rex is better than wal at just about every sport , much to wal 's annoyance . he owns boobsie , the dog 's mum , and also owned flash , the dog 's father , whose death was announced in book 14 . first appearance : book 3 ( july 1980 ) . ; pew : cooch 's pet magpie . orphaned when wal cut down his parents ' macrocarpa tree ; socially confused and always seeking revenge on wal . wal gave pew to cooch as a birthday present - the first time wal ever remembered it - to get rid of him , but pew 's revenge continues . cooch became a surrogate mother for pew , coaching him in the way of birds as best he can . in book 14 , pew falls in love with and abducts cheeky hobson 's pet budgerigar , little twinkle , which is then eaten by horse . first appearance : book 4 ( april 1981 ) . ; puti puti : rangi 's cousin . a city slicker from porirua , she often carries a boombox on her shoulder and invariably suffers culture shock when visiting the farm . in book 25 , she brings her pit bull terrier , terror , to the farm . first appearance : book 10 ( september 1985 ) . ; kathy : a beautiful , occasional visitor to cooch 's farm . her face remains a mystery , as she is almost always drawn facing away from the reader . the exception is in book 27 , when her visage is only partially obscured by spit murphy 's arm . kathy is loved by everyone , including the dog , and especially cooch ; much to his heartbreak , as they are first cousins . in the final book of the series , kathy tells cooch that she loves him and gives him a passionate kiss . first appearance : book 8 ( september 1983 ) . ; stewart '' irish '' murphy : wal 's other neighbour ; a brutish man who does not welcome visitors and shoots any dog that strays onto his property , blackwater station , or mercifully hangs them by their hind legs on a fence . once he did this to prince charles and lived to regret it when aunt dolly found out . always filthy ( '' health warning : do not approach this man downwind '' ) , probably due to farming numerous pigs , which cause wal plenty of grief . he has two loutish sons , spit and hunk . he is first mentioned in cooch 's introduction to book 3 , his pigs first appear in the same book , but he and his sons do not appear until book 9 ( october 1984 ) . ; elvis '' spit '' murphy : the brighter of irish murphy 's two sons , spit is described by the dog as '' a sort of rural john travolta with smaller lips and bigger jeans '' . he is wal 's rival in rugby and romance . he is also interested in cooch 's cousin kathy . ; ronald '' hunk '' murphy : irish murphy 's large , slow-witted and aggressive son . he is described by the dog as '' fat , pink and smelly '' . his nephew lex murphy ( first appearance : book 11 ) sometimes fights with rangi . ; '' irish '' murphy 's pigs : a fearsome gang of three to six enormous beasts . often lurking in the nearby river , causing consternation to unsuspecting fishermen and dogs . always ravenous , they once defeated and ate some large sharks that swam up the estuary . ; tiger , wolf and creampuff , '' irish '' murphy 's pig-dogs : they often terrorize the dog , who seeks help from wal , horse or major . now and then , the dog tries to take on all three of them at once . creampuff is a bull terrier . ; hermit ram '' the buffalo '' : this long unshorn ram has left the mob and lives in the farm 's wild scrub . he sometimes shows interest in the ewes , and dog is sent to pursue him , but without success . first appearance : book 11 . ; the goat : one of the toughest animals on the farm , the goat is usually tethered to a chain in wal 's garden . wal bought him to keep the grass down , but the goat prefers eating fruit trees and footy socks , and chasing the dog and wal . at one point , wal tries in vain to sell the goat and then decides to kill it , but can not , exclaiming '' dammit , i know this goat ! '' . first appearance : book 1 . ; the goose : another character introduced in the first footrot flats book , the goose occasionally stalks wal and pecks his posterior whenever possible . in the film '' the dog 's tale '' , the goose attempts to peck wal and finally gets his chance when wal rescues irish murphy from a river . ; cooch 's goats : a cunning pack of goats that uses gang tactics to annoy wal . for example , if wal plants trees behind a fence , cooch 's goats will stand on each other to get over and eat them . the dog hates mustering cooch 's goats . ; other hostile animals : in the early books , the dog 's main tormentors were the turkey , goat and pigs ( boris and dolores ) . in one strip in book 4 , the goose is chasing wal and the turkey is chasing the dog , but wal kicks the turkey and the dog jumps on the goose 's neck , then wal and the dog celebrate their partnership . sport . sport plays a major part in footrot flats . wal plays all sorts of sports including cricket , golf , fishing , rugby union , tennis and snooker . the dog often plays with wal , sometimes helping him , sometimes embarrassing him and sometimes being exploited . wal can never beat his younger brother rex in any sport . wal plays for the raupo rugby club as a hooker and is often seen playing and training in the strip . at one point wal was replaced by a younger man as he was getting too old , but the younger player was n't as good . the final few strips ever drawn involve an unlikely chain of events which culminate in wal somehow scoring a try against a touring international rugby side . wal also coaches the raupo school rugby team , with rangi being one of its more prominent members and the dog serving as mascot ( a duty he takes seriously , often blaming himself if the team loses ) . in the cricket season , wal plays for an unnamed team as an all-rounder , although he is sometimes pictured as the wicket keeper . cooch often plays cricket with wal and so does the dog , usually fielding in the slips or in the covers ( wherein the dog 's alias of 'the scarlet manuka ' sometimes comes into play , stealing cricket balls to 'rescue ' them from persecution ) . cooch also plays golf with wal , who has a homemade course on his farm . cooch is better than wal at golf , even though the course is very hard ( the first hole is a par 14 ) . when they do play on a real course , cooch usually wins . wal claims the trees are on cooch 's side . wal and cooch also play snooker on a small table in cooch 's house , where a tree hampers play . wal also occasionally plays tennis with cheeky hobson and fights for her affections with nigel erskine , another member of the tennis club . the dog is usually the ball boy . wal and cooch frequently fish in various ways : whitebaiting , long line fishing , and most often floundering . other sports seen in footrot flats are boxing , polo , soccer , squash , badminton and shooting . list of publications . main series footrot flats 1-27 ( 1978–99 ) the first two editions of footrot flats had no number , they were simply titled 'footrot flats ' . both were re-released in october 1980 as 'footrot flats one ' and 'footrot flats two' . the footrot flats 'weekender ' 1-8 ( 1985–98 ) the first weekender was titled '' the footrot flats weekender '' while volumes 2-8 were simply titled '' footrot flats weekender ( number ) '' . the puppydog footrot flats 1-21 ( 1/11/95 ) the 'puppydog ' dog versions of the original strips were simply physically smaller and reduced in length ; they presumably sold for a lower price . pocket books '' they 've put custard with my bone ! '' ( 1983 ) the cry of the grey ghost ( 1984 ) '' i 'm warning you , horse . '' ( 1985 ) it 's a dog 's life ( 1988 ) '' let slip the dogs of war ! '' ( 1992 ) footrot flats pocket book collection ( 1995 ) combined collections footrot flats : the making of the movie ( 1986 ) footrot flats : the dog 's tail tale ( 1986 ) footrot flats collector 's edition ( 1987 ) footrot flats collector 's edition 2 ( 1989 ) footrot flats collector 's edition 3 ( 1993 ) the footrot flats 'weekender ' special ( 1994 ) footrot flats gallery 1-3 ( 2005–06 ) footrot flats sports collection ( 2005 ) footrot flats : the wisdom of dog ( 27/9/2010 ) the art of footrot flats ( 25/10/2011 ) footrot flats : luv from dog ( 24/9/2013 ) the essential footrot flats ( 28/10/2014 ) footrot flats gallery 1 ( 27/10/15 , reprint ) footrot flats gallery 2 ( 26/10/16 , reprint ) murray ball collector 's trilogy footrot flats : the dog strips ( 2007 ) footrot flats : the long weekender ( 2008 ) six of the best by murray ball ( 2009 ) this is a collection of murray ball 's work outside of footrot flats . misc footrot flats collector ’ s edition box set ( 1982 , nz-only release ) footrot flats danish album series 1-27 called fæhunden ( 1984-2000 ) this was a larger format series printed and released in denmark , which was simply a translated version of the 1-27 series released in australia & nz the mini footrot flats ( 1984 ) also released as 'the kiddie-widdies footrot flats ' . ( in nz ) footrot flats - the stage musical ( 1984 ) footrot flats the motion picture : prospectus ( 1985 ) footrot flats school kit ( 1986 ) footrot flats japanese edition ( 1986 ) footrot flats danish book series 1-12 called fæhunden bøger ( 1989-2000 ) this was a smaller format series printed and released in denmark , which was a translated adaptation of the 1-8 weekender series of books released in australia & nz footrot flats in focus - a 1990 perspective ( 1989 ) footrot flats chinese edition - counterfeit copy ( 1990 ) footrot flats uk titan books series 1-6 ( 1990–94 ) footrot flats swedish books series 1-4 called fähunden ( 1991–94 ) footrot flats german edition ( 1991 , as '' dog von der stinkfußfarm '' ) footrot flats usa edition ( 1992 ) ( with foreword by charles m . schulz ) footrot flats calendar : 1983-1992 , 1997–2000 footrot flats astrological calendar : 1987 footrot flats sports calendar : 1987-1992 footrot flats zodiac calendar : 1989 the ballad of footrot flats ( 1996 ) footrot flats desk calendar : 1997 footrot flats - '' the dog 's tail tale '' ( vhs , dvd ) footrot flats - '' the dog 's tail tale '' ( re-release ) ( dvd/blu-ray ) ( 1/12/11 ) footrot flats 2015 40th anniversary commemorative calendar ( october 2014 ) miscellaneous merchandise included : greeting cards , postcards , posters , pencil cases , coloring books , notepad mugs , drinking glasses , beer stein , coasters , place mats , teaspoons , plates , beer clothing , bed linen , tea towels , aprons , beach towels , badges , lapel pins , transfers , patches activity packs , door hangers , stickers , wrapping paper , matches , key-rings stuffed toys , jigsaw puzzles , hot water bottles , ceramics , soap figurines , . see also . new zealand humour footrot flats : the dog 's tale ( 1986 film ) footrot flats : the dog 's tale ( soundtrack ) . notes . external links . the official footrot flats website launched 2017 official : footrot flats facebook page footrot flats at don markstein 's toonopedia . archived from the original on july 15 , 2016 . fæhunden - danish version of the 1-27 series , 1-12 albums the art of footrot flats ( 2011 ) a gisborne herald article