The Bureau

history . formation . ex-dexys members pete williams ( bass ) , geoff blythe ( tenor saxophone ) , steve spooner ( alto saxophone ) , stoker ( drums ) and mick talbot ( keyboards ) engaged the services of manager dave corke , a previous manager of dexys midnight runners , and promoted concerts in birmingham to raise money to finance the group . the bureau information tour '81 tour programme in december 1980 , the band were joined by rob jones ( guitar and trumpet ) , tony bischoff ( bass ) and archie brown ( vocals ) from a group called the upset , which had supported dexys on tour . the bureau began rehearsals with a trombonist known only as jake ( formerly of the r & b , soul , funk act gonzalez ) , melody maker , 31 january 1981 who came and went . only for sheep . in february 1981 the bureau signed a deal with record label wea and recorded their debut single '' only for sheep '' / '' the first one '' with producer pete wingfield ( who had produced dexys ' album searching for the young soul rebels ) at london 's vineyard studios . a video was recorded for '' only for sheep '' before the band left the uk for debut tour dates in the netherlands and belgium . permanent trombone player paul taylor was recruited at the eleventh hour and joined the group for the dates . the first ever gig in apeldoorn , the netherlands , was reviewed in uk music paper nme and the second gig at the paradiso club , amsterdam , was recorded for dutch radio . '' only for sheep '' was released in march 1981 record mirror , 14 march 1981 and was a hit in australia , reaching no . & nbsp ; 6 , kent , david ( 1993 ) . australian chart book 1970–1992 , st ives , n.s.w . but failed to reach the uk singles chart . on 12 march the bureau played their first british gig , a showcase , at ronnie scott 's in london . record mirror 21 march 1981 at the end of march 1981 the band rehearsed and recorded new songs for their debut album including the follow-up single '' let him have it '' , inspired by the derek bentley/christopher craig case . in april 1981 , the bureau made a debut live tv appearance on bbc midlands show look here and recorded four more songs for the debut album . they embarked on an extensive uk and ireland tour beginning at the forum ballroom in kentish town , london , on 16 april and ending at the lyceum on 17 may . record mirror 11 april 1981 the single '' let him have it/the noose '' was released in may 1981 and listed as '' record of the week '' in uk music paper record mirror record mirror , 23 may 1981 but failed to chart . in june 1981 the bureau played a gig supporting hazel o'connor and the specials at butts athletic stadium in coventry . their performance was described as '' triumphant '' by music journalist simon tebbutt . record mirror , 20 june 1981 they then supported the pretenders on tours of the uk and america between july and september 1981 . melody maker 8 august 1981 the milwaukee journal , 24 august 1981 some gigs included members of the bureau appearing with the pretenders for a cover of jackie wilson 's '' higher and higher '' , a recording of which appears on the cd reissue of the pretenders album pretenders ii . albums . the album the bureau was released in 1981 , but only in canada and australia . the canadian version of the album ( catalogue number xwea 58357 ) was eponymous but , in australia , the album was titled only for sheep ( catalogue number 600104 ) . in australia the song '' let him have it '' was titled '' let him have it ( sweet revenge ) '' . the bureau embarked on a second uk tour in november and december 1981 sharing the bill with the mo-dettes , and roddy radiation and the tearjerkers . the tour was dubbed '' the good , the bad and the ugly tour '' and ended at the venue , victoria , london , on 23 december 1981 . the band dissolved soon after completing the tour . the album finally became available in the uk when it received a cd release in 2005 . the cd includes extra tracks not available on the original release including an eleven-track concert and the video for '' only for sheep '' . the band reunited to play two launch gigs in london and birmingham in february 2005 , prompting the members to write and rehearse new material . october 2008 saw the release of a second , new album in the uk entitled and another thing . , which was released through the band 's website and promoted via live gigs in newcastle , birmingham and london , and an appearance on jools holland 's bbc radio 2 show . post-breakup . talbot went on to enjoy greater success as the co-founder with paul weller of the style council , while brown formed flag with ex-secret affair guitarist dave cairns . his current band , archie brown and the young bucks , is based in newcastle , with a catalogue of nine albums and a line-up of brown ( vocals , saxophone , guitar ) , patrick rafferty ( vocals , accordion , guitar , lap steel guitar , keyboards ) , ian thompson ( bass ) , phil screaton ( lead guitar ) and neil ramshaw ( drums ) . blythe teamed up with former colleague big jim paterson in the tko horns . pete williams went on to form the band these tender virtues in the mid-1980s and , more recently , baseheart . during the early 2000s , williams and talbot joined kevin rowland in a reformed dexys to record new material , but nothing was released at that time . 2011 saw the emergence of a new project , gi blythe , featuring geoff blythe ( saxophones ) and archie brown ( vocals ) , along with big jim paterson ( ex-dexys midnight runners , trombone ) , larry baeder ( guitars ) , joe '' bearclaw '' burcaw ( bass ) , pete levin ( keyboards ) and crispin taylor ( drums ) . the band released a debut album entitled lost in space in january 2012 . at the same time , williams , talbot , and paterson were recording one day i 'm going to soar with rowland and the new dexys , which was released in june 2012 . pete williams also released a solo album , see , in january 2012 to critical acclaim ; richard hawley guests on guitar along with paul taylor on trombone . williams released roughnecks and roustabouts in march 2015 with guests mick talbot and josie lawrence . . discography . singles . '' only for sheep '' / '' the first one '' ( 1981 ) ( aus 6 ) '' let him have it '' / '' the noose '' ( 1981 ) . albums . the bureau/only for sheep ( 1981 ) ( aus 59 ) and another thing . ( 2008 ) . references . external links . website of new project featuring archie brown and geoff blythe , gi blythe official website milwaukee journal page featuring the bureau/the pretenders review dexys ' pete williams – new solo album preview !