James Craig, 1st Viscount Craigavon

early life . craig was born at sydenham , belfast , the son of james craig ( 1828–1900 ) , a wealthy whiskey distiller who had entered the firm of dunville & co as a clerk : by age 40 he was a millionaire and a partner in the firm . james craig snr . owned a large house called craigavon , overlooking belfast lough . his mother , eleanor gilmore browne , was the daughter of robert browne , a prosperous man who owned property in belfast and a farm outside lisburn . craig was the seventh child and sixth son in the family ; there were eight sons and one daughter in all . he was educated at merchiston castle school in edinburgh , scotland ; his father had taken a conscious decision not to send his sons to any of the more fashionable public schools . after school he began work as a stockbroker , eventually opening his own firm in belfast . military career . craig enlisted in the 3rd ( militia ) battalion of the royal irish rifles on 17 january 1900 to serve in the second boer war . he was seconded to the imperial yeomanry , a cavalry force created for service during the war , as a lieutenant in the 13th battalion on 24 february 1900 , and left liverpool for south africa on the ss cymric in march 1900 . after arrival he was soon sent to the front , and was taken prisoner in may 1900 , but released by the boers because of a perforated eardrum . on his recovery he became deputy assistant director of the imperial military railways , showing the qualities of organisation that were to mark his involvement in both british and ulster politics . in june 1901 he was sent home suffering from dysentery , and by the time he was fit for service again the war was over . he was promoted to captain in the 3rd royal irish rifles on 20 september 1902 , while still seconded to south africa . military life suited him well , but he became impatient with what he saw as the lack of professionalism and efficiency in the british army . politics . on his return to ireland , having received a £100,000 legacy from his father 's will , he turned to politics , serving as member of the british parliament for east down from 1906 to 1918 . from 1918 to 1921 he represented mid down , and served in the british government as parliamentary secretary to the minister for pensions ( 1919–20 ) and parliamentary secretary to the admiralty ( 1920–21 ) . craig rallied ulster loyalist opposition to irish home rule in ulster before the first world war , organising the paramilitary ulster volunteers ( uvf ) and buying arms from imperial germany . the uvf became the nucleus of the 36th ( ulster ) division during the first world war . he succeeded edward carson as leader of the ulster unionist party in february 1921 . in the 1921 northern ireland general election , the first ever , he was elected to the newly created northern ireland house of commons as one of the members for county down . on 7 june 1921 , craig was appointed the first prime minister of northern ireland by the lord lieutenant of ireland . the house of commons of northern ireland assembled for the first time later that day . a dedicated member of the orange order and staunchly protestant , cain website , cain.ulst.ac.uk ; accessed 4 september 2017 . he famously stated , in april 1934 , in response to george leeke 's question regarding craig 's protestant parliament : the hon . member must remember that in the south they boasted of a catholic state . they still boast of southern ireland being a catholic state . all i boast of is that we are a protestant parliament and a protestant state . it would be rather interesting for historians of the future to compare a catholic state launched in the south with a protestant state launched in the north and to see which gets on the better and prospers the more . it is most interesting for me at the moment to watch how they are progressing . i am doing my best always to top the bill and to be ahead of the south . northern ireland house of commons official report , vol 34 col 1095 . sir james craig , unionist party , then prime minister of northern ireland , 24 april 1934 . this speech is often misquoted as : '' a protestant parliament for a protestant people '' , or '' a protestant state for a protestant people '' . this speech is often misquoted , intentionally or otherwise , as : '' a protestant parliament for a protestant people '' , and conflated with an incident which occurred respective to the naming of the new city of craigavon . knockmena ( a corruption of the townland name , knockmenagh ) was the preferred name nationalists hoped would be used , and which might have attracted broad acceptance on both sides . on 6 july 1965 , it was announced that the new city would be named craigavon after craig . a noted nationalist , joseph connellan , interrupted the announcement with the comment , '' a protestant city for a protestant people '' . mulholland , marc . '' why did unionists discriminate ? , academia.edu ; accessed 4 september 2017 . later that year , speaking in the house of commons at stormont on 21 november 1934 in response to an accusation that all government appointments in northern ireland were carried out on a religious basis , he replied : '' . it is undoubtedly our duty and our privilege , and always will be , to see that those appointed by us possess the most unimpeachable loyalty to the king and constitution . that is my whole object in carrying on a protestant government for a protestant people . i repeat it in this house '' . northern ireland parliamentary debates ; vol . 17 , columns 73 & 74 ; accessed 4 september 2017 . he was made a baronet in 1918 , and in 1927 was created viscount craigavon , of stormont in the county down . he was also the recipient of honorary degrees from queen 's university of belfast ( 1922 ) and oxford university ( 1926 ) . craig had made his career in british as well as northern irish politics ; but his premiership showed little sign of his earlier close acquaintance with the british political world . he became intensely parochial , and suffered from his loss of intimacy with british politicians in 1938 , when the british government concluded agreements with dublin to end the anglo-irish economic war between the two countries . he never tried to persuade westminster to protect northern ireland 's industries , especially the linen industry , which was central to its economy . he was anxious not to provoke westminster , given the precarious state of northern ireland 's position . in april 1939 , and again in may 1940 in the second world war , he called for conscription to be introduced in northern ireland ( which the british government , fearing a backlash from nationalists , refused ) . he also called for churchill to invade éire , the south of ireland , using scottish and welsh troops in order to seize the valuable ports and install a governor-general at dublin . lady londonderry confided to sir samuel hoare , the home secretary until the outbreak of the war , that craigavon had become '' ga-ga '' but craigavon was still prime minister when he died peacefully at his home at county down at the age of 69 . he was buried on the stormont estate , and was succeeded as the prime minister of northern ireland by the minister of finance , john miller andrews . personal life . his wife , cecil mary nowell dering tupper ( viscountess craigavon ) , whom he married on 22 march 1905 after a very brief courtship , was english , the daughter of sir daniel tupper , assistant comptroller of the lord chamberlain 's department of the king 's household . they had twin sons and a daughter . a president of the ulster women 's unionist council , she was created a dame commander of the order of the british empire in 1941 . cecil mary nowell dering tupper was a fourth cousin of the queen mother , elizabeth angela marguerite bowes-lyon . john lyon , ix earl of strathmore , m . 24 february 1767 , mary eleanor bowes . col . barrington price , m . 1 may 1789 , lady mary bowes-lyon . rev . cholmeley edward john dering , m . 1817 , maria price . lt.-col . cholmeley edward dering , m . 1841 , cecilia elizabeth louisa chadwick . sir daniel alfred anley tupper , m . 1882 , mary cholmeley dering . cecil mary nowell dering tupper , m . 22 march 1905 . james craig , i viscount craigavon . craigavon was succeeded as second viscount by his elder son , james ( 1906–1974 ) . his estate was valued at £3,228 , 2s . , 6d . effects in england : probate , 20 march 1941 , cgpla nire . , £24 , 138 9s . 9d . : probate , 3 march 1941 , cgpla nire . craig had a keen interest in ulster agriculture and was vice-president of listooder and district ploughing society ( the oldest in ireland ) from november 1906 until november 1921 and continued to present the all-ireland cup class until 1926 . . arms . see also . belfast blitz the emergency list of northern ireland members of the house of lords craigavon – the 'new town ' named after craig . notes . references . james craig profile in the dictionary of national biography . external links .