Taira no Kiyomori

early life . kiyomori was born in japan , in 1118 as the first son of taira no tadamori . his mother , gion no nyogo , was a palace servant based from the tale of the heike . family . father : taira no tadamori mother : gion no nyogo ( d . 1147 ) wives , concubine and children : wife : taira no tokiko taira no shigemori taira no munemori taira no tomomori taira no tokuko taira no shigehira . career . after the death of his father in 1159 , kiyomori assumed control of the taira clan and ambitiously entered the political realm in which he had previously only held a minor post . before that though , in 1156 , he and minamoto no yoshitomo , head of the minamoto clan , suppressed the rebels in the hōgen rebellion . this established the taira and minamoto as the top samurai clans in kyoto . however , this caused the allies to become bitter rivals which culminated four years later during the heiji rebellion in 1160 . kiyomori , emerging victorious with yoshitomo and his two eldest killed , was now the head of the single most powerful warrior clan in kyoto . however , his clan 's power and influence in the provinces at this time is a matter of debate . kiyomori showed mercy and exiled a few of yoshitomo 's sons , including yoritomo , noriyori , and yoshitsune – a benevolence that would turn out to be the taira clan 's downfall later on . due to his status as the head of the sole remaining warrior clan , kiyomori was in a unique position to manipulate the court rivalry between the retired emperor , go-shirakawa , and his son , emperor nijō . because of this manipulation , kiyomori was able to climb the ranks of government , though the majority of his promotions as well as the success of his family in gaining ranks and titles at court was due to shirakawa 's patronage . this culminated in 1167 , when kiyomori became the first courtier of a warrior family to be appointed daijō-daijin , chief minister of the government , and the de facto administrator of the imperial government . as was the norm , he soon relinquished the position and leadership of the taira clan , with the goal of maintaining the social and political prestige of having attained the highest office in the land , but being free of the attendant duties . this had been a common practice for many years in the highest levels of japanese government and in doing so kiyomori was asserting what he felt was his strong position in the kyoto government . however , many of the courtiers from traditional ( non-warrior ) noble families were less than pleased with both kiyomori 's attainment of power , and how he comported himself with regard to other high ranking courtiers . image : yoshitoshi the fever.jpg thumb 350px right while suffering from a fever , taira no kiyomori is confronted by a vision of hell and the ghosts of his victims , in an 1883 print by yoshitoshi . in 1171 , kiyomori arranged a marriage between emperor takakura and his daughter tokuko . their first son , the future emperor antoku , was born in 1178 . the next year , in 1179 , kiyomori staged a coup d'état forcing the resignation of his rivals from all government posts and subsequently banishing them . he then filled the open government positions with his allies and relatives , and imprisoned the cloistered emperor go-shirakawa . finally , in 1180 kiyomori forced emperor takakura to abdicate and give prince tokihito the throne , who then became emperor antoku . with the exertion of taira power and wealth and kiyomori 's new monopoly on authority , many of his allies , most of the provincial samurai , and even members of his own clan turned against him . prince mochihito , brother of emperor takakura , called on kiyomori 's old rivals of the minamoto clan to rise against the taira , beginning the genpei war in the middle of 1180 . kiyomori died early the next year from sickness , leaving his son munemori to preside over the downfall and destruction of the taira at the hands of the minamoto in 1185 . the tales of the heike states that as he lay dying , kiyomori 's fever was so high that anyone who attempted to even get near him would be burned by the heat . . cultural references . taira no kiyomori is the main character in the kamakura period epic , the tale of heike . the daiei film production of kenji mizoguchi 's 1955 film shin heike monogatari ( variously translated as taira clan saga , tales of the taira clan , and the sacrilegious hero ) credits its story as '' from the novel by yoshikawa eiji '' , which in turn is a 1950 retelling of the 14th-century epic the tale of the heike . the opening introduction to the film , in its english subtitles , is unlike most other tellings , mizoguchi 's film includes only the story of taira no kiyomori 's youth , depicting him as a hero , particularly in breaking the power of the tyrannical armed monks and their palanquin japan , where he says at his father 's grave '' father , with two arrows from my bow i destroyed a superstition that gripped men for centuries . the courtiers and priests have tried to have me for blasphemy . but others have supported me , more than i expected . some of them are lords , too . father , a greater battle lies ahead . but i remain undaunted . no matter how i am beaten , i shall rise again '' . the film then ends with kiyomori approaching an alfresco fujiwara dance , vowing to himself , '' dance , my lords , dance . your end is near . tomorrow will be ours ! '' dvd le héros sacrilège , films sans frontières 2004 taira no kiyomori was featured by 19th-century woodblock print artists as an exemplar of guilt and retribution , see the accompanying print by yoshitoshi . the famous print generally known as the vision of kiyomori by utagawa hiroshige depicts the actor nakamura utayemon iv in the character of kiyomori , confronted by the horrific vision of his snow-filled garden transformed into the heaped bones and skulls of his slaughtered enemies . in video games , kiyomori appears in warriors orochi 2 , 3 and 4 fighting for orochi 's army and using prayer beads as weapons . he also makes an appearance in dynasty warriors strikeforce , as a boss in one of the game 's crossover missions . additionally , he is the main antagonist in harukanaru toki no naka de 3 . kiyomori also features prominently as a sympathetic villain in osamu tezuka 's phoenix series in the first half of the ninth volume , turbulent times ( retitled civil war in english ) , another genpei war epic . like most villains in the series he desires the titular bird for its immortality granting blood , due to his desire to continue to lead and protect the taira clan and lack of confidence in his successors , but winds up being tricked into buying an imported peacock instead . a character named lord kiyomori appears in book 6 , '' the lords of the rising sun '' in the fabled lands adventure gamebook series , where he is portrayed as the imperial sovereign takakura 's chancellor , and on the verge of war with the self-proclaimed shogun by the name of '' yoritomo '' . the 2012 nhk taiga drama was about him . . honours . junior first rank ( 11 february 1167 ) . see also . taira no shigemori shishigatani incident fukuhara-kyō itsukushima shrine siege of shirakawa-den . references .