Gottlieb Daimler

daimler motors and the phönix engine ( 1890 to 1900 ) . with demand for engines growing , for uses in everything from motorboats to railcars , maybach and daimler expanded . with funding from gunpowder maker max duttenhofer , industrialist , and banker kilian von steiner , and munitions manufacturer : de : wilhelm lorenz , daimler motoren gesellschaft was founded 28 november 1890 , with maybach as chief designer . its purpose was the construction of small , high-speed engines for use on land , water , and air transport . the three uses were expressed by daimler in a sketch that became the basis for a logo with a three-pointed star . '' pact with the devil '' . from 1882 until 1890 , daimler had resisted making his company into an incorporation or stock company . he had seen what happened to too many engineers who had pioneered a capital invention as he had . many of them were forced out of their own companies by stock holders who '' knew better '' about how to run the company that they had just purchased than the man who created it . this is a very common occurrence in the business world . it happened to henry ford , ransom e . olds , karl benz , august horch ( audi ) , and many others . many german historians consider this daimler 's '' pact with the devil '' . daimler hated having to incorporate his company . unable to obtain majority control , he sold out and then resigned . dmg expanded , but it changed . the newcomers , not believing in automobile production , ordered the creation of additional stationary engine building capacity , and considered merging dmg with otto 's deutz-ag . daimler and maybach preferred plans to produce automobiles and reacted against duttenhofer and lorenz . maybach was denied a seat on the board and on 11 february 1891 , he left the business . he continued his design work as a freelance in cannstatt from his own house , with daimler 's support , moving to the closed hermann hotel in the autumn of 1892 . he used its ballroom and winter garden as workshops , employing twelve workers and five apprentices . the new company developed the high-speed inline-two phönix , for which maybach invented a spray carburetor . this was fitted in a singularly ugly car , which entered production in 1895 after a cessation of hostilities between daimler , maybach , and the dmg board . . daimler motoren gesellschaft and first automobile sold ( 1890 ) . in 1890 daimler founded his own engine business , daimler motoren gesellschaft ( dmg ) . its purpose was the construction of small , high speed engines they had developed based on the same stationary engine technology . in 1892 , dmg finally sold its first automobile . gottlieb daimler , aged 58 , had heart problems and suffered a collapse in the winter of 1892–1893 . his doctor prescribed a trip to florence , where he met lina hartmann , a widow 22 years his junior who was the owner of the hotel where he was staying . they married on 8 july 1893 , honeymooning in chicago during its world fair . returning from the 1893 world 's fair in chicago with his new wife , daimler had vowed to purchase enough shares of dmg to regain control . this effort failed . daimler sold all his shares and patents and resigned from the company . maybach had left earlier . the disputes with lorenz continued . daimler attempted to buy 102 extra shares to get a majority holding , but was forced out of his post as technical director . the corporation was 400,000 gold marks in debt . the other directors threatened to declare bankruptcy if daimler did n't sell them all his shares and all his personal patent rights from the previous thirty years . daimler accepted the offer , receiving 66,666 gold marks , and resigned in 1893 . in 1894 at the hermann hotel , maybach together with daimler and his son paul designed a third engine called the '' phoenix '' and had dmg make it . it featured : four cylinders cast in one block arranged vertically and parallel camshaft operated exhaust valves a spray nozzle carburetor , patented by maybach in 1893 an improved belt drive system this is probably the same internal-combustion engine referred to by the american author and historian henry brooks adams , who describes the '' daimler motor '' and its great speed from his visit to the 1900 paris exposition in his autobiography . daimler and maybach continued to work together . they built a four-cylinder engine with maybach ' spray nozzle carburetor . it was in the first organized automobile race , the '' paris to rouen '' and defeated all the entries from dmg . frederick simms , german-born long-time friend of gottlieb daimler insisted that daimler be brought back into the company making it a condition of his payment of £17,500 for the transfer of his daimler licenses to the british daimler company which would stabilize the corporation 's finances , that daimler , now aged sixty , should return to dmg . gottlieb daimler received 200,000 goldmarks in shares , plus a 100,000 bonus . simms received the right to use the name '' daimler '' as his brand name for daimler company products . in 1895 , the year dmg assembled its 1,000th engine , maybach returned as inspector general , receiving 30,000 shares . during this period , they agreed to licenses to build daimler engines around the world , which included : france , from 1890 , by panhard and peugeot the united states , from 1891 , under daimler motor company of long island city in a partnership with american and german piano maker steinway & sons the united kingdom , from 1893 , by frederick simms ' daimler motor syndicate transferred in 1896 to the daimler company austria , by austro daimler daimler died in 1900 , and in 1907 maybach resigned from dmg . founding of daimler-benz . daimler had developed the first liquid petroleum vehicle in 1885 and karl benz had developed the first purpose built automobile using a 2 cycle engine of his own design a few months later . daimler never met karl benz during the period of invention . in 1896 daimler ( dmg ) sued benz & cie for violating his 1883 patent on hot tube ignition . daimler won and benz had to pay royalties to dmg . daimler did not meet karl benz while they were in court in mannheim . later at the founding of the central european motor car association daimler and benz still did not speak to each other . years after daimler died , the two companies did cooperate in many ways . after many years of cooperation , on june 28 , 1926 representatives of daimler-motoren-gesellschaft ( dmg ) and benz & cie signed the agreement for the merger of the two oldest automobile manufacturers in the world . the resulting new company was named daimler benz . . honours . gottlieb daimler was accepted into the automotive hall of fame in 1978 . between 1993 and july 2008 daimler had a stadium named after him in stuttgart , germany . the mercedes-benz arena was the venue for six matches in the 2006 fifa world cup in germany . gottlieb daimler 's motto was das beste oder nichts ( '' the best or nothing at all '' ; '' nothing but the best '' ) . mercedes-benz adopted this motto as their slogan in 2010 . see also . list of german inventors and discoverers étienne lenoir - developer of the first atmospheric gaseous fueled internal combustion engine and automobile , pioneer of electro plating siegfried marcus - developed an early automobile wilhelm maybach - plant engine for gottlieb daimler at n.a . otto and at dmg nicolaus otto - developer of the first successful compressed charge gaseous fueled internal combustion engine nicolas léonard sadi carnot - physics of the internal combustion engine illuminating gas - the first internal combustion engine fuel ligroin - the first liquid automotive fuel - hexane-n . references . sources . siebertz , paul . gottlieb daimler : ein revolutionär der technik . 4 . auflage , stuttgart : reclam verlag , 1950 . wise , david burgess . '' daimler : founder of the four-wheeler '' , in northey , tom , ed . world of automobiles volume 5 , pp . & nbsp ; 481–3 . london : orbis , 1974 . renate völker , karl-otto völker : gottlieb daimler – ein bewegtes leben . silberburg-verlag , tübingen und baden-baden 2013 , . harry niemann : gottlieb daimler . fabriken , banken und motoren . delius klasing , bielefeld 2000 , . hans-christoph von seherr-thoss ( hrsg . ) : zwei männer , ein stern – gottlieb daimler und karl benz in bildern , daten , dokumenten . vdi-verlag , düsseldorf 1989 , . hier handelt es sich um reprints der beiden o.g . werke in einem band . external links . the workaholic who made the automotive revolution possible gottlieb-daimler memorial 1883 : the high-speed engine with hot-tube ignition system from daimler daimler 's dream engine of 1883 encarta article ( archived 31 october 2009 ) the maybach s600 - mercedes benz tribute to wilhelm maybach