John Playfair

life . born at benvie , slightly west of dundee to margaret young ( 1719/20 – 1805 ) and reverend james playfair ( died 1772 ) , the kirk minister of liff and benvie . playfair was educated at home until the age of 14 , when he entered the university of st andrews to study divinity . he also did further studies at edinburgh university . in 1766 , when only 18 , he was a candidate for the chair of mathematics in marischal college ( now part of the university of aberdeen ) , and , although he was unsuccessful , his claims were admitted to be high . six years later ( 1772 ) he applied for the chair of natural philosophy ( physics ) at st andrews university , but again without success . in 1773 he was licensed to preach by the church of scotland and was offered the united parishes of liff and his home parish of benvie ( made vacant by the death of his father ) . however , playfair chose to continue his studies in mathematics and physics , and in 1782 he resigned his charge to become the tutor of adam ferguson . by this arrangement playfair regularly visited edinburgh and went on to cultivate the literary and scientific society for which the city was at that time specially distinguished . in particular , he attended the natural history course of john walker . through nevil maskelyne , whose acquaintance he had first made in the course of the celebrated schiehallion experiments in 1774 , he also gained access to the scientific circles of london . in 1785 when dugald stewart succeeded ferguson in the university of edinburgh chair of moral philosophy , playfair succeeded the former to become the chair of mathematics . in 1795 playfair published an alternative , more stringent formulation of euclid 's parallel postulate , which is now called playfair 's axiom . although the axiom bears playfair 's name , he did not create it , but credited others , in particular william ludlam with its prior use . j . playfair and euclid , elements of geometry ; containing the first six books of euclid , with two books on the geometry of solids . to which are added , elements of plane and spherical trigonometry , j.b . lippincott & co , 1860 , p . 291 . available online from google books . see also cajori 's a history of mathematics . in 1802 playfair published his celebrated volume entitled illustrations of the huttonian theory of the earth . the influence exerted by james hutton on the development of geology is thought to be largely due to its publication . in 1805 playfair exchanged the chair of mathematics for that of natural philosophy in succession to john robison , whom also he succeeded as general secretary to the royal society of edinburgh . he took a prominent part , on the liberal side , in the ecclesiastical controversy that arose in connection with sir john leslie 's appointment to the post he had vacated , and published a satirical letter ( 1806 ) . he moved from 6 buccleuch place to a new house at 2 albany street ( then called albany row ) in 1807 . edinburgh post office directories 1805 to 1810 grant 's old and new edinburgh vol iii playfair was an opponent of gottfried leibniz 's vis viva principle , an early version of the conservation of energy . in 1808 , he launched an attack edinburgh review , 12 , 1808 , 120–130 on john smeaton and william hyde wollaston 's work championing the theory . in 1808 he also published a review of laplace 's traité de mécanique celeste . he died at 2 albany street on 20 july 1819 . he is buried nearby in old calton burial ground ( a secular burial ground ) . grant 's old and new edinburgh vol iii . family . playfair 's brothers were architect james playfair , solicitor robert playfair and engineer william playfair . his nephew , william henry playfair ( 1790–1857 ) was an eminent architect in scotland . in later life he admired and proposed to the wealthy widow jane davy . she turned him down and married humphry davy . sophie forgan , 'davy , jane , lady davy ( 1780–1855 ) ' , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 ; online edn , may 2008 accessed 17 dec 2014 he died of strangury on 20 july 1819 , and although an eminent man was buried in an unmarked grave in old calton burial ground , on waterloo place in edinburgh . his , and his brother , james 's graves were marked by a plaque unveiled in 2011 following a local campaign . the monument to his memory by william henry playfair , on calton hill , biographical dictionary of eminent scotsmen ( 1856 ) , reproduced in significant scots is visible from the spot . honours . fellow of the royal society of edinburgh fellow of the royal society , 1807 craters on mars and the moon were named in his honour . the mineral playfairite was named in his honour . information about playfairite on mindat database , retrieved on 19 april 2012 . j.l . jambor ( 1967 ) new lead sulfantimonides from madoc , ontario ; part 2 , mineral descriptions , canadian mineralogist , vol . 9 , 194–6 . critical bibliography . a four-volume collected edition of playfair 's works , with a memoir by james g . playfair , appeared at edinburgh in 1822 . see the collected works of john playfair on the internet archive ( www.archive.org ) his writings include a number of essays contributed to the edinburgh review from 1804 onwards , various papers in the philosophical transactions of the royal society ( including his earliest publication , '' on the arithmetic of impossible quantities '' , 1779 , and an '' account of the lithological survey of schehallion '' , 1811 ) and in the transactions of the royal society of edinburgh ( '' on the causes which affect the accuracy of barometrical measurements '' and others ) , the articles '' aepinus '' and '' physical astronomy '' , and a '' dissertation on the progress of mathematical and physical science since the revival of learning in europe '' in the encyclopædia britannica ( supplement to fourth , fifth and sixth editions ) . he also took an interest in indian astronomy and compared them with traditional and ancient astronomy from egypt and greece . he also examined indian concepts in trigonometry . his elements of geometry first appeared in 1795 and has passed through many editions ; his outlines of natural philosophy ( 2 vols . , 1812–1816 ) consist of the propositions and formulae which were the basis of his class lectures . playfair 's contributions to pure mathematics were not considerable , his papers '' on the arithmetic of impossible quantities '' and '' on the causes which affect the accuracy of barometrical measurements '' , and his elements of geometry , all already referred to , being the most important . his lives of matthew stewart , hutton , and robison , many of his reviews , and above all his '' dissertation '' are of the utmost value . references . external links . dictionary of scientific biography significant scots : john playfair national portrait gallery john playfair ( 1836 ) elements of geometry from google books , see page 22 for parallel axiom . ( from hathitrust ) from the linda hall library playfair 's ( 1802 ) illustrations of the huttonian theory of the earth playfair 's ( 1815 ) explication de playfair sur la théorie de la terre par hutton