Jan Karol Chodkiewicz

biography . early life . chodkiewicz was born around 1561 ( exact date of his birth is unknown ) as the son of jan hieronimowicz chodkiewicz , grand marshal of lithuania , castellan of vilnius and krystyna zborowska , daughter of a polish magnate family of zborowscy . from 1573 he was a student at the vilnius jesuit college and the vilnius university , and from 1586 to 1589 , together with his brother aleksander , he continued his studies abroad at the university of ingolstadt . he visited padua before returning to the polish–lithuanian commonwealth in 1590 . he started his military career soon after returning to the commonwealth , raising a rota of 50 to 100 men . he gained military experience in the fight against the rebellious cossacks during the severyn nalyvaiko 's uprising under field crown hetman stanisław żółkiewski . during that conflict he participated in the battle of kaniów on 14 april 1596 , and in the siege of the cossack tabor near lubny . in 1599 , he was appointed the elder ( starost ) of samogitia . chodkiewicz subsequently assisted chancellor and great crown hetman jan zamoyski in his victorious wallachian campaign , in which chodkiewicz participated in the battle of ploiești on 15 october 1600 . for that campaign , he was given that year the high office of the field lithuanian hetman , the second commander-in-chief of the lithuanian detachment of the polish–lithuanian commonwealth army . . war in the north . a year later , in 1601 , chodkiewicz accompanied zamoyski north , to the duchy of livonia ( inflanty ) , where he commanded lithuanian units on the right wing of the commonwealth army in a victorious battle of kokenhausen in late july that year in the war against sweden . he oversaw the fighting in the livonia theater after zamoyski 's return to poland in 1602 . in april 1603 , he captured dorpat ( modern tartu ) and defeated the swedish forces at biały kamień ( the battle of weissenstein ) on 23 september 1604 . his crowning achievement was the great victory near the dvina river in the battle of kircholm ( modern salaspils ) on 27 september 1605 , when , with barely 4000 troops , mostly the heavy cavalry of polish hussars , he annihilated a swedish army three times the size of his force . for that feat he received letters of congratulation from pope paul v , most of the catholic royalty of europe , and even the ahmed i and the shah of persia . soon afterward , he was rewarded with the rank of grand lithuanian hetman , in addition to a number of royal land grants and leases . yet this great victory was virtually fruitless , owing to the domestic dissensions ; the sejm ( commonwealth parliament ) failed to agree on raising the funds needed for the war effort . chodkiewicz was one of the magnates who remained loyal to king sigismund iii , and helped him to defeat the sandomierz rebellion ( rokosz of zebrzydowski ) in 1606–1607 . he commanded the right wing of the royal army during the battle of guzów on 6–7 july 1607 , in which the insurgents were defeated , and then quelled the unrest in the grand duchy of lithuania , fighting against another rebellious magnate , janusz radziwiłł , until radziwiłł negotiated a settlement with the king in 1608 . a fresh invasion of livonia by the swedes recalled him thither once more , and in 1609 he relieved riga and recaptured pernau . he improvised a small fleet and dealt a surprise blow to the swedish navy at the battle of salis . . wars in the east and south . image : hetmanchodkiewicz.jpg left thumb 150px jan karol chodkiewicz painted by juliusz kossak meanwhile , the dimitriad wars with muscovy broke out . instigated by king zygmunt , the war was unpopular among lithuanian magnates , and chodkiewicz was no exception ; in fact his displeasure was so public and significant that he lost the royal favor for a time . eventually their differences subsided , and chodkiewicz was sent against the muscovites , operating first near smolensk and pskov . the siege of mozhaysk in december of subsequent year did not prove successful , and this marked the end of the conflict . thumb the polish-muscovite war had no sooner been ended by the treaty of deulino than chodkiewicz was hastily dispatched southwards to defend the southern frontier against the turks , who , in the opening phase of the polish–ottoman war , defeated polish forces at cecora , killing hetman żółkiewski . an army of 160,000 turks and 60,000 tatars led by sultan osman ii in person advanced . but the cost of victory was his life . a few days before the siege was raised and the ottomans decided to open negotiations , the aged grand lithuanian hetman , already suffering from illness since the very start of this campaign , died in the fortress on 24 september 1621 . chodkiewcz 's body was transported to kamianets-podilskyi , where he was buried on 14 october 1621 . a few years later , in the summer of 1622 , his widow arranged for exhumation , and chodkiewicz was reburied in ostróg in june that year . in 1627 he was moved to a new chapel in ostróg , where he reburied again . his body was evacuated from ostróg during the chmielnicki uprising in 1648 , and returned there in 1654 . it was reburied yet again in a new tomb in ostróg in 1722 . . assessment and remembrance . in 1937 , polish historian wanda dobrowolska , wrote in her polish biographical dictionary entry on chodkiewicz that he was one of the chief members of the '' great hetman era '' , renowned for his talent as a strategist and organizer . she notes that chodkiewicz possessed an iron will , which he was able to impose on the troops under his command , and that he was an efficient commander , although more respected and feared than beloved by his troops . dobrowolska notes that he was an energetic and explosive antithesis of the composed żółkiewski , another great hetman of this era , whom chodkiewicz disliked and competed with throughout his life . chodkiewicz was not particularly involved in the politics of the commonwealth , although his high office and wealth gave him significant influence ; for the most part he used his political influence , and base of support in lithuania , to gather support for his military plans , increased the size of the army , and personal gratifications . his life was dominated by warfare , if not on the front lines , then on the political scene against other lithuanian magnates , particularly the radziwiłł family and the sejm politicians whom he held responsible for not passing enough taxes to support the army he wanted . over his career he acquired significant wealth , and funded a number of churches and other prestigious buildings . he often worked with the jesuits , including funding their kražiai college . he strongly believed his service for the state should be rewarded with land grants , but at the same time he would often use his own money to pay for the army 's military expenses . in his private life he is remembered as a very proud individual , and for stressing his identity as a member of the lithuanian nobility . he was a family man , devoted to his family , but his only son , from his marriage in 1593 to zofia mielecka , died aged 16 in 1613 , and she died in 1618 . he remarried in 1620 , wedding anna alojza ostrogska in november 1620 , shortly before departing on his final campaign . also that year his daughter anna married a lithuanian magnate , jan stanisław sapieha . some poems and other works praising him were written during his lifetime , and a religious work was dedicated to him by the jesuit piotr skarga . more works on chodkiewicz were written in the years after his death . he was one of wacław potocki 's characters in his epic novel on the chocim war , and he also appeared in the works of julian ursyn niemcewicz and zofia kossak-szczucka , usually portrayed as a patriot and military genius .