Spiritism

origins . spiritism is based on the five books of the spiritist codification written by french educator hypolite léon denizard rivail under the pseudonym allan kardec , in which he reported observations of phenomena at séances that he attributed to incorporeal intelligence ( spirits ) . his work was later extended by writers such as léon denis , gabriel delanne , arthur conan doyle , ernesto bozzano , gustav geley , chico xavier , divaldo pereira franco , emídio brasileiro , alexandr aksakov , william crookes , oliver lodge , albert de rochas , and amalia domingo soler . kardec 's research was influenced by the fox sisters and the use of ouija . interest in mesmerism also contributed to early spiritism . swedenborg . emanuel swedenborg ( january 29 , 1688 – march 29 , 1772 ) was a lutheran sweden scientist , philosopher , seer , and theologian . swedenborg had a prolific career as an inventor and scientist . at 56 , he claimed to have experienced visions of the spiritual world and talked with angels , devils , and spirits by visiting heaven and hell . he claimed he was directed by the lord jesus christ to reveal the doctrines of his second coming . swedenborg , however , warned against seeking contact with spirits . in his work apocalypse explained , 1182.4 , he wrote , '' many persons believe that man can be taught by the lord by means of spirits speaking with him . but those who believe this , and desire to do so , are not aware that it is associated with danger to their souls . '' see also heaven and hell 249 . nevertheless , swedenborg is often cited by spiritists as a major precursor for their beliefs . fox sisters . sisters leah ( 1814–90 ) , margaretta ( 1836–93 ) , and catherine ( 1838–92 ) fox played an important role in the development of modern spiritualism . the daughters of john and margaret fox , they were residents of hydesville , new york . in 1848 , the family began to hear unexplained rapping sounds . kate and maggie conducted channeling sessions in an attempt to contact the presumed spiritual entity creating the sounds , and claimed contact with the spirit of a peddler who was allegedly murdered and buried beneath the house . a skeleton later found in the basement seemed to confirm this . the fox girls became instant celebrities . they demonstrated their communication with the spirit by using taps and knocks , automatic writing or psychography , and later even voice communication , as the spirit took control of one of the girls . skeptics suspected this was deception and fraud , and sister margaretta eventually confessed to using her toe-joints to produce the sound . although she later recanted this confession , she and her sister catherine were widely considered discredited , and died in poverty . nonetheless , belief in the ability to communicate with the dead grew rapidly , becoming a religious movement called spiritualism , which contributed significantly to kardec 's ideas . talking boards . after the news of the fox sisters came to france , people became more interested in what was sometimes termed the '' spiritual telegraph '' . planchette , the precursor of the pencil-less ouija boards , simplified the writing process which achieved widespread popularity in america and europe . sargent , epes , planchette or , the despair of science , roberts brothers , boston , 1869 . franz mesmer . franz mesmer ( may 23 , 1734 – march 5 , 1815 ) discovered what he called magnétisme animal ( animal magnetism ) , which became known as mesmerism . the evolution of mesmer 's ideas and practices led scottish surgeon james braid ( 1795–1860 ) to develop hypnotism in 1841 . spiritism incorporated various concepts from mesmerism , among them faith healing and the energization of water to be used as a medicine . difference from spiritualism . spiritism differs from spiritualism primarily in that it believes in reincarnation . spiritism was not accepted by uk and us spiritualists of the day as they were undecided whether or not to agree with the spiritist view on reincarnation . arthur conan doyle . ( 1926 ) . the history of spiritualism . new york : g.h . doran , co in what is spiritism ? , kardec calls spiritism a science dedicated to the relationship between incorporeal beings ( spirits ) and human beings . thus , some spiritists see themselves as not adhering to a religion , but to a philosophical doctrine with a scientific fulcrum and moral grounds . another author in the spiritualist movement , sir arthur conan doyle included a chapter arthur conan doyle . ( 1926 ) . the history of spiritualism . new york : g.h . doran , co about spiritism in his book history of spiritualism , in which he states that spiritism is spiritualist , but not vice versa . many spiritualist works are widely accepted in spiritism , particularly the works of 19th-century physicists william crookes william crookes . ( 1874 ) . researches on the phenomena of spiritualism . burns , london and oliver lodge . oliver lodge . ( 1930 ) . the reality of a spiritual world . e . benn . beliefs . spiritist codification . the basic doctrine of spiritism ( '' the codification '' ) is defined in five of allan kardec 's books : the spirits book—defines the guidelines of the doctrine , covering concepts such as god , spirit , universe , man , society , culture , morals and religion ; the mediums ' book—makes claims about the mechanics of the spiritual world , such as the processes involved in channeling spirits and techniques to be developed by mediums ; the gospel according to spiritism—comments on the gospels , highlighting passages that kardec believed represent the ethical fundamentals shared by all religious and philosophical systems ; heaven and hell—purports to provide interviews with spirits of deceased people intending to establish a correlation between the lives they led and their conditions in the beyond ; the genesis according to spiritism—attempts to reconcile religion and science , dealing with three major conflicts between the two : the origin of the universe ( and of life , as a consequence ) and the concepts of miracle and premonition . kardec also wrote a brief introductory pamphlet ( what is spiritism ? ) and was the most frequent contributor to the spiritist review . his essays and articles were posthumously collected into the posthumous works . fundamental principles . as defined in the spirits ' book , the main principles of spiritism are : '' god is the supreme intelligence-first cause of all things . '' allan kardec : the spirits ' book , page 63 . '' god is eternal , immutable , immaterial , unique , all powerful , sovereignly just and good . '' allan kardec : the spirits ' book , page 32 . '' a spirit is not an abstract , undefined being , only to be conceived of by our thought ; it is a real , circumscribed being , which , in certain cases , is appreciable by the senses of sight , hearing , and touch . '' '' all spirits are destined to attain perfection by passing through the different degrees of the spirit-hierarchy . this amelioration is effected by incarnation , which is imposed on some of them as an expiation , and on others as a mission . material life is a trial which they have to undergo many times until they have attained to absolute perfection '' allan kardec : the spirits ' book , page 33 . '' a spirit 's successive corporeal existences are always progressive , and never retrograde ; but the rapidity of our progress depends on the efforts we make to arrive at the perfection . '' '' the soul possessed its own individuality before its incarnation ; it preserves that individuality after its separation from the body . '' '' on its re-entrance into the spirit world , the soul again finds there all those whom it has known upon the earth , and all its former existences eventually come back to its memory , with the remembrance of all the good and of all the evil which it has done in them . '' '' spirits exert an incessant action upon the moral world , and even upon the physical world ; they act both upon matter and upon thought , and constitute one of the powers of nature , the efficient cause of many classes of phenomena hitherto unexplained or misinterpreted . '' '' spirits are incessantly in relation with men . the good spirits try to lead us into the right road , sustain us under the trials of life , and aid us to bear them with courage and resignation ; the bad ones tempt us to evil : it is a pleasure for them to see us fall , and to make us like themselves . '' allan kardec : the spirits ' book , page 33 , 34 . '' the moral teaching of the higher spirits may be summed up , like that of jesus , in the gospel maxim , 'do unto others as you would that others should do unto you ; ' that is to say , do good to all , and wrong no one . this principle of action furnishes mankind with a rule of conduct of universal application , from the smallest matters to the greatest . '' allan kardec : the spirits ' book , page 35 . according to kardec , the spiritist moral principles are in agreement with those taught by jesus . kardec , allan , the gospel explained by the spiritist doctrine other individuals such as francis of assisi , paul the apostle , buddha and gandhi are also sometimes considered by the spiritists . spiritist philosophical inquiry is concerned with the study of moral aspects in the context of an eternal life in spiritual evolution through reincarnation , a process believers hold as revealed by spirits . sympathetic research on spiritism by scientists can be found in the works of oliver lodge , william crookes , william fletcher barrett , albert de rochas , emma bragdon , alexander moreira-almeida and others . basic tenets . the five chief points of the spiritism are : a . t . schofield . ( 2003 ) modern spiritism : its science and religion . kessinger publishing lewis spence . ( 2003 ) . encyclopedia of occultism & parapsychology . kessinger publishing there is a god , defined as '' the supreme intelligence and primary cause of everything '' ; there are spirits , all of whom are created simple and ignorant , but owning the power to gradually perfect themselves ; the natural method of this perfection process is reincarnation , through which the spirit faces countless different situations , problems and obstacles , and needs to learn how to deal with them ; as part of nature , spirits can naturally communicate with living people , as well as interfere in their lives ; many planets in the universe are inhabited . the central tenet of spiritism is the belief in spiritual life . from this perspective , the spirit is eternal , and evolves through a series of incarnations in the material world . . mediumship . spiritists assert that communication between the spiritual world and the material world happens all the time , to varying degrees . they believe that some people barely sense what the spirits tell them in an entirely instinctive way , and are not aware about their influence . in contrast , they believe that mediums have these natural abilities highly developed , and are able to communicate with spirits and interact with them visually or audibly , or through writing ( known by kardecists as psychography or automatic writing ) . ( see the book of mediums by allan kardec chapters x to xiii ) . spiritist practice . kardec 's works do not establish any rituals or formal practices . instead , the doctrine suggests that followers adhere to some principles common to all religions . meetings . the most important types of practices within spiritism are : regular meetings & mdash ; with a regular schedule , usually on evenings , two or three times a week . they involve a short lecture followed by some interactive participation of the attendees . these meetings are open to anyone ; medium meetings & mdash ; usually held after a regular meeting , only those deemed prepared or '' in need '' are expected to attend ; youth and children 's meetings & mdash ; once a week , usually on saturday afternoons or sunday mornings ; the spiritist equivalent to protestant christian sunday schools ; healing ; lectures & mdash ; longer , in-depth lectures to a broader audience on subjects thought to be '' of general interest '' , sometimes at theatres or ballrooms , often given by guest speakers ; special meetings & mdash ; séances held discretely , intended to conduct some worthy work ; spiritist week and book fairs . organization . spiritist associations have various degrees of formality , with some groups having local , regional , national or international scope . local organizations are usually called spiritist centres or spiritist societies . regional and national organizations are called federations , such as the federação espírita brasileira and the federación espírita española ; international organizations are called unions , such as the union spirite française et francophone . for many of its followers , the description of spiritism is three-fold : science . however , the mainstream scientific community does not accept spiritism as scientific , and its belief system fits within the definition of religion . jonathan smith . ( 2009 ) . pseudoscience and extraordinary claims of the paranormal : a critical thinker 's toolkit . wiley-blackwell . . geographic distribution . spiritism has adherents in many countries , including canada , britain , france , germany , jamaica , japan , portugal , spain , united states , and particularly in latin american countries such as argentina , uruguay , cuba , puerto rico , and brazil , which has the largest proportion and greatest number of followers , largely in the form of umbanda . david hess . spirits and scientists : ideology , spiritism , and brazilian culture , pennsylvania state univ press , 1991 the largest spiritist group in asia are the vietnamese followers of cao đài or caodaists , who formed a new religion building on the legacy of allan kardec in 1926 in saigon and tây ninh in what was then french indochina hoskins , janet alison 2015 . the divine eye and the diaspora : vietnamese syncretism becomes transpacific caodaism . honolulu : university of hawaii press . p . 4 , 239 . in brazil , the movement has become widely accepted , largely due to chico xavier 's works . the official spiritist community there has about 20 million followers , although some elements of spiritism are more broadly accepted and practiced in various ways by three times as many people across the country . some statistics suggest an adherence to spiritist practices by 40 million people in brazil . kardec 's spiritism : home for healing and spiritual evolution - emma bragdon , phd in the philippines , there is the union espiritista cristiana de filipinas , incorporada ( union of christian spiritists in the philippines , inc . ) , which was founded at the turn of the 1900s and registered with the securities and exchange commission in 1905 . the religious organization , which uses human mediums to communicate with spirits that have already attained purity or divinity for moral and spiritual guidance , has tens of thousands of members and worship centers in many parts of the country , mostly in northern luzon , central luzon and the national capital region . its motto : '' towards god through wisdom and love . '' its doctrine : '' without charity ( good deed ) , there is no possible salvation . '' it uses the holy bible as the basis of its teachings , supplemented by messages from divine spirits . criticisms . before world war i . since its early development , spiritism has attracted criticism . kardec 's own introductory book on spiritism , what is spiritism ? , published only two years after the spirits ' book , includes a hypothetical discussion between him and three idealized critics , '' the critic '' , '' the skeptic '' , and '' the priest '' , summing up much of the criticism spiritism has received . the broad areas of criticism relate to charlatanism , pseudoscience , heresy , witchcraft , and satanism . until his death , kardec continued to address these issues in various books and in his periodical , the revue spirite . later , a new source of criticism came from occultist movements such as the theosophical society , a competing new religion , which saw the spiritist explanations as too simple or even naïve . . interwar period . during the interwar period a new form of criticism of spiritism developed . rené guénon 's influential book the spiritist fallacy criticized both the more general concepts of spiritualism , which he considered to be a superficial mix of moralism and spiritual materialism , as well as spiritism 's specific contributions , such as its belief in what he saw as a post-cartesian , modernity concept of reincarnation distinct from and opposed to its two western predecessors , metempsychosis and transmigration . . post–world war ii . the catechism of the catholic church ( paragraph 2117 ) states that '' spiritism often implies divination or magical practices ; the church for her part warns the faithful against it '' . in brazil , catholic priests carlos kloppenburg and óscar gonzález-quevedo , among others , have written extensively against spiritism from both a doctrinal and parapsychological perspective . quevedo , in particular , has sought to show that spiritism 's claims of being a science are invalid . in addition to writing books on the subject , he has also hosted television programs debunking supposed paranormal phenomena , most recently in a series that ran in 2000 on globo 's news program , fantástico . brazilian spiritist , hernani guimarães andrade , has in turn written rebuttals to these criticisms . scientific skeptics also frequently target spiritism in books , media appearances , and online forums , identifying it as a pseudoscience . chico xavier . chico xavier ( april 2 , 1910 – june 30 , 2002 ) was a popular spiritist medium and philanthropist in brazil 's spiritist movement who wrote more than 490 books and over 10,000 letters to family members of deceased people , ostensibly using psychography . his books sold millions of copies , all of which had their proceeds donated to charity . they purportedly included poetry , novels , and even scientific treatises , some of which are considered by brazilian spiritist followers to be fundamental for the comprehension of the practical and theoretical aspects of allan kardec 's doctrine . one of his most famous books , the astral city , details one experience after dying . the book became a movie in 2010 available in multiple languages in addition to over 15 other movies . in popular culture . the following works contain concepts related to spiritist beliefs : . films . chico xavier , brazilian film , casting nelson xavier and ângelo antônio . a box office success in brazil , it follows the story of brazilian medium chico xavier . nosso lar , ( literally '' our home '' , but distributed under the title astral city : a spiritual journey internationally ) is a 2010 brazilian film directed by wagner de assis , based on the novel of the same name by chico xavier about spiritual life after death . kardec , a 2019 brazilian biographical drama film that follows the story of allan kardec , from his days as an educator to his contribution to the spiritist codification . . soap operas . in brazil , a number of soap operas have plots incorporating spiritism . '' a viagem '' ( the journey ) , produced in 1976/77 by tupi tv , involving mediumship , death , obsession , reincarnation , etc . it was remade by globo tv in 1994 . '' alma gêmea '' ( soulmate ) , produced in 2005/06 by rede globo , tells of a woman who dies and is reborn to find her soulmate again . '' o profeta '' ( the prophet ) , produced in 1977/78 by tupi tv and remade by globo tv ( 2006/07 ) , included spiritism as one of the philosophies trying to explain the main character 's gifts , including being able to predict the future . '' duas caras '' ( two-face ) , aired by rede globo in 2007/8 , includes a character named ezekiel , who is a pentecostalism challenged by manifestations of his mediumship . '' escrito nas estrelas '' ( written in the stars ) , ongoing as of july 2010 , includes various spiritist themes including reincarnation , spirit evolution , and mediumship . '' além do tempo '' ( beyond time ) , ongoing as of october 2015 , also includes many spiritist themes , including a second phase in which the characters reincarnate , in order to show the ongoing fights between them , and also that in future incarnations , their social class changes , being that low class characters come back as rich people and vice versa . see also . references . external links . for a list of writings by allan kardec see his biographic article . u.s . spiritist council british union of spiritist societies