Danny Bonaduce

early life . by his own account , bonaduce grew up in a dysfunctional family and suffered severe physical and emotional abuse at the hands of his father , tv writer and producer joseph bonaduce , while his mother betty could only stand by helplessly . . career . acting . bonaduce made a small appearance in the bewitcheds season 5 episode '' going ape '' , which aired on february 27 , 1969 , as a young boy in the park whose chimpanzee follows samantha ( elizabeth montgomery ) and tabitha ( erin murphy ) home . in the partridge family bonaduce played the role of danny partridge , a member of the musical partridge family . in the show , the partridges were a family band that toured the country in their hip , mondrian-inspired , painted school bus . danny partridge played bass guitar for the band and his younger siblings , tracy and chris , contributed to the band as percussionists . the series ran for four seasons , from 1970 to 1974 and , in 2003 , bonaduce was honored by the young artist award with its former child star '' lifetime achievement '' award for his role on the series . bonaduce made several movies during and after the run of the partridge family , including corvette summer ( 1978 ) starring mark hamill . hamill and bonaduce played high school students who went in search of a stolen customized corvette stingray . bonaduce also made guest appearances on several tv shows , including the television action drama chips . his career withered in the early 1980s . bonaduce and partridge family co-star dave madden made cameo appearances in a 1994 episode of married . with children . that same year , he appeared on an episode of space ghost coast to coast . he has also guest-starred in the first two episodes of the seventh season of csi : crime scene investigation and as the son of shirley jones 's character in the fourth season of the drew carey show . bonaduce has appeared as himself on the detective series monk and on the show girlfriends . bonaduce guest-starred with j . d . roth ( with whom he would later reunite for breaking bonaduce ) on a celebrity episode of sex wars . in 1999 , bonaduce appeared in the christmas episode , '' sabrina , nipping at your nose '' , of sabrina , the teenage witch . during his radio work , bonaduce was the host of the segment '' bonaduce 's buzz '' as part of wmaq-tv 's morning newscast first thing in the morning with art norman and allison rosati in 1994 ; but he left the station the following year to concentrate on his syndicated talk show . during the 1995–96 tv season , bonaduce was the host of danny ! , a syndicated talk show featuring the house band the critics . from 2001 to 2003 , bonaduce co-hosted the other half , a daytime talk show positioned as a complementary show to the view , on which he starred with mario lopez , dick clark , and cosmetic surgeon dr . jan adams ( who was later replaced by actor dorian gregory ) . during this time , he was also a hollywood correspondent for the australian morning show today . in 2005 , bonaduce starred in breaking bonaduce a vh1 reality show about his turbulent life with his wife gretchen . in 2006 , he had a recurring role in the crime scene drama csi as a character known as izzy delancy – a once great , but philandering , rock star , the victim of the infamous miniature killer . he also hosted the short-lived tabloid-themed game show starface , on game show network . in 2007 , bonaduce was both host and judge of the show i know my kid 's a star , a reality show on vh1 featuring parents and children trying to break into show business . he also appeared as a judge on the australian version of the show , my kid 's a star . bonaduce , admitting his own less-than-stellar track record , was a commentator for trutv 's trutv presents : world 's dumbest . from 2008 to 2013 . radio and music . bonaduce 's eponym lp was released in 1973 by lion records , a subsidiary label of mgm records . the single from the album , '' dreamland '' was a minor hit . in the late 1980s , bonaduce had become an on-air radio personality . he worked an overnight shift at philadelphia 's wegx-fm . from 1994 to 1996 , bonaduce hosted his own radio show , the danny bonaduce show on wckl ( fm ) in chicago . between 1996 and 1998 , bonaduce hosted a morning radio show in detroit on wkqi with comedian and last comic standing winner john heffron . in 1998 bonaduce was the morning show host for new york city 's big 105 wbix for a brief period . bonaduce was part of the adam carolla show in 2007 . in 2008 he was given a daily one-hour solo spot known as broadcasting bonaduce , which was broadcast locally on the l.a.-based klsx station . in february 2009 , it was announced that the station had changed its format from talk to top 40 , and the removal of broadcasting bonaduce from the klsx schedule was confirmed . on october 31 , 2011 , it was announced by seattle radio station kzok that bonaduce would be co-hosting their morning-drive show beginning on november 14 , 2011 . bonaduce came to seattle from a radio stint at wysp-fm in philadelphia , following a format change from classic rock to all sports radio in september 2011 . bonaduce is an ordained minister ; he was ordained online in order to perform a wedding ceremony as part of a 94wysp radio promotion in early 2011 . . altercation with jonny fairplay . on october 2 , 2007 , bonaduce was involved in an altercation with survivor show participant jonny fairplay during the fox reality awards . toward the end of the awards show , fairplay appeared onstage and was booed by the audience . bonaduce walked on stage and explained that the audience reaction was '' because they hate you . '' bonaduce was walking off the stage as fairplay called him back . fairplay then jumped on bonaduce to hug him and bonaduce stated later that he was uncomfortable with fairplay 's hands near his throat . bonaduce , a black belt in tang soo do , adjusted his balance and grip , and threw fairplay over his head . fairplay fell to the floor , face first , unable to halt his fall with his hands due to the microphone he was holding . fairplay stood up after a few moments and staggered before slowly walking off stage , his back to the audience . bonaduce then smiled and proceeded to make faces and exaggerated shrugging motions at the audience before walking off stage . bonaduce later said the two had never previously had any negative altercations or words , but that they had met occasionally in the past . he said he had never liked fairplay , mostly because fairplay , true to his form , had lied about his grandmother 's death during his first run on survivor . while bonaduce did not believe fairplay was significantly hurt at the time , tmz.com confirmed that fairplay bled significantly , lost some teeth and suffered a broken toe . fairplay pressed charges , and a felony battery investigation was opened by the police . on october 5 , 2007 , the l.a . district attorney 's office concluded that there was insufficient evidence to prove bonaduce had committed battery , because the contact had been initiated by fairplay and bonaduce had acted in self-defense . . boxing and wrestling . as an adult , bonaduce boxed donny osmond and former brady barry williams in separate charity events . bonaduce won both fights , gaining a decision over osmond and a tko over williams . on june 11 , 2007 , it was announced that bonaduce would box attorney robert shapiro for a charitable event . on september 13 , 2008 , bonaduce defeated bob levy ( comedian ) by a tko in the second one-minute round of a planned three-round fight . prior to the event , levy had slapped bonaduce while visiting bonaduce 's dressing room . it was announced in early january 2009 that bonaduce would box retired baseball player josé canseco at a charity event in the philadelphia area . bonaduce reportedly trained for the fight in sacramento , california with boxer angelo núñez . on january 24 , 2009 , bonaduce and canseco fought to a majority draw . in april 1994 , it was announced that bonaduce would be making his professional wrestling debut in a '' dark match '' at the spring stampede in chicago . on april 17 , 1994 , bonaduce stepped into the ring at the allstate arena . his opponent was another 1970s tv star , the brady bunch 's christopher knight . bonaduce won . bonaduce had his second professional wrestling match at total nonstop action wrestling 's april pay-per-view event lockdown against eric young , which he lost . bonaduce was a key player in the series hulk hogan 's celebrity championship wrestling . . writing . in 2002 , bonaduce released an autobiography , random acts of badness . . personal life . bonaduce has a black belt in karate . '' the partridge famiy tree , '' spin , sep 1990 , p . 68 bonaduce married his first wife , setsuko hattori in 1985 , and they divorced in 1988 . on november 4 , 1990 , bonaduce met second wife gretchen hillmer on a blind date and , on a whim , they married the same day . despite the unusual start to the marriage , the two remained married for over sixteen years and had two children together , isabella and dante . on april 9 , 2007 , the two divorced , citing irreconcilable differences . bonaduce began dating his current wife , amy railsback , in april 2007 . they met at a starbucks in the los angeles area . railsback , who is 23 years his junior , is a former substitute school teacher . she now manages bonaduce 's career full-time , runs gravel tones productions inc , and is occasionally seen in sketches on the smoking gun presents : world 's dumbest . on trutv . he proposed to amy in march 2009 , and the couple married on november 22 , 2010 , at the four seasons on maui , hawaii . they maintain homes in both los angeles and in seattle . bonaduce and david cassidy , his the partridge family costar , remained close friends until cassidy 's death on november 21 , 2017 . on january 20 , 2018 , bonaduce attended cassidy 's memorial service in los angeles . bonaduce also met actress shirley jones on the set of the partridge family . jones often allowed bonaduce to stay at her home in order to avoid his difficult home life . according to jones , bonaduce was '' smart '' and '' talented '' but a troublemaker off-camera , who '' was still a kid and would do kid things like get a dish of food and throw it across the room or have a pillow fight '' . bonaduce later commented that '' shirley jones could not have been kinder to me '' . . arrests . on march 9 , 1990 , he was arrested while attempting to buy cocaine in daytona beach , florida . bonaduce was there to host an event for d.a.r.e . , an anti-drug campaign aimed at children . bonaduce was eventually fired from wegx . he later became the morning shift dj at kkfr-fm in phoenix , arizona . on march 31 , 1991 , bonaduce was arrested in phoenix for beating and robbing darius barney , a transvestite prostitute ; '' authorities said the victim suffered a broken nose and a cut to his face . '' soon after , he was fired from kkfr . in july of the same year , bonaduce pleaded guilty to reduced charges . amongst his punishments , he was required to pay barney 's medical bills . later that same year , bonaduce returned to wegx in philadelphia . . political views . bonaduce has expressed his mostly conservative political views during guest appearances . he is a strong supporter of capital punishment and a strong military . several controversial statements have been made by bonaduce regarding left-wing or liberal celebrities , such as his remarks that jane fonda should have been shot for treason for her role in support of the north vietnamese army and viet cong during the vietnam war . he also stated on msnbc 's scarborough country that '' personally i think at this point if anyone had a rope thick enough , i think that rosie should be strung up for treason '' , referring to rosie o'donnell . . references . further reading . dye , david . child and youth actors : filmography of their entire careers , 1914–1985 . jefferson , nc : mcfarland & co . , 1988 , p . & nbsp ; 23 . external links . interview with danny , and more about the music . when young stars burn out msn jan 10 2009 audio interview with in your head