Holstentor

appearance . the holsten gate is composed of a south tower , a north tower and a central building . it has four floors , except for the ground floor of the central block , where the gate 's passageway is located . the side facing west ( away from the city ) is called the '' field side '' , the side facing the city the '' city side '' . the two towers and the central block appear as one construction when viewed from the city side . on the field side , the three units can be clearly differentiated . here the two towers form semicircles which at their widest point extend 3.5 metres beyond the central block . the towers have conical roofs ; the central block has a pediment . passageway and inscriptions . the passageway once had two gates on the field side , which have not survived . a portcullis installed in 1934 does not correspond to the original security installations . instead , there was once a so-called '' pipe organ '' at this location , with individual bars which could be lowered separately rather than together as a set . thus it was possible to first lower all but one or two rods , leaving a small gap for their own men to slip through later . there is an inscription over the passageway on both the city side and the field side . on the city side it reads , '' spql '' and is framed by the years 1477 and 1871 , the former being the supposed date of construction ( the correct date is , however , now known to be 1478 ) , the latter being the date of the gate 's restoration and the founding of the german reich . this inscription was modeled on the roman '' spqr '' ( latin senatus populusque romanus - the senate and people of rome ) and stands for senatus populusque lubecensis . it was , however , affixed only in 1871 . there was previously no inscription at this location . it would also have been pointless , since the view of the lower parts of the holsten gate from the city side was obscured by high walls . there is another inscription on the field side . the text is '' concordia domi foris pax '' ( '' harmony within , peace without '' ) . this inscription is also from 1871 and is a shortened form of the text which had previously been on the ( not preserved ) foregate : '' concordia domi et pax foris sane res est omnium pulcherrima '' ( '' harmony within and peace without are indeed the greatest good of all '' ; see '' outer holsten gate '' below ) . fortifications on the field side . functionally , the field and the city side have very different designs . while the city side is richly decorated with windows , this would be inappropriate on the field side considering the possibility of combat situations . on the field side there are accordingly only a few small windows . in addition , the walls are interspersed with embrasures . also , the wall thickness on the field side is greater than on the city side : 3.5 metres compared to less than 1 metre . the reasoning during construction may have been to be able to quickly destroy the gate from the city side in an emergency , so that it would not fall into enemy hands as a bulwark . the loopholes and the openings of the gun chambers are directed toward the field side . in each tower there were three gun chambers , one each on the ground , first and second floors . those on the ground floor have not been preserved . since the building has subsided over the centuries , they are now 50 centimetres below ground level , and even below the new flooring . on the first upper storey there are , in addition to the aforementioned chambers , two slits for small guns which were above and between the three chambers . there are also small openings on the third upper storey with forward- and downward-directed slits for firing small arms . the central block has no loopholes . the windows above the passage were also designed for dousing invaders with pitch or boiling water . ornamentation . the most striking nonfunctional embellishments are two so-called terracotta stripes which encircle the building . these consist of individual tiles , most of which are square with sides of 55 centimetres . each tile bears one of three different ornaments : either an arrangement of four heraldic lilies , a symmetrical lattice , or a representation of four thistle leaves . there is no apparent order to these recurring symbols , but each group of eight tiles is always followed by a tile with a different design . it has the form of a heraldic shield and bears either the lübeck heraldic eagle or a stylized tree . these shields are flanked by two male figures who function as bearers of a coat of arms . the terracotta stripes were repaired during restoration work between 1865 and 1870 . only three of the original tiles are preserved as museum specimens . the new tiles approximate the former design , although liberties were taken during the restoration . for example , the design of the heraldic eagle motif is by no means a reflection of the original . the pediment was also not faithfully restored , but this is not the fault of the restorers , since in the 19th century it had long been gone and its original appearance was unknown . an old view on an altarpiece in the lübeck fortress monastery shows a holsten gate with five pediment towers . but since this picture shows the holstentor gate in the middle of a fantasy landscape of mountains and forests the credibility of the representation is disputed . today , three towers crown the pediment , but they are visible only from the city side . it was constructed with red bricks . interior . both tower interiors have the same design . the ground floor and first upper story have the highest ceilings , while the floors above are much lower . two narrow spiral staircases wind their way upwards , in each case between the central building and the adjacent tower . on each floor corridors connect the rooms of the central block with tower rooms at the same level . the ceiling of the north tower 's second floor has been removed , so that today the second and third upper storeys there share a common space . this change dates from 1934 and does not reflect the original situation . the gun chambers are in front of the loopholes . today there are guns in the chambers of the second floor , but they are not originals and were placed there at a late date . above the gun chambers are hooks from which chains were suspended and attached to the cannon to cushion the recoil after firing . the higher gun chambers of the first upper storey could only be accessed with ladders . history . the rich and wealthy hanseatic city of lübeck felt the need in the course of the centuries to protect itself from outside threats with ever stronger walls and fortifications . three gates gave access to the city : the citadel gate in the north , mill gate in the south , and the holsten gate in the west . to the east , the city was protected by the dammed wakenitz river . here , the less martial hüxter gate led out of the city . these city gates were initially simple gates which were repeatedly strengthened over time so that they eventually all had an outer , middle and inner gate . today , only fragments remain of these ancient city gates . the gate now known as the citadel gate is the former interior citadel gate ; the middle and outer citadel gates no longer exist . all three mill gates have completely disappeared . the gate now known as the holsten gate is the former middle holsten gate ; there was also an ( older ) inner holsten gate , an outer holsten gate , and even a fourth gate , known as the second outer holsten gate . so the history of the holsten gate is actually the history of four consecutive gates , although only one of them is left . the names of the individual gates changed as a matter of course as their components emerged and disappeared . the middle holsten gate was once the outer holsten gate before the gates on either side were constructed . still today there is a great deal of confusion about the names as one studies the historical record . the four gates and their history are described below . inner holsten gate . the oldest holsten gate guarded the nearby banks of the trave river . one had to leave the city through this gate in order to get to the holsten bridge , which crossed the river . it is not known when a gate was erected here for the first time . the holsten bridge was first mentioned in a 1216 deed signed by the king of denmark . it is likely that already at that time there was a gate and a city wall along the trave river . the designations '' holsten bridge '' ( and '' holsten gate '' ) are simply a consequence of the fact that the city 's western exit was in the direction of holstein . historical records indicate that the holsten bridge and holsten gate were renewed in 1376 . there is good evidence for the appearance of the gate erected at that time in a woodcut of a view of the city of lübeck produced by elias diebel . although this is a city view from the eastern , wakenitz side of the old inner city hill , the artist has folded out essential parts of the gate 's west side , so that they too become visible . it was a rectangular tower with a wooden gallery on the upper part . at an unknown date in the 17th century , the inner holsten gate was replaced by a smaller , simple half-timbered gate—possibly because no point was seen in having a strong inner gate in light of the strong outer fortifications which had been erected in the meantime . the inner holsten tor was connected to the dwelling of the tollkeeper , who guarded the access to the city at this location . the half-timbered gate was replaced by a simple iron gate in 1794 , which in turn was demolished in 1828 , together with the tollkeeper 's house and the city wall along the trave river . it is likely that there was a gate also on the opposite bank of the trave at an early date . but nothing is known of its appearance . if it existed , it was torn down before or after the construction of the middle holsten gate . middle holsten gate . in the 15th century the entire gate construction was considered to be inadequate . the proliferation of firearms and canon made stronger fortifications necessary . it was decided to build another gate—the outer holsten gate , later known as the middle holsten gate and today only as the holsten gate . funding was secured by a legacy of the councilman john broling amounting to 4,000 lübeck marks . emil ferdinand fehling : lübeckische ratslinie . nr . 525 in 1464 the city 's architect , hinrich helmstede , began construction , which was completed in 1478 . it was erected on a seven-metre high hill raised for the purpose . already during the construction period this foundation proved to be unstable . the south tower sagged because of the marshy ground and already during constructions attempts were made to compensate for its inclination . for more history of the middle holsten gate see the section on demolition and restoration below . outer holsten gate . the exterior holsten gate was also known as the renaissance gate , the foregate or the crooked gate . it was constructed in the 16th century when a wall was built west of the middle holsten gate into which a gate was inserted . the outer holsten gate was completed in 1585 . the new gate obstructed the view of the middle holsten gate since its eastern exit was located only 20 metres from that construction . a walled area known as the zwinger was created between the two gates . its foregate was small compared with the approximately one hundred years older middle holsten gate , but much more richly decorated on the field side . the city side was by contrast left plain . the outer holsten gate was the first gate to bear an inscription . it read , '' pulchra res est pax foris et concordia domi – mdlxxxv '' ( '' it is wonderful to have peace without and harmony within - 1585 '' ) and was placed on the city side . it was later moved to the field side and slightly modified ( '' concordia domi et foris pax sane res est omnium pulcherrima '' , '' harmony within and peace without are the greatest good of all '' ) . connected to the gate was the home of the wall master , who was responsible for the maintenance of the fortifications . the builder of the renaissance gate was probably the city architect hermann von rode , who designed the front following dutch prototypes . for example , the nieuwe oosterpoort in hoorn is directly comparable . this gate existed for about 250 years and was in the end sacrificed to the railway ; it was demolished in 1853 to make room for the first lübeck train station and tracks . today , this station no longer exists either ; the present station is located about 500 metres to the west . second outer holsten gate . at the beginning of the 17th century new city walls were built in front of the city moat , under the supervision of military engineer johhann von brüssel . as part of this construction a fourth holsten gate was built in 1621 . it was completely integranted into the high walls and topped by an octagonal tower . the archways bore the inscriptions '' si deus pro nobis , quis contra nos '' ( '' if god be for us , who can be against us ? '' on the city side and '' sub alis altissimi ( '' under the protection of the most high '' on the field side . this gate was the last of the four holsten gates to be constructed and the first to disappear , namely in 1808 . demolition and restoration in the 19th century . in the course of industrialization , the fortifications were considered to be only annoying obstacles . in 1808 the second outer holsten gate was demolished , in 1828 the inner holsten gate , and in 1853 the outer holsten gate . it was then considered to be only as a matter of time before the middle holsten gate , the only remaining of the four gates , would be torn down . indeed , in 1855 , lübeck citizens petitioned the senate to finally demolish the remaining gate , since it hindered the extension of the railway facilities . this petition had 683 signatures . however , there was at that time also growing resistance to the destruction of old buildings . thus august reichensperger wrote in 1852 , '' even lübeck , once the proud head of the hanseatic league , does not seem able to endure the reflection of its former glory . it maims , crops and covers up so assiduously that '' modern enlightenment '' will soon have nothing to be ashamed of any more '' . when king frederick william iv of prussia heard of this , he sent prussia 's then-curator of historic monuments , ferdinand von quast , to salvage whatever could be saved . otto dziobek : infanterie-regiment '' lübeck '' ( 3 . hanseatisches ) nr . 162 ; erste auflage 1922 , im zusammenhang mit dem general v . quast und der bedeutung der v . quasts für lübeck controversy over the demolition went on for a long time . a decision was made only in 1863 when the lübeck citizens decided by a majority of just one vote not to demolish the building but to instead extensively restore it . meanwhile , the gate was in very bad condition , since every year it had sunk a few centimetres further into the ground . the lowest loopholes were already 50 centimetres below ground , and the inclination of the entire gate was beginning to be dangerous . this drastically altered the statics of the building , so that its collapse was feared . the holsten gate was thoroughly restored , with work continuing into 1871 . afterwards there was a change in the relationship of the lübeck population to the holsten gate . it was no longer perceived as a troublesome ruin , but as a symbol of a proud past . in 1925 , the german association of cities made the holstentor its symbol . as early as 1901 , the marzipan manufacturer niederegger used the holsten gate in its company trademark . other lübeck companies did the same . restoration 1933/34 . since the towers continued to slant and their collapse could still not be ruled out , a second restoration became necessary . this occurred in the years 1933-34 , during which the holsten gate was stabilized so that it finally stood firm . in this final restoration , reinforced concrete anchors were used to secure the towers , which were girded by iron rings . changes were , however , also made which did not correspond with the original character of the gate , including the above-mentioned merging of north tower floors . the nazis turned the holsten gate into a museum . it was called the hall of honor and glory , and was supposed to represent lübeck and german history from the perspective of nazi ideology . in the second half of the 20th century minor repairs were made to the holsten gate which are no longer in line with current standards for architectural conservation . restoration 2005/06 . from march 2005 to december 2006 , the holsten gate was again restored . the restoration was estimated to cost around one million euros , with 498,000 euros ( the originally planned cost ) being provided by the german foundation for monument protection and the possehl foundation . the remaining costs were primarily covered through donations from individuals , companies and academic institutions . a swastika dating from 1934 was cut out and taken away by unknown parties a few days after the scaffolding was installed for the repairs . it was considered to be the last swastika still remaining on a public building in germany and was supposed to be concealed with metal sheeting as part of the restoration work . a plate with the date 2006 was put up where the stolen swastika had been to commemorate the completion of restoration work . on 2 december 2006 , the holstentor reopened to the public as part of a light show created by the artist michael batz . for safety reasons the gate had been obscured during restoration by a high resolution depiction of the gate before work had begun , printed on scaffolding tarpaulins . the holsten gate today . in 1950 the holsten gate was again a museum , this time for municipal history . relics from historic lübeck were presented , the development of medieval lübeck was shown by using models and pictures , and models of the ships of the hanseatic league and the flagship '' eagle of lübeck '' were exhibited . the features of this museum were also not historically accurate . for example , the museum also included a torture chamber with a dungeon , a rack and other torture devices . but the holsten gate had never contained anything like that . the two monumental iron statues of reclining lions placed in an area in front of the holsten gate designed by harry maasz date from 1823 and are unsigned . they are attributed to christian daniel rauch and may possibly have been made with the collaboration of a member of rauch 's workshop , th . kalide ( 1801-1863 ) . one lion is asleep , the other is awake and attentively regards the other . they were originally placed in front of the house built in 1840 by the lübeck merchant and art collector john daniel jacobj ( 1798-1847 ) at große petersgrube 18 . in 1873 they were placed in front of the hotel stadt hamburg am klingenberg until its destruction in 1942 during world war ii , and only later in front of the holsten gate . they are complemented by a bronze statue on the other side of the street , the striding antilope , by the sculptor fritz behn . image : luebeck ht lion right.jpg lion on guard image : luebeck ht lion left.jpg sleeping lion image : behnantilope.jpg striding antelope the holsten gate museum was modernized in 2002 . not only was the torture chamber removed ; all rooms were redesigned according to a new concept that involved the integration of image and sound documentation . as of 2006 , the museum has been managed by the cultural foundation of the hanseatic city of lübeck . surroundings . the holsten gate is located in the lübeck city wall complex on the main access road connecting the main railway station with the suburb of st . lorenz and crossing the puppen bridge . the holsten gate square ( '' holstentorplatz '' ) is enclosed on one side by a branch of the deutsche bundesbank ; with new construction extending the original reichsbank building to the rear . on the other side there is the brick expressionist holsten gate hall ( '' holstentorhalle '' ) between the historic salt warehouses and the dgb 's house of trade unions ( '' gewerkschaftshaus '' ) . this building was altered with funds from the possehl foundation to create a rehearsal and teaching facility for lübeck 's university of music ( '' musikhochschule lübeck '' ) was rebuilt . another pedestrian bridge over the upper trave river was completed in spring 2007 to provide a connection the university 's main building complex in the old city centre . miscellaneous . on currency and postage stamps . the holsten gate appears on the 50 dm bank notes produced from 1960 to 1991 and on the german two-euro coin issued in 2006 . in 1948 it appeared on the four highest denominations ( dm 1 , dm 2 , dm 3 and dm 5 ) of the first long-term series of postage stamps in german mark currency , which featured buildings . in 2000 it appeared on the 5 dm and 10 dm postage stamp of another series , '' places of interest '' . in video games . the gate appeared in the trading simulation the patrician the gate also appeared as a landmark in the maxis pc game simcity 3000 . other uses . since 1926 there has been a stylization of the holsten gate in the emblem of the german association of cities ( deutscher städtetag dst ) . a simplified and scaled-down replica of the holsten gate was completed in 2008 for the hansa park in sierksdorf . the current guinness world record for the fastest marathon dressed as a landmark building was achieved by a richard mietz wearing a holstentor costume at the 2018 berlin marathon the amphicar ( a mass-produced amphibious automobile ) built in lübeck in the 1960s , sports a golden image of the holstentor on the horn button in the center of the steering wheel . many people who see the amphicar think the emblem is a castle .