Peter the Hermit

family . his name in french is pierre l'ermite . the structure of this name in french unlike in english has led some francophone scholars to treat l'ermite as a surname rather than a title . according to some authors , he was born around 1050 and was the son of renauld l'ermite of auvergne , and his wife alide montaigu , de picardie . others claim he was a member of the l'hermite family of auvergne in the netherlands . léon paulet , recherches sur pierre l'hermite et la croisade , ( ve jules renouard , 1856 ) p72 . these claims are disputed by other authors , who argue that nothing can confirm that '' the hermit '' was an actual surname and that surnames had not developed until after his day . heinrich hagenmeyer , le vrai et le faux sur pierre l'hermite : analyse critique des témoignages historiques relatifs à ce personnage et de légendes auxquelles il a donné lieu ( librairie de la société bibliographique , 1883 ) p 32 . dr m . hoefer ( dir . ) , nouvelle biographie générale , vol . 40 , paris , firmin-didot , 1862 , p.184 . . before 1096 . according to anna comnena , peter had to go on a pilgrimage to jerusalem before 1096 , but was prevented by the seljuk turks from reaching his goal and was reportedly mistreated . this was used to preach inflammatory statements about the turks toward upset christians . however , doubts remain whether he ever made such a journey . sources differ as to whether he was present at pope urban ii 's famous council of clermont in 1095 . it is certain that he was one of the preachers of the crusade in france afterward , and his own experience may have helped to give fire to the crusading cause . tradition in huy holds that he was there when the crusade was announced and he began his preaching at once . he soon leapt into fame as an emotional revivalist , and the vast majority of sources and historians agree that thousands of peasants eagerly took the cross at his bidding . jonathan riley-smith has proposed that the people 's crusade also included well-armed soldiers and nobles . this part of the crusade was also known as the crusade of the '' paupers '' , a term which in the middle ages indicated a status as impoverished or mendicant wards of the church . peter organized and guided the paupers as a spiritually purified and holy group of pilgrims who would , supposedly , be protected by the holy ghost . ( a list of known participants in peter 's army can be found at the digital humanities institute . ) . crusade to the holy land . before peter went on his crusade he received permission from simeon ii of jerusalem . peter was able to recruit from england , lorraine , france , and flanders . peter the hermit arrived in cologne , germany , on holy saturday , the 12th of april in 1096 . in the spring of 1096 peter was one of the prominent crusader leaders involved in the rhineland massacres against the jews . peter and his followers participated in the torture and slaughter of jews in lorraine , cologne , and mainz . in mainz , peter 's followers killed a large group of jews that had been granted refuge by a local bishop . leading the first of the five sections of the people 's crusade to the destination of their pilgrimage , the church of the holy sepulchre , he started ( with 40,000 men and women ) from cologne in april , 1096 , and arrived ( with 30,000 men and women ) at constantinople at the end of july . the eastern roman emperor alexios i komnenos was less than pleased with their arrival , for along with the head of the eastern orthodox church , patriarch nicholas iii of constantinople , he was now required to provide for the care and sustenance of the vast host of paupers for the remainder of their journey . before reaching constantinople though , peter and his followers began to experience difficulty . in zemun , the governor , who was descendant of a ghuzz turk , and a colleague , were frightened by the army 's size and decided to tighten regulations on a frontier . this would have been fine if a dispute about the sale of a pair of shoes had not occurred . this led to a riot and against peter 's wishes the town was attacked and the citadel was stormed . this resulted in 4000 hungarians being killed and many provisions being stolen . then on june 26 , 1096 peter 's army was able to cross the sava river . then the army marched into belgrade , set the town on fire , and pillaged it . the army then made its way into and through niš after an eight-day delay . after riding through nish the crusaders made their way towards sofia when they were attacked on the road . the army took heavy losses . they lost 1/4 of their men but arrived in sofia on july 12 nonetheless . the forces then arrived in constantinople on august 1 , 1096 . after a while , they arrived at a castle called xerigordon and captured it . they captured the castle by taking possession of the castle 's spring and well . after setting off to civetot , they had set up camp near a village called dracon . this is where the turks ambushed peter and his forces . this was the final battle of the people 's crusade that peter led . most of the paupers failed to make their way out of catholic jurisdiction . the majority were incapable of being provided for by the various lordships and dioceses along the way and either starved , returned home or were put into servitude , while a substantial number were captured and sold into slavery by the various slavic robber barons in the balkans , kindling the view of the balkan slavs as unredeemed robbers and villains . peter joined the only other section which had succeeded in reaching constantinople , that of walter sans avoir , into a single group and encamped the still numerous pilgrims around constantinople while he negotiated the shipping of the people 's crusade to the holy land . the emperor meanwhile had failed to provide for the pilgrims adequately and the camp made itself a growing nuisance , as the increasingly hungry paupers turned to pilfering the imperial stores . alexios , worried at the growing disorder and fearful of his standing before the coming armed crusader armies , quickly concluded negotiations and shipped them across the bosporus to the asiatic shore at the beginning of august , with promises of guards and passage through the turkish lines . he warned the people 's crusade to await his orders , but in spite of his warnings , the paupers entered turkish territory . the turks began skirmishing with the largely unarmed host . peter returned in desperation to constantinople , seeking the emperor 's help . in peter 's absence , the pilgrims were ambushed and cut to pieces in detail by the turks , who were more disciplined , at the battle of civetot . despite peter 's pronunciations of divine protection , the vast majority of the pilgrims were slaughtered by the swords and arrows of the turks or were enslaved . left in constantinople with the small number of surviving followers , during the winter of 1096–1097 , with little hope of securing byzantine support , the people 's crusade awaited the coming of the armed crusaders as their sole source of protection to complete the pilgrimage . when the princes arrived , peter joined their ranks as a member of the council in may 1097 , and with the little following which remained they marched together through asia minor to jerusalem . while his '' paupers '' never regained the numbers previous to the battle of civetot , his ranks were increasingly replenished with disarmed , injured , or bankrupted crusaders . nonetheless , aside from a few rousing speeches to motivate the crusaders , he played a subordinate part in the remaining history of the first crusade which at this point clearly settled on a military campaign as the means to secure the pilgrimage routes and holy sites in palestine . peter appears , at the beginning of 1098 , as attempting to escape from the privations of the siege of antioch—showing himself , as guibert of nogent says , a '' fallen star . '' guibert and other sources go on to write that peter was responsible for the speech before the half-starved and dead crusaders which motivated their sally from the gates of antioch and their subsequent crushing defeat of the overwhelmingly superior muslim army besieging the city . thus , having recovered his stature , in the middle of the year he was sent by the princes to invite kerbogha to settle all differences via a duel , which the emir subsequently declined . in 1099 peter appears as the treasurer of the alms at the siege of arqa ( march ) , and as leader of the supplicatory processions around the walls of jerusalem before it fell , and later within jerusalem which preceded the crusaders ' surprising victory at the battle of ascalon ( august ) . at the end of 1099 , peter went to latakia , and sailed thence for the west . from this time he disappears from the historical record . albert of aix records that he died in 1131 , as prior of a church of the holy sepulchre which he had founded in france . . role in preaching first crusade . although later catholic historians and many other scholars disagree , roger of wendover and matthew paris wrote that peter the hermit was the true author and originator of the first crusade , a view also recounted in the anonymous gesta francorum – written c . 1100 – and by albert of aix in his historia hierosolymitanae expeditionis , and also supported by some modern scholars . flori , jean . pierre l ' ermite et la première croisade , éditions fayard , 1999 blake , e.o . and morris , colin . peter and the origins of the first crusade , studies in church history , vol 22 , pp.440-453 . oxford , 1985 . such historical sources recount that during an early visit to jerusalem sometime before 1096 , jesus appeared to peter the hermit in the church of the holy sepulchre , and bade him preach the crusade . this story also appears in the pages of william of tyre , which indicates that even a few generations after the crusade , the descendants of the crusaders already believed peter was its originator . the origin of such a legend is a matter of some interest . von sybel , in his geschichte des ersten kreuzzuges , published in 1841 , suggested that in the camp of the paupers ( which existed side by side with that of the knights , and grew increasingly large as the crusade took a more and more heavy toll on the purses of the crusaders ) some idolization of peter the hermit had already begun , parallel to the similar glorification of godfrey by the lorrainers . . later life . there is very little concrete record for his life after returning to europe and much of what we do know is speculation or legend . however , albert of aix records that he died in 1131 , as prior of a church of the holy sepulchre which he had founded in france thomas dudley fosbroke , british monachism ; or , manners and customs of the monks and nuns of england ( etc . ) 3 . ed ( john bowyer nichols , 1843 ) p 317 . william hurd , a new universal history of the religious rites , ceremonies , and customs of the whole world : or , a complete and impartial view of all the religions in the various nations of the universe both ancient and modern , from the creation down to the present time : to which is added , a geographical description of the various parts , the religious rites and ceremonies of whose inhabitants are described , ( j . hemingway , 1799 ) p255 . or flanders . it is thought that during the siege of antioch during the days of famine and cold weather , peter attempted to flee only to be captured by the norman tancred and placed back on the battlefield in 1112 1 . peter also held services of intercession for latin and native recruits . peter advised greeks and latins to form processions as well . it is generally quoted that he founded an augustinian monastery in france named for the church of the holy sepulchre . however , it was actually in flanders at neufmoustier near huy , peter the hermit at britanica online . or huy itself which may have been huy history . his tomb is in the neufmoustier abbey , so it is presumed that this was his abbey but in another tradition the nearby solières abbey claims that it was his foundation . peter 's obituary is in the chronicle of abbey neufmoustier huy . l'original de cet obituaire se trouve au musée curtius à liège , page of 8 july 1115 . on its page entry of 8 july 1115 the chronicle says that this day saw '' the death of dom pierre , of pious memory , venerable priest and hermit , who deserved to be appointed by the lord to announce the first to the holy cross '' and the text continues with '' after the conquest of the holy land , pierre returned to his native country '' and also that '' he founded this church . and chooses them a decent burial '' . this record further supports neufmoustier 's claim as his foundation . legend . since his death various legends have sprung up around peter . one legend has its roots in the writings of jacques de vitry , who found it convenient to convince people from the diocese of liège of the merits of participating in the albigensian crusade by manipulating the story of peter . ul de saint-hilaire , liège et meuse mystérieux , vol . 2 , bruxelles , édition rossel , 1982 . les grands mythes de l'histoire de belgique , de flandre et de wallonie , evo-histoire , 1996 another legend is given in the 14th century by the french troubadour jehan-de-bouteiller , who sings the memory of '' a dict peter the hermit deschendant a count of clairmont by a sieur d'herrymont who married a montagut '' . peter the hermit 's parents would , therefore , be renauld de hérimont and aleidis montaigu ( aleidis is known in huy as the '' mother of dom pierre , with a home in huy '' ) . pierre d'hérimont dit l'ermite by freddy van daele , édition alfred van daele , hosdent-sur-mehaigne,2008 there is also a strong and old tradition that peter the hermit was the first to introduce the use of the rosary . it follows that he began this tradition in about 1090 . peter the hermit at britanica online . if this is the case and if he had also been on a previous pilgrimage to jerusalem , it is possible that he derived this practice from similar islamic practices . references . sources . '' peter the hermit '' , famous men of the middle ages prof . j . s . c . riley-smith , prof , jonathan phillips , dr . alan v . murray , dr . guy perry , dr . nicholas morton , a database of crusaders to the holy land , 1099-1149 ( available on-line )