Vorticism

prelude to vorticism . in the summer of 1913 roger fry , with duncan grant and vanessa bell , set up the omega workshops in fitzrovia – in the heart of bohemian london . fry was an advocate of an increasingly abstract art and design practice , and the studio/gallery/retail outlet allowed him to employ and support artists in sympathy with this approach , such as wyndham lewis , frederick etchells , cuthbert hamilton and edward wadsworth . lewis had made an impact at the allied artists ’ salon the previous year with a huge virtually abstract work , kermesse ( now lost ) , clive bell in the athenaeum of 27 july 1912 explained that , in order to appreciate this work , visitors ‘ having shed all irrelevant prejudices in favour of representation will be able to contemplate it as a piece of pure design ’ . and in the same year he had worked with the american sculptor jacob epstein on the decoration of madame strindberg ’ s notorious cabaret theatre club the cave of the golden calf . lewis and his omega workshop colleagues etchells , hamilton and wadsworth exhibited together later in the year at brighton with epstein and david bomberg . ‘ the camden town group : an exhibition of the work of english post-impressionists , cubists and others ’ , public art galleries , brighton , december 1913–january 1914 . lewis curated the exhibition ’ s ‘ cubist room ’ and provided a written introduction in which he attempted to cohere the various strands of abstraction on display : ‘ these painters are not accidently associated here , but form a vertiginous , but not exotic , island in the placid and respectable archipelago of english art . ’ quoted by cork , vorticism and its allies , p . 12 . . rebel artists . a quarrel with roger fry provided lewis with a pretext to leave the omega workshops and set up a rival organisation . karin orchard , ‘ ‘ ‘ a laugh like a bomb ” : the history and ideas of the vorticists ’ , in paul edwards ( ed . ) , blast : vorticism 1914–1918 ( aldershot : ashgate , 2000 ) , p . 15 . financed by lewis ’ s painter friend kate lechmere , the rebel art centre was established in march 1914 at 38 great ormond street . cork , vorticism and its allies , p . 17 . it was to be a platform for the art and ideas of lewis ’ s circle , and a lecture series included talks by lewis ’ s friend the poet ezra pound , the novelist ford madox hueffer ( later ford madox ford ) and the italian ‘ futurist ’ , filippo tommaso marinetti . marinetti had been a familiar – and provocative – presence in london since 1910 , and lewis had seen him create an art movement on the basis of his ‘ futurist ’ manifesto . it seemed as if everything novel or shocking in london was now being described as ‘ futurist ’ – including the work of the english cubists . cork , vorticism and its allies , p . 20 . when marinetti and the english futurist c . r . v . nevinson published a manifesto of ‘ vital english art ’ , the observer , 7 june 1914 . giving the rebel art centre as an address , it seemed like an attempted takeover . a few weeks later , lewis took out an advertisement in the spectator to announce the publication of ‘ the manifesto of the vorticists ’ – an english abstract art movement that was a ‘ parallel movement to cubism and expressionism ’ and would , the advertisement promised , be a ‘ death blow to impressionism and futurism ’ . the spectator , 13 june 1914 . . inventing vorticism . ezra pound had introduced the concept of ‘ the vortex ’ in relation to modernist poetry and art early on in 1914 . initially in correspondence in late 1913 and then in an informal talk at the rebel art centre in april 1914 ( philip rylands , ‘ introduction ’ , in antliff & greene ( eds . ) , the vorticists , p . 25 , n . 33 ) . at its most obvious , for example , london could be seen to be a ‘ vortex ’ of intellectual and artistic activity . however , for pound there was a more specific – if obscure – meaning : ‘ the vortex was that point in the cyclone where energy cuts into space and imparts form to it … the pattern of angles and geometric lines which is formed by our vortex in the existing chaos . ’ ezra pound in a 1915 interview for the russian journal strelets , quoted in rylands , ‘ introduction ’ , p . 23 . lewis saw the potential of ‘ vorticism ’ as an exciting rallying call that was also sufficiently vague , he hoped , to embrace the individualism of the rebel artists . lewis ’ s vorticist manifesto was to be published in a new literary and art journal , blast – ironically , the journal ’ s title had been suggested by nevinson , who was now persona non grata since the ‘ vital english art ’ manifesto . the french sculptor , painter and anarchist henri gaudier-brzeska had met ezra pound in july 1913 , mark antliff , ‘ sculptural nominalism/anarchist vortex ’ , in antliff & greene ( eds . ) , the vorticists , p . 47 . and their ideas on ‘ the new sculpture ’ published in the egoist , 16 february 1914 , pp . 67–8 , and 16 march 1914 , pp . 117–18 . developed into a theory of vorticist sculpture . two women artists , helen saunders and jessica dismorr , who had turned to ‘ cubist works ’ in 1913 , joined the rebels – and , although they were not regarded highly by the men , brigid peppin argues that saunders ’ s ‘ juxtapositions of strong and unexpected colour ’ may have influenced lewis ’ s later use of forceful colour . brigid peppin , ‘ women that a movement forgot ’ , tate , etc . 22 ( summer 2011 ) , p . 35 . another up-and-coming ‘ english cubist ’ using bold , discordant colour combinations was william roberts . writing much later , he recalled lewis borrowing two paintings – religion and dancers – to hang at the rebel art centre . william roberts , some early abstract and cubist work 1913–1920 ( london , 1957 ) , p . 9 . reproductions of these paintings were included in the first issue of blast . . blast . although the rebel art centre was short-lived , it closed later in 1914 following paranoia , jealousy and squabbling especially with regard to the relationship between kate latchmere and wyndham lewis and t . e . hulme – see , cork , vorticism and its allies , p . 17 . ‘ vorticism ’ was given assured longevity through the dazzling typography and the audacious ( and humorous ) ‘ blasting ’ and ‘ blessing ’ of myriad sacred cows of english and american culture that appeared in the first issue of blast : the review of the great english vortex , published in july 1914 . image : bomberg , the mud bath.jpg thumb 180x240px left david bomberg , the mud bath , 1914 , tate blast was launched at a ‘ riotous celebratory dinner ’ cork , vorticism and its allies , p . 21 . at the dieudonné hotel in the st james 's area of london on 15 july 1914 . the dieudonné ( the 'god-given ' ) was a french-run hotel at 9–11 ryder street ( now part of christie ’ s building in king street ) . it closed later in 1914 . in william roberts ’ s large painting from 1961–2 the vorticists at the restaurant de la tour eiffel , spring 1915 , roberts represents the blast launch as being at the restaurant de la tour eiffel in percy street , fitzrovia . richard cork clarifies that the painting is an ‘ imaginative evocation ’ of the event ‘ rather than a historically accurate record … . however the tour eiffel ’ s genial proprietor , rudolphe stulik , was always lavish with his hospitality towards the vorticists ; and roberts … . testified that ‘ ‘ in my memory la cuisine française and vorticism are indissolubly linked ” ’ – cork , vorticism and its allies , pp . 106–7 . the magazine was mainly the work of lewis , but also included extensive written pieces by ford madox hueffer and rebecca west , as well as poetry by pound , articles by gaudier-brzeska and wadsworth , and reproductions of paintings by lewis , wadsworth , etchells , roberts , epstein , gaudier-brzeska and hamilton . blast can be viewed online from many sources , including the manifesto was apparently ‘ signed ’ by eleven signatories . under ‘ signatures for manifesto ’ on page 43 of blast no.1 were listed ‘ r . aldington ’ , ‘ arbuthnot ’ , ‘ l . atkinson ’ , ‘ gaudier brzeska ’ , ‘ j . dismorr ’ , ‘ c . hamilton ’ , ‘ e . pound ’ , ‘ w . roberts ’ , ‘ h . sanders ’ ( sic ) , ‘ e . wadsworth ’ and ‘ wyndham lewis ’ . lewis , pound and gaudier-brzeska were at the intellectual heart of the project , but roberts ’ s later comments suggest that most of the group were not made aware of the manifesto ’ s contents before publication . roberts , some early abstract and cubist work , p . 9 . jacob epstein was presumably too established to be co-opted as a signatory , and david bomberg had threatened lewis with legal action if his work was reproduced in blast and made his independence very clear through a one-man show at the chenil galleries , also in july , where his large abstract painting mud bath was prominently displayed outside above the entrance . cork , vorticism and its allies , p . 24 . . vorticist exhibition . the publication of blast could not have come at a worst time , as in august 1914 britain declared war on germany . there would be little appetite for avant-garde art at this time of national and international crisis ; however , a ‘ vorticist exhibition ’ went ahead at the doré galleries in new bond street the following year . opened 10 june 1915 . the forty-nine ‘ vorticist ’ works by dismorr , etchells , gaudier-brzeska , lewis , one of the few surviving paintings from this exhibition is wyndham lewis ’ s workshop c.1914–15 in the tate collection . roberts , study for william roberts 's two step . saunders helen saunders , c.1915 vorticist design in the tate collection . and wadsworth showed a commitment to hard-edged , highly coloured , near-abstract work . perhaps by way of contrast ( or comparison ) , lewis also invited other artists including bomberg and nevinson to participate . those listed as having been ‘ invited to show ’ were bernard adeney , lawrence atkinson , bomberg , duncan grant , jacob kramer and nevinson ( labelled ‘ futurist ’ ) . a catalogue foreword by lewis clarified that ‘ by vorticism we mean ( a ) activity as opposed to the tasteful passivity of picasso ( b ) significance as opposed to the dull anecdotal character to which the naturalist is condemned ( c ) essential movement and activity ( such as the energy of the mind ) as opposed to the imitative cinematography , the fuss and hysterics of the futurists . ’ cork , vorticism and its allies , p.25 the exhibition was largely ignored by the press , and the reviews that did appear were damning . for example , p . g . konody in the observer , 4 july 1915 : ‘ the “ vorticists ” continue their antics in times as serious and critical as the present . ’ . blast : war number . just before the exhibition opening , news reached london of gaudier-brzeska ’ s death in the trenches in france . gaudier-brzeska had enlisted in the french army – the regimente d ’ infanterie 129e – and was killed in the trenches of neuville saint-vaast on 5 june 1915 . a ‘ notice to public ’ in the second number of blast explained that the publication had been delayed ‘ due to the war chiefly ’ and to ‘ the illness of the editor at the time it should have appeared and before ’ , blast : war number , published july 1915 , p . 7 . and the delay allowed the last-minute inclusion of a tribute to the artist . compared with blast no . 1 this was a scaled-back production – 102 pages , rather than the 158 pages of the first issue and with simple black-and-white ‘ line block ’ illustrations . however , compared with blast no . 1 , that did have the advantage of providing ‘ a cohesive vorticist aesthetic ’ . robert hewison , ‘ blast and the work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction ’ , in antliff & greene ( eds . ) , the vorticists , p . 71 . jessica dismorr and dorothy shakespear ( ezra pound ’ s wife ) joined a slightly broader range of artists that also included jacob kramer and nevinson . lewis ’ s rhetoric was more cautious this time – trying to avoid being seen by the readership as unpatriotic . understandably , he tried to strike an optimist tone with regard to the future of vorticism and blast ; however , within a year most of the artists had enlisted or volunteered in the armed forces : lewis – royal garrison artillery ; roberts – royal field artillery ; wadsworth – british naval intelligence ; bomberg – royal engineers ; dismorr – voluntary air detachment ; and saunders – government office work . jonathan black , ‘ taking heaven by violence ’ , in jonathan black ( ed . ) , blasting the future ! : vorticism in britain 1910–1920 ( london : philip wilson , 2004 ) , p . 35 , and peppin , ‘ women that a movement forgot ’ , p . 32 . . vorticists at the penguin club . ezra pound had been championing wyndham lewis ’ s work from 1915 with a successful new york lawyer and art collector , john quinn . vivien greene , ‘ ezra pound and john quinn : the 1917 penguin club exhibition ’ , in antliff & greene ( eds . ) , the vorticists , p.76 . relying on pound ’ s recommendations , a new york vorticist exhibition was built around forty-six works by lewis – some already in quinn ’ s collection – with additional work by etchells , roberts , dismorr , saunders and wadsworth . the exhibition was to be at an artist-run establishment , the penguin club in new york . 8 east 15th street , new york city . pound arranged for the transportation of works across the atlantic , and quinn took on the entire exhibition costs . greene , ‘ ezra pound and john quinn ’ , pp . 78 , 81 . quinn had already selected works that he was interested in buying , but after the exhibition , as no works had sold , he eventually purchased most of the larger items . greene , ‘ ezra pound and john quinn ’ , p . 81 . . war artists . there was almost no opportunity for the rebel artists to work creatively while in active service . see william roberts , memories of the war to end war 1914–18 ( london , 1974 ) for an account of life on the front line and the commissioning processes for war artists . however , wadsworth , unexpectedly , was able to pursue his artistic interests through the supervision of the dazzle-camouflage being applied to over two thousand ships , largely at bristol and liverpool . richard cork , ‘ wadsworth and the woodcut ’ , in jeremy lewison ( ed . ) , a genius of industrial england : edward wadsworth 1889–1949 ( bradford : arkwright arts trust , 1990 ) , p . 20 . towards the end of the war the journalist paul konody , now art adviser to the canadian war memorials fund ( and someone who had been blatantly anti-vorticism ) , commissioned lewis , wadsworth , nevinson , bomberg , roberts , paul nash and bomberg to produce monumental canvases on subjects relating to the canadian war experience for a projected memorial hall in ottawa . the artists were warned that only 'representative ' work would be acceptable , and indeed bomberg 's first version of his sappers at work the rejected sappers at work study is in the tate collection . was rejected as being 'too cubist ' . despite these restrictions , the extraordinary canvases feel uncompromisingly modernist , and certainly drew from pre-war avant-garde practices . see david cleall , 'the first german gas attack at ypres ' , in william roberts society newsletter , october 2014 . . group x . in the post-war years it was difficult for artists to receive patronage and to secure sales . nevertheless , lewis , wadsworth , roberts and atkinson all had one-man shows by the early 1920s – each artist navigating his own path between modernism and potentially more saleable recognisable subjects . wadsworth – adelphi gallery , march 1919 ; lewis – ‘ guns ’ , goupil gallery , february 1919 ; roberts – chenil gallery , november 1923 ; and atkinson – ‘ abstract sculpture and painting ’ , eldar gallery , may 1921 . lewis organised one more group show , in 1920 at the mansard gallery , bringing together ten artists under the banner ‘ group x ’ . group x exhibited at the mansard gallery in heal 's & son , tottenham court road , london , from 26 march to 24 april 1920 . now , however , there was little attempt to unify the artists 's contributions beyond lewis 's belief that ‘ the experiments by artists undertaken all over europe during the last ten years should . not be lightly abandoned . ’ wyndham lewis , 'introduction ' , in group x exhibition catalogue , 1920 . the diversity of styles on display , for example , included four self-portraits by lewis , while roberts exhibited four quite radical works in his evolving ‘ cubist ’ style . athletes exercising in a gymnasium , the wedding , the auction room and the cockneys – see ‘ william roberts : catalogue raisonné ’ available at six of the group x artists had been in the ‘ vorticist ’ group – dismorr , etchells , hamilton , lewis , roberts and wadsworth – and they were joined by the sculptor frank dobson , the painter charles ginner , the american graphic designer edward mcknight kauffer , and the painter john turnbull . the exhibition was mainly seen as a failure to ‘ rekindle a flame of adventure ’ . andrew gibbon williams , william roberts : an english cubist ( aldershot : lund humphries , 2004 ) , pp . 52–5 . . legacy . the disruption of war and the subsequent mobilisation of the artists contributed to a situation whereby many of the larger vorticist paintings were lost . an anecdote recorded by brigid peppin relates how helen saunders ’ s sister used a vorticist oil to cover her larder floor and ‘ it was worn to destruction ’ peppin , ‘ women that a movement forgot ’ , p . 32 . – an extreme example of how the paintings were not appreciated . when john quinn died , in 1927 , his collection of vorticist works was auctioned and dissipated to now untraceable purchasers , presumably in america . greene , ‘ ezra pound and john quinn ’ , p . 81 . writing in 1974 , richard cork , noted that ‘ thirty-eight of the forty-nine works displayed by the full members of the movement at the 1915 vorticist exhibition are now missing . ’ cork , vorticism and its allies , p . 26 . despite a resurgence of abstract art in britain in the middle years of the twentieth century , the contribution of vorticism was largely forgotten until a spat between john rothenstein of the tate gallery and william roberts blew up in the press . rothenstein ’ s 1956 tate gallery exhibition ‘ wyndham lewis and vorticism ’ was actually a lewis retrospective with very few vorticist works . and the inclusion of work by bomberg , roberts , wadsworth , nevinson , dobson , kramer under the heading ‘ other vorticists ’ – together with lewis ’ s assertion that 'vorticism , in fact , was what i , personally , did , and said , at a certain period ' – incensed roberts as it seemed that he and the others were being set up to be mere disciples of lewis . a letter of 15 november 1964 from lilian bomberg to william lipke in the tate gallery archive explains that david bomberg ‘ was very angry indeed and i think rightly so that he was included in the wyndham lewis tate gallery exhibition ’ . the case made by roberts in the five ‘ vorticist pamphlets ’ that he published between 1956 and 1958 see john roberts , ' a brief discussion of the vortex pamphlets ' , which first appeared in william roberts , five posthumous essays and other writings ( valencia , 1990 ) . was hampered by the absence of key works , but led to other self-published books by roberts which included early studies of his abstract work . william roberts , some early abstract and cubist work ( london , 1957 ) and william roberts , 8 cubist designs ( london , 1969 ) . a broader survey was provided by the d ’ offay couper gallery ’ s ‘ abstract art in england 1913–1914 ’ exhibition in 1969 . 11 november–5 december 1969 . five years later , the exhibition ‘ vorticism and its allies ’ curated by richard cork at the hayward gallery , london , 27 march–2 june 1974 . went further in painstakingly bringing together paintings , drawings , sculpture ( including a reconstruction of epstein ’ s rock drill 1913–15 ) , omega workshop artefacts , photographs , journals , catalogues , letters and cartoons . cork also included twenty-five ‘ vortographs ’ from 1917 by the photographer alvin langdon coburn that had been first displayed at the camera club in london in 1918 . the exhibition catalogue was subsequently supported by richard cork ’ s two-volume history vorticism and abstract art in the first machine age ( london : gordon fraser gallery , 1976 ) . . recent exhibitions . more recently , in 2004 in london and manchester , 'blasting the future ! : vorticism in britain 1910–1920 ' explored the links between vorticism and futurism , estorick gallery , london , 4 february–18 april 2004 , and whitworth art gallery , manchester , 7 may–25 july 2004 . and a major exhibition 'the vorticists : manifesto for a modern world ' in 2010–11 brought vorticist work to italy for the first time and to america for the first time since 1917 , as well as appearing in london . exhibition dates : nasher museum of art at duke university , north carolina , 30 september 2010–2 january 2011 ; peggy guggenheim collection , venice , 29 january–15 may 2011 ; and tate britain , 14 june–4 september 2011 . the curators , mark antliff and vivien greene , had also traced some previously lost works ( such as three paintings by helen saunders ) that were included in the exhibition . notes . references . antcliffe , mark , and greene , vivien ( eds . ) , the vorticists : manifesto for a modern world ( london : tate publishing , 2010 ) black , jonathan ( ed . ) , blasting the future ! : vorticism in britain 1910–1920 ( london : philip wilson , 2004 ) cork , richard , vorticism and abstract art in the first machine age ( two volumes ) ( london : gordon fraser gallery and berkeley : university of california press , 1976 ) cork , richard , vorticism and its allies ( london : arts council of great britain , 1974 ) haycock , david boyd , a crisis of brilliance : five young british artists and the great war . ( london : old street publishing , 2009 ) pound , ezra . , 'vorticism ' , in fortnightly review 96 , no . 573 ( 1914 ) , pp . 461–71 . external links . ezra pound 's 1914 vorticism essay in the fortnightly review ezra pound , vorticism wyndham lewis portraits exhibition at the national portrait gallery , london , 3 july – 19 october 2008 tate glossary a review of the 2011 vorticism exhibition at tate britain by professor andrew thacker . an english cubist : william roberts 1895–1980