Miloš Obilić

name . miloš is a slavic given name recorded from the early middle ages among the bulgarians , czechs , poles and serbs . it is derived from the slavic root mil- , meaning '' merciful '' or '' dear '' , which is found in a great number of slavic given names . several versions of the hero 's surname have been used throughout history . in his history of montenegro ( 1754 ) , vasilije petrović wrote of one miloš obilijević , and in 1765 , the historian pavle julinac rendered the surname as obilić . according to czech historian konstantin jireček , the surname obilić and its different renderings are derived from the serbian words obilan ( '' plenty of '' ) and obilje ( '' wealth , abundance '' ) . : the surname kobilić could come from the slavic word kobila ( mare ) , and means '' mare 's son '' , as in serbian legends the hero is said to have been nursed by one . jireček connected the surname to two noble families in medieval ragusa and trebinje , the kobilić and kobiljačić in the 14th and 15th centuries , and noted that they altered their surnames in the 18th century because they considered it '' indecent '' to be associated with mares . based on a 1433 document from ragusan archives , the historian mihailo dinić concluded that miloš 's original surname was indeed kobilić . the rendering obilić has universally been used by serbian writers in modern times . miloš is often referred to in the epic poems as '' miloš of pocerje '' , and according to local legends , he came from the western serbian region of pocerina . in pocerina there is a spring known as '' miloševa banja '' ( miloš 's spring ) and an old grave that is claimed to be the grave of miloš 's sister . . earliest sources . the earliest sources on the battle of kosovo , which generally favour the cult of prince lazar , do not mention miloš or his assassination of the sultan . the assassination itself is first recorded by deacon ignjatije on 9 july 1389 , only 12 days after the battle . the assassination of sultan murad and one of his sons was also mentioned in the instructions of the venetian senate issued to andrea bembo on 23 july 1389 , although venetians were uncertain if news about the assassination were true . on 1 august 1389 king tvrtko i of bosnia ( r . 1353-1391 ) wrote a letter to trogir to inform its citizens about ottoman defeat . victory over the turks was also reported by coluccio salutati ( died 1406 ) , chancellor of florence , in his letter to king tvrtko , dated 20 october 1389 , on behalf of the florentine senate . the killer is not named but he is described as one of twelve christian noblemen who managed to break through the ottoman ranks : : '' fortunate , most fortunate are those hands of the twelve loyal lords who , having opened their way with the sword and having penetrated the enemy lines and the circle of chained camels , heroically reached the tent of amurat murad himself . fortunate above all is that one who so forcefully killed such a strong vojvoda by stabbing him with a sword in the throat and belly . and blessed are all those who gave their lives and blood through the glorious manner of martyrdom as victims of the dead leader over his ugly corpse . '' emmert cites v.v . makušev , '' prilozi k srpskoj istoriji xiv i xv veka , '' glasnik srpskog ucenog društva 32 ( 1871 ) : pp . 174–5 . another italian account , mignanelli 's 1416 work , asserted that it was lazar who killed the ottoman sultan . the assassin 's first appearance in serbian sources is in the biography of stefan lazarević , lazar 's son , by constantine of kostenets , written in the 1440s . the hero , still anonymous , is described as a man of noble birth whom envious tongues had sought to defame before the prince . to prove his loyalty and courage , he left the front line on the pretext of being a deserter , seized the opportunity to stab the sultan to death and was killed himself shortly afterwards . the initial phase of ignominy and its redemption by a courageous plot of slaying the sultan are narrative ingredients which would become essential to the serbian legend as it evolved in later times . . ottoman and greek sources . the loss of the sultan also made an impression on the earliest ottoman sources . they usually describe how murad was unaccompanied on the battlefield and an anonymous christian who had been lying among the corpses stabbed him to death . in the early 15th century , for instance , the poet ahmedi writes that '' suddenly one of the christians , who was covered in blood and apparently hidden among the enemy dead , got up , rushed to murad and stabbed him with a dagger . '' ahmedi , ed . olesnicki , '' turski izvori o kosovskom bo ju . '' glasnik skopskog naucnog drustva 14 ( 1934 ) : 60–2 , as cited by emmert below . halil i̇nalcık explained that one of the most important contemporary ottomans sources about the battle of kosovo is the 1465 work of enveri . i̇nalcık argued that it was based on the testimony of a contemporary eyewitness of the battle , probably hoca omer , an envoy sent by the sultan to lazar before the battle . in this work enveri explains that before he became a serbian nobleman , miloš ( miloš ban is how i̇nalcık rendered the name in enveri 's text ) was a muslim at the sultan 's court who deserted ottomans and abjured islam . the sultan allegedly called him to return to his service many times . enveri explains that although miloš always promised to return , he never did . according to this account , when lazar was captured , miloš approached the sultan who was riding a black stallion and said : '' i am miloš ban , i want to go back to my islamic faith and kiss your hand . '' when miloš came close to the sultan , he struck him with the dagger hidden in his cuff . the sultan 's men cut miloš into pieces with swords and axes . one historian from edirne , oruc bey , explains the lack of protection by saying that the army was preoccupied with pursuing the enemy in rear flight and introduces an element of deception : the christian '' had promised himself as a sacrifice and approached murad , who was sitting alone on his horse . pretending he wished to kiss the sultan 's hand , he stabbed the sultan with a sharp dagger . '' oruc , tevarih i al-i osman , as cited by emmert . since about the late 15th century , greek sources also begin to record the event . the athenian scholar laonicus chalcocondyles ( d . c . 1490 ) claims to draw on greek traditions when he refers to murad 's killer as miloes , '' a man of noble birth . who voluntarily decided to accomplish the heroic act of assassination . he requested what he needed from prince lazar , and then rode off to murad 's camp with the intention of presenting himself as a deserter . murad , who was standing in the midst of his troops before the battle , was eager to receive the deserter . miloes reached the sultan and his bodyguards , turned his spear against murad , and killed him . '' writing in the second half of the same century , michael doukas regarded the story as worthy of inclusion in his historia byzantina . he relates how the young nobleman pretended to desert the battle , was captured by the turks and professing to know the key to victory , managed to gain access to murad and kill him . in 1976 , miodrag popović suggested that the narrative elements of secrecy and stratagem in the serbian tradition were all introduced from turkish sources , seeking to defame the capabilities of their christian opponents by attributing the death of the murat to '' devious '' methods . thomas a . emmert agrees with him . emmert says that turkish sources mentioned the assassination several times , while western and serbian sources did n't mention it until much later . he thinks that serbians knew about the assassination , but decided not to mention it in their first accounts for unknown reasons . '' it is important to note that neither this chronicle nor any of the other early serbian accounts of the battle attributes murad 's death to the hand of an assassin ( . ) the theme of assassination , which appeared in the contemporary accounts of the battle from florence and siena and was also an important theme in all of the fifteenth century turkish sources for the battle , would eventually become a central element in the serbian epic . ( . ) it is surprising that the assassination of murad is not recorded in any of the serbian cult sources for the battle . why the serbian authors would fail to speak of the assassin if they knew of him is unclear , ( . ) . whatever the reason for this silence , it appears from later sources that the story of murad 's assassination was clearly known in lazar 's principality . '' in 1512 ottoman historian mehmed nesri wrote a detailed account of the battle that became the source for later ottoman and western descriptions of the battle . nesri 's account took several elements from popular serbian tradition , and described the assassination in a way which reflected negatively on the perpetrators . . serbian traditions . miloš obilić is a major hero of the serbian legend of kosovo , whose central part is the battle of kosovo . according to the legend , miloš was a son-in-law of the serbian prince lazar . a quarrel broke out between his wife and her sister who was married to vuk branković , about superiority in valour of their respective husbands . as a consequence of this , branković took offence and picked a fight with miloš . filled with hate , branković maligned miloš to lazar , saying that he conspired with turks to betray the prince . at lazar 's supper on the eve of the battle , the prince reproached miloš for disloyalty . to prove his loyalty , miloš went into the turkish camp feigning defection . at a favourable moment , he stabbed and killed the turkish sultan murad , whose attendants then executed miloš . the legend then goes on to describe events regarding the battle . there are two main views about the creation of the kosovo legend . in one view , its place of origin lies in the region in which the battle of kosovo was fought . in the other view , the legend sprang up in more westerly balkan regions under the influence of the french chansons de geste . serbian philologist dragutin kostić stated that the french chivalric epics had in fact no part in the formation of the legend , but that they '' only modified the already created and formed legend and its first poetic manifestations '' . the nucleus from which the legend developed is found in the cultic literature celebrating prince lazar as a martyr and saint , written in moravian serbia between 1389 and 1420 . especially important in this regard is the discourse on prince lazar composed by serbian patriarch danilo iii . the legend would gradually evolve during the subsequent centuries . the tale of the maligned hero who penetrated the turkish camp and killed sultan murad , is found in the life of despot stefan lazarević written in the 1430s by konstantin the philosopher . the hero 's name is not mentioned in this work . the theme of the quarrel between lazar 's sons-in-law was first recorded in herzegovina in the mid-15th century . lazar 's supper on the eve of the battle and his reproach of miloš are mentioned in texts from the 16th century . the argument between lazar 's daughters over the valor of their husbands was first recorded by mavro orbin in 1601 . the fully developed legend of kosovo , with all of its elements , is recorded in the tale of the battle of kosovo composed around the beginning of the 18th century in the bay of kotor or old montenegro . this was a very popular text , whose copies were continuously produced for some 150 years in an area stretching from the south of ex-yugoslavia to budapest and sofia . the tale played a notable role in the awakening of national consciousness of the serbs in the habsburg monarchy , which began in the first half of the 18th century . the first author to refer to murad 's killer by his full name is konstantin mihailović , a serbian janissary from the village of ostrovica , near rudnik , who wrote his memoirs of a janissary or turkish chronicle in ca 1497 . in a passage intended to infer a moral lesson about disloyalty from the serbian defeat at kosovo , mihailović identifies miloš kobica as the knight who on the fateful last friday of the battle slew murad . the next time a name is given in the sources is three decades later , in 1530 , when the ( slovene ) monk benedikt kuripečič ( curipeschitz ) wrote memoirs of his travels through the balkan peninsula . his visit to murad 's tomb in kosovo polje provides the occasion for the story of the knight whom he names miloš kobilović . kuripešić elaborates on the humiliation and fall out favour which miloš endured before the battle , his last dinner with lazar and his nobles , his admittance to murad 's tent , the brutal murder and his own death on attempting to escape on horseback . the monk , though not explicit about his sources , writes that miloš was a celebrated figure in the popular traditions of serbs , who sing about his heroic exploits on the border . he recorded some legends about the battle of kosovo and mentions epic songs about obilić in regions far from kosovo , like bosnia and croatia . in his 1603 work richard knolles described the serbian epic poetry about the battle of kosovo and refer to obilić as '' cobelitz '' . in serbian epic poetry and song ( e.g . '' radul-bey and bulgarian king šišman '' and the song '' dušan 's wedding '' ) , miloš obilić is often grouped along with other literary creations like karadjordje , vuk karadžić and njegoš as serbs of dinarides who distinguished themselves as the great moral and/or intellectual minds of the past in contradistinction to bulgarian contemporaries , who could claim no such status . citing cvijić . in the poem '' obilić dragon 's son '' , miloš is given a mythical ancestry as the son of a dragon to emphasise his superhuman strength on a physical and spiritual level ; in this , he joins the ranks of many other heroes of serbian poetry who fought against turkish oppression and are claimed to have been descendants of a dragon . . later legends . an earlier episode of miloš obilić 's career in the service of prince lazar is related to the battle of pločnik , in which he participated and survived an arrow wound . in many sources he is mentioned as a son-in-law of prince lazar , which would make him a brother-in-law to vuk branković , another serbian high ranking nobleman and a prominent antagonist in epic traditions concerning the battle of kosovo . the characters of obilić and branković are usually contrasted in these legends . however , these claims can not be confirmed with certainty . another legend tells about the treason of vuk branković , serbian feudal lord and son-in-law of the serbian prince lazar . according to this legend , miloš was accused by branković , at the eve of the battle of kosovo of intent to betray his lord lazar and switch sides mid battle . the accusation was a result of alleged rivalry between the two . branković , a nobleman of much higher rank , was intensely jealous of the reputation that obilić enjoyed as the bravest of serbian knights . in order to clear his name and prove his loyalty to lazar and his country , miloš made a solemn oath to slay the ottoman sultan during the battle . other variants of songs and legends state that miloš was captured by a baba yaga ( a witch ) , who advised the turks how to kill miloš 's horse and find the keys of his armour , which were hidden in his moustache . miloš gained his revenge by killing the witch on a bridge , which is presently called babin most ( old woman 's bridge ) . in folk epic and legends , miloš was celebrated as the hero of supernatural birth and strength ( his mother was a fairy , demonic creature or his father was a dragon ; he had got his strength from the milk of the mare ) . he had an extraordinary horse called ždralin . in serbian epic poetry , there are several blood brotherhoods . miloš obilić with milan toplica and ivan kosančić , miloš obilić with prince marko , miloš obilić with the jugović brothers . . legacy . it was not until the early 19th century that miloš was also venerated as a saint in the serbian church . during the serbian revolution ( 1804–1815 ) , a fresco of miloš as a haloed , sword-bearing saint was painted in prince lazar 's narthex in the hilandar monastery on mount athos ( greece ) . the historian rade mihaljčić suggests that the cult was a popular movement which originated among the serbs south of the sava and danube during the ottoman period . later in the same century , the heroic figure of miloš was given a national boost in the epic poem the mountain wreath ( 1847 ) by petar ii petrović-njegoš , prince-bishop of montenegro . the poem praises the assassin 's valour in battle , calling him '' the victim of a noble feeling , / an all powerful military genius , / a dreadful thunder that smashes crowns '' . njegoš also instituted the obilić medal for courage . this event and the battle of kosovo itself has become embedded in the serbs ' national consciousness , history , and poetry . njegoš 's tales , including miloš , inspired later generations of serbs – notably gavrilo princip , the assassin of archduke franz ferdinand . in 1913 , the medal of miloš obilić was awarded by king peter i to soldiers for the acts of great personal courage , or for personal courage demonstrated on the battlefield . it was given during the balkan wars , world war i , and during world war ii , to members of the yugoslav army or allied forces and was discontinued with the end of the war . in the late 1980s , religious nationalists began to breathe further life into the figure of miloš and the kosovo myth . special inspiration was taken from njegoš 's the mountain wreath , with its portrayal of lazar as a christ-like martyr and obilić as the serb sacrificing himself to prove his loyalty and seek retribution . a key event which gave expression to this idea was the 600th anniversary of the battle of kosovo ( vidovdan ) on 28 june 1989 , which was held at the gazimestan plain , near the site of the battle . obilić 's feat has been cited as a source of inspiration in public speeches by political leaders , notably president milošević , who referred to him in his gazimestan speech on the occasion of the battle anniversary . his regime often alluded to obilić frequently in comparison to milosević , who was proclaimed the '' saviour of the nation '' . obilić is featured in serbian rhymical idiom '' dva loša ubiše miloša '' or '' dva su loša ubila miloša '' which translates as '' two no-goods have killed miloš '' . the idiom addresses the issue of quantity prevailing over quality as a sad fact of life , since obilić was outnumbered by the enemies . he is included in the 100 most prominent serbs . see also . battle of kosovo list of serbs history of serbia lazar of serbia . annotations . . further reading . ; primary sources deacon ignjatije wrote a description of the battle on 27 june 1389 , only 12 days after the battle . the instructions of the venetian senate issued to andrea bembo on 23 july 1389 . king tvrtko i of bosnia sent a letter with information about ottoman defeat to trogir on 1 august 1389 '' monumenta spectantia historiam slavorum meridionalium '' , p.48 coluccio salutati ( chancellor of florence , died 1406 ) wrote a letter to king tvrtko on 20 october 1389 . anonymous florentine chronicle , ed . l.a . muratori , cronica volgare di anonimo fiorentino dall ' anno 1385 al 1409 . rerum italicarum scriptores vol . 17 , fasc . 152 . citta di castello , 1917 . pp . & nbsp ; 77–9 . bertrando de mignanelli of siena , life of timur ( 1416 ) constantine of kostenets , life of despot stefan lazarević ( written 1440s ) konstantin mihailović ( 15th century ) , memoirs of a janissary ( or turkish chronicle ) written in period 1490—1501 ludovik crijević tuberon ( written before 1527 ) benedict kuripešić , travel memoirs ( written 1530 ) ottoman sources the poet ahmedi ( early 15th century ) , ed . a . olesnicki , turski izvori o kosovskom boju . , glasnik skopskog naucnog drustva 14 ( 1934 ) : 60–2 . uruc , historian greek sources laonicus chalcocondyles ( late 15th century ) doukas ( mid 15th century ) later narrations richard knolles , the generall historie of the turkes ( 1603 ) drama milos obilic ( 1826 ) petar ii petrović-njegoš , the mountain wreath ( written 1847 ) ; secondary sources ivanova , radost ( 1993 ) . '' the problem of the historical approach in the epic songs of the kosovo cycle . '' études balkaniques 4 : 111–22 . khan , mujeeb r . ( 1996 ) '' the 'other ' in the balkans . historical constructions of serbs and 'turks ' . '' journal of muslim minority affairs 16 . kostic , dragutin ( 1934–1935 ) . '' milos kopilic-kobilic-obilic . '' revue internationale des etudes balkaniques 1–2 : 232–54 . a study of miloš obilić 's name . rade mihaljčić ( 1989 ) . the battle of kosovo . belgrade . мирослав пантић , '' кнез лазар и косовска битка у старој књижевности дубровника и боке которске '' , зборник радова о кнезу лазару , београд , 1975