1992 in literature

events . august – an attempt is made to set fire to the national library of abkhazia in sukhumi during the war in abkhazia by georgian forces . august 25 – the national and university library of bosnia and herzegovina is annihilated during the siege of sarajevo by the army of republika srpska . september – michael ondaatje 's historiographic metafiction the english patient is published in canada . it will win the golden man booker in 2018 . unknown date – the goosebumps series of children 's horror fiction , penned by r . l . stine , is first published in the united states . . new books . fiction . ben aaronovitch – transit tariq ali – shadows of the pomegranate tree paul auster – leviathan iain banks – the crow road clive barker – the thief of always julian barnes – the porcupine greg bear – anvil of stars thomas berger – meeting evil louis de bernières – the troublesome offspring of cardinal guzman james p . blaylock – lord kelvin 's machine pascal bruckner – the divine child a . s . byatt – morpho eugenia roger caron – dreamcaper andrew cartmel – cat 's cradle : warhead patrick chamoiseau – texaco paulo coelho – the valkyries michael connelly – the black echo hugh cook the witchlord and the weaponmaster the worshippers and the way paul cornell – love and war bernard cornwell sharpe 's devil scoundrel douglas coupland – shampoo planet mia couto – sleepwalking land ( terra sonâmbula ) robert crais – lullaby town l . sprague de camp and christopher stasheff – the enchanter reborn elena ferrante – l'amore molesto ( troubling love ) tibor fischer – under the frog leon forrest – divine days john gardner – death is forever neil gaiman – the sandman : season of mists ( graphic novel ; volume 4 of the sandman series ) neil gaiman and dave mckean – signal to noise ( graphic novel ) cristina garcía – dreaming in cuban mark gatiss – nightshade ann granger – cold in the earth alasdair gray – poor things john grisham – the pelican brief hella haasse – heren van de thee ( the tea lords ) victor headley – yardie andrew hunt – cat 's cradle : witch mark simon ings – hot head p . d . james – the children of men denis johnson – jesus ' son ( short story collection ) john kessel – meeting in infinity stephen king dolores claiborne gerald 's game patrick mccabe – the butcher boy cormac mccarthy – all the pretty horses ( book 1 of the border trilogy ) val mcdermid – dead beat ian mcewan – black dogs terry mcmillan – waiting to exhale javier marías – a heart so white ( corazón tan blanco ) andrés l . mateo – la balada de alfonsina bairán rohinton mistry – tales from firozsha baag caitlin moran – the chronicles of narmo toni morrison – jazz michael ondaatje – the english patient ellis peters – the holy thief marc platt – cat 's cradle : time 's crucible terry pratchett lords and ladies small gods anne rice – the tale of the body thief mordecai richler – oh canada ! oh quebec ! jennifer roberson – lady of the forest robert schneider – schlafes bruder patricia schonstein – a time of angels w . g . sebald – the emigrants ( die ausgewanderten : vier lange erzählungen ) gail sheehy – silent passage sidney sheldon – the stars shine down michael slade – cutthroat danielle steel jewels mixed blessings neal stephenson – snow crash adam thorpe – ulverton sue townsend – the queen and i rose tremain – sacred country barry unsworth – sacred hunger gore vidal – live from golgotha : the gospel according to gore vidal vernor vinge – a fire upon the deep robert james waller – the bridges of madison county connie willis – doomsday book timothy zahn – dark force rising roger zelazny and thomas thurston thomas – flare juan eduardo zúñiga el último día del mundo ( the last day of the world ) misterios de las noches y los días ( mysteries of the nights and days ; short stories ) . children and young people . pamela allen – belinda chris van allsburg – the widow 's broom gillian cross – the great elephant chase garry disher – the bamboo flute anne fine – flour babies jamila gavin – the wheel of surya ( first in the surya trilogy ) rumer godden great grandfather 's house listen to the nightingale virginia hamilton ( with jerry pinkney ) – drylongso william mayne – low tide gerald mcdermott – zomo the rabbit : a trickster tale from west africa hilary mckay – the exiles michael morpurgo – waiting for anya barry moser – polly vaughn : a traditional british ballad jim murphy – the long road to gettysburg marcus pfister – rainbow fish ( der regenbogenfisch ) gloria jean pinkney ( with jerry pinkney ) – back home marjorie w . sharmat ( with marc simont ) – nate the great and the stolen base ulf stark – can you whistle , johanna ? ( kan du vissla johanna ? ) christopher tolkien ( with j . r . r . tolkien and alan lee ) – sauron defeated judith vigna – black like kyra white like me martin waddell & ndash ; owl babies nancy willard ( with barry moser ) – beauty and the beast douglas wood – old turtle . drama . herb gardner – conversations with my father peter handke – die stunde , da wir nichts voneinander wußten ( the hour we knew nothing of each other ) david mamet – oleanna louis nowra – così zlatko topčić – musa and the goat ( radio version ) michael wall – women laughing peter whelan – the school of night . poetry . ben okri – an african elegy . non-fiction . nelson algren ( died 1981 ) – america eats ( travel book , written 1930s ) karen armstrong – muhammad : a biography of the prophet bill bryson – neither here nor there : travels in europe margaret busby ( ed . ) – daughters of africa : an international anthology of words and writings by women of african descent from the ancient egyptian to the present linda colley – britons : forging the nation 1707–1837 esther delisle – the traitor and the jew ( le traître et le juif : lionel groulx , le devoir et le délire du nationalisme d'extrême droite dans la province de québec , 1929–1939 ) daniel dennett – consciousness explained eamon duffy – the stripping of the altars : traditional religion in england , c . 1400 to c . 1580 gerina dunwich – secrets of love magick christiane éluère – l'europe des celtes john gray – men are from mars , women are from venus elizabeth hay – the only snow in havana nick hornby – fever pitch charles jennings - up north neil lyndon – no more sex war : the failures of feminism 22 years on , i 'm republishing my controversial book on the failings of feminism - telegraph andrew morton – diana : her true story mark e . neely , jr . – the fate of liberty : abraham lincoln and civil liberties liza potvin – white lies ( for my mother ) léon werth ( died 1955 ) – 33 jours ( written 1940 ) . births . may 12 – kyra halland , american fantasy novelist . deaths . january 4 – alejandro carrión , ecuadorian poet and journalist ( born 1915 ) january 9 – bill naughton , irish-born english playwright and novelist ( born 1910 ) january 4 – john sparrow , english literary scholar ( born 1906 ) january 28 – dora birtles , australian novelist , poet and children 's writer ( born 1903 ) february 10 – alex haley , african-american writer ( born 1921 ) february 16 angela carter , english novelist ( lung cancer , born 1940 ) george macbeth , scottish poet and novelist ( motor neurone disease , born 1932 ) april 6 – isaac asimov , american science fiction author ( born 1920 ) april 21 – väinö linna , finnish novelist ( born 1920 ) april 28 – iceberg slim ( robert beck ) , american novelist ( born 1918 ) may 22 – elizabeth david , english cookery writer ( born 1913 ) july 6 – mary q . steele , american novelist ( born 1922 ) july 22 – reginald bretnor , american science fiction writer ( born 1911 ) july 23 – robert liddell , english biographer , novelist and poet ( born 1908 ) september 5 – fritz leiber , american writer of fantasy and science fiction ( born 1910 ) august 29 – mary norton , english children 's writer ( born 1903 ) november 7 – richard yates , american novelist and short-story writer ( emphysema , born 1926 ) november 17 – audre lorde , american poet , writer and feminist ( born 1934 ) december 22 – ted willis , english tv dramatist ( born 1914 ) december 25 – monica dickens , english novelist ( born 1915 ) december 27 – kay boyle , american writer , educator and activist ( born 1902 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : derek walcott camões prize : vergílio ferreira . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : fotini epanomitis , the mule 's foal c . j . dennis prize for poetry : robert harris , jane , interlinear and other poems kenneth slessor prize for poetry : elizabeth riddell , selected poems mary gilmore prize : alison croggon , this is the stone miles franklin award : tim winton , cloudstreet . canada . see 1992 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : marie wadden , nitassinan : the innu struggle to reclaim their homeland & nbsp ; . france . prix goncourt : patrick chamoiseau , texaco prix décembre : henri thomas , la chasse au trésor and roger grenier , regardez la neige qui tombe prix médicis french : michel rio , tlacuilo prix médicis international : louis begley , une éducation polonaise . united kingdom . booker prize : michael ondaatje , the english patient and barry unsworth , sacred hunger carnegie medal for children 's literature : anne fine , flour babies james tait black memorial prize for fiction : rose tremain , sacred country james tait black memorial prize for biography : charles nicholl , the reckoning : the murder of christopher marlowe cholmondeley award : allen curnow , donald davie , carol ann duffy , roger woddis eric gregory award : jill dawson , hugh dunkerley , christopher greenhalgh , marita maddah , stuart paterson , stuart pickford queen 's gold medal for poetry : kathleen raine 1992 whitbread awards : jeff torrington , swing hammer swing ! the sunday express book of the year : hilary mantel , a place of greater safety forward prizes for poetry ( first awards ) : thom gunn , the man with night sweats ( collection ) ; simon armitage , kid ( first collection ) ; jackie kay , '' black bottom '' ( single poem ) . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : hunt hawkins , the domestic life aiken taylor award for modern american poetry : gwendolyn brooks american academy of arts and letters gold medals drama : sam shepard bobbitt national prize for poetry : louise glück for ararat , and mark strand for the continuous life compton crook award : carol severance , reefsong frost medal : adrienne rich / david ignatow national book award for fiction : to all the pretty horses by cormac mccarthy national book critics circle award : to young men and fire by norman maclean nebula award : connie willis , doomsday book newbery medal for children 's literature : phyllis reynolds naylor , shiloh pen/faulkner award for fiction : to mao ii by don delillo pulitzer prize for fiction : jane smiley , a thousand acres pulitzer prize for poetry : james tate , selected poems pulitzer prize for drama : robert schenkkan , the kentucky cycle whiting awards : : fiction : r.s . jones , j.s . marcus , damien wilkins : nonfiction : eva hoffman , katha pollitt ( poetry/nonfiction ) : plays : suzan-lori parks , keith reddin , josé rivera : poetry : roger fanning , jane mead . elsewhere . premio nadal : alejandro gándara , ciegas esperanzas . references .