Racetrack (game)

the basic game . the rules are here explained in simple terms . as will follow from a later section , if the mathematical concept of vectors is known , some of the rules may be stated more briefly . the rules may also be stated in terms of the physical concepts velocity and acceleration . the track . on a sheet of quadrille paper ( '' quad pad '' , e.g . letter preprinted with a 1/4 '' square grid , or a4 with a 5 & nbsp ; mm square grid ) , a freehand loop is drawn as the outer boundary of the racetrack . a large ellipse will do for a first game , but some irregularities make the game more interesting . another freehand loop is drawn inside the first . it can be more or less parallel with the outer loop , or the track can have wider and narrower spots ( pinch spots ) , with usually at least two squares between the loops . a straight line is drawn anywhere across the two loops . this is the starting and finishing line . choose a direction for the race to be run , e.g . , clockwise . preparing to play . the order of players is agreed upon . each player chooses a color or mark ( such as x and o ) to represent the player 's car . each player marks a starting point for his or her car - a grid intersection at or behind the starting line . the moves . all moves will be from one grid point to another grid point . each grid point has eight neighbouring grid points : up , down , left , right , and the four diagonal directions . players take turns to move their cars according to some simple rules . each move is marked by drawing a line from the starting point of this move to a new point . each player 's first move must be to one of the eight neighbours of their starting position . ( the player can also choose to stand still . ) on each turn after that , the player can choose to move the same number of squares in the same direction as on the previous turn ; the grid point reached by this move is called the principal point for this turn . ( e.g . , if the previous move was four squares to the right and two squares upwards , then the principal point is found by moving another four squares to the right and two more squares upwards . ) however , the player also has the choice of any of the eight neighbours of this principal point . cars must stay within the boundaries of the racetrack ; otherwise they crash . finding a winner . the winner is the first player to complete a lap ( cross the finish line ) . additional and alternative rules . combining the following rules in various ways , there are many variants of the game . the track . the track need not be a closed curve ; the starting and finishing lines could be different . before starting to play , the players may go over the track , agreeing in advance about each grid point near the boundaries as to whether that point is inside or outside the track . alternatively , the track may be drawn with straight lines only , with corners at grid points only . this removes the need to decide dubious points . players may or may not be allowed to touch the walls , but not to cross them . the moves . instead of allowing moves to any of eight neighbours of the principal point , one may use the four neighbours rule , limiting moves to the principal point or any of its four nearest neighbours . when drawing the track , slippery regions with oil spill may be marked , wherein the cars can not change velocity at all , or only according to the four neighbours rule . the rule may e.g . apply to all moves beginning in the slippery region . on the track there may be also some turbo areas marked with an arrow with a specific length and direction . when a vehicle goes through this area , the principal point is moved as indicated by the arrow . collisions and crashes . usually , cars are required to stay on the track for the entire length of the move , not just the start and end . on heavily convoluted racetracks , allowing the line segment representing a move to cross the boundary twice ( with start and end points inside the track ) , some unreasonable shortcuts may be allowed . several cars may be allowed to occupy the same point simultaneously . however , the most common and entertaining rule is that while the line segments are allowed to intersect , a car can not move to or through a grid point that is occupied by another car , as they would collide . if a player is unable to move according to these rules , the player has crashed . a crashed car may leave the game , or various systems for penalizing crashes can be devised . a player running off the track may be allowed to continue , but is required to brake and turn around , and re-enter the track again crossing the boundary at a point behind the point where it left . at high speeds , this will take a considerable number of moves . another possibility is to penalize a car with '' damage points '' for each crash . e.g . , if it runs off the track or collides , it receives 1 damage point for each square of the last movement , and comes to an immediate stand-still . a car with 5 damage points , say , can not run anymore . finding a winner . at the end of the game , one may complete a round . e.g . , with three players a , b and c ( starting on that order ) , if b is the first to cross the finish line , c is allowed one more move to complete the a-b-c cycle . the winner is the player whose car is the greatest distance beyond the finish line . if the collision rule mentioned above is used , there is still a considerable advantage in moving first . this may be partially counterbalanced by having the players choose their individual starting points in reverse order . e.g . , first c chooses a start point , then b , then a . then , a makes the first move , followed by b , then c . another possible rule is to let the loser move first in the next game . mathematics and physics . each move may be represented by a vector . e.g . , a move four squares to the right and two up may be represented by the vector ( 4,2 ) . the eight neighbour rule allows changing each coordinate of the vector by ±1 . e.g . , if the previous move was ( 4,2 ) , the next one may be any of the following nine : : : ( 3,3 ) ( 4,3 ) ( 5,3 ) : : ( 3,2 ) ( 4,2 ) ( 5,2 ) : : ( 3,1 ) ( 4,1 ) ( 5,1 ) if each round represents 1 second and each square represents 1 metre , the vector representing each move is a velocity in metres per second . the four neighbour rule allows accelerations up to 1 metre per second squared , and the eight neighbours rule allows accelerations up to metres per second squared . ( if each square represents 10 metres instead , the size of the track and the maximum acceleration will be more realistic . ) the speed built up by acceleration can only be reduced at the same rate . this restriction reflects the inertia or momentum of the car . note that in physics , speeding , braking , and turning right or left all are forms of '' acceleration '' , represented by one vector . for a sports car , having the same maximum acceleration without loss of traction in all directions is not unrealistic ; see circle of forces . note , however , that the circle of forces strictly applies to an individual tyre rather than an entire vehicle , that a slightly elongated ellipse would be more realistic than a circle , and that the theory of traction involving this circle or ellipse is quite simplified . history and contemporary use . the origins of the game are unknown , but it certainly existed as early as the 1960s . the rules for the game , and a sample track game was published by martin gardner in january 1973 in his '' mathematical games '' column in scientific american ; and it was again described in car and driver magazine , in july 1973 , page 65 . today , the game is used by math and physics teachers around the world when teaching vectors and kinematics . however , the game has a certain charm of its own , and may be played as a pure recreation . martin gardner noted that the game was '' virtually unknown '' in the united states , and called it '' a truly remarkable simulation of automobile racing '' . he mentions having learned the game from jürg nievergelt , '' a computer scientist at the university of illinois who picked it up on a recent trip to switzerland '' . car and driver described it as having an '' almost supernatural '' resemblance to actual racing , commenting that '' if you enter a turn too rapidly , you will spin . if you '' brake '' too early , it will take you longer to accelerate out of the turn . '' triplanetary was a science fiction rocket ship racing game that was sold commercially between 1973 and 1981 . it used similar rules to racetrack but on a hexagonal grid and with the spaceships being placed in the center of the grid cells rather than at the vertices . the game used a laminated board which could be written on with a grease pencil . references . external links . graph racers racetrack '' racetrack , as it was played in the 1960s . '' vector racer ( aka racetrack ) online karopapier.de or graphracer.com online game to race against others ( currently german only , translations available )