Sibelius (scorewriter)

history . origins . sibelius was originally developed by british twins jonathan and ben finn for the acorn archimedes computer under the name 'sibelius 7 ' , not as a version number , but reminiscent of sibelius ' symphony no 7 . the finns said they could not remember why they used jean sibelius ' name , but it was probably because he was also ‘ a finn ' ( i.e . finnish ) , as well as being one of their favourite composers . development in assembly language on the risc os started in 1986 after they left school , and continued while they were at oxford and cambridge universities , respectively . both were music students , and said they wrote the program because they did not like the laborious process of writing music by hand . 'sibelius ' . music printing history . the program was released to the public in april 1993 on 3.5-inch floppy disk . it required considerably less than 1 mb of memory ( as its files only occupied a few kb per page of music ) , and the combination of assembly language and the archimedes ' arm processor meant that it ran very quickly . no matter how long the score , changes were displayed almost instantly . a unique feature of the sibelius gui at that time was the ability it gave the user to drag the entire score around with the mouse , offering a bird 's eye of the score , as distinct from having to use the qwerty input keyboard arrow keys , or equivalent , to scroll the page . the first ever user of sibelius was the composer and engraver richard emsley , who provided advice on music engraving prior to the start of development , and beta tested the software before its release . the first concert performance from a sibelius score was of an orchestral work by david robert coleman , copied by emsley . the first score published using sibelius was antara by george benjamin , also copied by emsley , and published by faber music . other early adopters included composer john rutter , conductor michael tilson thomas , and publisher music sales . as a killer application for the niche acorn platform , sibelius rapidly dominated the uk market . it also sold in smaller numbers in a few other countries , restricted by the availability of acorn computers . 'lite ' versions were subsequently released , and these were successful in uk schools , where acorns were widely used . arthur , charles . ( 10 january 2012 ) . 'how the bbc micro started a computing revolution ' . the guardian . ( united kingdom ) . expansion . in september 1998 , the first version for windows was released as 'sibelius ' , with the version number reset to 1.0 . a mac version 1.2 was released a few months later , and the company thereafter used conventional version numbers for both platforms across subsequent upgrades . scores created on one platform could be opened on the other , and were backward compatible . to produce these versions , the software was completely rewritten in c++ , while retaining most of the original 's functionality and user interface with numerous enhancements . the original acorn names 'sibelius 6 ' and 'sibelius 7 ' were later re-used to denote versions 6 and 7 of sibelius for windows/mac . releasing sibelius for more widely available computers brought it to a worldwide market , particularly the us , where sibelius software had opened an office in late 1996 . following the break-up of acorn computers ( 6 january 2011 ) . ‘ history of arm : from acorn to apple ’ . the daily telegraph . ( united kingdom ) . seymour , elle . ( 28 february 2012 ) . ‘ the day olivetti stitched up acorn computers ’ . huffington post . ( united kingdom ) . shortly after sibelius ' windows release , no further acorn versions were developed . sibelius software later opened an office in australia , also serving new zealand , where sibelius was widely used . in august 2006 , sibelius software ltd was acquired by avid technology , an american manufacturer of software and hardware for audio and video production . avid continued publishing sibelius as a stand-alone notation product , as well as integrating it with some of its existing software products . in july 2012 , avid announced plans to divest itself of its other consumer businesses , closed the sibelius london office , and laid off the original development team , amid an outpouring of user protest , then recruited a new team of programmers to continue sibelius development in montreal , canada and kyiv , ukraine . timeline . 1986 : founders jonathan and ben finn start designing sibelius 7 for acorn computers . 1993 : sibelius software founded to sell sibelius 7 and related computer hardware/software in the uk . early customers include europe 's largest publisher music sales , choral composer john rutter , and the royal academy of music . sibelius 6 ( educational version ) also launched . 1994 : distribution in europe , australia and new zealand commences . sibelius 7 student ( educational version ) launched . 1995 : german versions of sibelius launched . 1996 : us office opened in california . junior sibelius ( primary school program ) launched . 1998 : sibelius for windows launched worldwide . company ceases selling hardware to concentrate on core software business . 1999 : sibelius for mac , photoscore and scorch launched . sibelius forms us subsidiary , creating the sibelius group , which now has 25 employees . quester vct invests . 2000 : sibelius internet edition launched , and adopted for internet publishing by leading european publishers music sales and boosey & hawkes . sibeliusmusic.com and sibelius notes ( initially called teaching tools ) launched . 2001 : world 's largest sheet music publisher hal leonard also adopts sibelius internet edition . sibelius group reaches 50 employees . 2002 : sibelius is first major music program for mac os x . company acquires music software company midiworks . 2003 : revenues beat competitor makemusic inc . by 20 % , confirming sibelius as world market leader . starclass , instruments , g7 and g7music.net launched . sibelius group commences distributing musition and auralia . sibelius in japanese launched , distributed by yamaha . 2004 : compass , kontakt gold , sibelius student edition , sibelius in french and spanish launched . company acquires sequencextra . sibelius software used in more than 50 % of uk secondary schools . 2005 : australian subsidiary formed after acquiring australian distributor . company reaches 75 employees . wins prestigious queen 's award for innovation . releases rock & pop collection of sounds . commences distributing o-generator . 2006 : groovy music and coloured keyboard launched . sibelius software bought by avid technology . 2007 : japanese office opened . 2012 : avid closes sibelius ' london office and lays off original development team , sparking the 'save sibelius ' campaign . 2014 : first release of a sibelius version ( 7.5 ) by the new development team . rothman , philip ( 23 january 2014 ) . '' sibelius 7.5 announced : an evolutionary , not revolutionary upgrade '' . scoring notes . ( netherlands ) . 2018 : sibelius first ( free , entry-level product ) , sibelius ( formerly sibelius first ) and sibelius ultimate ( formerly sibelius ) launched together with a new year-based versioning system . features . core functionality . sibelius ' main function is to help create , edit and print musical scores . it supports virtually all music notations , enabling even the most complex of modern orchestral , choral , jazz , pop , folk , rock and chamber music scores to be engraved to publication quality . further , it allows scores to be played back or turned into midi or audio files , e.g . to create a cd . a built-in sample player and a large range of sampled sounds are included . 'professional sound library—only in sibelius ' sibelius supports any midi device , and allows virtual studio technology ( vst ) and audio units plug-ins to be used as playback instruments , giving users access to third-party sample libraries . score playback can also be synchronised to video , or to daw software via the rewire standard . by default , sibelius plays a brief passage from a jean sibelius symphony as it launches , a feature that can be disabled in the application 's preferences if desired . each version has used a different excerpt ; e.g . sibelius 7 appropriately uses the main theme from sibelius ' 7th symphony . in version 7.0 , avid rebuilt sibelius as a 64-bit computing , replacing the menu ( computing ) of previous versions with a ribbon interface in the process . this met with considerable user resistance , 'sib . 7.0 : the blasted ribbon ! ' . sibelius help center . avid ( company ) . however the ribbon remains integral to the current gui . add-ons . add-ons for sibelius that are currently or have previously been available include : sound libraries such as note performer , ‘ note performer features ’ . vienna symphonic library , ‘ vienna symphonic library : products ’ . vienna symphonic library . kontakt , garritan , ‘ configuring garritan libraries for use in sibelius ’ . finale ( software ) alfred music involvement . and mark of the unicorn 's ( motu ) symphonic instrument , 'motu symphonic instrument overview ' . mark of the unicorn . which can be added as manual sound sets in the playback devices options from the sibelius play tab . ‘ 631 : how to play back through a different device ’ . help center . avid ( company ) . extra plug-in features . ‘ extra plug-ins for sibelius ’ . avid ( company ) these are usually free of charge , and often created by sibelius users , the most prolific of whom has been bob zawalich . ‘ written by bob zawalich ’ . scoring notes . myriad 's pdf to musicxml transcribing application pdftomusic . ‘ pdf to music ’ . myriad . neuratron 's music ocr program photoscore ( scanning ) , ‘ photoscore and notateme ’ . neuratron . which can be used to scan and create a sibelius score from printed music and pdf documents . a lite version is bundled with sibelius . neuratron 's audioscore , ‘ audioscore ’ . also bundled in a lite version , which claims to be able to turn singing or an acoustic instrument performance into a score , ‘ create scores from a variety of sources ’ . avid ( company ) . though many users have complained that this does not work . ‘ neuratron audioscore ultimate 8 - customer reviews ’ . amazon ( company ) . ‘ neuratron audioscore ultimate 7 - customer reviews ’ . amazon ( company ) . audioscore currently holds a two-star rating on cnet.com . qwerty keyboards such as logic keyboard . avid sibelius - advance line keyboard . logic keyboards . keyboard covers such as kb covers . ‘ sibelius keyboard cover ’ . kb covers . mobile device vnc controllers such as ipad sibelius wizard williams , derek . ‘ ipad sibelius wizard ’ . ‘ 'sib . 7.1.3 : sibelius wizard ’ . help center . avid ( company ) . and sibelius control for ipad , escher , tobias . ‘ sibelius control for ipad ’ . allowing the user to control sibelius wirelessly via shortcuts set up within the preferences . cloud publishing . sibelius users can publish their scores directly from the software via the internet using desktops , laptops or ipads . anyone else using software called sibelius scorch ‘ sibelius scorch ’ . avid ( company ) . ( free for web browsers , charged for on ipads ) can then view these scores , play them back , transpose them , change instruments , or print them from the web browser version . scoreexchange.com is a website where any sibelius user can upload scores they have composed , arranged or transcribed with sibelius , so that anyone can access the music . the site began in 2001 as sibeliusmusic.com , and by june 2011 had amassed nearly 100,000 scores . the ipad version of scorch also includes a store containing over 250,000 scores from publishers music sales , hal leonard , and sibelius scorch is used in the websites of various music publishers and individual musicians . publishers can license the sibelius internet edition for commercial online publishing . from october 2017 , scorch has been replaced by sibelius cloud publishing , providing publishers with an api to automate the publishing and selling of digital sheet music . ‘ sibelius - cloud sharing and publishing ’ . avid ( company ) . it uses the same technology as scorch to allow sibelius users to share music online directly from within the program , and addresses compatibility issues . avid knowledge base : sibelius scorch plug-in compatibility . avid ( company ) . . education . there are various education-specific features for sibelius ' large market of schools and universities . the sibelius educational suite 'sibelius ultimate in the classroom ' includes extensive built-in music teaching materials , and the ability to run and manage multiple copies of the software on a network at discounted educational pricing . in 2012 , sibelius student was replaced by a new version of sibelius first . lite notation based on sibelius is included in avid 's pro tools audio editing software . network . a network license is available for schools , colleges , universities and other multi-client situations . 'network license server ' . avid ( company ) . . awards . numerous awards for the software include : 2005 queen 's awards for enterprise - innovation ( sibelius software ltd ) ; parents ' choice award - silver award winner ( sibelius student ) ; parents ' choice award for ( sibelius 3 ) 2006 music industry awards - best music software ( sibelius 4 ) 'award-winning sibelius ' . avid ( company ) . see also . list of scorewriters scorewriter list of music software . references . external links .