Television broadcasting in Australia

public television . australia has three national public broadcasters , the australian broadcasting corporation , the special broadcasting service , and , as more recently , national indigenous television . australian broadcasting corporation . abc television is a division of the australian broadcasting corporation , established in 1956 . abc tv , abc tv plus , abc me and abc news are available nationally , in addition to abc australia ( southeast asian tv channel ) , focused at the asia-pacific region . abc tv carries a variety of local and national news , current affairs , and sports coverage , as well as australian arts and comedy programming . it is well known for broadcasting british programming , primarily from the bbc , itv , and channel 4 . abc tv plus , established as a second digital-only channel called abc2 on 7 march 2005 . originally aimed at providing 'more choice , more often ' , the channel mainly provided repeats of popular abc productions , such as australian story and stateline , and was prohibited by law from carrying programmes from a number of genres ; however , after the removal of these restrictions the channel 's content was broadened considerably . it was announced by the abc that , from 4 december 2017 , abc2 was to be replaced by abc comedy , ending the channel 's 12-year run . abc me , a third digital-only kids channel began on 4 december 2009 . abc news , a digital news channel began on 22 july 2010 . abc kids , a digital shared channel began on 2 may 2011 . special broadcasting service . sbs television is a division of the special broadcasting service , founded to provide for the estimated 20 % of australians that speak a language other than english in the home , aiming to complement the abc . in recent years sbs tv has begun to target a broader cross-section of the australian community , in part because of the emergence of specialty subscription television channels aimed at such minorities . in addition to its free-to-air channels , sbs also has an interest in the world movies . sbs shows many non-english language films with english subtitles , and each morning shows news bulletins in foreign languages from around the world in its worldwatch timeslot . in addition to this , a great deal of programming from the pbs , arte , bbc and cbc , and even comedy central are shown . acquired entertainment programs include the us animated series south park , queer as folk and inspector rex . in addition to news and current affairs programming such as sbs world news and dateline , the network also commissions locally produced documentaries , movies and comedy programs . less-popular mainstream sports such as soccer , cycling and athletics are also shown . sbs currently broadcast two channels : sbs , known as 'sbs one ' between 2009 and 2015 , and sbs viceland , known as sbs two between 2009 and 2016 . national indigenous television . national indigenous television , funded by the commonwealth of australia , is produced in sydney and broadcast via imparja television 's existing satellite capacity . the idea for a national , indigenous television service was initially conceived by the national indigenous radio service ( the peak indigenous radio group ) , which initially lobbied the government to start a new , nationwide indigenous television network . although no major political party championed this cause , commercial broadcaster imparja television stated in 2004 that it would run such a network , at least within its own licence area . in 2005 the federal department of communications , information technology and the arts considered funding such a station , and conducted a review process . on 13 july 2007 nitv launched , replacing indigenous community television on the optus aurora remote satellite service . on 12 december 2012 nitv was launched on the free to air 4th digital channel of sbs , making this channel available to all australians wherever sbs digital television is broadcast . commercial television . 350px in order to allow for commercial licensing , the country was divided into a number of licence areas . when these were drawn up in the 1950s , each major city or regional area - about 50 in all - was considered its own market region . in each of the five major capitals , three commercial licences were granted ( the exception being perth which did not receive its third commercial station until 1988 ) , while smaller cities or regions were granted a single licence . the process of aggregation began in 1989 . regional markets were merged and ( usually ) three licences were granted in the new , aggregated , area , with the exception of tasmania and remote & central australia , which got two licences . as some markets were formed by the merger of up to six different individual markets , this meant that some stations had to merge or form partnerships in order to remain competitive . around the same time , many remote market regions were replaced with two satellite market regions - one for regional western australia , and one for remote central and eastern australia - although each of these regions was only granted two licences . some remained un-aggregated , and are today known as diary markets . these were granted a second licence , sometimes to the same company that owned the existing licence . two-broadcaster areas were later granted a third licence , to a joint venture company formed as a partnership of the two existing broadcasters . examples of these include tasmanian digital television , mildura digital television and darwin digital television service . areas with one broadcaster were also granted a third licence to the same company that owned the other two licences . metropolitan . there are three main metropolitan networks , the seven network , nine network and network 10 . although primarily targeted at metropolitan areas , these names are also used in some regional areas ( others choose to run the same programming as these stations , but use independent names ) . seven network headquarters ( administration ) : eveleigh , sydney national play-out centre : frenchs forest , sydney main studio breakfast/ morning show/ news ( national bulletins ) : martin place , sydney others production : australian technology park , sydney and docklands studios melbourne nine network headquarters : north sydney national play-out centre : frenchs forest , sydney main studio breakfast/ morning show/ news ( national bulletins ) : north sydney others production : docklands studios melbourne network 10 headquarters & national play-out centre : pyrmont , sydney main studio morning show/ news ( national bulletins ) : pyrmont , sydney although the names of the metropolitan stations remain the same across cities , their ownership varies ( see below ) . regional and remote . the 40 % of australians living outside of metropolitan areas are served by multiple regional television networks , including win television , prime7 , the gwn7 , nbn television , imparja television , southern cross television , southern cross ten , as well as the seven network . the regional coverage has evolved significantly since services commenced , with the aggregation in the eastern states of the early 1990s and the commencement of digital and subscription television in the 2000s major pivots for content and branding . most regional stations utilise some sort of co-brand with a metropolitan network e.g . '' prime7 '' . as with some of the metropolitan stations , local content is present only in the form of local news bulletin or local advertising . the amount of local news provided varies from two-minute updates to full-hour , seven nights a week news bulletins . current ownership . commercial stations in metropolitan markets ( sydney , melbourne , brisbane , adelaide , perth ) , in addition to some regional markets , are owned and operated by their respective network instead of an affiliate operator . however , commercial stations in most regional and remote areas are instead operated by broadcasters with unique licences and commercial agreements with the metropolitan market networks . some regional markets have one operator holding a monopoly over all three networks , with one '' digital only '' supplementary station of the three operating under a supplementary licence . officially , so called '' digital only '' services are supplementary licences given through section 38b of the broadcasting services act 1992 . even though australia no longer has any analogue television signals , the then-commonly used term '' digital only '' is also listed here for posterity . other regional markets have only two operators , each affiliated with their own networks . consequently , these two operators have formed a supplementary '' digital only '' joint venture to broadcast the remaining third network . notes . community broadcasting . in 1993 the australian broadcasting authority allocated licences for a sixth television channel for non-profit community and educational use on a trial basis . the groundwork for community television was laid in the broadcasting services act 1992 , which defined a new service category , community television , for the first time . prospective community television providers were invited to apply for transmitter licences , which were granted to groups in sydney , melbourne , brisbane , adelaide and lismore . in february , 1995 , the west australian community broadcasting association was appointed to manage access to the sixth channel in perth and mandurah on behalf of groups based in the two cities . licences were also granted in 1996 to hobart access community television inc in hobart and bendigo community television inc in bendigo however these were not renewed . similarly , a licence for bushvision in mount gambier was granted in 2005 , but it later lapsed . permanent licences for sydney , melbourne , brisbane and perth were allocated in 2004 , while trial licences remain in effect in adelaide and lismore . the australian community television alliance , established in march 2008 is the national representative organisation for community television . the ceo of tvs sydney , laurie patton , is the secretary and represents acta on the federal government 's digital switchover taskforce industry advisory group . in addition to these , a number of community groups produce programming in regional areas , including queanbeyan canberra television ( qctv ) in canberra , hunter community television in newcastle , illawarra community television ( ictv ) in wollongong and warp television in bathurst . groups in a number of areas including ballarat and victor harbor have unsuccessfully applied for licences . aurora community television , australian multicultural television , ballarat community cable television , channel vision ( canberra ) and satellite community tv , although not licensed as community stations , provide similar services . community television stations went digital in 2010 . however , in september 2014 australian federal communications minister malcolm turnbull announced that licensing for community television stations would end in december 2015 . in september 2015 , turnbull , now prime minister , announced an extension of the deadline to 31 december 2016 . deadline was further extended incrementally by communications minister mitch fifield until june 2021 , however by 2015 sydney 's television sydney had ceased broadcasting , as had brisbane 's 31 digital , switching to a short-live online streaming service . as of january 2021 , the only remaining community television stations in australia still broadcasting are melbourne 's c31 and adelaide 's channel 44 . subscription television . three of the four major providers of subscription television in australia carry a common service ; however they have a number of differences . foxtel currently 'controls ' the common service that austar and optus resell . this service is known as the foxtel platform . austar broadcasts into all of regional australia ( except western australia ) , tasmania and darwin while foxtel broadcasts in all capital cities , the gold coast , the central coast and all of western australia until mid-2012 when foxtel/austar merge . optus television operates only in the small parts of sydney , melbourne , brisbane and adelaide where it has laid cable . selectv was the fourth provider of subscription television controlled by win corporation . selectv was available throughout australia via satellite and focused on providing content in comparatively low priced packages to a number of specialised market segments ; including spanish , greek , and italian . as of january 2011 , the service is no longer available . there are two small region-based subscription television providers ; transact which is available in canberra ; and neighbourhood cable based in ballarat , and also available in geelong & mildura . there are also a number of satellite services that target specific language speaking groups , the largest being ubi world tv , a non-english language service . globecast tv and pan global tv are non-english language , christian and sport channel platforms that are controlled by globecast . various operators run their own subscription services on these platforms . in addition , there are other satellite subscription services available through other providers . national iptv operators include tpg iptv . datacasting . datacasting in australia began as a test transmission in sydney using one of the reserved digital spectrum positions . australian broadcast infrastructure company broadcast australia undertook the three-year trial using the dvb-t system . the trial consisted of a number of services on one standard 7 & nbsp ; mhz multiplex , collectively known as digital forty four . the service was extended past the three-year period , but ended in march 2010 the services included ; a combined program guide for the free-to-air broadcasters , named channel 4 ; a news , sport , and weather datacast channel provided by the australian broadcasting corporation ; a government and public information channel , known as channel nsw , which included real time traffic information and surf webcams ; the australian christian channel ; the expo channel ; and various federal parliamentary audio broadcasts . today , datacasting consists of information based channels that are broadcast as subchannels of the existing commercial broadcasters . as of mid 2013 , these broadcast mainly infomercials . examples include tvsn and 4me . narrowcasting . there are currently six narrowcasting services in australia : aboriginal television - darwin - link goolarri television ( gtv ) - broome - link indigenous community television ( ictv ) - alice springs ngarda community television and radio - roebourne , western australia snowy mountains television ( smtv ) - jindabyne , new south wales westlink - western australia two of the narrowcast services , westlink and indigenous community television ( ictv ) , are available to satellite users across australia via the vast service . westlink is additionally rebroadcast terrestrially in bunbury and albany . the service is funded by the government of western australia and is primarily used for educational purposes but also for teleconferencing , training and corporate services . aboriginal television , gtv and ngarda tv are local indigenous-owned services that broadcast only to their home market . smtv is also restricted to its home market of jindabyne . amateur broadcasting . the australian amateur radio bands include frequencies standard televisions can receive , which have led to amateur radio operators making use of this by amateur television . the frequency overlap occurs roughly where television channel 16 lies . typically , channel 16 is used for amateur television transmissions ; however , other frequencies are sometimes utilized , especially those used by satellite television services . most transmissions can be viewed and heard on an analogue television , but some transmissions require additional or other equipment . new south wales . television gladesville ( vk2tvg ) in sydney conducts three test transmissions per week on channel 16 , including a three-hour live to air program on wednesday nights . the central coast amateur radio club also has an amateur television repeater ( vk2rtg ) on channel 16 . vk2rts broadcasts from lawson near katoomba on channel 16 . club activity is on mondays between 8 and 10p.m . a voice liaison and control frequency of 147.325 & nbsp ; mhz ( +600 & nbsp ; khz duplex ) is used . vk2rfm broadcasts from oakdale near camden on 1250 & nbsp ; mhz fm which can be viewed with an analog satellite receiver . club activity is tuesdays between 8 and 10p.m . the liaison and control frequency is 147.400 & nbsp ; mhz simplex . both repeaters cover the entire sydney basin . they are operated by the sydney amateur television group and may be activated and used at any time from the control channels . uhf tv channel 35 was used until july 2001 when the australian communications and media authority reassigned the channel for digital television . victoria ( 2 digital atv channels ) . vk3rtv is melbourne 's main amateur television station , and is available via channel 16 at the lower end of the uhf tv band ( below channel 28 ) . the amateur television repeater is located on mount dandenong . there are a small number of amateur television enthusiasts ( amateur radio operators with television transmitting equipment ) who transmit to melbourne and surrounds via vk3rtv . these include vk3aaz , vk3aob , vk3agj , vk3bfg , vk3bcu , vk3ch , vk3crg , vk3fmd , vk3gmz , vk3iv , vk3jda , vk3jdg , vk3kbl , vk3khb , vk3kos , vk3la , vk3mn , vk3pb , vk3tms , vk3tvz , vk3xok , vk3xkd and vk3xza . vk3rtv is now a 2-channel digital television facility on 446 & nbsp ; mhz . the new system features two standard definition digital channels . bendigo in central victoria also has an amateur television transmitter ( vk3rbo ) on the 13 & nbsp ; cm band . this can be received using surplus microwave dishes and downconverters . the station is known to show episodes of the amateur television program 'amateurlogic' . . queensland . amateur television in queensland had its beginnings in the late 1970s , after a group of local ham radio enthusiasts showed interests in setting up their own television repeater , although this would not occur until the 1980s . for several years , broadcasters had to rely on a low-powered repeater located in brisbane 's northern suburbs , but eventually permissions were granted to have a more advanced and more central repeater constructed within the inner-city suburb of spring hill . in 1990 , brisbane 's amateur television club provided a two-way television system for lamington national park during the park 's 75th anniversary celebrations . in october that year , amateur television history was made when broadcasters vk4bob and vk4xrl transmitted video to sydney 's atv clubs which was relayed by the aussat satellite . various transmitters continue to broadcast to this day . some queensland atv transmitters are located in the outer-brisbane suburbs of ocean view and wamuran . in november 2012 , the ocean view site will begin its first digital transmission test . in 2014 , the spring hill repeater was demolished . see also . australian broadcasting corporation history of broadcasting in australia list of people in communications and media in australia list of radio stations in australia . notes . references .