Hal Hartley

early life . hartley was born in lindenhurst in southern long island , new york , the son of an ironworker . hal hartley biography ( 1959– ) hartley had an early interest in painting and attended the massachusetts college of art in boston where he studied art and developed an interest in filmmaking . in 1980 , he was accepted to the filmmaking program at the state university of new york at purchase in new york , where he met a core group of technicians and actors who would go on to work with him on his feature films , including his regular cinematographer michael spiller . feature films . hartley shot his first feature film , the unbelievable truth , in 1988 . made on a shoestring budget and filmed in his native long island , it was an unconventional love story about a suburban long island teenager ( played by adrienne shelly , a soon-to-be hartley regular ) falling in love with a handsome mechanic with a criminal past ( robert john burke , also a soon-to-be hartley regular ) . the screenplay featured what have become hartley 's trademarks – deadpan humour , offbeat , stilted , pause-filled dialogue , and characters posing philosophical questions about the meaning of life , combined with a degree of stylization in acting , choreography see steven rawle , performance in the cinema of hal hartley ( cambria press , 2011 ) and camera movement . the film received positive reviews and was nominated for the grand jury prize at the 1990 sundance film festival , establishing hartley as a distinctive new talent in the burgeoning independent filmmaking movement . hartley 's next film , trust ( 1990 ) , followed similar themes and style to the unbelievable truth , again an offbeat romantic comedy starring adrienne shelly as a long island teenager who forms a complex romantic relationship with a mysterious computer repairman ( played by martin donovan , another hartley regular ) . trust won the waldo salt screenwriting award at the 1991 sundance film festival . hartley followed this with the short feature surviving desire ( 1991 ) , a romantic comedy about a college professor ( donovan ) who has an affair with a student ( mary b . ward ) . simple men ( 1992 ) , a drama about two brothers ( played by burke and bill sage ) who reunite to search for their anarchist father and encounter two women in a small town ( karen sillas and elina löwensohn ) , was entered in competition at the 1992 cannes film festival . his next feature , amateur ( 1994 ) , marked a change of pace for hartley , exploring more somber themes and with a more tragic tone . described as '' a metaphysical thriller '' , it starred the french actress isabelle huppert as a former nun trying to write pornographic fiction who meets thomas ( martin donovan ) , a man suffering from amnesia , and sophia ( elina löwensohn ) , thomas 's wife and a porn star who reveals that thomas was a violent criminal and pornographer . hartley developed flirt ( 1995 ) as an extension of his short film of the same name made in 1993 . the film is a triptych of three separate characters involved in romantic entanglements in different cities – new york , berlin and tokyo – with each story using the same dialogue . the film stars hartley regulars bill sage , parker posey , martin donovan , dwight ewell and the japanese actress miho nikaido , whom hartley married in 1996 . later works . hartley achieved his greatest commercial and critical success with his next feature , henry fool ( 1997 ) , a darkly comic drama about a near-catatonic garbageman , simon grim ( james urbaniak ) , and his sister fay ( parker posey ) , who meet henry fool ( thomas jay ryan ) , a libertine and aspiring novelist who inspires simon to write and seduces fay and her depressed mother ( maria porter ) . simon 's literary output , an epic poem written in blank verse , becomes a national sensation , winning acclaim and controversy for its pornographic content . simon eventually becomes a literary celebrity , winning the nobel prize for literature . while henry 's writing career fades , he is coerced into marrying fay , whom he has gotten pregnant , and abandons writing and takes simon 's old job as a garbageman to support his family . the film garnered positive reviews and was entered into competition at the 1998 cannes film festival , where hartley won the best screenplay award . hartley was invited to contribute the american entry to a series of films financed by french television to celebrate the 2000 millennium . his entry , a black comedy entitled the book of life ( 1998 ) was shot entirely on digital video in new york in 1998 . the story imagines jesus ( martin donovan ) returning to earth on the eve of the 2000 millennium to open the book of life ( stored on an apple mac laptop ) which will start the apocalypse . jesus , accompanied by mary magdalene ( singer-songwriter pj harvey ) becomes enamoured of humanity and argues with satan ( thomas jay ryan ) as to whether or not to end human civilisation . the film also features yo la tengo , who appear as a salvation army band . some sources state that william burroughs is also featured , but according to hartley , this is actually a shot of the film 's production manager doing a burroughs impression . the film screened on french television and had a limited commercial release in cinemas . hartley 's next feature no such thing ( 2001 ) tells the story of beatrice ( sarah polley ) , a journalist whose fiancé is killed by a monster in iceland . beatrice 's editor ( helen mirren ) orders beatrice to go to iceland to interview the monster ( robert john burke ) , who is a sensitive philosopher . the pair return to new york where the media turns them into celebrities . the film is intended as a satire of news media 's obsession with celebrities and manipulating events to create news headlines . the film also stars julie christie as a doctor sympathetic to the monster 's cause . the film was screened in the un certain regard section at the 2001 cannes film festival . the girl from monday ( 2005 ) continued hartley 's critical and satiric interest in media manipulation and the negative consequences of monopoly and globalization . filmed in new york city and puerto rico , the film is set in a future dystopia where people are encouraged to record their sexual encounters as an economic transaction and thus increase their consumer buying power . the film stars bill sage , sabrina lloyd and tatiana abracos . it premiered at the 2005 sundance film festival and received a limited cinematic release , receiving mostly negative reviews . in late 2005 , hartley moved from new york to berlin and began preparing fay grim , an intended sequel to henry fool . the film , which starred parker posey , james urbaniak and thomas jay ryan reprising their roles from henry fool , was a comedy-drama in which fay is coerced by a cia agent ( jeff goldblum ) to try to locate notebooks that belonged to henry ( now a fugitive ) . fay learns that the notebooks contain classified information that could compromise us security , leading fay into a search around the world to find them . the film was shot in 2006 in locations in berlin , paris , and istanbul and premiered at the 2006 toronto international film festival . it had a limited cinematic release in 2007 and received mixed reviews . since 1999 , hartley 's films have predominantly been shot with digital cameras , including the features the book of life , the girl from monday , fay grim and meanwhile ( 2011 ) , in addition to his short films . his digital aesthetic is significantly different from that seen in the 1990s , and his films shot by michael spiller on 35mm film , which exhibit blurring of the image ( due to a very low shutter speed ) , the use of freeze frames , and shifts between colour and black-and-white footage , also display a considerable divergence from the washed-out colours and straightforward cinematography of the long island films from the early 1990s . steven rawle , performance in the cinema of hal hartley ( cambria press , 2011 ) meanwhile received its world premiere at the camerimage in bydgoszcz , poland on 29 november 2011 . the hour-long feature was released on dvd in 2012 following a successful funding campaign by hartley using the kickstarter website . meanwhile by hal hartley – kickstarter , kickstarter.com in november 2013 , hartley funded ned rifle , the third film in the trilogy that began with henry fool and fay grim , via a kickstarter campaign . ned rifle by hal hartley – kickstarter , kickstarter.com the film premiered on september 7 , 2014 , at the 2014 toronto international film festival . dennis harvey , '' film review : ‘ ned rifle ’ , '' variety , september 8 , 2014 . between 2015 and 2017 , hartley directed eight episodes of red oaks , an amazon studios comedy web television series . short films . in addition to his feature work , hartley has made a number of short films , many of which have been collected and re-released in dvd anthologies . theatre . hartley 's stage play soon , a drama dealing with the waco siege , between the religious community known as the branch davidians and the us federal government , was first produced at the salzburg festival and then later that year in antwerp . it was also staged in the us in 2001 . awards . in 1996 , hartley was made chevalier of the ordre des arts et des lettres . from 2001 through 2004 hartley was a visiting lecturer at harvard university , while simultaneously editing no such thing , shooting the girl from monday , and writing fay grim . he was awarded a fellowship by the american academy in berlin in late 2004 , where he did research related to a proposed large-scale project concerning the life of french educator and social activist simone weil . personal life . in 1996 , hartley married the japanese dancer and actress miho nikaido , one of the stars of his film flirt . filmography . feature films . the unbelievable truth ( 1989 ) trust ( 1990 ) surviving desire ( 1991 ) simple men ( 1992 ) amateur ( 1994 ) flirt ( 1995 ) henry fool ( 1997 ) the book of life ( 1998 ) no such thing ( 2001 ) the girl from monday ( 2005 ) fay grim ( 2006 ) meanwhile ( 2011 ) ned rifle ( 2014 ) . short films . kid ( 1984 ) the cartographer 's girlfriend ( 1987 ) dogs ( 1988 ) ambition ( 1991 ) theory of achievement ( 1991 ) flirt ( 1993 ) opera no . 1 ( 1994 ) nyc 3/94 ( 1994 ) iris ( 1994 ) the new math ( s ) ( 2000 ) kimono ( film ) ( 2000 ) the sisters of mercy ( 2004 ) a/muse ( 2010 ) implied harmonies ( 2010 ) the apologies ( 2010 ) adventure ( 2010 ) accomplice ( 2010 ) . web television . red oaks ( 2015–17 ) . references . external links . the director interviews : hal hartley , fay grim at filmmaker magazine drinks with tony podcast interview hal hartley and parker posey interview hammer to nail interview literature on hal hartley