Carlota of Mexico

childhood . the only daughter of leopold i of the belgians and louise of orléans , charlotte was born at the royal castle of laeken , belgium . she was named after her father 's first wife , princess charlotte of wales . charlotte had three brothers : louis-philippe , who died in infancy ; the future leopold ii of belgium ; and prince philippe , count of flanders . she was close to her maternal grandmother , maria amalia of the two sicilies , queen of france , and the two regularly corresponded . when charlotte was ten years old , her mother , queen louise-marie , died of tuberculosis and charlotte was entrusted to the countess of hulst , a close family friend . although young , the princess had her own household ; but for a few weeks out of the year , charlotte stayed in claremont with maria amalia and the rest of her mother 's family in exile . it was rumoured that , in 1866 , charlotte was having an affair with belgian officer colonel and that she gave birth to a son , maxime weygand , in brussels on 21 january 1867 . weygand refused to confirm or deny the persistent rumor and his parentage remains uncertain . weygand was a french military commander in both world wars i and ii . marriage . in her youth , charlotte resembled her mother , and was noted to be a beauty , possessing delicate features . combined with her status as the only daughter of king leopold , she was a desirable bride . on july 27 , 1857 , charlotte married her second cousin maximilian i of mexico in brussels , the idealistic younger brother of emperor franz joseph i of austria . napoleon iii gave charlotte and her husband maximilian a beautiful bisque bust of charlotte as a wedding gift . in the court of wien she was much prized by her mother-in-law , princess sophie , who saw in her the perfect example of a wife to an austrian archduke . this contributed to the strained relationship between charlotte and elisabeth of bavaria , wife of franz joseph , whom sophie treated rather cruelly . it is said that charlotte disliked the deep connection that existed between elisabeth and maximilian , who were confidantes and shared the same tastes for many things , especially because her sister-in-law was universally admired for her beauty and charms . charlotte spent several relatively happy years in italy as maximilian 's wife while the archduke served as the governor of the austrian provinces of lombardy and venetia . the position was purely nominal , as power rested in the hand of the emperor and his officers . with the loss of lombardy to the kingdom of piedmont in 1859 , the unemployed maximillian and charlotte began the construction of the castle of miramare , on the adriatic coast near trieste . charlotte played a major part in planning the layout and statuary of the extensive gardens , while contributing some of her own paintings to the gallery of the palace . . empress of mexico . in the early 1860s , the ambitious napoleon iii initiated the french intervention in mexico . france , eager to turn mexico into a satellite state , searched for a suitable figurehead to serve as the nominal emperor of mexico . his choice was maximilian , who held no real power in the austrian-ruled parts of northern italy and was eager for a more challenging role . while franz joseph remained ambiguous on the proposal and his ministers questioned its wisdom , the decisive charlotte overcame her husband 's doubts . maximilian accepted the mexican crown and the couple sailed for the new world . the imperial couple , as they now were , were crowned at the catedral metropolitana in 1864 and chose as their seat mexico city , making their home in the neoclassical chapultepec castle . in mexico , she was known as carlota . life in mexico . carlota tried to take her imperial duties seriously and even undertook a tour of the remote yucatán frontier in november of 1865 , visiting the ruins of uxmal . while there she wrote a series of letters and reports on the peninsula that are now archived in the national archives of austria and the library of congress . carlota and maximilian had no children , but in 1865 the imperial couple adopted agustín de iturbide y green and salvador de iturbide y de marzán—grandsons of agustín de iturbide , an earlier emperor of mexico ( r . 1822–23 ) . they gave two-year-old agustín the title of '' his highness , the prince of iturbide '' —similar imperial titles were accorded to various members of the child 's extended family—but never intended to give him the throne , because he was not of royal blood . maximilian explained himself that it was all a charade to get his brother archduke karl ludwig of austria to give him one of his sons as heir . only months after the coronation , however , napoleon iii began signaling his abandonment of maximilian , and the french began to withdraw their troops from mexico . this strategic pullback was a potentially fatal blow to the infant mexican monarchy . the situation was exacerbated by a united states blockade that prevented french reinforcements from landing . in a desperate attempt to save her husband 's throne , carlota set sail for europe from the port of veracruz upon the transatlantic ocean liner empress eugénie on july 13 , 1866 , determined to persuade napeoleon iii to reverse his decision to withdraw french troops . to help legitimise her visit she was accompanied by m . martin castillo , minister of foreign affairs . mission in europe . carlota arrived in france at the harbour of saint-nazaire on august 8 and was greeted by juan almonte and his wife . from there carlota took a train and arrived in paris on august 9—on the way she had received a telegraph from napoleon iii , informing her that he was terribly ill , but this did little to dissuade her . she stayed at the le grand hôtel and upon arriving was greeted by napoleon iii 's wife , eugénie de montijo , hoping to deter the determined empress . but again , carlota could not be dissuaded and eugénie came to arrange the first of three meetings between the two of them . carlota gave long impassioned speeches , reminding napoleon iii of his promises and the treaty of miramar . but he and his ministers were unwavering in their position , viewing the mexican empire as a lost cause and feeling there were greater concerns on the home front with prussia . with her efforts all falling to ruin carlota began manifesting symptoms of paranoia and suffered a profound cognitive and emotional collapse . the first signs of this could be seen with her second meeting with napoleon , where she became overwhelmed by sadness and threw herself into a nearby armchair , sobbing hysterically . on august 19 in le grand hôtel , napoleon iii met carlota for the third and final time , declaring with finality his decision to cease providing aid and encouraged her to have maximilian abdicate the throne . on august 21 , carlota left for miramare , maximilian 's castle near the imperial free city of trieste in the austrian littoral , an austrian-ruled part of north-eastern italy . on the journey there , carlota 's mental health showed signs of worsening—passing by a farmer , she became convinced that it was an assassin after her and persistently shouted at her coachman to drive faster . once at miramare she found a message from maximilian waiting for her , imploring carlota to seek an audience with pope pius ix in rome . on the way to rome she showed further signs of deteriorating mental health ; while stopping for the night at the city of bolzano ( german : botzen ) in south tyrol , then part of the austrian empire , carlota informed martin castillo that she felt unwell and insisted that it was due to being poisoned by spies and traitors of napoleon iii among them . carlota finally had her audience with pope pius ix on september 27 , but he was reluctant to use his influence to intervene with napoleon iii on her empire 's behalf . she became despondent and distant thereafter , overwhelmed by despair and paranoia , and remained within her hotel for the next two days . she had begun to deny herself food and water , fearful that someone was out to poison her . on october 1 , carlota went to the vatican to meet with the pope , dressed in clothes of mourning , her face reportedly displaying sunken eyes and flushed cheeks . crying hysterically , she begged to be sheltered for the night out of fear of assassins sent by napoleon waiting outside , refusing to leave the premises even if it meant having to sleep on the stone floor . the pope conceded to her request and had a bed moved into the library for her , making her one of the few women to ever stay overnight in the vatican . carlota spent most of that night writing her will and farewell letters . the following days carlota confined herself to her hotel room , leaving only on occasion to drink public water from the fountains in rome with a goblet she had stolen from the pope 's apartment . de terugkeer van charlotte paperback . juli 1867 – een delicate opdracht voor baron adrien goffinet , université de genève when her family eventually became informed of her activities they were shocked and king leopold sent the count of flanders to italy to visit his sister . the empress , who was very depressed and unstable , took her court to miramare on advice of her brother , the count of flanders . dr . riedel , director of the lunatic asylum of vienna , visited her in order to report to the emperor . widowhood . while the empress carlota was resting , the emperor of austria and the king of the belgians sent delegations to miramare castle . the bombelles , and dr von jilek , a friend of the emperor of mexico , were sent to miramare . the king of the belgians sent auguste goffinet on a mission to get his sister home . emperor maximilian was captured by mexican republican forces and executed on 19 june 1867 . now an archduchess again , she was obedient to the austrian imperial court , and count karl of bombelles tried to keep her in miramare . discussions between the austrian imperial court and brussels became more important , because of the heritage . franz joseph i placed charlotte under the custody of his brother , archduke karl ludwig of austria . leopold ii of the belgians , who had succeeded his father in december 1865 , sent his wife , queen marie henriette , to vienna to visit her cousin , emperor franz joseph , and take care of charlotte . charlotte was kept under observation by a team of medical and imperial guards . the king sent jan frans bulckens ( 1813–1876 ) , a belgian psychiatrist , to his sister . the medical team decided that the empress could not be told of the execution of her husband . with medical approval , queen marie henriette gave her sister-in-law a faked telegram from her husband to come back to brussels . this worked and the dowager empress left miramare for the last time . together with her sister-in law , queen marie henriette , and the belgian delegation , they left for belgium . after she left miramare she was returned to the imperial court . historians think that after the death of the emperor in mexico , charlotte only had the status of a rich dowager . for the viennese court and imperial family , it was in their financial interest to keep her in miramare . there her fortune was guarded under the care of eduard von radonetz , the prefect of . when she was in belgium , the viennese court would need to pay her dowry to leopold in belgium . this theory is confirmed by andré castelot . maximilien et charlotte du mexique : la tragédie de l'ambition charlotte and her sister-in-law were allowed to go back to belgium where the king gave her a court at bouchout castle in meise , belgium . during the final years of his life , the king cared for his sister . the former empress wrote notes of profound gratitude of the care she received from her brother and nephews . g . freddy , léopold ii intime , parijs , 1905 during the first world war , there was fighting near bouchout castle . the occupying german army did not , however , enter the grounds , over which an austro-hungarian flag flew ; because austria-hungary was one of the chief allies of the german empire and carlota was the widowed sister-in-law of the austrian emperor . as carlota 's illness progressed , her paranoia faded . she remained deeply in love with her husband . after his death , she cherished all of the surviving possessions they had enjoyed in common . carlota died of pneumonia brought on by influenza at bouchout castle on 19 january 1927 , and is buried in the royal crypt of the church of our lady of laeken . honours . carlota of mexico received the following honours : hof- und staatshandbuch der österreichisch-ungarischen monarchie ( 1866 ) , genealogy p . 2 mexican empire : grand mistress and dame grand cross of the order of saint charles ( mexico ) dame grand cross of the mexican imperial orders dame grand cross of the order of guadalupe : dame of the order of the starry cross : dame grand cross of honour and devotion : dame grand cross of the order of saint isabel , 19 april 1865 : 525th dame of the order of queen maria luisa , 22 december 1857 . in popular culture . medea de novara portrayed empress carlota in the films juárez y maximiliano ( 1934 ) , la paloma ( 1937 ) , the mad empress ( 1939 ) and caballería del imperio ( 1942 ) , all directed by de novara 's husband , director miguel contreras torres . bette davis portrayed empress carlota in the film juarez ( 1939 ) , directed by william dieterle . carlota is referenced in the first season of the dick van dyke show in an episode titled '' empress carlotta 's necklace '' ( 1961 ) . maría rivas portrayed the empress in the historical telenovela maximiliano y carlota ( 1965 ) , directed by ernesto alonso . christine wodetzky portrayed empress carlota in the tv miniseries maximilian von mexiko ( 1970 ) . nelly meden portrayed empress carlota in another historical telenovela , el carruaje ( 1972 ) . helena rojo portrayed the empress in the film those years ( spanish : aquellos años , 1973 ) . news from the empire ( spanish : noticias del imperio , 1986 ) , a novel by fernando del paso , shows a literary portrait of the empress and her madness . laura flores also portrayed the empress in a historical telenovela , the flight of the eagle ( spanish : el vuelo del águila , 1994-1995 ) , which was also directed by ernesto alonso . marisol santacruz portrayed empress carlota in an episode of the mexican documentary television series secretos de nuestra historia ( 2006 ) , which features '' virtual interviews '' with historical figures of mexico . federica de cola portrayed empress carlota in the tv miniseries sisi ( 2009 ) . the musical carlota : a serpentine crown ( 2009 ) , by composer and scenarist marcel wick , portrays carlota as a woman driven by ambition towards inevitable disaster . the novel carlota : the empress who went mad with love ( spanish : carlota : la emperatriz que enloquecio de amor , 2017 ) , by laura martínez-belli . is the central character of adiós mamá carlota ( 2019 ) , a historical play written by luis valdez that premiered at the san jose stage company . carlota as an elderly widow is the focus of '' throne of shadows , '' an audio drama written by thomas e . fuller and performed by the atlanta radio theatre company . url . see also . list of heads of state of mexico baron auguste goffinet . references . further reading . . andré bénit , charlotte , princesse de belgique et impératrice du mexique ( 1840-1927 ) . un conte de fées qui tourne au délire , historic'one , plougastel , 2017 . andré bénit , « charlotte de belgique , impératrice du mexique . une plongée dans les ténèbres de la folie . essai de reconstitution fictionnelle » , mises en littérature de la folie , çédille , revista de estudios franceses , monografías de çédille 7 , 2017 , . andré bénit , légendes , intrigues et médisances autour des « archidupes » . charlotte de saxe-cobourg-gotha , princesse de belgique / maximilien de habsbourg , archiduc d ’ autriche . récits historique et fictionnel , peter lang , bruxelles , 2020 . 438p . . . external links . imperial house of mexico - - o