Tiny Tim (musician)

early life . khaury was born in manhattan , new york city , on april 12 , 1932 . his mother tillie ( née staff ) , a garment worker , was the daughter of a rabbi . she had immigrated from brest-litovsk , present-day belarus , as a teen in 1914 . khaury 's father , butros khaury , was a textile worker from beirut , present-day lebanon , whose father was a maronite catholic priest . khaury displayed musical talent at a very young age . at the age of five , his father gave him a vintage wind-up phonograph and a 78-rpm record of '' beautiful ohio '' by henry burr . he would sit for hours listening to the record . at the age of six , he began teaching himself guitar . by his pre-teen years , he developed a passion for records , specifically those from the 1900s through the 1930s . he began spending most of his free time at the new york public library , reading about the history of the phonograph industry and its first recording artists . he researched sheet music , often making photographic copies to take home to learn , a hobby he continued for his entire life . he attended george washington high school in washington heights , manhattan . life and career . at eleven years of age , khaury began learning to play the violin and enjoyed performing at home for his parents . he later picked up the mandolin and the ukulele—the latter of which became his signature instrument . during his recovery from having his appendix removed in 1945 , he read the bible and listened to music on the radio ; after his recovery , he rarely left his room except to go to school , where he was a mediocre student . after repeating his sophomore year of high school , he dropped out , taking a series of menial jobs . in a 1968 interview on the tonight show , he described the discovery of his ability to sing in an upper register : '' i was listening to the radio and singing along ; as i was singing i said 'gee , it 's strange . i can go up high as well . ' '' in a 1969 interview he said he was listening to rudy vallée sing in a falsetto , and '' had something of a revelation—i never knew that i had another top register , '' describing it as a religious experience . by the early 1950s , he had landed a job as a messenger at the new york office of metro-goldwyn-mayer studios , where he became ever more fascinated with the entertainment industry . he then entered a local talent show and sang '' you are my sunshine '' in his newly discovered falsetto . he started performing at dance club amateur nights under different names , such as texarkana tex , judas k . foxglove , vernon castle , and emmett swink . to stand out from the crowd of performers he wore wild clothing and , after seeing an old poster of a long-haired rudolph valentino , grew his own hair out to shoulder length and wore pasty white facial makeup . his mother did not understand herbert 's change in appearance and was intending to take her son , now in his twenties , to see a psychiatrist at bellevue hospital , until his father stepped in . in 1959 , he dropped all his other stage names and performed as '' larry love , the singing canary '' at hubert 's museum and live flea circus in new york city 's times square . while performing there , he signed with a manager who sent him on auditions throughout the greenwich village section of new york , where he performed unpaid amateur gigs , playing the ukulele and singing in his falsetto voice the song which became his signature , '' tiptoe through the tulips '' . film critic roger ebert wrote : i first saw tiny tim very early in his career , in greenwich village in the winter of 1962–63 . there was a convention of college newspaper editors , and a few of us – i remember jeff greenfield coming along – went to the black pussycat and found ourselves being entertained by a man the likes of whom we 'd not seen before . he was already locally popular . in 1963 , he landed his first paying gig at page 3 , a gay and lesbian club in greenwich village , playing 6 hours a night , 6 nights a week , for 96 per month . he performed for the next two years as '' dary dover '' , and after that , '' sir timothy timms '' . after being booked to follow a '' midget '' act , his manager , george king , billed the 6 ' 1 '' ( 185 & nbsp ; cm ) khaury using the ironic stage name '' tiny tim '' . tiny tim appeared in jack smith 's normal love ( 1963 ) , as well as the independent feature film you are what you eat ( 1968 ) in which he sang the ronettes song '' be my baby '' in his falsetto range ; also featured was a rendition of sonny and cher 's '' i got you babe '' , with tim singing the cher parts in his falsetto voice , along with eleanor barooshian singing sonny bono 's baritone part . these tracks were recorded with musicians who later joined the band . the '' i got you babe '' performance led to a booking on the rowan and martin 's laugh-in , a popular american television comedy-variety show . co-host dan rowan announced that laugh-in believed in showcasing new talent , and introduced tiny tim . the singer entered carrying a shopping bag , pulled his martin soprano ukulele from it , and sang a medley of '' a tisket a tasket '' and '' on the good ship lollipop '' as an apparently genuinely dumbfounded co-host dick martin watched . for his third number on laugh-in , tiny tim entered blowing kisses , preceded by an elaborate procession of the cast and , after a short interview , he sang '' tiptoe through the tulips '' . in 1968 , his first album god bless tiny tim was released . it contained an orchestrated version of '' tiptoe through the tulips '' , which became a hit after being released as a single . for all my little friends ( 1969 ) was a collection of children 's songs and was nominated for a grammy award . on october 7 , 1969 , tiny tim had the opportunity to take the ice with his favorite toronto maple leafs pro sports team before a charity event at the hockey shrine maple leaf gardens . wearing the skates and jersey of future hockey hall of fame member pat quinn and helped by team members mike walton and jim mckenny , he made an attempt to skate for the very first time . he was quoted as saying , '' what a thrill ! just being on the ice was great ! '' reacting well to his evidenced inability to skate on his own , he said , “ i was always athletic spiritually , not physically . '' tiny tim was married three times , and had one daughter from his first marriage to the then 17-year-old victoria budinger – also known as '' miss vicki '' – at the age of 37 . tiny tim married miss vicki on the tonight show starring johnny carson on december 17 , 1969 , with 40 million people watching . in 1971 , budinger gave birth to their daughter tulip victoria . tiny tim and victoria budinger divorced three years later . budinger subsequently had several marriages . tiny tim married jan alweiss ( '' miss jan '' ) in 1984 , and susan marie gardner ( '' miss sue '' ) in 1995 . gardner was a 39-year-old harvard graduate and a fan of tim 's since she was 12 . when tiny tim first became well known to the american public , many people erroneously believed that he was british . many pundits and journalists debated whether the character being presented was just an orchestrated act or the real thing . '' it quickly became clear that he was genuine , '' however , and that he could probably be best described as '' a lonely outcast intoxicated by fame '' and '' a romantic '' always in pursuit of his ideal dream . after his career highlights in the late 1960s , tiny tim 's television appearances dwindled , and his popularity began to wane . he continued to play concerts , making several lucrative appearances in las vegas . in august 1970 he performed “ there 'll always be an england ” to an estimated 600,000 people at the isle of wight festival 1970 . the uk press announced that he had stolen the show '' without a single electric instrument . '' when his recording contract ended with reprise , he founded his own record label and humorously named it vic tim records , as a pun on the combination of his wife 's name with that of his own . he performed with the american alternative rock band camper van beethoven in 1986 . he played the lead role in the 1987 horror film blood harvest , acting the role of mervo . in the 1990s , he released several albums , including rock ( 1993 ) , i love me ( 1993 ) , and girl ( 1996 ) . tiny tim , a biography by harry stein , was published in 1976 by playboy press . he also appeared in the wwe in 1993 , in a skit with jerry lawler on '' king 's court '' . lawler smashed tim 's ukulele , causing tim to cry . . instruments . tiny tim played the ukulele left-handed ( but the guitar right-handed ) , though he retained the standard string placement . the instruments he played included a vintage martin , a favilla , and a johnston metal resonator . tiny was a huge fan of arthur godfrey and taught himself to play using a method book that came with the godfrey-endorsed maccaferri islander plastic ukulele . . death . thumb on september 28 , 1996 , tiny suffered a heart attack just as he began singing at a ukulele festival at the montague grange hall in montague , massachusetts ( this hall is often confused in accounts of the incident with the nearby bookmill , at which he had recorded a video interview earlier that same day ) . he was hospitalized at the nearby franklin county medical center in greenfield for approximately three weeks before being discharged with strong admonitions not to perform again because of his health , weight , and dietary needs for his diabetic and heart conditions . he ignored the advice . on november 30 , 1996 , he was playing at a gala benefit hosted by the women 's club of minneapolis . he had let his third wife ( '' miss sue '' ) know before the show that he was not feeling well , but did not want to disappoint the fans . before the start of his performance , most of the audience had left . while performing his last number of the evening , he suffered another heart attack on stage in the middle of a rendition of his hit , '' tiptoe through the tulips '' . his wife asked him if he was feeling all right , and he said he was not ; she was helping him back to their table when he collapsed , and never regained consciousness . emts performed on-site cpr and transported him to hennepin county medical center , where after repeated revival attempts , he was pronounced dead at 11:20 pm . his remains are entombed in a mausoleum in lakewood cemetery in minneapolis . a large mural of tiny tim with tulip themes by famous australian artist martin sharp is in the macquarie university student council in sydney , australia . . posthumous releases . in 2000 , the rhino handmade label released the posthumous tiny tim live at the royal albert hall . this recording had been made in 1968 at the height of tiny tim 's fame , but reprise records never released it . the limited-number cd sold out and was reissued on rhino 's regular label . in 2009 , the collector 's choice label released i 've never seen a straight banana : rare moments vol . 1 , produced and recorded by richard barone in 1976 . the album was a collection of rare recordings of some of tiny tim 's favorite songs from 1878 through the 1930s , along with some of his own compositions . in 2009 , it was reported that justin martell was preparing a biography of tiny tim , released in 2016 under the title eternal troubadour : the improbable life of tiny tim . martell is called one of america 's '' foremost experts '' on tiny tim ; he contributed liner notes to i 've never seen a straight banana and the 2011 tiny tim compilation lp tiny tim : lost & found 1963–1974 ( rare & unreleased ) , released on secret seven records . in 2013 , a biography of tiny tim was released in two editions . tiny tim : tiptoe through a lifetime was released july 16 , 2013 , and is by lowell tarling ( author ) and martin sharp ( illustrator ) . ship to shore phonoco followed up lost & found vol 1 with a vol 2 featuring tiny tim 's 1974 live recording of '' ( nobody else can love me like ) my old tomato can '' on a limited edition wax cylinder . in 2016 , ship to shore phonoco released tiny tim 's america , a collection of demos recorded by tiny tim in 1974 and finished in 2015 with overdubs overseen by producer richard barone and tiny tim 's cousin eddie rabin . the album was subtitled '' rare moments vol . 2 '' and was presented as a spiritual sequel to 2009 's i 've never seen a straight banana : rare moments vol 1 . . honors and awards . , recognizing performers that have played sold-out shows or have otherwise demonstrated a major contribution to the culture at the iconic venue . receiving a star '' might be the most prestigious public honor an artist can receive in minneapolis , '' according to journalist steve marsh . . discography . god bless tiny tim ( reprise records , 1968 ) with love and kisses from tiny tim : concert in fairyland ( bouquet slp 711 ) recorded 1962 . '' unauthorized '' recording . tiny tim 's 2nd album ( reprise records , 1968 ) the beatles ' 1968 christmas record ( lyntone , lyn 1743/4 , 1968 ) for all my little friends ( reprise records , 1969 ) - this album was nominated for a grammy award . tip toe to the gas pumps / the hickey ( on your neck ) ( clouds records , 1979 ) - 45 rpm single ; a-side refers to long gas lines during opec oil crisis . wonderful world of romance ( street of dreams yprx 1724 . 1980 ) recorded at emi australia , only 200 pressed , no cover printed . chameleon ( street of dreams yprx 1848 , 1980 ) - only 1000 copies pressed . tiny tim : the eternal troubadour ( playback pbl 123441 , 1986 ) tip-toe thru the tulips/ resurrection ( bear family bcd 15409 , 1987 ) leave me satisfied ( nlt 1993 ) 1989 ( unreleased country album ) the heart album ( ca-song ca 1369 ) , 1991 – ( tiny tim has six songs on this album ) tiny tim rock ( regular records , 1993 ) i love me ( yucca tree records , 1993 ) songs of an impotent troubadour ( durtro , 1994 ) tiny tim 's christmas album 1994 ( rounder records , 1994 ) live in chicago with the new duncan imperials ( 1995 , pravda records ) prisoner of love : a tribute to russ columbo ( vinyl retentive productions , 1995 ) girl ( with brave combo ) ( rounder records , 1996 ) tiny tim unplugged ( tomanna 51295 , 1996 ) – recorded live in birmingham , alabama the eternal troubadour : tiny tim live in london ( durtro , 1997 , recorded in 1995 ) tiny tim live ! at the royal albert hall ( rhino handmade , 2000 , recorded in 1968 ) god bless tiny tim : the complete reprise studio masters.and more ( rhino handmade , 2006 , 3-cd set ) chameleon ( zero communications ttch 12061 , 2006 , cd release ) wonderful world of romance ( zero communications , ttww 12062 , 2006 , recorded in 1979 ) stardust ( zero communications , ttst 12063 , 2006 ) i 've never seen a straight banana – rare moments vol . 1 ( collectors choice music wwccm 20582 ) ( 2009 ) tiny tim : lost & found ( rare & unreleased 1963–1974 ) ( secret seven records , 2011 , compilation ) tiny tim 's america ( ship to shore phonograph company , 2016 , previously unreleased ) '' store page – tiny tim 's america '' ship to shore phonoco . retrieved june 6 , 2017 . references . external links . photos of tiny tim by robert whitaker tiny tim with bob dylan and the band tiny tim 's tomb at roadside america complete tiny tim discography fbi records : the vault – herbert khaury ( tiny tim ) at fbi.gov