Pan's People

formation and early history . formation from beat girls . the origins of pan 's people lie in the dance centre-based katy-dids , a six-girl jazz dance group formed in may 1964 comprising linda bywaters , linda lawrence , jenny ferle , lyn wolseley , diane south and ann chapman . this group , renamed the beat girls following the commencement of their residence on the beat room in july 1964 , subsequently appeared on many music and light entertainment tv programmes in the u.k . and netherlands . following numerous line-up changes , by december 1966 only two members were left who had appeared in the beat room series , which ended in january 1965 : barbara ( babs ) lord , who appeared from september 1964 diane south - though having appeared in the katy-dids and beat girls since 1964 , she was never a regular , as she frequently stood in as choreographer when their choreographer/manager , gary cockrell , was unavailable . the other members at this time were : flick colby ( 1946–2011 ) - recruited in january 1966 , though she already had a dutch tv special , featuring the beat girls , built around her . patricia ( dee dee ) wilde - joined in march 1966 , she had attended the elmhurst school for dance in surrey . lorelly harris - joined around may 1966 penelope ( penny ) fergusson - joined around may 1966 , a former member of the royal ballet school following an equity-backed dispute with their management over pay rates for dutch shows , three members , colby , lord and wilde walked out and formed a new group on 8 december 1966 in london . after considering other names , including dionysus 's darlings they agreed on the name pan 's people , named after the greek god , pan as the '' god of dance , music and debauchery '' . by 18 december , they were joined by two of the remaining three beat girls , harris and fergusson . this marked the end of the beat girls as a regular act on british television , however with new recruits joining diane south , it continued its dutch engagements from january 1967 , finally ceasing to perform in may 1968 . by christmas 1966 pan 's people recruited felicity balfour ( sometimes called felicity balfour smith ) , a schoolfriend of dee dee wilde 's and also briefly in the beat girls , forming a sextet , with colby also acting as choreographer . press accounts during the lifetime of the group omit the beat girls group from pan 's people 's history however modern-day recollections include this time though sometimes incorrectly as a continuation of the previous group . . early work and line-up changes . their first tv appearance was in the belgian tv programme , vibrato in january 1967 , with the initial line-up . in february/march 1967 , felicity balfour 's contract was terminated , due to her being unsettled in the group . after pan 's people , amongst other subsequent activities she performed with the denise shaune dancers , and worked in musical theatre , notably forming part of the original london cast of joseph and the amazing technicolor dreamcoat . following an audition , balfour was replaced by ruth pearson ( 1946–2017 ) . pearson like lord was an original beat girls member , performing in the group until early 1966 , then in a prior beat girls breakaway group , tomorrow 's people . pearson also did some of the group choreography over the first two years in the group . the new line-up with pearson appeared on the dickie valentine show in september and october 1967 , replacing the beat girls from the 1966 series - all the pan 's people in this line-up except pearson had appeared in the earlier series . the group were to appear in a ballet performed with the yardbirds in december 1967 , but it was cancelled shortly before it was to be performed . also in december 1967 , penny fergusson left to do other work , and was replaced by louise clarke ( 1949–2012 ) in february 1968 three of pan 's people ( lord , colby and wilde ) appeared in the west german show beat , beat , beat with tom jones . this series was unique in that ruth pearson got sole choreography credit . in the final change before the top of the pops era , lorelly harris chose to leave in march 1968 , ultimately going into the bluebell girls . she was replaced by andrea ( andi ) rutherford . ( 1947–2015 ) . early management . colby 's future husband , james ramble , was manager , initially in partnership with promoter rik gunnell , but solo by the time of his marriage to colby in 1967 . he retained this role into 1970 , the year of his divorce from colby . in 1970 he claimed to have created two rules , one that the dancers must wear their hair down , and second that they must get married rather than have partners , however the second rule was also reported later the same year as marriage was not allowed until the end of 1971 . following the end of his management , the troupe members managed themselves - later accounts of the history of pan 's people focus on this second structural phase . . early top of the pops ( april 1968 to early 1972 ) and the 'original ' line-up . top of the pops before pan 's people . top of the pops began on 1 january 1964 as a weekly programme playing a selection of records from the current charts . from november 1964 , top of the pops had an all-girl dance troupe regularly appearing , the go-jos , formed and choreographed by another ex-beat girl , jo cook . through to the beginning of 1968 , professional dancing had been restricted to approximately monthly appearances by this group , performing to one track on the show typically where the artist could n't attend . this situation began to change in january 1968 - whilst still in the beat girls , diane south appeared solo on the show , dancing to judy in disguise ( with glasses ) . on several occasions pan 's people presented brochures to the bbc with a view to appearing on top of the pops , the last being in march 1968 , but up to this point , they had not been employed on any bbc programme . . early appearances by pan 's people members . in late march 1968 , the producers held an open audition for dancers on top of the pops to appear on 4 april 1968 to a routine to '' simon says '' by the 1910 fruitgum company . four dancers were engaged , dee dee wilde and ruth pearson from pan 's people ( who along with the four other pan 's people had auditioned individually rather than as part of a group ) , and janice ( janie ) kells and jackie dalton ( both later in the young generation ) . an established choreographer , virginia mason , arranged the dancing . however a bbc database recording band appearances only indicates 'disc ' for this performance , omitting mention of dancers , so there is no direct evidence this performance was ever broadcast . following the performance , the two pan 's people participants spoke to the producer of the show , colin charman , and persuaded him to hire pan 's people as a group . this led a further routine with three members of pan 's people ( wilde , pearson and colby ) with no extra dancers , and choreographed by colby . the exact date and performance varies in different sources , alternatively : cry like a baby by the box tops . the bbc archive indicates this track was only featured on the show on 18 april . young girl by gary puckett and the union gap - the bbc archive indicates this track was featured on the show on 2 , 16 and 23 may , with later showings after known pan 's people performances the two early performances are sometimes stated in contemporary sources as go-jo performances but the gojos were not involved . subsequently , the entire pan 's people sextet appeared in a routine set to '' us male '' by elvis presley on 30 may 1968 . the final performance of the go-jos was either to the 1910 fruitgum company , whose track was on top of the pops on 4 and 25 april 1968 or the rolling stones . , transmitted 20 june 1968 . by either scenario , pan 's people were left as the sole dance troupe by july 1968 . following the changes in the line-up during their first year , pan 's people by the time of their first appearance on top of the pops were : louise clarke flick colby ( dancer and choreographer ) babs lord ruth pearson andi rutherford dee dee wilde this is often called the 'original ' line-up , though several dancers had joined subsequent to its formation . in summary : . surviving top of the pops appearances . pan 's people performed at a time when the bbc routinely wiped the videos of the top of the pops shows to save money on new tapes and because it was not thought that anyone would want to watch the shows again . however , organisations such as the bfi and kaleidoscope have spent time searching archives and as a result many recorded dance routines have been rediscovered . more recently they have found roughly 40 lost dances on home video tapes and have extracted digital footage from the very fragile analog tapes . estimated video survivals by year : :1968/69 – none :1970 – 14–18 :1971 – 18 :1972 – 8 :1973 – 24 :1974 – 23 :1975 – 47 :1976 – 17 ( of 21 ) . life after totp . even after their departure from top of the pops pan 's people were much in demand for personal appearances . dee dee wilde continued to dance with and manage a new group of girls under the name pan 's people : pauline crawford , abigail higgins , patricia mcsherry , francesca whitburn and sarah woollett . also members for a short time during this period were the future hot gossip dancers sarah brightman and carol fletcher . babs lord married actor robert powell and became an amateur yachtswoman and world explorer , with several trips to the himalayas , the sahara , both poles and the jungle in guyana . by 2013 she had visited both the north and south poles . lord was the subject of bbc 's this is your life in november 2001 . she appeared on the final regular weekly edition of top of the pops on 30 july 2006 , the only member of any of the show 's dance troupes to appear in person at the recording . in 1997 cherry gillespie appeared as a panellist on channel five 's nostalgia quiz wowfabgroovy . cherry also appeared in “ octopussy ” with roger moore patricia 'dee dee ' wilde eventually married composer and musician , henry marsh . flick colby died of bronchial pneumonia as a result of cancer on 26 may 2011 , at the age of 65 . louise clarke died of heart failure on 24 august 2012 at the age of 62 . in november 2013 , signum books released the autobiography 'pan 's people : our story , ' authored by babs powell , ruth pearson , dee dee wilde , cherry gillespie and writer simon barnard . in april 2014 babs , sue , dee dee and ruth reunited to model clothes for isme.com . andi rutherford died after a long illness on 3 december 2015 at the age of 68 . ruth pearson died following a battle with cancer on 27 june 2017 at the age of 70 . . references . external links . one for the dads : discussion forum and video collection : pan 's people , legs and co , ruby flipper and others