Tawhid

arguments for the oneness of god . theological . theologians usually use reason and deduction to prove the existence , unity and oneness of god . they use a teleological argument for the existence of god as a creator based on perceived evidence of order , purpose , design , or direction—or some combination of these—in nature . teleology is the supposition that there is a purpose or directive principle in the works and processes of nature . يك‌ برهان‌ لمّی نيز در اين‌ باب‌ مطرح‌ شده‌ است‌ : يكدستی و يكتايی عالم‌ ( خَلْق‌ ) از يك‌ پديدآورنده‌ و مدبّر حكايت‌ می كند . « ذهن‌ سليم‌ متنبه‌ میشود از شدت‌ ارتباط‌ عالَم‌، بعضی به‌ بعض‌ ديگر، بر وحدت‌ خالق توحيد در كلام encyclopedia islamica another argument which is used frequently by theologians is reductio ad absurdum . they use it instead of positive arguments as a more efficient way to reject the ideas of opponents . . استدلال‌ بر توحيد، مسبوق‌ به‌ پذيرش‌ وجود خداست‌ و طبعاً در صورت‌بندی آن‌، غالباً مواجهه‌ با مدعيان‌ و معتقدان‌ به‌ دو يا چند خدا در نظر بوده‌ و نظريه‌ ثنويها و مجوس‌ و نصارا ابطال‌ میشده‌ است‌ . به‌ همين‌ سبب‌ از قديمترين‌ زمان‌، متكلمان‌ برای دفاع‌ از آموزه‌ توحيد و اثبات‌ آن‌، احتجاج‌ به‌ روش‌ خُلف‌ را كارآمدتر از ارائه‌ ادله‌ اثباتی میدانسته‌اند . آنان‌ بيشترِ دلايل‌ توحيد را با اين‌ رويكرد ارائه كرده اند . توحيد در كلام encyclopedia islamica . god as the cause of causes . against the polytheism of pre-islamic arabia , the qur'an argues that the knowledge of god as the creator of everything rules out the possibility of lesser gods since these beings must be themselves created . for the qur'an , god is an immanent and transcendent deity who actively creates , maintains and destroys the universe . the reality of god as the ultimate cause of things is the belief that god is veiled from human understanding because of the secondary causes and contingent realities of things in the world . thus the belief in the oneness of god is equated in the qur'an with the '' belief in the unseen '' ( sura . the qur'an summarizes its task in making this '' unseen '' , to a greater or lesser degree '' seen '' so that belief in the existence of god becomes a master-truth rather than an unreasonable belief . the qur'an states that god 's signals are so near and yet so far , demanding that its students listen to what it has to say with humility ( sura , sura . the qur'an draws attention to certain observable facts , to present them as '' reminders '' of god instead of providing lengthy '' theological '' proofs for the existence and unity of god . fazlur rahman ( 1980 ) , p . 2 ash'ari theologians rejected causality in essence , but accepted it as something that facilitates humankind 's investigation and comprehension of natural processes . these medieval scholars argued that nature was composed of uniform atoms that were '' re-created '' at every instant by god . the laws of nature were only the customary sequence of apparent causes ( customs of god ) , the ultimate cause of each accident being god himself . robert g . mourison ( 2002 ) other forms of the argument also appear in avicenna 's other works , and this argument became known as the proof of the truthful . ibn sina initiated a full-fledged inquiry into the question of being , in which he distinguished between essence ( mahiat ) and existence ( wujud ) . he argued that the fact of existence can not be inferred from or accounted for by the essence of existing things and that form and matter by themselves can not interact and originate the movement of the universe or the progressive actualization of existing things . existence must , therefore , be due to an causality that necessitates , imparts , gives , or adds existence to an essence . god as the necessary existent . an ontological argument for the existence of god was first proposed by avicenna ( 965-1037 ) in the metaphysics section of the book of healing this was the first attempt at using the method of a priori proof , which utilizes intuition and reason alone . avicenna 's proof of god 's existence is unique in that it can be classified as both a cosmological argument and an ontological argument . '' it is ontological insofar as ‘ necessary existence ’ in intellect is the first basis for arguing for a necessary existent '' . the proof is also '' cosmological insofar as most of it is taken up with arguing that contingent existents can not stand alone and must end up in a necessary existent '' . another argument avicenna presented for god 's existence was the problem of the mind-body dichotomy . according to avicenna , the universe consists of a chain of actual beings , each giving existence to the one below it and responsible for the existence of the rest of the chain below . because an actual infinite is deemed impossible by avicenna , this chain as a whole must terminate in a being that is wholly simple and one , whose essence is its very existence , and therefore is self-sufficient and not in need of something else to give it existence . because its existence is not contingent on or necessitated by something else but is necessary and eternal in itself , it satisfies the condition of being the necessitating cause of the entire chain that constitutes the eternal world of contingent existing things . thus his ontological system rests on the conception of god as the wajib al-wujud ( necessary existent ) . there is a gradual multiplication of beings through a timeless emanation from god as a result of his self-knowledge . avicenna 's cosmological argument for god 's existence . indivisibility of god 's sovereignty . the qur'an argues that there can be no multiple sources of divine sovereignty since '' behold , each god would have taken away what each had created , and some would have lorded it over others ! '' the qur'an argues that the stability and order prevailing throughout the universe shows that it was created and is being administered by only one god ( sura . the qur'an in verse 21:22 states : '' if there were numerous gods instead of one , the heavens and the earth would be in a sorry state '' . later muslim theologians elaborated on this verse saying that the existence of at least two gods would inevitably arise between them , at one time or another , a conflict of wills . since two contrary wills could not possibly be realized at the same time , one of them must admit himself powerless in that particular instance . on the other hand , a powerless being can not by definition be a god . therefore , the possibility of having more than one god is ruled out . mustansir mir , polytheism and atheism , encyclopedia of the qur'an for if a god is powerful above another , then this asserts a difference in the particular attributes that are confined to the essence of godhood , which implies the lesser god must lack in certain necessary attributes deeming this deity as anthropomorphic and snatching away the title of a god from such entity . other arguments . the quran argues that human beings have an instinctive distaste for polytheism : at times of crisis , for example , even the idolatry forget the false deities and call upon the one true god for help . as soon as they are relieved from the danger , they however start associating other beings with god . '' so when they ride in the ships they call upon allah , being sincerely obedient to him , but when he brings them safe to the land , lo ! they associate others ( with him ) '' ( sura . next , the qur'an argues that polytheism takes away from human dignity : god has honored human beings and given them charge of the physical world , and yet they disgrace their position in the world by worshipping what they carve out with their own hands . lastly , the qur'an argues that monotheism is not a later discovery made by the human race , but rather there is the combined evidence of the prophetic call for monotheism throughout human history starting from adam . the qur'an suggests several causes for deviation from monotheism to polytheism : great temporal power , regarded by the holder and his subjects as 'absolute ' — may lead the holder to think that he is god-like ; such claims were commonly forced upon , and accepted by , those who were subject to the ruler . also , certain natural phenomena ( such as the sun , the moon and the stars ) inspire feelings of awe , wonder or admiration that could lead some to regard these astrolatry . another reason for deviation from monotheism is when one becomes a slave to his or her base desires and passions . in seeking to always satisfy the desires , he or she may commit a kind of polytheism . . interpretations . understanding of the meaning of tawhid is one of the most controversial issues among muslims . islamic scholars have different approaches toward understanding it , comprising athari , kalam , islamic philosophy and sufism and irfani approach . these different approaches lead to different and in some cases opposite understanding of the issue . theological viewpoints . certain theologians use the term tawhid in a much broader meaning to denote the totality of discussion of god , his existence and his various attributes . others go yet further and use the term to ultimately represent the totality of the '' principles of religion '' . in its current usage , the expressions '' tawhid '' or '' knowledge of tawhid '' are sometimes used as an equivalent for the whole kalam , the islamic theology . according to sunni islam , the orthodox understanding of theology is taken directly from the teachings of muhammad with the understanding and methodology of his companions , sourced directly from the revealed scripture the qur'an ; being the main information source for understanding the oneness of god in islam . all muslim authorities maintain that a true understanding of god is impossible unless he introduces himself due to the fact that god is beyond the range of human vision and senses . therefore , god tells people who he is by speaking through the prophets . according to this view , the fundamental message of all of the prophets is : '' there is no god worthy of worship except allah ( avoiding the false gods as stated in surah hud ) . '' chittick ( 2006 ) , p . 47 . athari/salafi approach . the approach of textual interpretation in islam is to avoid delving into theological speculation and did not employ the use of kalam . halverson j.r . ( 2010 ) the doctrines of sunni theology . in : theology and creed in sunni islam . palgrave macmillan , new york after exposure of the early muslim community to challenges from hellenistic philosophy , sunni muslims later developed codified theological frameworks ( see ash'ari ) to uphold and defend their beliefs . mu'tazili school . the mu'tazilis liked to call themselves the men of the tawhid ( ahl al-tawhid ) . in maqalat al-islamiyin , abu al-hasan al-ash'ari describes the mu'tazilite conception of the tawhid as follows : corbin ( 1993 ) , pp . 109 and 110 god is unique , nothing is like him ; he is neither body , nor individual , nor substance , nor accident . he is beyond time . he can not dwell in a place or within a being ; he is not the object of any creatural attribute or qualification . he is neither conditioned nor determined , neither engendered nor engendering . he is beyond the perception of the senses . the eyes can not see him , observation can not attain him , the imagination can not comprehend him . he is a thing , but he is not like other things ; he is omniscient , all-powerful , but his omniscience and his all-mightiness can not be compared to anything created . he created the world without any pre-established archetype and without an auxiliary . according to henry corbin , the result of this interpretation is the negation of the divine attributes , the affirmation of the created quran , and the denial of all possibility of the vision of god in the world beyond . corbin ( 1993 ) , p . 110 mu'tazilis believed that god is deprived of all positive attributes , in the sense that all divine qualifications must be understood as being the essence itself , and declaring that god is existing ubiquitously and in everything . they resorted to esoteric interpretation of the qur'an or prophetic reports with seemingly anthropomorphic content , e.g . , the hand is the metaphorical designation of power ; the face signifies the essence ; the fact that god is seated on the throne is a metaphorical image of the divine reign , and so on . corbin ( 1993 ) , p . 115 . ash'ari school . the solution proposed by abu al-hasan al-ash'ari to solve the problems of tashbih and ta'til concedes that the divine being possesses in a real sense the attributes and names mentioned in the qur'an . insofar as these names and attributes have a positive reality , they are distinct from the essence , but nevertheless they do not have either existence or reality apart from it . the inspiration of al-ash'ari in this matter was on the one hand to distinguish essence and attribute as concepts , and on the other hand to see that the duality between essence and attribute should be situated not on the quantitative but on the qualitative level—something which mu'tazilis thinking had failed to grasp . corbin ( 1993 ) , pp . 115 and 116 ash'ari theology , which dominated sunni islam from the tenth to the nineteenth century , insists on ultimate divine transcendence and holds that divine unity is not accessible to human reason . ash'arism teaches that human knowledge regarding it is limited to what was has been revealed through the prophets , and on such questions as god 's creation of evil and the apparent anthropomorphism of god 's attributes , revelation has to accepted bila kayfa ( without asking how ) . . twelvers theology . twelvers theology is based on the hadith which have been narrated from the islamic prophet muhammad , ali , fifth , sixth , seventh and eighth imams and compiled by shia scholars such as al-shaykh al-saduq in al-tawhid . tabatabaei ( 19981 ) , pp . 23 and 24 according to shia theologians , the attributes and names of god have no independent and hypostatic existence apart from the being and essence of god . any suggestion of these attributes and names being conceived of as separate is thought to entail polytheism . it would be even incorrect to say god knows by his knowledge which is in his essence but god knows by his knowledge which is his essence . also , god has no physical form , and he is imperceptible . momen ( 1985 ) , p . 176 twelvers believe god is alone in being , along with his names , his attributes , his actions , his theophanies . the totality of being therefore is he , through him , comes from him , and returns to him . god is not a being next to or above other beings , his creatures ; he is being , the absolute act of being ( wujud mutlaq ) . for , if there were being other than he ( i.e . , creatural being ) , god would no longer be the unique , i.e . , the only one to be . as this divine essence is infinite , his qualities are the same as his essence , essentially there is one reality which is one and indivisible . the border between theoretical tawhid and shirk is to know that every reality and being in its essence , attributes and action are from him ( from him-ness ) , it is tawhid . every supernatural action of the prophets is by god 's permission as quran points to it . the border between the tawhid and shirk in practice is to assume something as an end in itself , independent from god , not as a road to god ( to him-ness ) . . philosophical viewpoints . al-farabi , al-razi and especially avicenna put forward an interpretation of tawhid in light of reason , with the qur'an and hadith serving as a basis . before avicenna the discussions among muslim philosophers were about the unity of god as divine creator and his relationship with the world as creation . the earlier philosophers were profoundly affected by the emphasis of plotinus on divine simplicity . َwhether this view can be reconciled with islam , particularly given the question of what role is left for god 's will , was to become a subject of considerable controversy within intellectual islamic discourse . sufi and irfani viewpoint . in islamic mysticism ( sufism and irfan ) , tawhid is not only the affirmation in speech of god 's unity , but also as importantly a practical and existential realization of that unity . this is done by rejecting the concepts tied to the world of multiplicity , to isolate the eternal from the temporal in a practical way . the ideal is a radical purification from all worldliness . carl ernst ( 1984 ) , p . 29 according to vincent j . cornall , it is possible to draw up a monist image of god ( see sufi metaphysics ) by describing the reality as a unified whole , with god being a single concept that would describe or ascribe all existing things : '' he is the first and the last , the evident and the immanent : and he has full knowledge of all things . '' ( sura '' however many muslims criticize monism for it blurs the distinction between the creator and the creature , something incompatibility with the genuine and absolute monotheism of islam . roger s . gottlie ( 2006 ) , p . 210 for muslim mystics ( sufis ) , the affirmation in speech of god 's unity is only the first step of tawhid . further steps involve a spiritual experience for the existential realization of that unity . categorizations of different steps of tawhid could be found in the works of muslims sufis like junayd baghdadi and al-ghazali . it involves a practical rejection of the concepts tied to the world of multiplicity . al-junayd for example '' distinguishes four steps , starting from the simple attestation of unicity which is sufficient for ordinary believers , and culminating in the highest rank reserved for the elite , when the creature totally ceases to exist before his lord , thus achieving al-fanā fi al-tawhīd annihilation in unity '' . . annihilation and subsistence . according to the concept of fana , annihilation and subsistence , '' man 's existence , or ego , or self-hood . must be annihilated so that he can attain to his true self which is his existence and '' subsistence '' with god . all of man 's character traits and habits , everything that pertains to his individual existence must become completely naughted and '' obliterated '' ( mahw ) . then god will give back to him his character traits and everything positive he ever possessed . but at this stage , he will know consciously and actually - not just theoretically - and with a through spiritual realization , that everything he is derives absolutely from god . he is nothing but a ray of god 's attributes manifesting the hidden treasure . '' william chittick ( 1983 ) , p . 179 . unity of existence . the first detailed formulation of '' unity of existence '' ( wahdat al-wujud ) is closely associated to ibn arabi . widely different interpretations of the meaning of the '' unity of existence '' have been proposed throughout the centuries by critics , defenders , and western scholars . ibn arabi himself did n't use the term '' unity of existence '' and similar statements had been made by those before him . for example , according to al-ghazali '' there is nothing in wujud existence except god.wujud existence only belongs to the real one '' . ghazali explains that the fruit of spiritual ascent of the sufi is to '' witness that there is no existence in the world save god and that 'all things are perishing except his face ' ( qur'an 28:88 ) '' amin banani , richard g . hovannisian , georges sabagh ( 1994 ) , p . 71 william chittick , wahdat al-wujud , encyclopedia of islam and the muslim world , p . 727 many authors consider being or existence to be the proper designation for the reality of god . while all muslims believe the reality of god to be one , critics hold that the term '' existence '' ( wujud ) is also used for the existence of things in this world and that the doctrine blurs the distinction between the existence of the creator and that of the creation . defenders argued that ibn arabi and his followers are offering a '' subtle metaphysics following the line of the asharite formula : '' the attributes are neither god nor other than god . '' god 's '' signs '' ( ayat ) and '' traces '' ( athar ) —the creatures—are neither the same as god nor different from him , because god must be understood as both absent and present , both transcendent and immanent . understood correctly , wahdat al-wujud elucidates the delicate balance that needs to be maintained between these two perspectives . '' shah wali allah of delhi argued that the ibn arabi 's '' unity of being '' was experiential and based on a subjective experience of illumination or ecstasy , rather than an ontological reality . john esposito ( 1998 ) , p . 121 '' ما عرف الله من شبهه بخلقه '' al-saduq ( 1386 ) , al-tawhid , tehran , p . 50 ali , one the earliest and prominent companions , says avicenna who tried to posit the existence of god through philosophical way says so it 's clear that the first ( al-awwal ) does n't have any type , essence , quality , quantity , place , time , similar , partner and opposite , he 's exalted and majestic . he does n't have any restriction and there is n't any arguments for or against him . « فقد وضح ان الاول لا جنس له و لا ماهية له و لا كيفية له و لا كمية له و لا اين له و لا متى له و لا ندله و لا شريك له و لا ضدله، تعالى و جلوانه لا حد له و لا برهان عليه » . الشفاء، الالهيات، مقاله 8، فصل5 ( طبع مصر، صفحه 354 ) . بري از رنج و گدازي بري از درد و نيازي - بري از بيم و اميدي بري از چون و چرائي نتوان وصف تو گفتن كه تو در فهم نگنجي - نتوان شبه تو جستن كه تو در وهم نيائ -- -- - > . influences on the muslim culture . the islamic doctrine of tawhid puts forth a god whose rule , will or law are comprehensive and extend to all creatures and to all aspects of the human life . early muslims understood religion to thus cover the domains of state , law and society . john esposito ( 1998 ) , p . 24 it is believed that the entirety of the islamic teaching rests on the principle of tawhid . in the following , we provide a few examples of the influences of tawhid on the muslim culture : . interpersonal relationship . according to the qur'an , one consequence of properly conceived relationship between god and man as the served and servant , is the proper relationship among humans . in order to achieve the former , the qur'an consistently '' reminds '' men of two points : 1 . that god is one ; everything except god ( including the entirety of nature ) is contingent upon god . 2 . with all his might and glory , god is essentially the all-merciful god . fazlur rahman ( 1980 ) , p . 2-3 . good and evil . according to the qur'an , allah is the progenitor of all things , both good and evil . as is written in the qur'an , all of humanity is created at the will of allah , both the good and the evil ; and that their natures have been predisposed as such since the beginning of creation . according to the qur'an , satan deviated from the oneness of allah in the story of creation of man by permitting his own hierarchical value system to supersede allah 's will : allah asked the angels to bow to adam , who he had created from clay . satan refused , saying that '' i am better than him ; you created me from fire and created him from clay '' . the medieval muslim scholar , al-ghazali pointing out that the only legitimate '' preference principle '' in the sight of allah is piety , writes : '' every time a rich man believes that he is better than a poor one , or a white man believes that he is better than a black one , then he is being arrogant . he is adopting the same hierarchical principles adopted by iblis satan in his jahl ignorance , and thus falling into shirk opposite of tawhid . '' azizah al-hibri ( 2003 ) . secularism . in many jurisdictions of the world , the laws and the general attitude of the population hold that the sphere of public life should be secular , and that belief in and practice of religion should remain in the sphere of private life . one motive for adopting this stance has been to reduce the effects of conflict between followers of different religions or between adherents of secularism and those of a religion . in public life , this view insists that the authority of the state prevails over any religious authorities . for some islamic thinkers , these propositions infringe the doctrine of tawhid , and are therefore anathema . if the cosmos is a unified and harmonious whole , centered around the omnipotent and omnipresent god , they hold that recognising any other authority as superior is wrong . according to one writer : '' traditionally , a muslim is not a nationalist , or citizen of a nation-state ; he has no political identity , only a religious membership in the umma . for a traditional muslim , islam is the sole and sufficient identification tag and nationalism and nation-states are obstacles '' . ozay mehmet ( 1990 ) , p . 57 hence the idea of creating a wholly islamic state , or a revived caliphate . in practice , nearly all muslims live their daily lives under some national jurisdiction and accept at least part of the constraints this involves . islamic art . the desire to preserve the unity and transcendence of god led to the prohibition of muslims from creating representation or visual depictions of god , or of any prophet including muhammad . representations in art of the human form are a disputed matter in fiqh . the key concern is that the use of statues or images may lead to idolatry . the dominant forms of expression in the islamic art , thus , became calligraphy and arabesque .