Paros

geography . paros ' geographic co-ordinates are 37° n . latitude , and 25° 10 ' e . longitude . the area is . its greatest length from n.e . to s.w . is , and its greatest breadth . the island is of a round , plump-pear shape , formed by a single mountain sloping evenly down on all sides to a maritime plain , which is broadest on the north-east and south-west sides . the island is composed of marble , though gneiss and mica-schist are to be found in a few places . to the west of paros lies its smaller sister island antiparos . at its narrowest , the channel between the two islands is less than wide . a car-carrying shuttle-ferry operates all day ( to and from pounda , south of parikia ) . in addition a dozen smaller islets surround paros . paros has numerous beaches including golden beach ( chrissí aktí ) near drios on the east coast , at pounda , logaras , piso livadi , naousa bay , parikia and agia irini . the constant strong wind in the strait between paros and naxos makes it a favoured windsurfing location . islands . gaiduronisi – north of xifara portes island – west of the town of paros tigani island – southwest of paros drionisi – southeast of paros . history . antiquity . the story that paros of parrhasia colonized the island with arcadians heraclides de rebus publicis 8 is an etymological fiction of the type that abounds in greek legends . ancient names of the island are said to have been plateia ( or pactia ) , demetrias , strongyle ( meaning round , due to the round shape of the island ) , hyria , hyleessa , minoa and cabarnis . stephanos byz . the island later received from athens a colony of ionians schol . dionysius periegetes 525 ; herodian i.171 under whom it attained a high degree of prosperity . it sent out colonies to thasos thucydides peloponnesian war iv.104 ; strabo geography 487 and parium on the hellespont . in the former colony , which was planned in the 15th or 18th olympiad , the poet archilochus , zafeiropouloy f . , and a . , agelarakis “ warriors of paros ” , archaeology 58.1 ( 2005 ) : 30–35 . a native of paros , is said to have taken part . as late as 385 bc the parians , in conjunction with dionysius of syracuse , founded a colony on the illyrian island of pharos ( hvar ) . diodorus siculus xv.13 shortly before the persian war , paros seems to have been a dependency of naxos . herodotus histories v.31 in the first greco-persian war ( 490 bc ) , paros sided with the persians and sent a trireme to marathon to support them . in retaliation , the capital was besieged by an athenian fleet under miltiades , who demanded a fine of 100 talents . but the town offered a vigorous resistance , and the athenians were obliged to sail away after a siege of 26 days , during which they had wasted the island . it was at a temple of demeter thesmophoros in paros that miltiades received the wound from which he died . herodotus op.cit . vi.133–136 by means of an inscription , ross was able to identify the site of the temple ; it lies , as herodotus suggests , on a low hill beyond the boundary of the town . paros also sided with shahanshah xerxes i against greece in the second greco-persian war ( 480–479 bc ) , but , after the battle of artemisium , the parian contingent remained inactive at kythnos as they watched the progression of events . herodotus op.cit . viii.67 for their support of the persians , the islanders were later punished by the athenian war leader themistocles , who exacted a heavy fine . herodotus op.cit . viii.112 under the delian league , the athenian-dominated naval confederacy ( 477–404 bc ) , paros paid the highest tribute of the island members : 30 talents annually , according to the estimate of olympiodorus ( 429 bc ) . olympiodorus 88.4 this implies that paros was one of the wealthiest islands in the aegean . little is known about the constitution of paros , but inscriptions seem to show that it was modeled on the athenian democracy , with a boule ( senate ) at the head of affairs . corpus inscriptionum graecarum 2376–2383 ; ross , inscr . med . ii.147 , 148 in 410 bc , athenian general theramenes discovered that paros was governed by an oligarchy ; he deposed the oligarchy and restored the democracy . diodorus siculus xiii.47 paros was included in the second athenian confederacy ( the second athenian league 378–355 bc ) . in c . 357 bc , along with chios , it severed its connection with athens . from the inscription of adule , it is understood that the cyclades , which are presumed to include paros , were subjected to the ptolemies , the hellenistic dynasty ( 305–30 bc ) that ruled egypt . paros then became part of the roman empire and later of the byzantine empire , its greek-speaking successor state . crusades . in 1204 , the soldiers of the fourth crusade seized constantinople and overthrew the byzantine empire . although a residual byzantine state known as the empire of nicaea survived the crusader onslaught and eventually recovered constantinople ( 1261 ) , many of the original byzantine territories , including paros , were lost permanently to the crusading powers . paros became subject to the duchy of the archipelago , a fiefdom made up of various aegean islands ruled by a venetian duke as nominal vassal of a succession of crusader states . in practice , however , the duchy was always a client state of the republic of venice . ottoman era and independence . in 1537 , paros was conquered by the ottoman turks and remained under the ottoman empire until the greek war of independence ( 1821–1829 ) . during the russo-turkish war ( 1768–1774 ) in 1770–1775 naoussa bay was the home base for the russian archipelago squadron of count alexey orlov . under the treaty of constantinople ( 1832 ) , paros became part of the newly independent kingdom of greece , the first time the parians had been ruled by fellow greeks for over six centuries . at this time , paros became the home of a heroine of the nationalist movement , manto mavrogenous , who had both financed and fought in the war for independence . her house , near ekatontapiliani church , is today a historical monument . on 26 september 2000 the ferry ms express samina collided with the portes islets off the bay of parikia , killing 82 of those on board . ( ) . parikia . the capital , parikia , situated on a bay on the north-west side of the island , occupies the site of the ancient capital paros . parikía harbour is a major hub for aegean islands ferries and catamarans , with several sailings each day for piraeus , the port of athens , heraklion , the capital of crete , and other islands such as naxos , ios , mykonos , and santorini . in parikia town , houses are built and decorated in the traditional cycladic style , with flat roofs , whitewash walls and blue-painted doors and window frames and shutters . shadowed by luxuriant vines , and surrounded by gardens of oranges and pomegranates , the houses give the town a picturesque aspect . above the central stretch of the seafront road , are the remains of a medieval castle , built almost entirely of the marble remains of an ancient temple dedicated to apollo . similar traces of antiquity , in the shape of bas-reliefs , inscriptions , columns , and so on , are numerous . on a hillside in the southern outskirts of parikia on the left of the parikia – alyki road are the remains of a temple dedicated to asclepius . in addition , close to the modern harbour , the remains of an ancient cemetery are visible , having been discovered recently during non-archaeological excavations . back from the port , around 400 & nbsp ; m left of parikia 's main square , is the town 's principal church , the panagia ekatontapiliani , literally meaning '' church of the hundred doors '' . its oldest features almost certainly predate the adoption of christianity as the state religion of the roman empire in 391 . it is said to have been founded by the mother of the roman emperor constantine i ( ruled 306 & ndash ; 337 ) , saint helen , during her pilgrimage to the holy land . there are two adjoining chapels , one of very early form , and also a baptistery with a cruciform font . the archaeological museum of paros is located in parikia town , a small but interesting museum housing some of the many finds from sites in paros . the best pieces , however , are in the athens national archaeological museum . the paros museum contains a fragment of the parian chronicle , a remarkable chronology of ancient greece . inscribed in marble , its entries give time elapsed between key events from the most distant past ( 1500 bc ) down to 264 bc . inscriptiones graecae xii.100 seqq . . other settlements . on the north side of the island is the bay of naoussa ( naussa ) or agoussa , which provides a safe and spacious harbour . in ancient times it was closed by a chain or boom . another good harbour is that of drios on the south-east side , where the turkish fleet used to anchor on its annual voyage through the aegean during the period of ottoman rule over paros ( 1537–1832 ) . the three villages of dragoulas , mármara and tsipidos , situated on an open plain on the eastern side of the island , and rich in remains of antiquity , probably occupy the site of an ancient town . they are known together as the '' villages of kephalos '' after the steep and lofty hill of kephalos . on this hilltop stands the monastery of agios antonios ( st . anthony ) . around it are the ruins of a medieval castle which belonged in the late middle ages to the venice noble family of the venieri . they gallantly but vainly defended it against the turkish admiral barbarossa in 1537 . another settlement on the island paros is lefkes ( λεύκες ) . lefkes is an inland mountain village away from parikia . in the late 19th century , lefkes was the center of the municipality of iria which belonged to the province of naxos until 1912 . the name of the municipality iria was one of the ancient names of paros . lefkes was the capital of the municipality iria which included the villages angyria or ageria , aliki , aneratzia , vounia , kamari , campos , langada , maltes and marathi . iria became lefkes community following the law enforcement dnz/1912 '' on municipalities '' . at that time , the village managed to achieve great economic development . in the 1970s many residents moved to athens , maroussi and melissia due to urbanization . however , the last few years , tourism presented to be a new source of income for the locals that led to the reconstruction of homes and landscaping for a peaceful and sweet life . lefkes became part of the municipality of paros in the kapodistrias reform . in the latest census ( 2011 ) the population numbered 545 inhabitants . marble quarries . parian marble , which is white and translucent , with a coarse grain and a very beautiful texture , was the chief source of wealth for the island . the celebrated marble quarries lie on the northern side of the mountain anciently known as marathi ( afterwards capresso ) , a little below a former convent of st mina . the marble , which was exported from the 6th century bc onwards , was used by praxiteles and other great greek sculpture . it was obtained by means of subterranean quarries driven horizontally or at a descending angle into the rock . the marble thus quarried by lamplight was given the name of lychnites , lychneus ( from lychnos , a lamp ) , or lygdos . pliny the elder historia naturalis xxxvi . 5 , 14 ; plato eryxias , 400 d ; athenodorus v.205 f ; diodorus siculus 2.52 several of these tunnels are still to be seen . at the entrance to one of them is a bas-relief dedicated to pan and the nymphs . several attempts to work the marble have been made in modern times , but it has not been exported in any great quantities . the major part of the remaining white marble is now state-owned and , like its pentelic counterpart , is only used for archaeological restorations . notable people . ; ancient agoracritus ( 5th century bc ) , sculptor archilochus ( c . 680 bc–c . 645 bc ) , lyric poet scopas ( c . 395–350 bc ) , sculptor and architect theoctiste of lesbos ( 9th century ) , hermit saint thrasymedes ( 4th century bc ) , sculptor thymaridas ( c . 400 bc–350 bc ) , mathematician ; modern nurbanu sultan ( cecilia venier-baffo ) ( 1525–1583 ) mother of ottoman sultan murad iii vassilis argyropoulos ( 1894–1953 ) actor nicholas mavrogenes ( 1738–1790 ) , prince of wallachia athanasius parios ( 1721/22–1813 ) , theologian manto mavrogenous ( 1796–1848 ) , heroine in the greek war of independence yiannis ragousis ( 1965– ) , politician yiannis parios ( 1946- ) , musician . see also . communities of the cyclades aegean center for the fine arts . references . ; notes ; sources clarke travels iii ( london , 1814 ) de tournefort , j.r . voyage du levant i.232 seqq . ( lyon , 1717 ) william martin leake , travels in northern greece iii.84 seqq . ( london , 1835 ) . external links . website of the municipality of paros moving postcards paros church of ekatontapyliani ( church of a hundred doors )