1920 in literature

events . february 2 – beyond the horizon , eugene o'neill 's second full-length play , opens with a morosco theatre matinée in new york city , partly as a producer 's experiment and partly to quiet the actor richard bennett , who sought to play the lead . reviewers hail the play and o'neill gains fame . february 27 – an inaugural meeting of the bloomsbury group 's memoir club is arranged by mary maccarthy in london . spring – the poet anton podbevšek and others organize the novo mesto spring ( novomeška pomlad ) event , the beginning of slovenes modernism . march 15 – the blue flame , a four-act play by george v . hobart and john willard after leta vance nicholson , opens at the shubert theatre ( new york city ) on broadway before a year 's u.s . tour . though described by a critic as '' one of the worst plays ever written , '' it is a commercial success , largely due to theda bara as the central character of a vamp . march 22 – federico garcía lorca 's first play , the butterfly 's evil spell ( el maleficio de la mariposa ) is poorly received at its première in madrid . march 26 – this side of paradise by f . scott fitzgerald sets him up as a writer and celebrity . an initial 3,000 copies sell out in three days . the book 's reputation dims in later years , but dorothy parker will recall that it was seen as innovative when it first appeared . april hart crane publishes his poem '' my grandmother 's love letters '' in the dial , his first major move toward recognition as a poet . the pulp magazine black mask is launched in new york city as '' an illustrated magazine of detective mystery , adventure , romance , and spiritualism '' by journalist h . l . mencken and drama critic george jean nathan . image : fitzgerald , saturday evening post.png thumb right link bernice bobs her hair upright 0.8 f . scott fitzgerald 's story '' bernice bobs her hair '' was published in may 1920 . april 3 – f . scott fitzgerald marries zelda sayre in the rectory of st . patrick 's cathedral ( manhattan ) . may 1 – f . scott fitzgerald 's short story '' bernice bobs her hair '' appears in the saturday evening post and on the magazine 's cover , illustrated by artist norman rockwell . july – krishna lal adhikari 's makaiko kheti ( the cultivation of maize ) is published in nepal ; following claims that it contains '' mischievous expressions to treason '' , the author is sentenced to nine years in prison ( where he will die in 1923 ) and all known copies of the book are destroyed . august 22 – the salzburg festival in austria is inaugurated with a performance of hugo von hofmannsthal 's play jedermann ( everyman , 1911 ) in front of salzburg cathedral , directed by max reinhardt . october – agatha christie 's first novel , the mysterious affair at styles , appears in the u.s . , introducing her long-running belgian detective hercule poirot in the setting of an english country house . the book is published in the u.k . on january 21 , 1921 . november 1 – eugene o'neill 's the emperor jones plays at the playwright 's theater in new york city with charles sidney gilpin in the title role . november 9 – d . h . lawrence 's novel women in love appears in a limited u.s . subscribers ' edition . december – the first edition of the poems of the english war poet wilfred owen , killed in action in 1918 , appears in london , introduced by his friend siegfried sassoon . only five of owen 's verses were published in his lifetime . this introduces his work to many readers . it includes the 1917 poems '' anthem for doomed youth '' and '' dulce et decorum est '' , horrifying imagery in the latter 's 28 lines poem 's making it one of the best-known condemnations of war . december 23 – arthur schnitzler 's play reigen ( la ronde , 1900 ) receives a first authorized performance , in berlin , where it is criticized on moral and anti-semitic grounds . christmas – monteiro lobato 's children 's story '' a menina do narizinho arrebitado '' ( girl with the upturned nose ) , the origin of the sítio do picapau amarelo novel series , is published in brazil . unknown dates karel čapek 's drama r.u.r . , published in prague , introduces the word robot into english . publication in paris of the first volume of the collection budé initiates editions of classical texts with parallel french translation : plato 's hippias minor ( hippias mineur ) . van wyck brooks ' the ordeal of mark twain controversially argues that twain was '' a victim of arrested development '' with a dual personality . it begins a reassessment of an author seen hitherto mainly as a humorous writer . the 1920s will bring similar reconsideration of many 19th-century american writers , notably herman melville and emily dickinson . . new books . fiction . sherwood anderson – poor white e . f . benson – queen lucia marjorie bowen – the burning glass rhoda broughton – a fool in her folly emilio carrere – the tower of the seven hunchbacks ( la torre de los siete jorobados ) catherine carswell – open the door ! agatha christie – the mysterious affair at styles ( first hercule poirot mystery ) colette – chéri joseph conrad – the rescue william aubrey darlington – alf 's button miguel de unamuno tres novelas ejemplares y un prólogo ( three exemplary novels and a prologue ) tulio montalbán grazia deledda – le madre ( the mother ) ethel m . dell – the top of the world suat derviş – kara kitap ( black book ) alfred döblin – wallenstein john dos passos – three soldiers hans fallada – der junge goedeschal ( young goedeschal ) f . scott fitzgerald – this side of paradise zona gale – miss lulu bett john galsworthy in chancery awakening edgar jepson – the loudwater mystery d . h . lawrence – women in love sinclair lewis – main street david lindsay – a voyage to arcturus compton mackenzie – the vanity girl e . phillips oppenheim – the great impersonation dowell philip o'reilly – five corners ernest pérochon – nêne marcel proust – the guermantes way ( le côté de guermantes i , first part of vol . 3 of in search of lost time ) merari siregar – azab dan sengsara ( pain and suffering ) sigrid undset – kristin lavransdatter ( begins publication with kransen – the bridal wreath ) edgar wallace – the daffodil mystery mary augusta ward – harvest edith wharton – the age of innocence owen wister – a straight deal zara wright – black and white tangled threads francis brett young – the tragic bride . children and young people . l . frank baum – glinda of oz edgar rice burroughs – tarzan the untamed r . a . h . goodyear – forge of foxenby hugh lofting – the story of doctor dolittle olive beaupré miller – in the nursery ( first in the my book house series ) opal whiteley – the story of opal : the journal of an understanding heart . drama . s . ansky – the dybbuk ( first performed , in author 's yiddish translation as דֶער דִבּוּק צִווִישֶן צְווַיי ווֶעלְטֶן , tzvishn zwey weltn – der dibuk ) j . m . barrie a kiss for cinderella mary rose karel čapek – r.u.r . nikolai evreinov – the storming of the winter palace john galsworthy – the skin game walter c . hackett – mr . todd 's experiment georg kaiser – gas ii edward knoblock – mumsie vladimir mayakovsky – the championship of the universal class struggle eugene o'neill – the emperor jones mary roberts rinehart and avery hopwood – the bat ernst toller – man and masses ( masse mensch ) louis verneuil – daniel stanisław ignacy witkiewicz – they ( oni ) . poetry . louis aragon – '' feu de joie '' paul auster ( ed . ) ( 1982 ) . the random house book of twentieth-century french poetry , with translations by american and british poets . new york : random house . edmund blunden – the waggoner and other poems robert bridges – october and other poems t . s . eliot – poems ( twelve poems including '' lune de miel '' and '' the hippopotamus '' ) robert frost – miscellaneous poems aaro hellaakoski – me kaksi bolesław leśmian – meadow ( łąka ) edna st . vincent millay – a few figs from thistles hope mirrlees – paris : a poem wilfred owen – poems ezra pound – hugh selwyn mauberley carl sandburg – smoke and steel siegfried sassoon – picture show anton schnack – tier rang gewaltig mit tier ( beast strove mightily with beast ) georg trakl – der herbst des einsamen ( the autumn of the lonely ) miguel de unamuno – el cristo de velázquez . non-fiction . sarah bernhardt – petite idole marc bloch – rois et serfs . un chapitre d'histoire capétienne sigmund freud – beyond the pleasure principle ( jenseits des lustprinzips ) william inge – the idea of progress ernst jünger – storm of steel ( in stahlgewittern ) j . thomas looney – shakespeare identified h . l . mencken – prejudices : second series harold monro – some contemporary poets ( 1920 ) joseph shield nicholson – the revival of marxism , final book charles à court repington – the first world war , 1914–1918 radu rosetti – povești moldovenești frederick jackson turner – the frontier in american history h . g . wells – the outline of history . births . january 2 ( probable date ) – isaac asimov , russian-born american science-fiction author and biochemist ( died 1992 ) january 14 jean dutourd , french novelist ( died 2011 ) che lan vien , vietnamese poet ( died 1989 ) january 22 – philippa pearce , english children 's writer ( died 2006 ) january 24 – keith douglas , english poet ( died 1944 ) february 11 – daniel f . galouye , american science-fiction author ( died 1976 ) february 12 – william roscoe estep , american historian and educator ( died 2000 ) february 19 – jaan kross , estonian writer ( died 2007 ) february 21 – ishigaki rin ( 石垣 りん ) , japanese poet ( died 2004 ) february 28 – zaim topčić , yugoslav and bosnian writer ( died 1990 ) february 29 – howard nemerov , american poet ( died 1991 ) march 10 – boris vian , french novelist ( died 1959 ) march 11 – d . j . enright , english writer ( died 2002 ) march 19 – kjell aukrust , norwegian author , poet and artist ( died 2002 ) march 25 – paul scott , english novelist , playwright and poet ( died 1978 ) march 31 – marga minco ( sara menco ) , dutch novelist and journalist april 5 – arthur hailey , english-born canadian novelist ( died 2004 ) april 11 – marlen haushofer , austrian novelist ( died 1970 ) april 17 – bengt anderberg , swedish poet , novelist , children 's writer ( died 2008 ) may 8 – sloan wilson , american author and poet ( died 2003 ) may 9 – richard adams , english novelist , author of watership down ( died 2016 ) june 2 – marcel reich-ranicki , polish-born german literary critic ( died 2013 ) june 8 – gwen harwood , australian poet ( died 1995 ) june 9 – isobel english ( guesdon jolliffe ) , english novelist ( died 1994 ) june 13 – ruth guimarães , afro-brazilian classicist , fiction writer and poet ( died 2014 ) june 18 aster berkhof , belgian novelist ( died 2020 ) rosemary dobson , australian poet ( died 2012 ) june 20 – amos tutuola , nigerian writer ( died 1997 ) july 3 – max wilk , american playwright , screenwriter and author of fiction and nonfiction ( died 2011 ) july 12 – pierre berton , canadian author ( died 2004 ) august 3 – p . d . james , english crime novelist ( died 2014 ) august 4 – john figueroa , jamaican poet ( died 1999 ) august 9 – tormod skagestad , norwegian poet , novelist and playwright ( died 1997 ) august 16 – charles bukowski , american writer ( died 1994 ) august 18 – harbhajan singh , punjabi poet and critic ( died 2002 ) august 21 – christopher robin milne , english writer and bookseller ( died 1996 ) august 22 – ray bradbury , american science-fiction writer ( died 2012 ) october 7 – daniel vidart , uruguayan anthropologist , writer , historian , and essayist ( died 2019 ) october 8 – frank herbert , american science-fiction writer ( died 1986 ) october 15 – mario puzo , american author of the godfather ( died 1999 ) november 7 – elaine morgan , welsh writer on anthropology november 16 colin thiele , australian author ( died 2006 ) peter viertel , american author ( died 2007 ) november 23 – paul celan , romanian poet ( died 1970 ) december 10 – clarice lispector , ukrainian-born brazilian novelist ( died 1977 ) december 15 – albert memmi , tunisian writer in french december 20 – väinö linna , finnish novelist ( died 1992 ) . deaths . january 2 – paul adam , french novelist ( born 1862 ) january 4 – benito pérez galdós , spanish novelist ( born 1843 ) january 18 – giovanni capurro , italian poet ( born 1825 ) february 8 – richard dehmel , german poet ( born 1863 ) february 29 – a . h . bullen , english editor and publisher ( born 1857 ) march 9 – haralamb lecca , romanian dramatist , poet and translator ( paralysis , born 1873 ) march 15 – edith holden , english diarist and illustrator ( drowned , born 1871 ) march 26 – mary augusta ward ( mrs . humphry ward ) , tasmanian-born english novelist ( born 1851 ) may 7 – hugh thomson , british illustrator ( born 1860 ) may 11 – william dean howells , american realist novelist ( born 1837 ) may 21 – eleanor h . porter , american novelist ( born 1868 ) june 5 rhoda broughton , welsh novelist and short-story writer ( born 1840 ) julia a . moore , american poet ( born 1847 ) june 14 – max weber , german political economist ( born 1864 ) june 27 – adolphe basile routhier , canadian poet ( born 1839 ) september 29 – josé domingo gómez rojas , chilean poet ( meningitis , born 1896 ) october 17 – john reed , american journalist ( born 1887 ) october 20 – bithia mary croker , irish-born novelist ( born c . 1848 ) november 1 – walter bradford woodgate , english boating writer and oarsman ( born 1841 ) november 9 – alberto blest gana , chilean novelist ( born 1830 ) november 22 – manuel pérez y curis , uruguayan poet ( born 1884 ) november 24 – alexandru macedonski , romanian poet , novelist and dramatist ( heart disease , born 1854 ) december 18 – matthías jochumsson , icelandic poet , playwright and translator ( born 1835 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : d . h . lawrence , the lost girl james tait black memorial prize for biography : g . m . trevelyan , earl grey of the reform bill nobel prize for literature : knut hamsun pulitzer prize for the novel : no award given pulitzer prize for poetry : no award given pulitzer prize for drama : eugene o'neill , beyond the horizon . references .