1898 in literature

events . january 13 – émile zola 's open letter to félix faure , president of france , on the dreyfus affair , j'accuse… ! , is published on the front page of the paris daily newspaper l'aurore . on february 23 , zola is convicted of criminal libel in connection with j'accuse… ! . following dismissal of his appeal he flees to london ( arriving on july 19 ) to escape imprisonment . in august he begins writing his novel fécondité in the suburbs . february 5–june 18 – m . p . shiel 's '' yellow peril '' novel the empress of the earth , written around contemporary events in china , appears in the pearson weekly short stories ( london ) and in book form in july as the yellow danger ; it is frequently reprinted . february 25 – première of frank wedekind 's earth spirit ( erdgeist ) , first of his lulu plays , in leipzig , in a production by carl heine , with wedekind himself in the role of dr . schön . march 25 – o . henry is imprisoned in ohio penitentiary , columbus , for embezzlement . may 28 – max beerbohm succeeds george bernard shaw as theater critic of saturday review ( london ) ; shaw introduces him as '' the incomparable max '' . june – first appearance of e . w . hornung 's fictional gentleman thief a . j . raffles in the story '' the ides of march '' in cassell 's magazine ( london ) . december 2 – moscow art theatre 's first season opens with a double bill of emilia matthai 's greta 's happiness and carlo goldoni 's the mistress of the inn . the successful and influential moscow art theatre production of the seagull by chekhov ( its moscow première ) , would open on . unknown dates peadar ua laoghaire 's story begins serialisation in ireland as the first irish language novel ( published in book form 1904 ) . gerald duckworth establishes the publishers gerald duckworth and company in london . henry james 's novella in the cage is among their first year 's output . english designer c . r . ashbee begins book production at the essex house press . joseph wright 's english dialect dictionary begins publication . the '' generation of '98 '' writers and thinkers are active in spain . the term '' young poland '' is coined after a manifesto by artur górski , published in the kraków newspaper życie ( '' life '' ) , to signify the period of modernism in the polish arts . . new books . fiction . txomin agirre – aunamendiko lorea nephi anderson – added upon leonid andreyev – '' bargamot and garaska '' ( баргамот и гараська , short story ) elizabeth von arnim – elizabeth and her german garden f . w . bain – a digit of the moon l . frank baum – by the candelabra 's glare arnold bennett – a man from the north vicente blasco ibáñez – the shack ( la barraca ) mary elizabeth braddon – rough justice n . d . cocea – poet-poetă ralph connor – black rock joseph conrad – tales of unrest alexander craig – ionia stephen crane the monster ( novella ) the open boat and other tales stephanus jacobus du toit – die koningin van skeba paul laurence dunbar folks from dixie ( short stories ) the uncalled finley peter dunne – mr . dooley in peace and in war ellen thorneycroft fowler – concerning isabel carnaby john fox , jr . – the kentuckians ángel ganivet – los trabajos del infatigable creador pío cid maurice hewlett – forest lovers anthony hope – rupert of hentzau joris-karl huysmans – la cathédrale henry james – the turn of the screw ( novella in the two magics ) olha kobylianska – valse melancolique jerome k . jerome – the second thoughts of an idle fellow john luther long – '' madame butterfly '' pierre louÿs – la femme et le pantin charles major – when knighthood was in flower george moore – evelyn innes władysław reymont – the promised land ( ziemia obiecana ; serialization completed ) morgan robertson – futility , or the wreck of the titan emilio salgari – the black corsair garrett p . serviss – edison 's conquest of mars ( serialization ) italo svevo – senilità ( as a man grows older ) mary augusta ward – helbeck of bannisdale theodore watts-dunton – aylwin h . g . wells – the war of the worlds ( book publication ) edward noyes westcott – david harum owen wister – lin mclean charlotte mary yonge – the armourer 's prentices émile zola – paris . children and young people . j . meade falkner – moonfleet kenneth grahame – dream days k . langloh parker & ndash ; more australian legendary tales emilio salgari – il corsaro nero ( the black corsair – first in the black corsair series of five books ) ernest thompson seton – wild animals i have known jules verne – the mighty orinoco ( le superbe orénoque ) . drama . gabriele d'annunzio città morta la gioconda sogno di un pomeriggio d ' autunno r.c . carton – lord and lady algy josé echegaray – la duda ( the calum ) clyde fitch – nathan hale jacob gordin – mirele efros john oliver hobbes ( pearl craigie ) – the ambassador arthur wing pinero – trelawny of the 'wells' george bernard shaw – arms and the man iosif vulcan – soare cu ploaie ( sunshower ) . poetry . thomas hardy – wessex poems and other verses oscar wilde ( originally as '' c.3.3 '' ) – the ballad of reading gaol . non-fiction . catherine isabella dodd – introduction to the herbartian principles of teaching ebenezer howard – to-morrow : a peaceful path to real reform fred t . jane – jane 's fighting ships sidney lee – a life of william shakespeare liliʻuokalani – hawaii 's story by hawaii 's queen thérèse of lisieux ( died 1897 ) – the story of a soul ( l'histoire d'une âme ) samuel liddell macgregor mathers – the book of sacred magic of abra-melin the mage a . e . waite – the book of black magic and of pacts . births . april 8 – maurice bowra , english poet and humorist ( died 1971 ) april 28 – william soutar , scottish poet and diarist ( died 1943 ) february 6 – melvin b . tolson , african-american modernist poet ( died 1966 ) march 12 – tian han , chinese dramatist ( died 1968 ) may 19 – julius evola , italian esotericist , journalist and philosopher ( died 1974 ) may 23 – scott o'dell , american children 's author ( died 1989 ) june 9 – curzio malaparte , italian novelist , playwright , and journalist ( died 1957 ) july 22 stephen vincent benét , american poet and short-story writer ( died 1943 ) erich maria remarque , german novelist ( died 1970 ) august 23 – george papashvily , georgian-american sculptor and author ( died 1978 ) august 28 – malcolm cowley , american novelist , poet , literary critic and journalist ( died 1989 ) september 13 – arthur j . burks , american writer ( died 1974 ) september 15 – j . slauerhoff , dutch poet and novelist ( died 1936 ) september 16 – h . a . rey , german-born american children 's writer and illustrator ( died 1977 ) october 9 – tawfiq al-hakim , egyptian novelist and dramatist ( died 1987 ) october 17 – simon vestdijk , dutch writer ( died 1971 ) november 14 – benjamin fondane , romanian-born french poet , playwright and critic ( died 1944 ) november 29 – c . s . lewis , english novelist and children 's writer ( died 1963 ) december 27 – w . c . sellar , english humorous writer ( died 1951 ) . deaths . january 14 – lewis carroll ( charles l . dodgson ) , english scholar and children 's writer ( born 1832 ) january 18 – henry liddell , english lexicographer of greek ( born 1811 ) march 6 – felice cavallotti , italian poet , playwright and politician ( born 1842 ) march 12 – zachris topelius , swedish-language finnish novelist ( born 1818 ) march 24 – george thomas stokes , irish church historian ( born 1843 ) march 25 – james payn , english novelist ( born 1830 ) march 31 – eleanor marx , english political writer and translator ( born 1855 ) may 22 – edward bellamy , american novelist ( born 1850 ) july 14 – eliza lynn linton , english novelist and journalist ( born 1822 ) july 20 – jean ingelow , english poet and novelist ( born 1820 ) august 7 – georg ebers , german novelist and egyptologist ( born 1837 ) august 17 – sir william fraser , 4th baronet , english politician , author and book collector ( born 1826 ) september 9 – stéphane mallarmé , french symbolist poet ( born 1842 ) september 20 – theodor fontane , german novelist and poet ( born 1819 ) september 29 – william kingsford , english-born canadian historian ( born 1819 ) november 29 – ángel ganivet , spanish writer ( born 1865 ; suicide by drowning ) december 10 – william black , scottish novelist ( born 1841 ) . awards . newdigate prize – john buchan . references .