Bene Tleilax

plotlines . the original series . the tleilaxu control a number of planets but are originally connected with tleilax , the sole planet of the star thalim ; herbert 's 1965 novel dune notes that the tleilaxu are the source of '' twisted '' mentats . baron harkonnen states his intent to '' send at once to tleilax for a new mentat '' after piter de vries is killed . the tleilaxu themselves step into the foreground in 1969 's dune messiah , as their face dancer scytale enters into a conspiracy with the bene gesserit , spacing guild , and house corrino to topple the rule of paul atreides . to this end , the tleilaxu resurrect paul 's dead friend duncan idaho as the ghola hayt , trained as a mentat . hayt 's function is to unwittingly destroy paul psychologically , and failing that , kill paul when triggered by an implanted command . the emotional stress of this assassination attempt unlocks duncan 's memories in hayt , which scytale uses to illustrate that the tleilaxu can provide paul with a fully realized ghola of his deceased concubine chani , in exchange for his abdication . paul refuses , and kills scytale . duncan further ponders the tleilaxu legacy of his creation in children of dune ( 1976 ) . over 3,500 years later in god emperor of dune ( 1981 ) , tleilaxu face dancers kill and replace nearly everyone in the ixian embassy on arrakis as part of an assassination attempt on paul 's seemingly immortal son , the god emperor leto ii atreides . the tleilaxu have been providing leto with duncan idaho gholas for centuries , and their plot fails in part due to the ingenuity of the latest duncan . leto , however , later allows himself to be assassinated in a scheme executed by siona and an enlightened duncan . another 1,500 years later in heretics of dune ( 1984 ) , the tleilaxu routinely provide the bene gesserit with duncan idaho gholas , and have also developed the ability to grow the spice melange in the same axlotl tanks they use to grow gholas . secretly a theism zensunni society , the tleilaxu believe they are on the brink of taking control of the imperium . they have perfected their face dancers , who are now perfect mimics , able to copy the memories and consciousness of the people they imitate . virtually undetectable to all but the bene gesserit , these face dancers begin to replace leaders in the imperium as a means for the tleilaxu to seize control . the plan fails as , over time , the face dancers come to believe they are the people they have copied , and elude their genetically-programmed loyalty to the tleilaxu masters . following the death of leto ii , humanity had been thrown into chaos . the breakdown of leto 's empire , severe famine on many worlds , and the introduction of ixian navigation machines had caused billions of people to leave the settled worlds , striking off into unknown space in a diaspora known as the scattering . the people who had gone out into the scattering are often referred to as the '' lost ones . '' in heretics of dune , the descendants and '' creations '' of these lost ones have begun to return to the old empire , including the fierce , domination-hungry honored matres and a new breed of tleilaxu . tleilaxu master tylwyth waff notes : by the events of chapterhouse : dune ( 1985 ) , the bene tleilax have been all but eradicated by the honored matres save for one master , scytale ; he is a ghola of the original scytale of dune messiah , somehow having ascended from face dancer to master . he tells the bene gesserit leader darwi odrade that '' descendants of people we sent into the scattering returned with captive futars . a mingling of human and cat , as you doubtless know . but they did not reproduce in our tanks . and before we could determine why , the ones brought to us died . '' both odrade and scytale realize this was a ploy of the descendant tleilaxu to gain the confidence of the masters and yet not divulge their secrets . scytale 's secret bargaining tool while held against his will by the bene gesserit is a hidden nullentropy capsule containing cells carefully and secretly collected by the tleilaxu for millennia , including the cells of tleilaxu masters , face dancers , paul atreides , chani , gurney halleck , thufir hawat and other legendary figures . he intends to not only grow his own life-sustaining ghola , but to resurrect the rest of his order as well . in the meantime , he has given the bene gesserit enough of the axlotl technology to grow their own gholas , in particular a replacement for their military genius miles teg . . sequels . in brian herbert and kevin j . anderson 's 2006 continuation of the original series , hunters of dune , the descendant tleilaxu , now called the lost tleilaxu , are at odds with their forebears . ruled by a council of elders , the lost tleilaxu have at their disposal a subgroup of advanced face dancers who can not be detected by even the bene gesserit . the highest-level face dancer is khrone , who is trusted to execute the most important tasks of the elders . to further their goals for domination of the universe , the lost tleilaxu ally with the honored matres to obliterate nearly all tleilaxu planets . despite having the technology to create gholas , the lost tleilaxu do not know how to manufacture melange in axlotl tanks ( as the '' original '' tleilaxu do ) because that process was developed after their line of tleilaxu departed the old empire . their immediate goal is to rediscover this secret to break the bene gesserit monopoly on the all-important spice . all of the '' original '' tleilaxu masters , except for scytale , have been killed by the honored matres . the lost tleilaxu leadership has also been infiltrated and overtaken by khrone 's face dancers ; with it no longer necessary to pretend to be inferior to the elders , khrone kills the last true elder , burah . the face dancers have also secretly gained control of many similar power bases across the old empire . under the leadership of khrone , the lost tleilaxu 's new primary goal is to find the ithaca , the no-ship that escaped chapterhouse . a minion of daniel and marty , khrone believes their '' infallible '' projections that the ithaca contains something or someone important to them , the necessary fulcrum to influence the final battle against the human race . meanwhile , scytale , still a prisoner of the bene gesserit on the wandering ithaca , manages to negotiate permission to grow a ghola of himself . second-rank lost tleilaxu uxtal had served elder burah , transcribing meetings and disseminating the information to other elders . after burah 's murder , khrone sends uxtal to the tleilaxu capital , bandalong now ruled by renegade honored matre leader hellica to pacify hellica by having uxtal produce ( under threat of death and using axlotl technology ) the orange adrenaline-enhancing drug used by the honored matres . khrone implements a parallel plan to the pursuit of the ithaca , purportedly to create other weapons for daniel and marty 's conquest of the universe . he tasks uxtal to create a ghola of vladimir harkonnen from genetic material found in a damaged nullentropy tube ( from the charred corpse of a tleilaxu master ) in bandalong . this ghola is to be used to condition the subsequently-grown ghola of paul atreides , called paolo , himself created from blood found on an artifact from caladan . though daniel and marty lose interest in the project , khrone continues ; the face dancer has his own agenda for domination of the universe , and believes that , like the tleilaxu , daniel and marty can be fooled . the guild navigator edrik comes to tleilax seeking uxtal 's knowledge of axlotl tanks ; the navigator fears his kind 's obsolescence when the new ixian navigation technology ( secretly masterminded by khrone ) becomes available . he seeks an alternate source of spice to break the bene gesserit monopoly , but even uxtal believes that secret has died with the tleilaxu masters murdered by the honored matres . eventually he is able to access the genetic material of deceased master waff , and through an accelerated process creates several ( ultimately flawed ) waff gholas , hoping to unlock the secret of producing melange in the tanks . the entire universe is unaware that in the events of chapterhouse dune , scytale had been forced to give the passengers of the ithaca the secret , and it is in use on the no-ship as their primary source of spice . murbella , leader of the bene gesserit new sisterhood , conquers tleilax , discovering that matre superior hellica and several of her elite guard are also face dancer duplicates . uxtal is devoured by hungry sligs , and the sole remaining waff ghola escapes . he finds refuge with the spacing guild , offering edrik something better than artificial melange the genetic knowledge for the guild to create their own , optimized sandworms , the natural origin of the spice cycle . finally , it is revealed that the force behind the plot against humanity is in fact mankind 's ancient enemy , the thinking machines ; daniel and marty are in fact new incarnations of machine leader omnius and his second-in-command erasmus , introduced in the legends of dune prequel trilogy by brian herbert and kevin . j anderson . in the series finale , sandworms of dune ( 2007 ) , it is revealed that the autonomous face dancers are creations of the reincarnated omnius and erasmus but seek to overthrow their machine '' masters '' as well . secretly in control of ix and its technology production , khrone manipulates the spacing guild and new sisterhood , setting them up for disastrous failure in their final battle against the thinking machine forces of omnius . when khrone asserts dominance over even the machine empire , a smug erasmus activates a fail-safe built into all enhanced face dancers , instantly killing khrone and all of his minions across the universe . . prelude to dune . in the prelude to dune ( 1999–2001 ) prequel trilogy by brian herbert and anderson , it is noted that the founder of the bene tleilax had been a master named xuttuh . master ajidica heads project amal , an early attempt by the bene tleilax to create synthetic melange in order to eliminate dependence upon the planet arrakis ; intending an eventual tleilaxu takeover of the universe , ajidica sends '' improved '' face dancers off to unexplored systems . . legends of dune . the ancestors of the bene tleilax are featured in the legends of dune ( 2002–2004 ) prequel series by brian herbert and anderson . they are a civilization of human merchants known as the '' tlulaxa '' , who specialize in slaves and replacement organs . they claim that the organs are grown artificially in organ farms ; in reality , the vast majority of the organs are harvested from slaves . the tlulaxa do have working organ farms , but they are used mainly as a front for the slave harvesting operations and provide only a small fraction of the replacement organs . . description . tleilaxu master . masters are the leaders and real minds of the bene tleilax . after dune messiah , they have the ability to regain their genetic memory with ease , allowing them to live forever , using the axlotl tanks to create gholas of themselves . in heretics of dune it is noted via epigraph that tleilaxu sperm '' does not carry forward in a straight genetic fashion . gaps occur '' , and that they are '' naturally immune to an ixian probe , '' an interrogation device which normally can extract information even from the dead . the tleilaxu are described as short , dwarf-like characters with gray skin , hair and eyes , elfin features and pointy teeth . the bene gesserit suspect that their appearance is intended to encourage others to underestimate them . tleilaxu masters control their creations by forcing them into a hypnosis state with some predefined , implanted sound ( often a specific humming or whistling noise ) . in dune messiah , the tleilaxu dwarf bijaz hums to activate dormant programming in the duncan idaho ghola hayt to induce him to kill paul atreides : '' he began to hum , a keening , whining monotonous theme , repeated over and over . hayt stiffened , experiencing odd pains that played up and down his spine . the sound made hayt think of ancient rituals , folk memories , old words and customs , half-forgotten meanings in lost mutterings . '' in heretics of dune , master waff tries to control his face dancer duplicate of tuek : '' humming sounds like the noises of angry insects came from his mouth , a modulated thing that clearly was some kind of language . '' in chapterhouse dune , scytale sees an opportunity to control/influence the duncan idaho ghola and thus effect his escape from the bene gesserit when he thinks : somehow , i must contrive it that idaho and i meet intimately . there 's always the whistling language we impress on every ghola . in dune messiah , the tleilaxu dwarf bijaz controls the ghola hayt through a specific humming intonation that renders hayt open to implanted commands . in heretics of dune , the master waff attempts to control his perfectly mimicked face dancer copy of high priest tuek with a humming language , but fails due to the copy 's complete assimilation into its new form . technologies . the bene tleilax are masters of biological science and control the secrets of a number of important technologies in the dune universe . axlotl tank . an axlotl tank is essentially a brain-dead woman whose womb is used as a tank to create ghola . the bene tleilax 's use of their women in this capacity explains why no one has ever seen a tleilaxu female . in heretics of dune , it is revealed that the tleilaxu have developed the ability to grow the spice melange in axlotl tanks , breaking the monopoly on spice that arrakis held for thousands of years which strongly controlled the economics and the politics of the imperium . in chapterhouse dune , the bene gesserit have acquired axlotl tank technology and are able to use it to make gholas for their own purposes , but not spice . they are revealed not to be tanks at all , but dramatically altered women . the axlotl tank is similar to the reproductive '' stumps '' in herbert 's hellstrom 's hive . chairdogs . another of the most profitable and widely used creations of the tleilaxu , chairdogs are alive and partially sentient creatures used for seating . they possess the ability to shape themselves to fit their occupant . some characters dislike sitting on an animal and prefer normal chairs . chairdogs are also featured in herbert 's whipping star and the dosadi experiment , books unconnected to the dune series . these books also feature bedogs ( chairdogs used for sleeping ) . face dancer . face dancers are a servant caste of sterile humanoid shapeshifting , with full sentience but genetically-programmed loyalty to the tleilaxu masters . they are able to physiologically change their appearance to impersonate other people . they are used by the tleilaxu throughout the universe to replace people whom the tleilaxu find useful , usually killing the originals . in this way they may infiltrate and control various groups in the universe . face dancers are '' jadacha hermaphrodites '' , able to change their gender at will . herbert describes face dancers in their natural state in heretics of dune : the tleilaxu are able to control face dancers by forcing them into a hypnosis state with some predefined sound , often a specific humming or whistling noise . in heretics of dune , master waff tries to control his face dancer duplicate of tuek : '' humming sounds like the noises of angry insects came from his mouth , a modulated thing that clearly was some kind of language . '' in chapterhouse : dune , duncan idaho notes that the mysterious observers daniel and marty resemble face dancers : daniel and marty later indicate that they may in fact be independent face dancers : . ghola . similar to a clone , a ghola is a '' manufactured '' human duplicate ; but while clones are grown from living cells , a ghola is grown in an axlotl tank from cells collected from a deceased subject . at the time of dune , gholas have no access to the lives of the person from whom they were cloned , but after dune messiah , the tleilaxu discover that a ghola can recover his or her genetic memory during a carefully staged moment of extreme stress . much later in the series , it is revealed that the masters of the tleilaxu have been using this knowledge gained in dune messiah as an improvised device for immortality : at their death , they are cloned ; their clone recovers its memories , and the masters , in their serial incarnations , have memories stretching back thousands of years . the surviving masters of heretics of dune are clearly the longest-lived characters in the saga , after duncan idaho who is the first ghola to recover its memories . scytale himself , by the events of chapterhouse dune , would be over 5,000 years old through his serial incarnations . sligs . one of the earliest successes of tleilaxu genetic engineering , the slig is a hybrid livestock animal—a cross between a large slug and a terran pig—first mentioned in heretics of dune and considered a delicacy : 'the sweetest meat this side of heaven . ' most people had thought that they were '' tank-bred mutations '' , '' ugly creatures who excreted slimy , foul-smelling residue , and whose multiple mouths ground incessantly on garbage '' , even though they enjoy devouring the flesh of these beasts ( marinated slig medallions in rich caladan wine sauces are considered a prime delicacy ) . despite being the producers of sligs , the tleilaxu themselves do not consume the animals , having designed them to facilitate what they see as the degrading decadence and spiritual bankruptcy of all cultures but their own . emperor : battle for dune . the tleilaxu are one of the five subfactions in the 2001 computer game emperor : battle for dune . references .