Akhmed Zakayev

biography . early life . akhmed zakayev was born in the settlement of kirovskiy , kirovskiy raion ( nowadays called balpyk bi , koksu district ) , in the kazakh ssr , soviet union , which is now in almaty region , in kazakhstan ; his family was deported by stalin 's regime along with the rest of the chechens in 1944 . he graduated from acting and choreography schools in voronezh and moscow and worked as an actor at a theatre in the chechen capital grozny , specializing in a shakespearean roles . from 1991 , he was the chairman of the chechen union of the theatrical actors . in 1994 , zakayev became a minister of culture in the chechen separatist government of dzhokhar dudayev . chechen wars and the interwar period . after russian forces entered chechnya , starting the first chechen war , zakayev left his job and took up arms . serving at first as a minor commander in the unit of ruslan gelayev , he took part in the 1995 battle of grozny and then led the defence of the village of goyskoye . after this the armed group under his command operated in the south-west part of chechnya with its headquarters in the town of urus-martan . he was eventually promoted to the rank of brigadier general and appointed commander of the urus-martan front . in february 1996 , zakayev became commander of the entire western group of defense of ichkeria . in august 1996 , his forces took part in the decisive raid on grozny , risky walk in rebel-held chechen capital , the new york times , 14 august 1996 where he personally led the attack on the city 's central railway station . moscow gives more evidence on zakayev , the st . petersburg times , 3 december 2002 zakayev 's war service paved his way to chechen high politics . he became the acting president zelimkhan yandarbiyev 's advisor for the security matters and the secretary of the chechen security council and represented chechnya at the khasav-yurt accord , which brought a peaceful end to the first armed conflict between moscow and grozny . after the war , zakayev became chechen deputy prime minister ( in charge of education and culture ) and a special envoy of elected president of ichkeria aslan maskhadov for relations with moscow , taking part in the delegation that signed the official chechen-russian peace treaty at the kremlin in 1997 . chechnya : the turning point that was n't , rfe/rl , 11 may 2007 during the interwar period , he opposed the rise of radical islam in chechnya and co-authored a book entitled wahhabism - the kremlin 's remedy against national liberation movements , alleging an association between islamism extremism and soviet global '' pro-terrorist '' policy and support for dictatorships in the muslim world . during the early phases of the second chechen war in 1999–2000 , zakayev commanded maskhadov 's presidential guard ; he was also involved in negotiations with russian representatives before and during the resumed hostilities . in 2000 , having been wounded in a car accident during the new siege of grozny , he left chechnya for treatment . after this he stayed abroad and became president maskhadov 's most prominent representative in western europe , while ilyas akhmadov was the chechen emissary to the united states . in exile . since january 2002 , zakayev and his immediate family have been residing permanently in the united kingdom . on 18 november 2001 , zakayev , officially internationally wanted by russia , flew from turkey to the sheremetyevo international airport near moscow to meet the kremlin 's envoy , general viktor kazantsev for the high-level talks since the start of the war . moscow opens chechnya peace talks , bbc news , 18 november 2001 russian , chechen rebel envoy hold first talks since war began , los angeles times , 19 november 2001 kremlin and rebel envoys discuss peace for chechnya , the new york times , 19 november 2001 russia opens talks with chechens , cnn , 19 november 2001 chechnya peace talks get under way , the st . petersburg times , 20 november 2001 these negotiations were fruitless because kazantsev demanded a complete capitulation of the chechen side , with the only acceptable topic for the russian side being the disarmament of chechen separatists and their re-integration into civilian life . long negotiations with unclear results , prague watchdog , 16 november 2001 on 18 july 2002 , zakayev also met with the former secretary of security council of russia ivan rybkin in zürich , switzerland . prominent candidates for russia 's presidency , pravda , 12 december 2004 in october 2002 , zakayev organized the world chechen congress in copenhagen , denmark ( which was attended among others by the former first speaker of the state duma , ruslan khasbulatov ) . during the congress , zakayev was accused by russia of involvement in planning of the moscow theater hostage crisis . he was detained there on 30 october 2002 , under an interpol warrant filed by russia , which named him a suspect in the theater siege . russian to the core , time , 3 november 2002 alex goldfarb and marina litvinenko . '' death of a dissident '' free press , new york , 2007 . zakayev denied involvement in the theater capture . he was held in denmark for five weeks and then released due to lack of evidence , as russia 's formal extradition request did not include any evidence linking him to the siege . russia pushes for chechen extradition , bbc news , 2 november 2002 denmark frees top chechen envoy , bbc news , 3 december 2002 zakayev evidence on shaky ground , the st . petersburg times , 19 november 2002 on 7 december 2002 , zakayev returned to the uk but the british authorities arrested him briefly at london heathrow airport ; he was released on 50,000 gbp bail , which was paid by british actress vanessa redgrave , his friend who had travelled with him from denmark . he was accused by russian authorities of 13 criminal acts zakayev welcomed the british deportation hearings as an opportunity to put his case before an international public . zakayev welcomes deportation trial , institute for war and peace reporting , 21 february 2003 all accusations were proven to be false . one accusation , cutting fingers of a suspected fsb informer ivan solovyov , was based on a written testimony by zakayev 's former bodyguard , duk-vakha dushuyev , provided by russian authorities ; however , it appeared that solovyev had lost his fingers much earlier to frostbite . dushuyev himself has escaped from russia and then in his statement claimed that he was tortured at a russian army base with electric shocks to extort the false testimony to be used against zakayev . key witness in chechen extradition case 'was tortured ' , the independent , 25 july 2003 evidence gathered by torture , bbc news , 31 july 2003 kadyrov accused of intimidation , the st . petersburg times , 9 september 2003 in another accusation , father sergei , one of two russian orthodox church priests allegedly murdered by zakayev , turned out to be in fact still alive . the witness reverend filipp , allegedly kidnapped by zakayev in 1996 , also refuted his supposed testimony and even denounced russian authorities for '' implicating the church in politics '' . leading russian human rights activist sergei kovalev told the court zakayev would be at risk of death in russian captivity ( kovalev spoke about two high-profile chechen prisoners , field commanders salman raduyev and turpal-ali atgeriyev , who died soon after being jailed in russia , and of another , parliamentary speaker ruslan alikhadzhiyev , who has '' disappeared '' without trace after his arrest in 2000 ) . according to alexander goldfarb , one of the defence 's most important arguments was the 2001 meeting between zakayev and general kazantsev , since this meeting took place when the chechen envoy had already been put by russia on the international wanted list . at the time of the meeting kremlin 's spokesman on chechnya sergei yastrzhembsky said on television that russian government had no grievances against zakayev . zakayev saved by mr y , gazeta.ru , 2003/07/01 therefore , on 13 november 2003 , judge timothy workman rejected the russian request , deciding that it was politically motivated and that zakayev would be at risk of torture in the case of '' unjust and oppressive '' extradition . judge rejects bid to extradite chechen rebel leader , the guardian , 13 november 2003 russia loses fight over chechen 's extradition , the new york times , 29 november 2008 the judge also said the crimes which involved zakayev allegedly using armed force against combatants were not extraditable because they took place in the situation of civil war . chechen rebel defeats putin 's extradition plea , the telegraph , 13 november 2003 russian request to extradite chechen exile is turned down , the independent , 14 november 2003 russian authorities in turn responded by accusing the court of double standards . uk accused of hypocrisy on terror , bbc news , 13 november 2003 on 29 november 2003 , it was announced that zakayev had been granted political asylum in the uk . chechen envoy granted uk asylum , bbc news , 9 november 2003 after receiving political asylum in britain in 2003 , zakayev made london his permanent residence , and he visited several countries ( including france , germany and poland ) without being arrested . during the september 2004 beslan school hostage crisis , zakayev consented to the request of the civilian negotiators and authorities of north ossetia–alania to fly to russia to negotiate with the hostage takers . however , the siege ended in bloody confusion just a few hours before this could happen . zakayev was asked to assist in negotiations at the school , the moscow times , 6 september 2004 . new details emerge on maskhadov 's bid to mediate in beslan , the jamestown foundation , 6 january 2006 communication breakdown , time , 12 september 2004 as an envoy of maskhadov , he also met in london with the representatives of the union of the committees of soldiers ' mothers of russia in february 2005 , where they agreed on a peace proposal centred around a gradual cessation of violence by rebels corresponding with the three-week ceasefire unilaterally declared by maskhadov ( who once again called for president of russia vladimir putin to negotiate ) . these efforts were ignored by the russian government and maskhadov himself was soon killed in chechnya . on 31 october 2007 , zakayev officially distanced himself from the newly resigned chechen separatist leader doku umarov and the chechen islamist ideologist movladi udugov , who together had declared the creation of caucasus emirate in the place of abolished chri . in response , zakayev called for the remnants of the separatist parliament to form the new government and salvage legitimacy . statement by the minister for foreign affairs of the chechen republic of ichkeria , chechenpress , 31 october 2007 soon after , on 20 november 2007 , zakayev submitted his resignation from the ministerial post , but said this should not be viewed as a departure from '' the fight for our independence , our freedom , and for the recognition of our state '' . foreign minister of chechen separatist government resigns , rfe/rl , 20 november 2007 in september 2008 , ramzan kadyrov said he was now trying to persuade chechens refugees and exiles to return , including akhmed zakayev , whom kadyrov described as '' a valuable artist who would be welcome to return to help revive chechnya 's cultural heritage . '' us 'provoked russia-georgia war ' , bbc news , 10 september 2008 zakayev and alla dudayeva , the widow of the first chechen president dzhokhar dudayev , accused udugov of being a paid agent provocateur for the russia 's fsb . russia : is north caucasus resistance still serious threat ? , rfe/rl , 1 november 2007 in london , zakayev became friends with the russian dissident and former fsb officer alexander litvinenko , later alexander litvinenko poisoning in november 2006 ; litvinenko laid to rest in historic highgate , the telegraph , 08/12/2006 zakayev accused the russian president putin of ordering the death of litvinenko . in 2007 , british police warned zakayev that there was an increased threat to his personal security shortly before the alleged attempt to kill berezovsky by the fsb-connected chechen gangster movladi atlangeriyev ( or '' mr a '' ) . police feared assassination for two russian dissidents , the guardian , 22 july 2007 according to the kgb defector oleg gordievsky in 2008 , zakayev was placed 2 on the fsb assassination list , between berezovsky and litvinenko . in january 2008 , zakayev 's name showed up on the purported hit list of ramzan kadyrov 's enemies abroad to be killed , which was published on the internet following the murder of the chechen dissident umar israilov ( a former bodyguard of kadyrov who was shot dead after receiving asylum in austria ) . slain exile 's family warns of death list , the australian , 26 january 2009 zakayev was arrested by the polish police during his visit to poland on 17 september 2010 . chechen separatist leader zakayev 'arrested ' in poland , bbc news , 17 september 2010 he was released the same day . invitation to return to chechnya . on 11 february 2009 , ramzan kadyrov said he personally invited zakayev to return to chechnya if he does not want to be '' used by special services and other forces against russia '' . at the same time , russia 's ambassador in london , said britain had turned into a '' sanctuary '' for russia 's fugitives , including zakayev , still-wanted on terrorism charges . kadyrov invites zakayev to return to chechnya , the moscow times , 11 february 2009 in an interview for radio free europe/radio liberty , zakayev claimed to rebuff the chechen president 's reported offer and said that kadyrov was only following the kremlin 's orders ; zakayev rebuffs chechen president 's reported offer , rfe/rl , 11 february 2009 he also reinstates this stance two days later in the interview for the bbc russian service . закаев говорит , что не намерен возвращаться , bbc russian service , 10 february 2009 zakayev says that he is not intended to return , chechenpress , 12 february 2009 kadyrov has said that '' he zakayev is the only man on the part of ichkeria who i would like to bring back home . i do not know what the competent bodies think , but i believe he did not commit serious crimes . '' nevertheless , on 17 february , the russian state agency ria novosti agency wrote that zakayev allegedly announced his intentions to return to chechnya and '' work for a lasting peace '' in the republic . exiled chechen zakayev hopes to return to motherland , ria novosti , 17 february 2009 according to the caucasus emirate 's mouthpiece kavkaz center , zakayev , who may be granted amnesty , stated his readiness to return and '' contribute to a long-term peace in the region '' in an interview for ekho moskvy on the same day . according to zakayev , kadyrov can unite the chechen society , kavkaz center , 17 february 2009 kavkaz center - which supported umarov - has called zakayev '' the head of a telephone government , '' referring to the fact that zakayev has little influence on the insurgents on the ground . a never-ending war on 23 august 2009 , in a controversial move , he was reportedly dismissed as prime minister by the chairman of the chechen republic of ichkeria parliament in exile , as he '' transgressed his mandate and recognized the legitimacy of the kremlin ’ s puppet regime '' , saralyapov accused and dismissed to zakayev waynakh.com , 23 august 2009 and shortly afterwards , he was capital punishment by sharia court of the caucasus emirate , because he '' professes democratic religion , propagates secularism , and prefers the laws established by men to the shari ' a law of almighty and great allah . '' north caucasus resistance sentences chechen leader to death radio free europe , 25 august 2009