Fairchild Semiconductor

company history . 1950s . in 1956 , william shockley opened shockley semiconductor laboratory as a division of beckman instruments in mountain view , california ; his plan was to develop a new type of '' 4-layer diode '' that would work faster and have more uses than then-current transistors . at first he attempted to hire some of his former colleagues from bell labs , but none were willing to move to the west coast or work with shockley again at that time . shockley then founded the core of the new company with what he considered the best and brightest graduates coming out of american engineering schools . while shockley was effective as a recruiter , he was less effective as a manager . a core group of shockley employees , later known as the traitorous eight , became unhappy with his management of the company . the eight men were julius blank , victor grinich , jean hoerni , eugene kleiner , jay last , gordon moore , robert noyce , and sheldon roberts . looking for funding on their own project , they turned to sherman fairchild 's fairchild camera and instrument , an eastern u.s . company with considerable military contracts . in 1957 the fairchild semiconductor division was started with plans to make silicon transistors at a time when germanium was still the most common material for semiconductor use . according to sherman fairchild , noyce 's impassioned presentation of his vision was the reason sherman fairchild had agreed to create the semiconductor division for the traitorous eight . noyce advocated the use of silicon as substrate & nbsp ; – since the material costs would consist of sand and a few fine wires , the major cost would be in the manufacturing process . noyce also expressed his belief that silicon semiconductors would herald the start of disposable appliances that , due to cheap electronic components , would not be repaired but merely discarded when worn out . their first transistors were of the silicon mesa variety , innovative for their time , but relatively poor reliability . fairchild 's first marketed transistor was the 1958 2n696 , a mesa transistor developed by moore , and it was a huge success . the first batch of 100 was sold to ibm for 150 a piece in order to build the computer for the b-70 bomber . more were sold to autonetics to build the guidance system for the minuteman ballistic missile . at the same time jean hoerni developed the planar process which was a huge improvement & nbsp ; – transistors could be made more easily , at a lower cost and with higher performance and reliability . the planar process made most other transistor processes obsolete . one such casualty was philco 's transistor division , whose newly built 40 million plant to make their germanium padt process transistors became unviable . within a few years every other transistor company paralleled or licensed the fairchild planar process . hoerni 's 2n1613 was a major success , with fairchild licensing the design across the industry . in 1960 , fairchild built a circuit with four transistors on a single wafer of silicon , thereby creating the first silicon integrated circuit ( texas instruments ' jack kilby had developed an integrated circuit made of germanium on september 12 , 1958 , and was awarded a u.s . patent ) . the company grew from twelve to twelve thousand employees , and was soon making 130 million a year . 1960s . fairchild 's noyce and texas instrument 's kilby had independently invented the integrated circuit ( ic ) based on bipolar technology . in 1960 , noyce invented the planar integrated circuit . the industry preferred fairchild 's invention over texas instruments ' because the transistors in planar ics were interconnected by a thin film deposit , whereas texas instruments ' invention required fine wires to connect the individual circuits . noyce 's invention was enabled by the planar process developed by jean hoerni . in turn , hoerni 's planar process was inspired by the surface passivation method developed by mohamed atalla at bell labs in 1957 . in the early 1960s , fairchild r & d began experimenting with the mosfet ( metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor ) , also known as the mos transistor . the first mosfet was invented by mohamed atalla and dawon kahng at bell labs in 1959 , and demonstrated in early 1960 , but was initially overlooked and ignored by bell labs . however , the mosfet generated significant interest at fairchild . inspired by the first mosfet , chih-tang sah built an mos-controlled tetrode at fairchild later that year . mos devices were later commercialized by fairchild in 1964 , with p-channel devices for logic and switching applications . the experiments led to fairchild 's development of mos integrated circuits . in 1963 , fairchild hired bob widlar to design analog operational amplifiers using fairchild 's process . since fairchild 's processes were optimized for digital circuits , widlar collaborated with process engineer dave talbert . the collaboration resulted in two revolutionary products & nbsp ; – µa702 and µa709 . hence , fairchild dominated the analog integrated circuit market , having introduced the first ic operational amplifiers , or '' op-amps '' , bob widlar 's µa702 ( in 1964 ) and µa709 . in 1968 , fairchild introduced david fullagar 's µa741 , which became the most popular ic op amp of all time . by 1965 , fairchild 's process improvements had brought low-cost manufacturing to the semiconductor industry & nbsp ; – making fairchild nearly the only profitable semiconductor manufacturer in the united states . fairchild dominated the market in dtl , op-amps and mainframe computer custom circuits . in 1965 , fairchild opened a semiconductor assembly plant on the navajo nation in shiprock , new mexico . at its peak , the plant employed over a thousand navajos , the majority of whom were women . in the shiprock dedication commemorative brochure released by the fairchild company , the diné ( navajo ) women circuit makers were celebrated as '' culture workers who produced circuits as part of the 'reproductive ' labor of expressing navajo culture , rather than merely for wages . '' this claim was based on the opinion that circuits of the electronic chips had a mere resemblance with the complex geometric patterns on the navajo rugs . paul driscoll , the shiprock plant manager , spoke of the '' untapped wealth of natural characteristics of the navajo.the inherent flexibility and dexterity of the indians . '' although highly successful during its operation , the plant was closed in 1975 . while the fairchild corporation claims the diné women were chosen to work in the shiprock plant due to their '' 'nimble fingers ' '' as previously noted , the women of the shiprock reservation were actually chosen as the workforce due to a lack of labor rights asserted by the women in addition to '' cheap , plentiful workers and tax benefits '' . fairchild had not done well in the digital integrated circuit market . their first line of ics was the '' micrologic '' resistor–transistor logic ( rtl ) line which was used in the apollo guidance computer . it had the advantage of being extremely simple & nbsp ; – each inverter consisted of just one transistor and two resistors . the logic family had many drawbacks that had made it marginal for commercial purposes , and not well suited for military applications : the logic could only tolerate about 100 millivolts of noise & nbsp ; – far too low for comfort . it was awhile before fairchild relied on more robust designs , such as diode–transistor logic ( dtl ) which had much better noise margins . sales due to fairchild semiconductor division had doubled each year and by the mid-1960s comprised two-thirds of total sales of the parent company . in 1966 , fairchild 's sales were second to those of texas instruments , followed in third place by motorola . noyce was rewarded with the position of corporate vice-president and hence became the de facto head of the semiconductor division . however , internal trouble at fairchild began to surface with a drop in earnings in 1967 . there was increasing competition from newer start-ups . the semiconductor division , situated in mountain view and palo alto , california , was actually managed by executives from syosset , new york , who visited the california sites once a year , even though the semiconductor division earned most of the profits of the company . fairchild 's president at that time , john carter , had used all the profits to fund acquisitions of unprofitable ventures . noyce 's position on fairchild 's executive staff was consistently compromised by sherman fairchild 's faction . charles e . sporck was noyce 's operations manager . sporck was reputed to run the tightest operation in the world . sporck , pierre lamond and most managers had grown upset and disillusioned with corporate focus on unprofitable ventures at the expense of the semiconductor division . executives at the semiconductor division were allotted substantially fewer stock options compared to other divisions . in march 1967 , sporck was hired away by peter j . sprague to national semiconductor . sporck brought with him four other fairchild personnel . actually , lamond had previously assembled a team of fairchild managers in preparation to defect to plessey , a british company . lamond had recruited sporck to be his own boss . when negotiations with plessey broke down over stock options , lamond and sporck succumbed to widlar 's and talbert 's ( who were already employed at national semiconductor ) suggestion that they look to national semiconductor . making silicon valley : innovation and the growth of high tech , 1930-1970 , by christophe lécuyer , published by mit press , 2006 . , ; page 260 widlar and talbert had earlier left fairchild to join molectro , which was later acquired by national semiconductor . national semiconductor founding in the fall of 1967 , fairchild suffered a loss for the first time since 1958 and announced write-offs of 4 million due to excess capacity , which contributed to a total loss of 7.6 million . profits had sunk to 0.50 a share , compared to 3 a share the previous year , while the value of the stock dropped in half . in october 1967 , the board ordered carter to sell off all of fairchild 's unprofitable ventures . carter responded to the order by resigning abruptly . furthermore , fairchild 's dtl technology was being overtaken by texas instruments 's faster ttl ( transistor–transistor logic ) . while noyce was considered the natural successor to carter , the board decided not to promote him . sherman fairchild led the board to choose richard hodgson . within a few months hodgson was replaced by a management committee led by noyce , while sherman fairchild looked for a new ceo other than noyce . in response , noyce discreetly planned a new company with gordon moore , the head of r & d . they left fairchild to found intel in 1968 and were soon joined by andrew grove and leslie l . vadász , who took with them the revolutionary silicon gate ( sgt ) , recently created in the fairchild r & d laboratory by federico faggin who also designed the fairchild 3708 , the world ’ s first commercial mos integrated circuit using sgt . fairchild mos division was slow in understanding the potential of the sgt which promised not only faster , more reliable , and denser circuits , but also new device types that could enlarge the field of solid state electronics & nbsp ; – for example , ccds for image sensors , dynamic rams , and non-volatile memory devices such as eprom and flash memories . intel took advantage of the sgt for its memory development . federico faggin , frustrated , left fairchild to join intel in 1970 and design the first microprocessors using sgt . among the investors of intel were hodgson and five of the founding members of fairchild . sherman fairchild hired lester hogan , who was the head of motorola semiconductor division . hogan proceeded to hire another hundred managers from motorola to entirely displace the management of fairchild . the loss of these iconic executives , coupled with hogan 's displacement of fairchild managers demoralized fairchild and prompted the entire exodus of employees to found new companies . many of the original founders , otherwise known as the '' fairchildren '' , had left fairchild in the 1960s to form companies that grew to prominence in the 1970s . robert noyce and gordon moore were among the last of the original founders to leave , at which point the brain-drain of talents that had fueled the growth of the company was complete . a fairchild advertisement of the time showed a collage of the logos of silicon valley with the annotation '' we started it all '' . it was later , in 1971 , don hoefler popularizated the name '' silicon valley usa '' in electronic news . he notes he did n't invent the name . see also gregory gromov a legal bridge spanning 100 years : from the gold mines of el dorado to the '' golden '' startups of silicon valley by gregory gromov and techcrunch 2014 update of hoefler 's article . . 1970s . hogan 's action to hire from motorola had motorola file a lawsuit against fairchild , which the court then decided in fairchild 's favor in 1973 . judge william copple ruled that fairchild 's results were so unimpressive that it was impossible to assess damages '' under any theory . '' hogan was dismissed as president the next year , but remained as vice chairman . in 1973 , fairchild became the first company to produce a commercial charge-coupled device ( ccd ) following its invention at bell labs . digital image sensors are still produced today at their descendant company , fairchild imaging . the ccd had a difficult birth , with the devastating effects on fairchild of the 1973–75 recession that followed on the 1973 oil crisis . after intel introduced the 8008 8-bit microprocessor , fairchild developed the fairchild f8 8-bit microprocessor , which was according to the cpu museum '' in 1977 the f8 was the world 's leading microprocessor in terms of cpu sales . '' in 1976 , the company released the first video game system to use rom cartridges , the fairchild video entertainment system ( or ves ) later renamed channel f , using the f8 microprocessor . the system was successful initially , but quickly lost popularity when the atari 2600 video computer system ( or vcs ) was released . by the end of the 1970s they had few new products in the pipeline , and increasingly turned to niche markets with their existing product line , notably '' hardened '' integrated circuits for military and space applications and isoplanar ecl products used in exotic applications like cray computers . fairchild was being operated at a loss , and the bottomline subsisted mostly from licensing of its patents . in 1979 , fairchild camera and instrument was purchased by schlumberger limited , an oil field services company , for 425 million . at this time , fairchild 's intellectual properties , on which fairchild had been subsisting , were expiring . 1980s . in 1980 , under schlumberger management , the fairchild laboratory for artificial intelligence research ( flair ) was started within fairchild research . in 1985 the lab was separated to form schlumberger palo alto research ( spar ) . fairchild research developed the clipper architecture , a 32-bit risc-like computer architecture , in the 1980s , resulting in the shipping of the c100 chip in 1986 . the technology was later sold to intergraph , its main customer . schlumberger sold fairchild to national semiconductor in 1987 for 200 million . the sale did not include fairchild 's test division , which designed and produced automated test equipment ( ate ) for the semiconductor manufacturing industry , nor did it include schlumberger palo alto research . 1990s . in 1997 , the reconstituted fairchild semiconductor was reborn as an independent company , based in south portland , maine with kirk pond as ceo . on march 11 , 1997 , national semiconductor corporation announced the us 550 million sale of a reconstituted fairchild to the management of fairchild with the backing of sterling llc , a unit of citicorp venture capital . fairchild carried with it what was mostly the standard products group previously segregated by gil amelio . the fairchild semiconductor corporation announced november 27 , 1997 that it would acquire the semiconductor division of the raytheon corporation for about 120 million in cash . the acquisition was completed on december 31 , 1997 . in december 1998 , fairchild announced the acquisition of samsung 's power division , which made power mosfets , igbts , etc . the deal was finalized in april 1999 for 450 million . to this day , fairchild remains an important supplier for samsung . in august 1999 , fairchild semiconductor again became a publicly traded company on the new york stock exchange with the ticker symbol fcs . fairchild 's south portland , maine and mountaintop , pennsylvania locations are the longest continuously operating semiconductor manufacturing facilities in the world , both operating since 1960 . 2000s . on march 19 , 2001 , fairchild semiconductor announced that it had completed the acquisition of intersil corporation 's discrete power business for approximately 338 million in cash . the acquisition moved fairchild into position as the second-largest power mosfet supplier in the world , representing a 20 percent share of this 3 billion market that grew 40 percent last year . on september 6 , 2001 , fairchild semiconductor announced the acquisition of impala linear corporation , based in san jose , california , for approximately 6 million in stock and cash . impala brought with it expertise in designing analog power management semiconductors for hand-held devices like laptops , mp3 players , cell phones , portable test equipment and pdas . on january 9 , 2004 , fairchild semiconductor ceo kirk pond was appointed as a director of the federal reserve bank of boston , elected by member banks to serve a three-year term . on april 13 , 2005 , fairchild announced appointment of mark thompson as ceo of the corporation . thompson would also be president , chief executive officer and a member of the board of directors of fairchild semiconductor international . he originally joined fairchild as executive vice president , manufacturing and technology group . on march 15 , 2006 , fairchild semiconductor announced that kirk p . pond would retire as chairman at the company 's annual stockholders ' meeting on may 3 , 2006 . pond would continue as a member of the company ’ s board of directors . mark thompson ( then ceo ) became chairman . on september 1 , 2007 , new jersey-based rf semiconductor supplier anadigics acquired fairchild semiconductor 's rf design team , located in tyngsboro , massachusetts , for 2.4 million . 2010s . in april 2011 , fairchild semiconductor acquired transic , a silicon carbide power transistor company originally based in sweden . on november 18 , 2015 , on semiconductor made an offer to acquire fairchild semiconductor for 2.4 billion ( or 20 per share ) after a few months of speculation that fairchild was seeking a potential buyer . on april 10 , 2016 , fairchild semiconductor moved its headquarters from san jose ( 3030 orchard pkwy . ) to sunnyvale ( 1272 borregas ave . ) on september 19 , 2016 , on semiconductor and fairchild semiconductor jointly announced that on semiconductor had completed its announced 2.4 billion cash acquisition of fairchild . in the fall of 2016 , the fairchild 'on ' semiconductor international closed the west jordan , utah , manufacturing plant . . alumni . gil amelio julius blank lee boysel ron brachman wilfred corrigan alan l . davis richard o . duda james m . early federico faggin jack gifford victor grinich andrew grove peter e . hart jean hoerni lester hogan eugene kleiner hector levesque richard f . lyon gordon moore robert noyce stav prodromou chih-tang sah jerry sanders ed turney leslie l . vadász frank wanlass bob widlar andrew witkin don valentine bernard a yurash . see also . fairchild aircraft . references . external links . fairchild imaging it corporate histories collection link to fairchild semiconductor history content on the computer history museum site . buying tomatoes at the birthplace of silicon valley : what happened to the original fairchild site and to shockley lab . the silicon gate technology , developed at fairchild in 1968 by f . faggin et al . , was presented at the idem in washington dc , in oct . 1968 .