Gemistus Pletho

biography . early life and career . georgius gemistus was born in constantinople in 1355/1360 . merry , bruce ( 2002 ) '' george gemistos plethon ( c . 1355/60–1452 ) '' in amoia , alba & knapp , bettina l . , multicultural writers from antiquity to 1945 : a bio-bibliographical sourcebook . greenwood publishing group . raised in a family of well-educated christians , he studied in constantinople and adrianople , before returning to constantinople and establishing himself as a teacher of philosophy . hanegraaff p.31 adrianople , the ottoman capital following its capture by the ottoman sultan murad i in 1365 , was a centre of learning modelled by murat on the caliphates of cairo and baghdad . plethon admired plato ( greek : plátōn ) so much that late in life he took the similar-meaning name plethon . πλήθων : '' the full '' , pronounced . plethon is also an archaic translation of the greek γεμιστός gemistós ( '' full , stuffed '' ) some time before 1410 , emperor manuel ii paleologus sent him to mistra in the despotate of morea in the southern peloponnese , which remained his home for the rest of his life . in constantinople , he had been a senator , and he continued to fulfil various public functions , such as being a judge , and was regularly consulted by rulers of morea . despite suspicions of heresy from the church , he was held in high imperial favour . hanegraaff p.31 in mistra he taught and wrote philosophy , astronomy , history and geography , and compiled digests of many classical writers . his pupils included bessarion and george scholarius ( later to become patriarch of constantinople and plethon 's enemy ) . he was made chief magistrate by theodore ii . he produced his major writings during his time in italy and after his return . hanegraaff p.32 . council of florence . in 1428 pletho was consulted by emperor john viii on the issue of unifying the greek and latin churches , and advised that both delegations should have equal voting power . byzantine scholars had been in contact with their counterparts in western europe since the time of the latin empire , and especially since the byzantine empire had begun to ask for western european help against the ottomans in the 14th century . western europe had some access to ancient greek philosophy through the catholic church and the muslims , but the byzantines had many documents and interpretations that the westerners had never seen before . byzantine scholarship became more fully available to the west after 1438 , when byzantine emperor john viii palaeologus attended the council of ferrara , later known as the council of florence , to discuss a union of the eastern orthodoxy and catholic church churches . despite not being a theologian , pletho was chosen to accompany john viii on the basis of his renowned wisdom and morality . other delegates included pletho 's former students bessarion , mark eugenikos and scholarios . debolt , darien c . ( 1998 ) george gemistos plethon on god : heterodoxy in defence of orthodoxy . a paper delivered at the twentieth world congress of philosophy , boston , mass . retrieved 2008-11-20 . . pletho and the renaissance . at the invitation of some florentine humanists he set up a temporary school to lecture on the difference between plato and aristotle . few of plato 's writings were studied in the latin west at that time , timaeus in the partial translation of calcidius was available ; henricus aristippus ' 12th century translation of the meno and phaedo was available , but obscure ; leonardo bruni 's translations of the phaedo , apology , crito and phaedrus appeared only shortly before pletho 's visit . ( debolt ) and he essentially reintroduced much of plato to the western world , shaking the domination which aristotle had come to exercise over western european thought in the high and later middle ages . marsilio ficino 's introduction to the translation of plotinus has traditionally been interpreted to the effect that cosimo de ' medici attended pletho 's lectures and was inspired to found the accademia platonica in florence , where italian students of pletho continued to teach after the conclusion of the council . however , according to james hankins , ficino was misunderstood . in fact , communication between pletho and cosimo de ' medici - for whose meeting there is no independent evidence - would have been severely constrained by the language barrier . furthermore , ficino 's '' platonic academy '' was more of an '' informal gymnasium '' that did not have a particularly platonic orientation . hanegraaff p.41 nevertheless , pletho came to be considered one of the most important influences on the italian renaissance . marsilio ficino , the florentine humanism and the first director of the accademia platonica , paid plethon the ultimate honour , calling him 'the second plato ' , while cardinal bessarion speculated as to whether plato 's soul occupied his body . plethon may also have been the source for ficino 's orphic system of natural magic . while still in florence , pletho wrote a volume titled wherein aristotle disagrees with plato , commonly called de differentiis , to correct the misunderstandings he had encountered . he claimed he had written it '' without serious intent '' while incapacitated through illness , '' to comfort myself and to please those who are dedicated to plato '' . hanegraaff p.32 george scholarius responded with a defence of aristotle , which elicited plethon 's subsequent reply . expatriate byzantine scholars and later italian humanists continued the argument . pletho died in mistra in 1452 , or in 1454 , according to j . monfasani ( the difference between the two dates being significant as to whether or not plethon still lived to know of the fall of constantinople in 1453 ) . in 1466 , some of his italian disciples , headed by sigismondo pandolfo malatesta , stole his remains from mistra and interred them in the tempio malatestiano in rimini , '' so that the great teacher may be among free men '' . writings . image : plethon autograph.jpg thumb one of plethon 's manuscripts ( biblioteca nazionale marciana , venice ) . reform of the peloponnese . believing that the peloponnese were direct descendants of the ancient hellenes , plethon rejected justinian 's idea of a universal empire in favour of recreating the hellenistic civilization , the zenith of greek influence . james henderson burns , the cambridge history of medieval political thought c . 350–c . 1450 , cambridge university press , 1988 . in his 1415 and 1418 pamphlets he urged manuel ii and his son theodore to turn the peninsula into a cultural island with a new constitution of strongly centralised monarchy advised by a small body of middle-class educated men . the army must be composed only of professional native greek soldiers , who would be supported by the taxpayers , or '' helots '' who would be exempt from military service . land was to be publicly owned , and a third of all produce given to the state fund ; incentives would be given for cultivating virgin land . trade would be regulated and the use of coinage limited , barter instead being encouraged ; locally available products would be supported over imports . mutilation as a punishment would be abolished , and chain gangs introduced . homosexuals and sexual deviants would be burnt at the stake . the social and political ideas in these pamphlets were largely derived from plato 's republic . plethon touched little on religion , although he expressed disdain for monks , who '' render no service to the common good '' . he vaguely prescribed three religious principles : belief in a supreme being ; that this being has concern for mankind ; and that it is uninfluenced by gifts or flattery . manuel and theodore did not act on any of these reforms . . de differentiis . in de differentiis plethon compares aristotle 's and plato 's conceptions of god , arguing that plato credits god with more exalted powers as '' creator of every kind of intelligible and separate substance , and hence of our entire universe '' , while aristotle has god as only the motive force of the universe ; plato 's god is also the end and final cause of existence , while aristotle 's god is only the end of movement and change . plethon derides aristotle for discussing unimportant matters such as shellfish and embryos while failing to credit god with creating the universe , for believing the heavens are composed of a fifth element , and for his view that contemplation was the greatest pleasure ; the latter aligned him with epicurus , plethon argued , and he attributed this same pleasure-seeking to monks , whom he accused of laziness . later , in response to gennadius ' defence of aristotle , plethon argued in his reply that plato 's god was more consistent with christian doctrine than aristotle 's , and this , according to darien debolt , was probably in part an attempt to escape suspicion of heterodoxy . . nomoi . after his death , plethon 's nómōn syngraphḗ ( νόμων συγγραφή ) or nómoi ( νόμοι , '' book of laws '' ) was discovered . it came into the possession of princess theodora , wife of demetrios , despot of morea . theodora sent the manuscript to scholarius , now gennadius ii , patriarch of constantinople , asking for his advice on what to do with it ; he returned it , advising her to destroy it . morea was under invasion from sultan mehmet ii , and theodora escaped with demetrios to constantinople where she gave the manuscript back to gennadius , reluctant to destroy the only copy of such a distinguished scholar 's work herself . gennadius burnt it in 1460 ; however , in a letter to the exarch joseph ( which still survives ) he details the book , providing chapter headings and brief summaries of the contents . it seemed to represent a merging of stoic philosophy and zoroastrian mysticism , and discussed astrology , daemons and the migration of the soul . he recommended religious rites and hymns to petition the classical gods , such as zeus , whom he saw as universal principles and planetary powers . man , as relative of the gods , should strive towards good . plethon believed the universe has no beginning or end in time , and being created perfect , nothing may be added to it . he rejected the concept of a brief reign of evil followed by perpetual happiness , and held that the human soul is reincarnated , directed by the gods into successive bodies to fulfill divine order . this same divine order , he believed , governed the organisation of bees , the foresight of ants and the dexterity of spiders , as well as the growth of plants , magnetic attraction , and the amalgamation of mercury and gold . plethon drew up plans in his nómoi to radically change the structure and philosophy of the byzantine empire in line with his interpretation of platonism . the new state religion was to be founded on a hierarchical pantheon of pagan gods , based largely upon the ideas of humanism prevalent at the time , incorporating themes such as rationalism and logic . as an ad-hoc measure he also supported the reconciliation of the two churches in order to secure western europe 's support against the ottomans . journal of hellenic studies , vol . 7 , p . 356 . he also proposed more practical , immediate measures , such as rebuilding the hexamilion , the ancient defensive wall across the isthmus of corinth , which had been breached by the ottomans in 1423 . the political and social elements of his theories covered the creation of communities , government ( he promoted benevolent monarchy as the most stable form ) , land ownership ( land should be shared , rather than individually owned ) , social organisation , families , and divisions of sex and class . he believed that labourers should keep a third of their produce , and that soldiers should be professional . he held that love should be private not because it is shameful , but because it is sacred . . summary . plethon 's own summary of the nómoi also survived , amongst manuscripts held by his former student bessarion . this summary , titled summary of the doctrines of zoroaster and plato , affirms the existence of a pantheon of gods , with zeus as supreme sovereign , containing within himself all being in an undivided state ; his eldest child , motherless , is poseidon , who created the heavens and rules all below , ordaining order in the universe . zeus ' other children include an array of '' supercelestial '' gods , the olympians and tartareans , all motherless . of these hera is third in command after poseidon , creatress and ruler of indestructible matter , and the mother by zeus of the heavenly gods , demi-gods and spirits . the olympians rule immortal life in the heavens , the tartareans mortal life below , their leader kronos ruling over mortality altogether . the eldest of the heavenly gods is helios , master of the heavens here and source of all mortal life on earth . the gods are responsible for much good and no evil , and guide all life towards divine order . plethon describes the creation of the universe as being perfect and outside of time , so that the universe remains eternal , without beginning or end . the soul of man , like the gods is immortal and essentially good , and is reincarnated in successive mortal bodies for eternity at the direction of the gods . . other works . many of plethon 's other works still exist in manuscript form in various european libraries . most of plethon 's works can be found in j . p . migne 's patrologia graeca collection ; for a complete list see fabricius , bibliotheca graeca ( ed . harles ) , xii . in modern literature . early in his writing career , e . m . forster attempted a historical novel about plethon and sigismondo pandolfo malatesta , but was not satisfied with the result and never published it — though he kept the manuscript and later showed it to naomi mitchison . mentioned in a 1925 letter to mitchison , quoted in her autobiography you may well ask : a memoir 1920–1940 ezra pound included plethon in his poem the cantos . references to plethon and sigismondo malatesta can be found in canto 8 . plethon is also mentioned in canto 23 and 26 . pound was fascinated by the role that plethon 's conversation must have had on cosimo de medici and his decision to acquire greek manuscripts of plato and neoplatonic philosophers . by having manuscripts brought from greece and becoming the patron of '' the young boy , ficino , '' cosimo facilitated the preservation and transmission of greek cultural patrimony into the modern world after the fall of constantinople in 1453 . plethon thus played a key but hidden role in the italian renaissance . pletho is a major character in the historical novel porphyry and ash by peter sandham , set in the final year of the byzantine empire .