Geoffrey II, Duke of Brittany

life . in the 1160s , henry ii began to alter his policy of indirect rule in brittany and to exert more direct control . everard ( 2000 ) , pp.41–42 . henry had been at war with conan iv , duke of brittany . local breton nobles rebelled against conan , so conan sought henry ii 's help . in 1164 , henry intervened to seize lands along the border of brittany and normandy and , in 1166 , he invaded brittany to punish the local barons . everard ( 2000 ) , p.42 . henry then forced conan to abdicate as duke and to give brittany to his five-year-old daughter , constance , who was handed over and betrothed to henry 's son geoffrey . this arrangement was quite unusual in terms of medieval law , as conan might have had sons who could have legitimately inherited the duchy . geoffrey and constance eventually married , in july 1181 . warren , wilfred lewis , king john , ( university of california press , 1973 ) , 574 . growing tensions between henry and louis vii of france finally spilled over into open war in 1167 , triggered by a trivial argument over how money destined for the crusader states of the levant should be collected . louis allied himself with the welsh , scots and bretons and attacked normandy . dunbabin , p.59 . henry responded by attacking chaumont-sur-epte , where louis kept his main military arsenal , burning the town to the ground and forcing louis to abandon his allies and make a private truce . dunbabin , p.59 ; warren ( 2000 ) , p.106 . henry was then free to move against the rebel barons in brittany , where feelings about his seizure of the duchy were still running high . everard ( 2000 ) , pp.45–46 . geoffrey was fifteen years old when he joined the first revolt against his father . he later reconciled to henry in 1174 when he participated in the truce at gisors . geoffrey prominently figured in the second revolt of 1183 , fighting against richard , on behalf of henry the young king . geoffrey was a good friend of louis vii 's son philip , and the two men were frequently in alliance against king henry . geoffrey spent much time at philip 's court in paris , and philip made him his seneschal . there is evidence to suggest that geoffrey was planning another rebellion with philip 's help during his final period in paris in the summer of 1186 . as a participant in so many rebellions against his father , geoffrey acquired a reputation for treachery . gerald of wales wrote the following of him : '' he has more aloes than honey in him ; his tongue is smoother than oil ; his sweet and persuasive eloquence has enabled him to dissolve the firmest alliances and by his powers of language able to corrupt two kingdoms ; of tireless endeavour , a hypocrite in everything , a deceiver and a dissembler . '' dan jones , '' the plantagenets '' , p.102 geoffrey also was known to attack monasteries and churches in order to raise funds for his campaigns . this lack of reverence for religion earned him the displeasure of the church and , as a consequence , of the majority of chroniclers who wrote about his life . family . geoffrey and constance had three children , one born after geoffrey 's death : eleanor , fair maid of brittany ( 1184–1241 ) maud/matilda of brittany ( 1185–before may 1189 ) arthur i , duke of brittany ( 1187–1203 ? ) . death . geoffrey died on 19 august 1186 , at the age of 27 , in paris . there is also evidence that supports a death date of 21 august 1186 . marie-aline de mascureau , chronologie , published originally in aliénor d ’ aquitaine . revue 303 , hors-série no 81 , p . 218-223 , nantes 2004 , in edmond-rené labande , pour une image véridique d ’ aliénor d ’ aquitaine , edited with a preface by martin aurell of la société des antiquaires de l'ouest-geste edition of 2005 . , p . 142 there are two alternative accounts of his death . the more common first version holds that he was trampled to death in a jousting tournament . at his funeral , a grief-stricken philip is said to have tried to jump into the coffin . roger of hoveden 's chronicle hoveden on the 1183 revolt is the source of this version ; the detail of philip 's hysterical grief is from gerald of wales . in the second version , in the chronicle of the french royal clerk rigord , geoffrey died of sudden acute chest pain , which reportedly struck immediately after his speech to philip , boasting his intention to lay normandy to waste . possibly , this version was an invention of its chronicler , sudden illness being god 's judgment of an ungrateful son plotting rebellion against his father , and for his irreligiosity . alternatively , the tournament story may be an invention of philip 's to prevent henry ii 's discovery of a plot ; by inventing a social reason , a tournament , for geoffrey 's being in paris , philip obscured their meeting 's true purpose . marie of champagne , with whom geoffrey was on good terms , was present at the requiem for her half-brother and established a mass chantry for the repose of his soul . geoffrey was buried in the choir of notre dame de paris cathedral , but his tombstone was destroyed in the 18th century before the french revolution . destroyed tombs at notre-dame de paris his body was exhumed in 1797 and measured at 5 & nbsp ; ft 6.5 in ( 1.69 m ) . as related by valentine green in the gentleman 's magazine , 67 , pt 2 , 1797 . succession . after geoffrey 's death , henry ii arranged for constance , geoffrey 's widow , to marry ranulf de blondeville , 6th earl of chester . ranulf would become duke of brittany , jure uxoris , for a short time before this marriage was annulled . ancestry . see also . dukes of brittany family tree earl of richmond british monarchs family tree list of horse accidents . notes . references . bibliography . costain , thomas b . the conquering family , 1962 everard , judith . charters of duchess constance of brittany and her family , 1171–1221 , 1999 everard , judith . brittany and the angevins : province and empire , 1158–1203 , 2000 gillingham , john . the life and times of richard i , 1973 gillingham , john . richard the lionheart , 1978 gillihgham , john . richard i , 1999 reston , james . warriors of god : richard the lion-heart and saladin in the third crusade , 2001 warren , w . l . henry ii , 2000 . external links . the medieval sourcebook contains many primary sources including hoveden and gerald of wales , some of which pertains to geoffrey