1902 in sports

american football . college championship rose bowl ( 1901 season ) : the michigan wolverines won 49-0 over the stanford indians to win the college football national championship michigan wolverines – college football national championship professional championships national football league ( 1902 ) – pittsburgh stars ohio league – akron east ends events 1 january — inaugural rose bowl game is played at pasadena , california september — the first professional football league , the national football league ( 1902 ) , which is unrelated to the current nfl , is formed from three teams based in pennsylvania and who are backed by major league baseball . the league folds a few months later . 21 november — the philadelphia athletics ( nfl ) defeated the kanaweola athletic club of elmira , new york , 39–0 , in the first ever professional american football night game . 29 november — the pittsburgh stars defeated the philadelphia football athletics , 11–0 , at the pittsburgh coliseum , to win the 1902 national football league championship . 28 december — the syracuse athletic club defeated the new york philadelphians , 5–0 , in the indoor american football game , which was held at madison square garden . association football . brazil fluminense fc was founded in laranjeiras area , rio de janeiro . england the football league – sunderland 44 points , everton 41 , newcastle united 37 , blackburn rovers 36 , nottingham forest 35 , derby county 35 fa cup final – sheffield united 2–1 southampton at crystal palace , london ( replay following 1–1 draw at crystal palace ) 26 april — shortly after being saved from bankruptcy , newton heath changes its name to manchester united scotland scottish football league – rangers scottish cup final – hibernian 1–0 celtic at celtic park spain 10 march — foundation of real madrid as madrid fútbol club . athletics . sammy mellor wins the sixth running of the boston marathon . . australian rules football . vfl premiership collingwood wins the 6th vfl premiership : collingwood 9.6 ( 60 ) d essendon 3.9 ( 27 ) at melbourne cricket ground ( mcg ) with a handful of exceptions , all vfl/afl grand finals are played at the mcg from 1902 . baseball . national championship national league championship – pittsburgh pirates american league championship – oakland athletics events 23 april — infielder lou castro debuts with the oakland athletics in the american league as the first latin-american to play in major league baseball winnipeg maroons wins the inaugural northern league championship in the minor leagues . boxing . events joe gans wins the world lightweight championship by knocking out frank erne in the first round . gans successfully defends the title five times by the end of the year . 25 july — james j . jeffries defeats bob fitzsimmons by an eighth-round knockout in san francisco , fitzsimmons failing in his bid to recover the world heavyweight championship lineal world champions cyber boxing zone world heavyweight championship – james j . jeffries world middleweight championship – tommy ryan world welterweight championship – barbados joe walcott world lightweight championship – frank erne → joe gans world featherweight championship – young corbett ii world bantamweight championship – harry forbes . cricket . events no cricket is played in south africa due to the boer war . australia defeats england in the ashes by 2 tests to 1 after the first two tests have been rained off . in one of the most famous test series in history , the final three matches are full of drama with victor trumper scoring a century before lunch in the third test , australia winning the fourth test by just 3 runs and england winning the fifth test by one wicket following a century in only 75 minutes by gilbert jessop . england county championship – yorkshire minor counties championship – wiltshire most runs – victor trumper 2570 48.49 ( hs 128 ) most wickets – wilfred rhodes 213 13.15 ( bb 8–26 ) wisden cricketers of the year – warwick armstrong , cuthbert burnup , james iremonger , james kelly , victor trumper australia sheffield shield – new south wales most runs – clem hill 1035 51.75 ( hs 107 ) most wickets – len braund 62 28.69 ( bb 6–90 ) india bombay presidency – europeans shared with parsees south africa currie cup – not contested west indies inter-colonial tournament – not contested . figure skating . world figure skating championships world men 's champion – ulrich salchow ( sweden ) . golf . major tournaments british open – sandy herd us open – laurie auchterlonie , who becomes the first golfer to break 80 in all four rounds of the us open other tournaments british amateur – charles hutchings us amateur – louis n . james . horse racing . england grand national – shannon lass 1,000 guineas stakes – sceptre 2,000 guineas stakes – sceptre the derby – ard patrick the oaks – sceptre st . leger stakes – sceptre australia melbourne cup – the victory canada queen 's plate – lyddite ireland irish grand national – patlander irish derby stakes – st . brendan usa kentucky derby – alan-a-dale preakness stakes – old england belmont stakes – masterman . ice hockey . stanley cup winnipeg victorias successfully defends the stanley cup , defeating toronto wellingtons in a cup challenge by two games to nil in a best-of-three series march – winnipeg victorias wins the manitoba hockey association championship to retain the stanley cup 1 march — montreal hc wins the canadian amateur hockey league ( cahl ) championship and challenges winnipeg 13–17 march — montreal and winnipeg play a best-of-three series for the stanley cup , montreal winning by two games to one to claim the stanley cup for the first time since 1894 . motor racing . paris-vienna trail the paris-vienna trail is run on 26–29 june over 990 & nbsp ; km and won by marcel renault ( france ) driving a renault in a time of 15:47:43 . the race is in retrospect sometimes referred to as the vii grand prix de l'acf . 1902 grand prix and paris races . retrieved on 12 september 2009 . gordon bennett cup the third gordon bennett cup is run from paris to innsbruck and won by selwyn edge ( great britain ) driving a napier 30hp . circuit des ardennes the inaugural circuit des ardennes is run on 31 july 1902 in the vicinity of bastogne . the total distance is 512.05 & nbsp ; km ( i.e . , 85.34 & nbsp ; km x 6 laps ) . the winner is charles jarrott ( great britain ) , driving a panhard-levassor 70 & nbsp ; hp in a time of 5:53:39 . great britain the first motor race in great britain is held at bexhill-on-sea with more than 200 entries . birthplace of british motor racing . retrieved on 16 august 2009 . . rowing . the boat race 22 march — cambridge wins the 59th the boat race 1902 . rugby league . events featherstone rovers founded england championship – broughton rangers challenge cup – broughton rangers 25–0 salford at athletic grounds , rochdale rugby league county leagues – wigan rugby league county leagues – leeds . rugby union . home nations championship 20th six nations championship series is won by wales . speed skating . speed skating world championships men 's all-round champion – none declared . tennis . england the championships , wimbledon – laurence doherty ( gb ) defeats arthur gore ( gb ) 6–4 6–3 3–6 6–0 the championships , wimbledon – muriel robb defeats charlotte cooper sterry 7–5 6–1 france french men 's singles championship – michel vacherot defeats max decugis 6–4 6–2 french women 's singles championship – françoise masson defeats p girod : details unknown usa us open ( tennis ) – william larned defeats reginald doherty ( gb ) 4–6 6–2 6–4 8–6 us open ( tennis ) – marion jones defeats elisabeth moore 6–1 1–0 retired davis cup 1902 international lawn tennis challenge – 3–2 at crescent athletic club ( grass ) brooklyn , united states . references .