Stinking badges

history . the original version of the line appeared in b . traven 's novel the treasure of the sierra madre ( 1927 ) : the line was popularized by john huston 's 1948 film adaptation of the novel , which was altered from its content in the novel to meet the motion picture production code regulations severely limiting profanity in film . in one scene , a mexican bandit leader named '' gold hat '' ( portrayed by alfonso bedoya ) tries to convince fred c . dobbs ( humphrey bogart ) that he and his company are federales : . in popular culture . the phrase has often been quoted , paraphrased , and parodied in a variety of media . comics . in one issue of the teenage mutant ninja turtles archie comics , the malignoid drones scul and bean meet with the nihilistic industrian null to discuss the contract between him and the malignoid queen maligna . when null insists on consolidating the contract through his lawyers , either scul or bean yells out : '' lawyers ? ! we do n't need no stinkin ' lawyers ! ! '' '' the man who sold the world '' . teenage mutant ninja turtles adventures 19 ( april 1991 ) in the teenage mutant ninja turtles series from image comics , donatello paraphrases a variation of that sentence ( '' plans ? ! i do n't need no stinking plans ! '' ) whilst using his cyborg systems to restore a stripped-down aircar . teenage mutant ninja turtles vol.3 10 ( juli 1997 , image comics ) . film . in mel brooks 's western blazing saddles ( 1974 ) , the line was delivered as '' badges ? we do n't need no stinking badges . '' in charles swenson 's animated film down and dirty duck ( 1974 ) , a stereotypical mexican mouse character , wearing a sombrero and a bandolier ( probably in a parody of speedy gonzales ) , speaks the line as '' i do n't want your stinkin ' badges ! '' in the film the ninth configuration ( 1980 ) , when the asylum patients are quoting lines from movies , one quotes '' badges ? we do n't need no stinking badges . '' in the sketch-comedy film elephant parts ( 1981 ) , one of the fake ad sequences portrays '' an authentic mexican bandito in a mexican-american restaurant , '' whose sole line is '' nachos ? we do n't need no stinkin ' nachos ! '' in john sayles 's sci-fi comedy the brother from another planet ( 1984 ) , two men in black are hunting for the protagonist in a harlem bar , where the following exchange takes place . bartender : '' your badges , man . '' man in black 2 : '' badges ? '' man in black 1 : '' what badges ? '' man in black 2 : '' we do n't have to show you any badges . '' in the movie gotcha ! ( 1985 ) , the character manolo says '' do n't show me your badges ; we do n't know nothing about no stinking badges . '' the movie troop beverly hills ( 1989 ) contains the line '' we do n't need no stinkin ' patches . '' in the '' weird al '' yankovic film uhf ( 1989 ) , when animal show host raul ( trinidad silva ) is asked to take a consignment of badgers , he says '' badgers ? badgers ? ! we do n't need no stinking badgers ! '' in the film flashback ( 1990 ) , as the hooker is undressing the fbi agent , she discards his badge saying '' we do n't need no stinkin ' badges . '' in the ron howard film backdraft ( 1991 ) , william baldwin 's character tries to refresh his nephew 's memory by using a hand puppet to exclaim , '' spinach ? we do n't need no stinkin ' spinach ! '' in the film no code of conduct ( 1998 ) paul gleason 's character says in a bad mexican accent '' badges ? we do n't need no stinkin ' badges ! '' , then goes on to sheepishly mention that he was quoting from the 1974 film blazing saddles . in the film bubble boy ( 2001 ) , when jimmy offers danny trejo 's character slim patches for his motorcycle 's flat tire he responds , '' patches ? i could use some stinking patches . '' in the film zombie strippers ( 2008 ) , when paco ( joey medina ) is told to obtain some wild animals to dispose of the bodies , he says , '' badgers ? badgers ? we do n't need no stinking badgers . '' in the film 6 underground ( 2019 ) , three says the line while breaking into the enemy stronghold and going past the security desk . in spike lee 's american war drama film da 5 bloods ( 2020 ) , when desroche 's gunmen first try to dispossess the bloods of the recovered gold bars , the leader of the gunmen tells paul , '' we do n't need no stinking official badges . '' . games . the trading card game magic : the gathering ( 1993 ) makes reference to a card that was to be included in the joke unhinged set called , '' we do n't need no stinkin ' merfolk ! '' the game ftl : faster than light ( 2012 ) includes an achievement called , '' i do n't need no stinkin ' upgrades ! '' the game ground zero texas ( 1993 ) has a dialog from actor danny trejo saying : '' badges , we do n't need no stinking badges '' in the adventure game escape from monkey island ( 2000 ) , the main protagonist guybrush threepwood is given a dialogue option , when asked for id by the bartender , '' id ? i do n't need no stinkin ' id ! '' in the first-person shooter duke nukem forever ( 2011 ) , the main protagonist says '' keycard ? i do n't need no fucking keycards ! '' when he faces a door which requires a keycard to be opened . in the game leisure suit larry 6 : shape up or slip out ! ( 1993 ) , the main protagonist has the line of dialogue , '' badges ? ve don ' need no steenkin ' badges ! '' to cavaricchi , the aerobics instructor . . literature . in the stephen king novel it ( 1986 ) , character richie tozier repeatedly says , in a poor imitation of a mexican accent , '' batches ? we do n't need no steeking batches . '' in the stephen king novel bag of bones the narrator describes his denial of having writer 's block by saying to the reader '' writer 's block ? what writer 's block ? we do n't got no stinking writer 's block . '' the luis valdez play i do n't have to show you no stinkin ' badges ( 1987 ) draws its title from this quote , and makes a specific reference to sierra madre . in eldest ( 2005 ) , the second novel in christopher paolini 's the inheritance cycle series , a cobbler named loring eschews the use of barges as a means of human transportation , saying , '' barges ? we do n't want no stinking barges . '' in william s . burroughs ' report on the 1968 democratic convention for esquire magazine , burroughs has a cop demand to see the permit of the candidate 's entourage . the response is : '' permits ? we do n't have any permits . we do n't have to show you any stinking permits . you are talking suh to the future president of america . '' . music . the song '' badges '' ( 1984 ) by minutemen quoted the line as : '' we have no badges . we do n't need no badges . we do n't need no stinking badges '' . the song '' medicine show '' ( 1985 ) by big audio dynamite sampled the quote by alfonso bedoya from the film the treasure of the sierra madre . the song prominently featured quotes sampled from other westerns as well , including several by or making reference to the eli wallach character tuco from the film the good , the bad and the ugly . this association — as well as the similarity of voice and accent employed by both actors in their respective bandito roles — reinforces the common misconception that wallach delivered the famous line . julian cope 's semi-eponymous song '' julian h cope '' from his album jehovahkill ( 1992 ) featured the line : '' badges ? badges ? we do n't need no stinkin ' badges ! so sissified , civilised , i want to be a savage '' . the 2 skinnee j 's song '' the good , the bad , and the skinnee '' ( 1998 ) from the album supermercado ! features the line '' badges , we do n't need no stinking badges '' sung as a refrain five times in a row . at the beginning of the song '' big fat money '' off the album balance by van halen , someone ( probably bruce fairbairn ) asked , '' al , you want a click on this one ? '' to which alex van halen replied , '' i do n't need no stinkin ' click ! '' the new york-based jamband moe . often uses the line humorously during a pause in their song '' mexico '' when playing it live . the roger clyne and the peacemakers song '' barons to break , '' from the album native heart ( 2017 ) , includes the line in the chorus . the ian brown song '' little seed , big tree '' has the phrase at the beginning of the song . television . in the season 4 episode 10 , titled '' there goes the neighborhood '' , of the the a-team , when shown the town watch fake badges murdock says '' badges ? we do n't need no stinkin ' badges '' in the episode '' it 's a nice place to visit '' ( 33 , 1967 ) of the monkees , micky dolenz misquoted the line as '' badges ? we do n't need no stinking badges '' . in the episode '' filthy pictures '' ( 1980 ) of wkrp in cincinnati , johnny fever is telling a story '' i said show me some badges , and the guys says , badges ! uh , we do n't need no stinking badges '' in a 1983 episode of wizards and warriors , the character marko ( played by walter olkewicz ) delivers a spoof of the line as '' badgers ? we do n't need no stinkin ' badgers '' . in the episode '' sledge in toyland '' ( december 3 , 1987 ) of sledge hammer ! , sledge and his partner arrive at the office of the murdered toy tycoon and the security guard sticks a visitor 's badge on his chest . sledge throws it on the counter saying : '' heeeey , i do n't need no sticking badges . '' in the episode '' darkstar rising '' ( 2008 ) of ben 10 : alien force , when kevin is lamenting the loss of his plumber 's badge , ben says , '' badges ? we do n't need no stinking badges . '' in a 2014 episode of transformers : rescue bots , kade burns says '' badgers ? we do n't need no stinking badgers . '' in an episode ( season 1 , episode 2 : '' a better mousetrap '' ) of the 2003 teenage mutant ninja turtles series , michelangelo intones , '' chill , bro — we do n't need no stinking surface world . '' in the salute your shorts episode '' the treasure of sarah madre '' ( 1991 ) , the gang is digging for buried treasure , and z.z . finds a junior park ranger 's badge , about which michael states , '' badges ? we do n't need no stinking badges ! '' in the friends season 8 episode '' the one with the baby shower '' ( 2002 ) , the quote is mentioned as one of joey 's training questions for the show bamboozled . in the '' a beautiful mine '' ( 2003 ) episode of the adventures of jimmy neutron : boy genius , sheen says , '' uh , libby , i do n't think they need no stinkin ' badges . '' in the '' stuck with dick '' episode ( 1998 ) of 3rd rock from the sun , harry says '' bagels ? bagels ? we do n't need no stinkin ' bagels ! '' . in the '' ghost in the machine , '' episode 82 , season 3 ( 1986 ) of the transformers , the ghost of starscream accosts decepticon guards runabout and runamuck by saying , '' passes ? passes ? i do n't have to show you no stinking passes ! '' in the tv movie good luck charlie , it 's christmas ! , when asked to see some identification badges , the leader of a group of live action video game players responded with '' badges ? we do n't need no stinkin ' badges ! '' in the episode '' musta been a beautiful baby '' ( episode 28 , october 13 , 1993 ) of adventures of sonic the hedgehog , scratch and grounder masquerade as police officers from the '' department of lost kids '' , and when asked for their badges , reply '' badges ? we do n't need no stinking— '' before being cut off and thrown out . in the episode '' gumby with a pokey '' ( season 7 , episode 21 , may 17 , 2010 ) of two and a half men , berta and charlie are quoting movies while high , and berta says the line '' badges ? we do n't need no stinkin ' badges ! '' using a popsicle as a mustache . in the episode '' blood drive '' ( season 5 , episode 18 , march 5 , 2009 ) of the office , michael is talking at a valentine 's day singles party and says '' relationships ? we don ’ t need no stinkin ’ relationships ! '' . theatre . in the broadway production of american idiot , between the songs '' st . jimmy '' and '' give me novocaine '' the character , st . jimmy , proclaims that '' we do n't need no stinkin ' badges ! '' before johnny and whatsername initiate an intimate moment in the center stage bed . references . external links . rudebadmood