Fragging

response . the u.s . military 's responses to fragging incidents included greater restrictions on access to weapons , especially grenades , for soldiers in non-combat units and '' lockdowns '' after a fragging incident in which a whole unit was isolated until an investigation was concluded . for example , in may 1971 , the u.s . army in vietnam temporarily halted the issuance of grenades to nearly all its units and soldiers in vietnam , inventoried stocks of weapons , and searched soldier 's quarters , confiscating weapons , ammunition , grenades , and knives . this action , however , failed to reduce fragging incidents as soldiers could easily obtain weapons in a flourishing black market among nearby vietnamese communities . the u.s . military also attempted to diminish adverse publicity concerning fragging and the security measures it was taking to reduce it . only a few fraggers were identified and prosecuted . it was often difficult to distinguish between fragging and enemy action . a grenade thrown into a foxhole or tent could be a fragging , or the action of an enemy infiltrator or saboteur . enlisted men were often close-mouthed in fragging investigations , refusing to inform on their colleagues out of fear or solidarity . although the sentences prescribed for fragging were severe , the few men convicted often served fairly brief prison sentences . ten fraggers were convicted of murder and served sentences ranging from ten months to thirty years with a mean prison time of about nine years . . influence . in the vietnam war , the threat of fragging caused many officers and ncos to go armed in rear areas and to change their sleeping arrangements as fragging often consisted of throwing a grenade into a tent where the target was sleeping . for fear of being fragged , some leaders turned a blind eye to drug use and other indiscipline among the men in their charge . fragging , the threat of fragging , and investigations of fragging sometimes disrupted or delayed tactical combat operations . officers were sometimes forced to negotiate with their enlisted men to obtain their consent before undertaking dangerous patrols . the breakdown of discipline , including fragging , was an important factor leading to the creation of an all-volunteer military force by the united states and the termination of conscription . the last conscript was inducted into the army in 1973 . the volunteer military moderated some of the coercive methods of discipline previously used to maintain order in military ranks . . notable incidents . 1704 – battle of blenheim : an unpopular major of the 15th regiment of foot was shot in the head by his own men after the battle had been won . 1815 – battle of quatre bras : the commander of the 92nd ( gordon highlanders ) regiment of foot , colonel john cameron of fassfern , was shot and killed by a man whom he had recently flogged . 1847 – mexican–american war : on two occasions , lt . col . braxton bragg ( later a confederate general ) survived attempts on his life . once an artillery shell exploded under his bed . 1894 – battle of the yalu river : admiral ding ruchang 's legs were crushed , either due to a construction defect or the deliberate misfiring of his ship 's main battery by the ship 's captain . paine , s.c.m . ( 2003 ) . the sino-japanese war of 1894–1895 : perception , power , and primacy , cambridge university press . pp . 179–189 . . world war i . according to general frank percy crozier , an unpopular british sergeant was killed when one of his men came up behind him and dropped an unpinned hand grenade down his trousers . regan , g . ( 2002 ) backfire : a history of friendly fire from ancient warfare to the present day , robson books , p . 233 . vietnam war ( u.s . forces ) . on 21 april 1969 , a grenade was thrown into the company office of k company , 9th marines , at quảng trị combat base , rvn ; first lieutenant robert t . rohweller died of wounds he received in the explosion . private reginald f . smith pleaded guilty to the premeditated murder of rohweller and was sentenced to 40 years ' imprisonment ; he died in custody on 25 june 1982 . a known drug user , smith was apprehended when boasting about the killing to a colleague in formation while still having a grenade ring on his finger . on 15 march 1971 , a grenade tossed into an officer billet at bien hoa air base killed lieutenants thomas a . dellwo and richard e . harlan of the 1st cavalry division ( airmobile ) ; private e-2 billy dean smith was charged with killing the officers but was acquitted in november 1972 . . vietnam war ( australian forces ) . on 23 november 1969 , lieutenant robert thomas convery of the 9th battalion , royal australian regiment was killed when a grenade exploded as he was asleep in his tent at nui dat , south vietnam . private peter denzil allen was convicted of convery 's murder and served ten years and eight months of a life sentence in risdon prison . heavy drinking had taken place the previous night . on christmas day 1970 , sergeants allan brian moss and john wallace galvin were shot dead and sergeant frederick edwin bowtell injured when private paul raymond ( ramon ) ferriday fired his rifle into the sergeant 's mess of the royal australian army service corps at nui dat , south vietnam , following an all-day drinking session . ferriday was convicted on two counts of manslaughter and one of assault with a weapon and served eight years of a ten-year sentence . during the trial , ferriday was described by an army psychiatrist to be of '' paranoid character '' and prone to violent fits of rage , although eyewitness accounts mentioned in the trial described him of being aware of his actions afterwards and offered details of previous threatening altercations . . middle east peacekeeping . 1982 : irish army private michael mcaleavey , serving at tebnine with the united nations interim force in lebanon , opened fire with an fn fal battle rifle and shot dead corporal gregory morrow , private thomas murphy and private peter burke . he originally claimed they had been killed by lebanese gunmen , but later admitted the killings , saying he had '' snapped '' due to dehydration and heat exhaustion . he received a life sentence at a court martial , being paroled in 2009 . . the troubles . 9 may 1992 : during the reconstruction of a security base devastated just two days before by a provisional ira bomb at fivemiletown , in county tyrone , while soldiers from the first battalion staffordshire regiment were providing a security detail to the workers , an eighteen-year-old private fired his sa80 rifle seven times at the company 's sergeant major in a frenzy , killing him in front of the rest of the platoon . the serviceman was eventually acquitted of the charge of murder , fortnight , issues 302-312 , p . 33 but declared guilty of manslaughter . there were allegations of bullying and mistreating from the non-commissioned officer . . war in afghanistan . 17 august 2002 , british army sergeant robert busuttil of the royal logistic corps was shot dead by subordinate corporal john gregory during a barbecue at kabul international airport . it was later revealed that corporal gregory had been drinking and the two men had earlier been involved in an altercation . it was in the immediate aftermath of this that corporal gregory returned with his weapon loaded , and fired up to ten rounds killing sergeant busuttil as he lay in a hammock before turning the weapon on himself . . iraq war ( u.s . forces ) . on 23 march 2003 , in kuwait , sergeant hasan karim akbar cut power to his base , threw four hand grenades into three tents where fellow members of the 101st airborne division were sleeping , and opened fire with his rifle when the personnel ran to take cover . army captain christopher s . seifert and air force major gregory l . stone were killed , and fourteen other soldiers were wounded by shrapnel . akbar was tried by court martial at fort bragg , north carolina , in 2005 . on 21 april 2005 , akbar was found guilty of two counts of premeditated murder and three counts of attempted premeditated murder and was sentenced to death on 28 april . '' akbar convicted of murder '' , fox news '' military 's death row : hasan akbar case '' , abc news captain phillip esposito and 1st lieutenant louis allen were killed on 7 june 2005 as a result of the explosion of a claymore mine placed on esposito 's office window at forward operating base danger in tikrit , iraq . the unit 's supply sergeant was charged with the murder , but was acquitted at court-martial . on 11 may 2009 , sergeant john russell camp liberty killings and shot dead five u.s . military personnel ( u.s . army specialist jacob d . barton , sergeant christian e . bueno-galdos , major matthew p . houseal , private first class michael e . yates , and u.s . navy commander charles k . springle ) . russell pleaded guilty to five counts of premeditated murder and was sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole . royal navy . on 8 april 2011 , during a port visit to southampton , able seaman ryan donovan abandoned his sentry post at the boarding ramp of submarine hms astute , and opened fire with an sa80 rifle on cpos david mccoy and chris brown after they confronted him at the submarine 's weapons locker ; he then forced his way into the control room and opened fire , killing lt cdr ian molyneux and wounding lt cdr christopher hodge before being tackled to the ground by a visiting dignitary , city council leader royston smith , as he reloaded . donovan pleaded guilty to molyneux 's murder and the attempted murders of hodge , brown , and mccoy and was sentenced to life imprisonment with a minimum of 25 years . . see also . 2009 fort hood shooting deaths of phillip esposito and louis allen fratricide friendly fire green on blue attack mutiny united states v . hasan k . akbar . references .