Toronto Islands

history . prior to european colonization , the toronto area was home to various native peoples , including the anishinaabeg ( known also as the ojibwa and mississaugas ) , who were the last to occupy the area . the anishinaabeg , who named the peninsula ( as the entirety of centre island was at the time ) '' menecing '' , brought their sick to the peninsula to recover in its healthful atmosphere . to the descendants of the ojibwa , now the mississaugas of the credit first nation , the toronto islands are sacred land . the toronto purchase of 1787 and 1805 , according to the british , included the islands . the mississaugas , in a land claim settlement process started in 1986 , claimed that the islands were never included . in 2010 , the government of canada and the mississaugas reached a settlement which resulted in a cash payment to the mississaugas from the government of canada . in return , the mississaugas relinquished their claim to the islands . the peninsula and surrounding shoal that now form the toronto islands were first surveyed in 1792 by lieutenant joseph bouchette of the royal navy . d.w . smith 's gazetteer recorded in 1813 that '' the long beach or peninsula , which affords a most delightful ride , is considered so healthy by the indians that they resort to it whenever indisposed '' . many aboriginal encampments were located between the peninsula 's base and the don river . the peninsula was actually a series of many sand spits and ponds . during the 1790s , the british built the first buildings on the island . a blockhouse and storage structures were built at gibraltar point in 1794 . the garrison was known as the blockhouse bay garrison , and it supported the garrison on the mainland . by 1800 , another blockhouse and a guard house were built . these were destroyed in the battle of york . another garrison was built , but it was abandoned by 1823 and demolished in 1833 . the gibraltar point lighthouse was constructed at gibraltar point , the south-western extremity of the peninsula in 1809 . it is perhaps best known for the demise of its first keeper , german-born john paul radelmüller , whose alleged 1815 murder by soldiers from fort york forms the basis of toronto ’ s most enduring ghost story . although the precise circumstances of his death remain a mystery , recent research has verified many aspects of the popular legend . the two soldiers charged with but ultimately acquitted of radelmüller 's murder were john henry and john blueman , both of the glengarry light infantry . the peninsula was first cut off from the mainland to the east by a storm in 1852 , but a breakwater was built and the channel was filled in by silt . however , in 1858 , the peninsula became an island permanently by a violent storm that cut a wide channel . the same storm destroyed two hotels on the island . after the peninsula became an island , the hanlan family were among the first year-round inhabitants , settling at gibraltar point in 1862 . in 1867 , the city of toronto acquired the islands from the federal government , and the land was divided into lots , allowing cottages , amusement areas and resort hotels to be built . the west side of the island became a resort destination for the people of toronto and the first summer cottage community was built there . in 1878 , a hotel was built by john hanlan at the north-west tip of the island and soon after the area became known as hanlan 's point . john 's son , ned hanlan , earned international recognition as a rower before taking over his father 's business . other notable families on the islands include the durnans ( james james durnan was the gibraltar point lighthouse keeper in 1832 ) and wards ( david ward settled on the eastern end in 1830 ) . at the same time as hanlan 's point was developing as a summer suburb of toronto , developments were going on elsewhere on the islands . along the lakefront of centre island , large victorian summer homes were built by toronto 's leading families looking for refuge from the summer heat and drawn by the prestigious royal canadian yacht club , which had moved to a location on the harbour side of centre island in 1881 . by contrast , the ward 's island community began in the 1880s as a tent city . william e . ward built the ward 's hotel and a few houses and rented tents to visitors . the records of the school board indicate that a one-room school existed on donated land near the gibraltar lighthouse in approximately 1888 but it was not necessarily open every day , particularly in winter . the school became permanent in 1896 , though still with a single teacher . after it burned down a new school was built ; there were 52 students in 1909 and by 1954 , a full 630 . as of 2018 , the island public/natural science school operates classes for junior kindergarten to grade 6 , a residential natural science program ( which began in 1960 ) for visiting grade 5 and 6 students and a day care centre for children ages 2 – 5 . in 1899 , there was a colony of eight summer tenants on ward 's island paying 10 rent for the season . by 1913 , the number of tents pitched had increased to the point where the city felt it necessary to organize the community into streets , and the tents eventually evolved into a cottage community . in 1894 , a land reclamation project by the toronto ferry company created space for an amusement park at hanlan 's point . in 1897 , the hanlan 's point stadium was built alongside the amusement park for the toronto maple leaf baseball team . the stadium was rebuilt several times over the years , and in 1914 , babe ruth hit his first professional home run into the waters of lake ontario from this stadium . in the 1920s , the maple leaf team moved to a new stadium on the mainland . from 1915 to 1916 , a temporary wooden hangar see image at aviation technomuses was built at the beach by the curtiss flying school . this floatplane aerodrome was used for flight training for world war i . in 1937 , construction started on a new airport on the site of the park and stadium . the construction of the airport on infill led to the demolition of the stadium and most of the amusement park . it also meant that the cottage community at hanlan 's point needed to be relocated . the residents were given the choice of either moving their cottages further south at hanlan 's point or resettling on algonquin island . originally , algonquin island was simply a sandbar known as sunfish island that was expanded by land reclamation operations . in 1938 , streets were laid out to accommodate 31 cottages that were moved by barge from hanlan 's point . the original aspect of algonquin island was of unvegetated sand , and the current lush environment of the island is the result of many years of work by residents . the airport opened in 1939 , formally named the port george vi island airport , after the reigning monarch of the time . during the first few years of the second world war , expatriate norwegian ( rnaf ) pilots-in-training used the toronto island airport as a training field for both fighter and bomber pilots . several accidents , including one where a pilot under instruction clipped the funnel and mast of the island ferry boat sam mcbride and crashed , leading to the training school being moved north to muskoka , ontario . ( the park on the mainland called little norway park commemorates this period . ) in 1947 , toronto city council approved the year-round occupancy of the islands as an emergency measure , to expire in 1968 . at its peak in the 1950s , the island residential community extended from ward 's island to hanlan 's point and was made up of some 630 cottages and homes , in addition to amenities including a movie theatre , a bowling alley , stores , hotels , and dance halls . not long after its creation in 1953 , metropolitan toronto council undertook to remove the community and replace it with parkland . the construction of the gardiner expressway had removed many acres of recreational land along the toronto waterfront , and the islands lands were to replace the acreage . in 1955 , after the city had transferred the lands to metro , the new metro parks department started to demolish homes and cottages whose lease had expired or whose leaseholders surrendered their leases . in 1959 , the metro parks department opened 'far enough farm ' , and in 1967 , opened the centreville amusement park , along with a new public marina . in 1971 , metro parks opened a new ferry terminal at the foot of bay street . unlike the previous terminal , no waiting room was provided . by 1963 , all islanders willing to leave the island had departed and the remaining islanders started to fight the plans of metro council to remove their homes . while demolitions still proceeded , the islanders ' alderman david rotenberg pushed the islanders ' cause and the number of demolitions dwindled . in 1969 , the toronto islands ' residents association ( tira ) was formed . still , by 1970 only 250 homes , on ward 's and algonquin islands , had escaped the bulldozer . the 1970s saw no further demolitions as the metro parks plans were thwarted by year-to-year leases and the changing of the guard on toronto city council to a group more sympathetic to the islanders . in 1973 , city council voted 17–2 to preserve the community and transfer those lands back to the city . however , metro council remained opposed and the islanders started legal challenges to metro 's plans in 1974 to delay metro 's plans of expropriation . by 1978 , metro council had won several legal battles and had obtained 'writs of possession ' for the 250 homes . at the time , a minority provincial progressive conservative government was in place with both the liberal and ndp opposition parties in favour of the islanders and the islanders appealed to the provincial government , winning more time when the province agreed to act as mediator between the city and islanders and metro . matters came to a head on 28 july 1980 , when a sheriff sent to serve eviction notice to remaining residents was met at the algonquin island bridge by much of the community , whose leaders persuaded the sheriff to withdraw . on july 31 , the community won the right to challenge the 1974 evictions . the islanders lost the challenge . the supreme court ruled that the city had a right to evict them . the province started a formal inquiry headed by barry swadron into the toronto islands . on 18 december 1981 , the province of ontario passed a law legalizing the islanders to stay until 2005 . this kept the lands in metro 's ownership , to be leased to the city who would lease it to the islanders . wrangling over the terms of the lease payments to metro took several years . then , in 1993 , the premier of ontario , bob rae , helped to get legislation passed , the toronto islands residential community stewardship act , ( s.o . 1993 , c . 15 ) , which granted islanders continued deeds to their houses and 99-year leases on the land . a land trust was established to handle any transfers or sales of such properties on the islands . there are 262 residential properties on ward ’ s island and algonquin island as of late 2018 . under the act , the deed to a house may be transferred only to the current owner 's child or spouse . if the house must be sold for personal reasons , and if a child or spouse will not be the new owner , the process is handled by the toronto islands residential community trust corporation . the house and the land lease are sold for the owner 's benefit , but the buyer must be an individual on the 500 person waiting list which was established through a lottery . a firm price is set by the trust ; no bids or negotiation are allowed . this process was intended to eliminate the risk of the homes being sold on the open market , driving up the prices , and prevents a windfall for the owner . . geography . the area of the islands is about . the largest , outermost island , called centre island , is crescent-shaped and forms the shoreline of both the eastern and western channels . algonquin ( sunfish island ) and olympic are two of the other major islands . the former is mostly a residential area and the latter is parkland . what is commonly called ward 's island is actually the eastern end of centre island and like algonquin is a residential area . the centre island dock and centreville amusement park are located on middle island , which as a consequence , is often mistaken for centre island . centre island is sometimes referred to as toronto island ( note the singular form ) to prevent this type of confusion . other smaller islands include : mugg 's island – home to the island yacht club forestry island – heavily forested and no fixed link to other islands snake island – partially forest and beach facing toronto harbour ( snake island park ) ; access from the pedestrian bridge on the south side to centre island south chippewa island – heavily forested and located between snake island and south island south island – used for mooring and on-land storage of boats by the royal canadian yacht club ; east end of the island cut off at chippewa avenue and covered by trees ; a tennis court is located on west end of the island rcyc island – occupied by royal canadian yacht club with clubhouse , moorings and other club facilities ; private pier for rcyc launches kwasind and hiawatha to the mainland two unnamed islands occupy what was once block house bay : a small island ( sometimes called doughnut island ) in long pond ( the former water intake of the city of toronto ) – located across from mugg 's island small island in lighthouse pond sometimes called hanlan 's island the islands were originally a -long peninsula or sand spit extending from the mainland . the islands are composed of alluvial deposits from the erosion of the scarborough bluffs . the flow from the niagara river to the south across lake ontario causes a counter-clockwise east-to-west current which has , over time , deposited sediments at the south end of the harbour to form a sand spit . in 1852 , a storm flooded sand pits on the peninsula , creating a channel east of ward 's island . the channel was widened and made permanent by a violent storm in 1858 . the channel became known as the eastern gap . the peninsula to the west became known as the toronto islands . to the east of the gap , the area of today 's cherry beach was known as '' fisherman 's island '' . sediment deposition to the islands halted in the 1960s when the leslie street spit was extended beyond the southern edge of the islands . left to nature , the islands would diminish over time , but this is limited due to hard shorelines built to limit erosion . over the years , land reclamation has contributed to an increase in the size of the islands . the harbour was shallow with a sandy bottom and the sands were moved by dredging or suction methods . ward 's island was expanded by dredging . today 's algonquin island , formerly known as sunfish island , was created from harbour bottom sands . the area now occupied by the airport has been subject to several landfills over what was once sandy shoal , initially to accommodate the amusement park that preceded the airport , and then to accommodate the airport itself . the western channel to the north of the airport is part of the original western channel , which was just south of today 's fort york . it was opened in 1911 as part of a program to improve boat navigation into the harbour . the airport lands were created from harbour sands in the late 1930s . a series of waterways allow boat traffic to navigate the islands : allan lamport regatta course – located between centre island and middle island from long pond to east end of far enough farm block house bay – located on the east side of hanlan 's point deep pike cut - located on the east side of mugg 's island lighthouse pond – located next to gibraltar point lighthouse long pond – located between allan lamport regatta course and block house bay ; also referred to as kennedy pond in the 1890s snake pond – located between snug harbour and algonquin island snug harbour – located between snake island and olympic island sunfish cut - located between snake island and algonquin island trout pond – located west of lighthouse bay on the south end of hanlan 's point hanlan bay was a waterway that has since been buried under the toronto island airport runways . jim crow pond - filled in by south island ward 's pond - located roughly along the south side of olympic island and south island . climate . the toronto island has a humid continental climate ( dfb ) under the köppen climate classification system . the climate differs from the mainland in that cooler lake waters surrounding the island cool spring , summer and early fall daytime temperatures by 2–3c , on average . in winter , the unfrozen lake waters are sometimes warmer than the air , temperatures are roughly equivalent to the downtown area but warmer than areas further away from the lake . fog and low-clouds are more frequent at the island than on the mainland . nearshore areas of the lake only freeze after a consistent period of sub-freezing weather . the highest temperature ever recorded at toronto island was on 15 june 1919 . the coldest temperature ever recorded was on 13 january 1914 . . bibliography . . further reading . '' toronto island school is vital . '' ( letter ) toronto star . june 29 , 1992 . letter section . jones , frank . '' toronto island school revisited . '' toronto star . may 17 , 1998 . life p . e1 . external links . city of toronto website about the islands toronto island history project toronto islands historical plaque