Hanging

methods of judicial hanging . there are numerous methods of hanging in execution which instigate death either by the fracturing of the spine or by strangulation . short drop . the short drop is a method of hanging performed by placing the condemned prisoner on a raised support such as a stool , ladder , cart , or other vehicle , with the noose around the neck . the support is then moved away , leaving the person dangling from the rope . suspended by the neck , the weight of the body tightens the noose around the neck effecting strangulation and death . this typically takes 10-20 minutes . before 1850 , the short drop was the standard method of hanging , and is still common in suicides and extrajudicial hangings ( such as lynchings and summary executions ) which do not benefit from the specialised equipment and official table of drops used in the newer methods . pole method . a short drop variant is the austro-hungarian '' pole '' method , called würgegalgen ( literally : strangling gallows ) , in which the following steps take place : the condemned is made to stand before a specialized vertical pole or pillar , approximately 3 metres in height . a rope is attached around the condemned 's feet and routed through a pulley at the base of the pole . the condemned is hoisted to the top of the pole by means of a sling running across the chest and under the armpits . a narrow-diameter noose is looped around the prisoner 's neck , then secured to a hook mounted at the top of the pole . the chest sling is released , and the prisoner is rapidly jerked downward by the assistant executioners via the foot rope . the executioner stands on a stepped platform approximately 1.2 metres high beside the condemned , and guides the head downward with his hand simultaneous to the efforts of his assistants . in some countries the executioner would then manually dislocate the condemned 's neck . this method was later also adopted by the successor states , most notably by czechoslovakia ; where the '' pole '' method was used as the single type of execution from 1918 until the abolition of capital punishment in 1990 . nazi war criminal karl hermann frank , executed in 1946 in prague , was among approximately 1,000 condemned people executed in this manner in czechoslovakia . . standard drop . the standard drop involves a drop of between and came into use from 1866 , when the scientific details were published by an irish doctor , samuel haughton . its use rapidly spread to english-speaking countries and those where judicial systems had an english origin . it was considered a humane improvement on the short drop because it was intended to be enough to cervical fracture , causing immediate unconsciousness and rapid brain death . this method was used to execute condemned nazis under united states jurisdiction after the nuremberg trials including joachim von ribbentrop and ernst kaltenbrunner . report by kingsbury smith , international news service , 16 october 1946 . in the execution of ribbentrop , historian giles macdonogh records that : '' the hangman botched the execution and the rope throttled the former foreign minister for 20 minutes before he expired . '' macdonogh g . , '' after the reich '' john murray , london ( 2008 ) p . 450 . a life magazine report on the execution merely says : '' the trap fell open and with a sound midway between a rumble and a crash , ribbentrop disappeared . the rope quivered for a time , then stood tautly straight . '' life magazine , 28 october 1946 : the gallows chamber . long drop . . the careful placement of the eye or knot of the noose ( so that the head was jerked back as the rope tightened ) contributed to breaking the neck . prior to 1892 , the drop was between four and ten feet ( about one to three metres ) , depending on the weight of the body , and was calculated to deliver a force of 1,260 lbf ( 5,600 newtons or 572 kgf ) , which fractured the neck at either the 2nd and 3rd or 4th and 5th cervical vertebrae . this force resulted in some decapitations , such as the infamous case of tom ketchum in new mexico territory in 1901 , owing to a significant weight gain while in custody not having been factored into the drop calculations . between 1892 and 1913 , the length of the drop was shortened to avoid decapitation . after 1913 , other factors were also taken into account , and the force delivered was reduced to about 1,000 & nbsp ; lbf ( 4,400 n or 450 kgf ) . the decapitation of eva dugan during a botched hanging in 1930 led the state of arizona to switch to the gas chamber as its primary execution method , on the grounds that it was believed more humane . '' gruesome death in gas chamber pushes arizona towards injections '' , new york times , 25 april 1992 ( retrieved 7 january 2008 ) . one of the more recent decapitations as a result of the long drop occurred when barzan ibrahim al-tikriti was hanged in iraq in 2007 . accidental decapitation also occurred during the 1962 hanging of arthur lucas , one of the last two people to be put to death in canada . nazis executed under british jurisdiction , including josef kramer , fritz klein , irma grese and elisabeth volkenrath , were hanged by albert pierrepoint using the variable drop method devised by marwood . the record speed for a british long drop hanging was 7 seconds from the executioner entering the cell to the drop . speed was considered to be important in the british system as it reduced the condemned 's mental distress . . as suicide . hanging is a common suicide method . the materials necessary for suicide by hanging are readily available to the average person , compared with firearms or poisons . full suspension is not required , and for this reason , hanging is especially commonplace among suicidal prisoners ( see suicide watch ) . a type of hanging comparable to full suspension hanging may be obtained by self-strangulation using a ligature around the neck and the partial weight of the body ( partial suspension ) to tighten the ligature . when a suicidal hanging involves partial suspension the deceased is found to have both feet touching the ground , e.g . , they are kneeling , crouching or standing . partial suspension or partial weight-bearing on the ligature is sometimes used , particularly in prisons , mental hospitals or other institutions , where full suspension support is difficult to devise , because high ligature points ( e.g . , hooks or pipes ) have been removed . in canada , hanging is the most common method of suicide , and in the u.s . , hanging is the second most common method , after self-inflicted gunshot wounds . in the united kingdom , where firearms are less easily available , in 2001 hanging was the most common method among men and the second most commonplace among women ( after poisoning ) . those who survive a suicide-via-hanging attempt , whether due to breakage of the cord or ligature point , or being discovered and cut down , face a range of serious injuries , including cerebral anoxia ( which can lead to permanent brain damage ) , laryngeal fracture , cervical spine fracture ( which may cause paralysis ) , tracheal fracture , pharyngeal laceration , and carotid artery injury . . as human sacrifice . there are some suggestions that the vikings practiced hanging as human sacrifices to odin , to honour odin 's own sacrifice of hanging himself from the yggdrasil . . hanging by the ribs . in 1713 , juraj jánošík , a semi-legendary slovak outlaw and folk hero , was sentenced to be hanged from his left rib . he was left to slowly die . '' modern-day 'outlaws ' gather to honour jánošík '' . the slovak spectator . 9 july 2012 . the german physician gottlob schober ( 1670–1739 ) , who worked in russia from 1712 , notes that a person could hang from the ribs for about three days prior to expiring , his primary pain being that of extreme thirst . he thought this degree of insensitivity was something peculiar to the russian mentality . the dutch in suriname were also in the habit of hanging a slave from the ribs , a custom amongst the african tribes from whom they were originally purchased . john gabriel stedman stayed in south america from 1772 to 1777 and described the method as told by a witness : stedman , j.g . : '' narrative , of a five years ' expedition '' , vol.1 , london 1813 , p.116 william blake was specially commissioned to make illustrations to stedman 's narrative . honour , hugh ( 1975 ) . the european vision of america cleveland , ohio ; the cleveland museum of art , p.343 . grammar . the proper , traditional past tense and past participle form of the verb '' hang '' , in this sense , is ( to be ) '' hanged '' . oxford english dictionary ( 2015 update ) , oup , oxford , uk some dictionaries list only '' hanged '' , online online whereas others show both forms . for example , '' people are hanged ; meat is hung '' .