1904 in sports

american football . college championship college football national championship – penn quakers professional championships ohio league – massillon tigers western pennsylvania championship – latrobe athletic association events 15 november — canton athletic club ( later renamed the canton bulldogs ) is first established . association football . international world governing body fifa is founded . the football associations of england , scotland , wales and ireland do not join at this time . austria formation of the austrian football association ( österreichischer fußball-bund or öfb ) brazil botafogo de futebol e regatas was founded in rio de janeiro . england the football league – the wednesday 47 points , manchester city 44 , everton 43 , newcastle united 42 , aston villa 41 , sunderland 39 fa cup final – manchester city 1–0 bolton wanderers at crystal palace , london . germany national championship – competition is annulled by the dfb following a protest by karlsruher fv that matches have not been played on neutral grounds as stipulated by the rules . portugal benfica founded in lisbon as the grupo sport lisboa . in 1908 , it merges with sc de benfica to form sport lisboa e benfica ( sl benfica ) . scotland scottish football league – third lanark scottish cup final – celtic 3–2 rangers at hampden park sweden formation of the swedish football association ( svenska fotbollförbundet or svff ) . athletics . michael spring wins the eighth running of the boston marathon . . australian rules football . vfl premiership fitzroy wins the 8th vfl premiership – fitzroy 9.7 ( 61 ) d carlton 5.7 ( 37 ) at melbourne cricket ground ( mcg ) . baseball . world series nl champion new york giants refuses to participate in the 1904 world series . boston americans repeat as american league champions . events 5 may — cy young of boston americans pitches a perfect game , the second of his three no-hitters . he goes on to complete 24 hitless innings , still the record , and 45 scoreless innings , a record broken by jack coombs in 1910 duluth white sox wins the northern league championship . boxing . events 29 april — barbados joe walcott meets dixie kid to defend the world welterweight championship and , though well on top , is disqualified by the referee after 20 rounds for an alleged foul . kid claims the title but it is subsequently discovered that the referee has bet on kid to win and so kid 's claim is widely disregarded . 30 september — walcott meets world lightweight champion joe gans in a non-title fight which is scored a draw after 20 rounds . 17 october — joe bowker ( england ) challenges frankie neil in london for the world bantamweight championship and wins over 20 rounds , the first non-american to hold this title . 31 october — joe gans meets jimmy britt in san francisco to defend the world lightweight championship . britt knocks gans down four times but , after the last one in the fifth round , he hits gans again before he has stood up and is disqualified for the foul . afterwards , gans vacates the title which is awarded to britt . two years later , gans will claim that the fight has been fixed by his and britt 's managers . 31 december — during a new year celebration , walcott accidentally shoots himself in the hand to effectively ending his days as a top prizefighter . while he will return to the ring in 1906 ( losing his welterweight title in the process ) , he never regains his old form and loses most of his subsequent fights . lineal world champions cyber boxing zone world heavyweight championship – james j . jeffries world light heavyweight championship – bob fitzsimmons world middleweight championship – tommy ryan world welterweight championship – barbados joe walcott world lightweight championship – joe gans → jimmy britt world featherweight championship – abe attell world bantamweight championship – frankie neil → joe bowker . cricket . england county championship – lancashire minor counties championship – northamptonshire most runs – tom hayward 3170 54.65 ( hs 203 ) most wickets – j t hearne 145 18.84 ( bb 8–49 ) wisden cricketers of the year – bernard bosanquet , ernest halliwell , james hallows , percy perrin , reggie spooner australia sheffield shield – new south wales most runs – victor trumper 990 55.00 ( hs 185 ) most wickets – wilfred rhodes 65 16.23 ( bb 8–68 ) india bombay presidency – parsees south africa currie cup – transvaal west indies inter-colonial tournament – trinidad and tobago . cycling . tour de france henri cornet ( france ) wins the tour de france . figure skating . world figure skating championships world men 's champion – ulrich salchow ( sweden ) . golf . major tournaments british open – jack white u.s . open – willie anderson other tournaments british amateur – walter travis us amateur – chandler egan . horse racing . england grand national – moifaa 1,000 guineas stakes – pretty polly 2,000 guineas stakes – st . amant the derby – st . amant the oaks – pretty polly st . leger stakes – pretty polly australia melbourne cup – acrasia canada queen 's plate – sapper ireland irish grand national – ascetic 's silver irish derby stakes – royal arch usa kentucky derby – elwood preakness stakes – bryn mawr belmont stakes – delhi . ice hockey . stanley cup january — ottawa hockey club defeats winnipeg rowing club to defend the stanley cup in a cup challenge . february — stanley cup champion ottawa hockey club withdraws from the canadian amateur hockey league ( cahl ) over a demand by the league to replay a game . february — ottawa defeats toronto marlboros in a cup challenge . 2 march — ottawa plays montreal wanderers to a 5–5 tie in a cup challenge , but montreal refuses terms of continuation of series and defaults . march — quebec bulldogs win the cahl championship and demand the stanley cup , but the trustees rule the cup stays with ottawa . quebec refuses to play ottawa in a challenge . march — ottawa defeats the brandon wheat kings 2 games to 0 in a cup challenge . 18 december — dawson city nuggets begin a 4,000 mile journey by dog sled to play the ottawa hockey club in a stanley cup challenge scheduled for 13 january 1905 . motor racing . gordon bennett cup fifth running of the gordon bennett cup takes place in the taunus in germany . the winner is léon théry ( france ) driving a richard-brasier . circuit des ardennes the third circuit des ardennes is run on 25 july over 591.255 & nbsp ; km ( 118.251 & nbsp ; km x 5 laps ) in the vicinity of bastogne . the winner is george heath ( usa ) driving a panhard-levassor 70 & nbsp ; hp in a time of 5:30:49 . vanderbilt cup william kissam vanderbilt ii launches the vanderbilt cup at a course set out in nassau county , new york on long island . it creates controversy in new york with numerous attempts made , including legal action , to try to prevent it taking place . the inaugural race is run over a course of winding dirt roads through nassau county . several european drivers with experience of the gordon bennett cup take part and the event is a huge commercial success . the winner is george heath ( usa ) driving a panhard-levassor 70 & nbsp ; hp . olympic games . 1904 summer olympics the 1904 summer olympics took place in st . louis , missouri , united states . lacrosse was played at the olympics for the first time . the first africans participated in the olympics : two tswana athletes competed at the st . louis games in the marathon . the united states won the most medals ( 239 ) and the most gold medals ( 78 ) . rowing . the boat race 26 march — cambridge wins the 61st the boat race 1904 . rugby league . england championship – bradford fc challenge cup – halifax 8–3 warrington at the willows , salford rugby league county leagues – not contested rugby league county leagues – not contested . rugby union . home nations championship 22nd home nations championship series is won by scotland . speed skating . speed skating world championships men 's all-round champion – sigurd mathisen ( norway ) . tennis . england the championships , wimbledon – laurence doherty ( gb ) defeats frank riseley ( gb ) 6–1 7–5 8–6 the championships , wimbledon – dorothea douglass lambert chambers defeats charlotte cooper sterry 6–0 6–3 france french men 's singles championship – max decugis defeats andré vacherot 6–1 9–7 6–8 6–1 french women 's singles championship – kate gillou defeats françoise masson : details unknown usa us open ( tennis ) – holcombe ward defeats william clothier 10–8 6–4 9–7 us open ( tennis ) – may sutton defeats elisabeth moore 6–1 6–2 davis cup 1904 international lawn tennis challenge – 5–0 at warple road ( grass ) london , united kingdom . references .