Singer-songwriter

definition and usage . '' singer-songwriter '' is used to define popular music artists who write and perform their own material , which is often self-accompanied generally on acoustic guitar or piano . such an artist performs the roles of composer , lyricist , vocalist , sometimes instrumentalist , and often self-manager . according to allmusic , singer-songwriters ' lyrics are often personal but veiled by elaborate metaphors and vague imagery , and their creative concern is to place emphasis on the song rather than their performance of it . most records by such artists have a similarly straightforward and spare sound that placed emphasis on the song itself . the term has also been used to describe songwriters in the rock , folk , country , and pop music genres including henry russell , aristide bruant , hank williams , and buddy holly . it came into popular usage in the 1960s onwards to describe songwriters who followed particular stylistic and thematic conventions , particularly lyrical introspection , confessional songwriting , mild musical arrangements , and an understated performing style . according to writer larry david smith , because it merged the roles of composer , writer , and singer , the popularity of the singer-songwriter reintroduced the medieval troubadour tradition of '' songs with public personalities '' after the tin pan alley era in american popular music . song topics of singer-songwriters from the american folk music revival include political protest , as in the case of woody guthrie and pete seeger . according to the journal of popular music studies , from the folk revival and onward into its permeance in pop music , the role of a singer-songwriter has involved several dimensions of creative identity : . chanson , the french tradition . french '' chanson '' comes from an old tradition , since the middle ages . it is driven by the rhythms of the french language and has a generally higher standard of lyrics than in the english-speaking world . it can be distinguished from the rest of french '' pop '' music or soft rock format that began to spread in france during the 1960s until today , under the cultural influence of anglo-american rock music and the rock band era . the first modern french singer-songwriter was charles trenet , who began his solo career in 1938 . he was the first to use jazz rhythms in chanson . he would remain an isolated act until the creative blooming of a new generation during the post-war ( mid-1940s and 1950s ) , where such artists as léo ferré , georges brassens , félix leclerc ( from quebec ) , serge gainsbourg , jacques brel ( from belgium ) , henri salvador ( from french guiana ) , charles aznavour , and barbara appeared , with contrasted and rich imagination . most of them are recognized as great masters by younger generations of french artists , especially ferré ( for the richness of his lyrics , his melodic genius , his critical density on social issues and his body of work 's profoundness ) and gainsbourg ( for the bright and tasteful adaptation of pop or rock music with french language-driven rhythms ) . during the 1960s and 1970s , the most prominent singer-songwriters included claude nougaro , jean ferrat , boby lapointe , michel polnareff , nino ferrer , christophe , albert marcœur , bernard lavilliers , frédérik mey and jacques higelin , amongst others . cantautori , the italian tradition . cantautori ( italian plural ; the singular is cantautore ) is the italian expression corresponding to singer-songwriters in english . the word is a portmanteau of cantante ( singer ) and autore ( writer ) . the first internationally renowned cantautore was domenico modugno with his song '' volare ( song ) '' , a huge best seller in 1958 ; other early cantautori , who begun their career in the late 50s , are gino paoli , luigi tenco , umberto bindi , giorgio gaber and enzo jannacci . fabrizio de andré , lucio battisti and francesco guccini began their career in the 60s , while edoardo bennato , lucio dalla , francesco de gregori , franco battiato , rino gaetano , ivano fossati , antonello venditti , claudio baglioni , pino daniele , roberto vecchioni , angelo branduardi and eugenio finardi all appeared in the 70s . their songs are still popular today , often telling stories of marginalized ( de andré , guccini , dalla ) and rebellious people ( finardi , de gregori , venditti ) , or having a political background ( venditti , guccini ) . branduardi was instead much more influenced by medieval and baroque musical styles , while his lyrics are usually inspired by ancient fables . battiato started as a progressive rock and cultivated music artist in the 1970s , shifting to an original blend of pop , electronic , new wave , and world music in the 1980s . the neapolitan cantautore pino daniele has often fused genres as diverse as r & b , fusion , blues , pop , jazz , and tarantella to produce a sound uniquely his own , with lyrics variously in italian , neapolitan , or english . similarly paolo conte was often tagged as a cantautore , but was more into the jazz tradition . in the 1980s vasco rossi was renowned for his blend of blues-tinged rock music mixed with italian melodies . he was nicknamed the '' only italian rockstar '' ( l'unica rockstar italiana ) by his fans . with a mixture between international sounds and italian lyrics , in the 2000s bugo become the '' fantautore '' , a neologism conied for him . despite not having achieved great fame , he is considered the pioneer of the renewal of italian songwriting , far from the politicized of the 70s . in the last 25 years the genre has been mainly represented by samuele bersani , caparezza , and the so-called 2nd roman school of cantautori ( max gazzè , niccolò fabi , daniele silvestri ) . the word has been borrowed into other languages , including spanish , portuguese , and catalan cantautor , french chantauteur , maltese kantawtur , romanian cantautor , and slovenian kantavtor . iberian-latin american traditions . beginning in the 1960s and following the italian cantautori style of the 1950s ( like the one of domenico modugno ) , many latin american countries developed singer-songwriter traditions that adopted elements from various popular styles . the first such tradition was the mid-1960s invention of nueva canción , which took hold in andean countries like chile , peru , argentina and bolivia . at around the same time , the brazilian popular style bossa nova was evolving into a politically charged singer-songwriter tradition called tropicalismo . two performers , gilberto gil and caetano veloso became two of the most famous people in all of brazil through their work in tropicalismo . after world war ii it was developed in italy a very prolific singer-songwriter ( in italian cantautore ) tradition , initially connected with the french school of the chansonniers , and lately developed very heterogeneously . although the term cantautore normally implies consistent sociopolitical content in lyrics , noteworthy performers in a more inclusive singer-songwriter categorization are : domenico modugno , luigi tenco , gino paoli , sergio endrigo , fabrizio de andré , francesco de gregori , antonello venditti , roberto vecchioni , ivano fossati , lucio dalla , francesco guccini and franco battiato . in neighbouring malta , the main singer-songwriters are walter micallef , manwel mifsud and vince fabri . they all perform in maltese . spain and portugal have also had singer-songwriter traditions , which are sometimes said to have drawn on latin elements . catalonia is known for the nova cançó tradition – exemplified by joan manuel serrat and lluis llach ; the portuguese folk/protest singer and songwriter josé afonso helped lead a revival of portuguese folk culture , including a modernized , more socially aware form of fado called nova canção . following portugal 's carnation revolution of 1974 , nova canção became more politicized and was known as canto livre . another important spain singer-songwriters are joaquín sabina , josé luis perales and luis eduardo aute . in the latter part of the 1960s and into the 1970s , socially and politically aware singer-songwriters like silvio rodríguez and pablo milanés emerged in cuba , birthing a genre known as nueva trova . trova as a genre has had broad influence across latin america . in mexico , for example , canción yucateca on the yucatán peninsula and trova serrana in the sierra juárez , oaxaca are both regional adaptations of trova . today , guatemalan ricardo arjona qualifies as latin america 's most commercially successful singer-songwriter . although sociopolitical engagement is uneven in his oeuvre , some see arjona 's more engaged works as placing him in the tradition of the italian cantautori . in the mid-1970s , a singer-songwriter tradition called canto popular emerged in uruguay . with the influence of tropicalismo , traditional samba and bossa nova , mpb ( música popular brasileira ) , or brazilian popular music , became highly singer-songwriter based . for years solo artists would dominate brazilian popular music with romantic cynicism alla jobim or subliminal anti-government messages alla chico buarque . after the end of the military dictatorship in brazil , brazilian music became less politically and socially conscious . the censored raul seixas or the humorous spiritualist jorge ben were slowly obscured by funk carioca , axé music and disco . in recent years , however , a new stock of socially conscious brazilian singer-songwriters is beginning to break the almost strictly dance-music momentum that has reigned since the 1980s ( see the 'brazilian folk/folk-rock sub-article in brazilian music ) . soviet union and russia . since the 1960s , those singers who wrote songs outside the soviet establishment have been known as '' bards '' . the first songs traditionally referred to as bard songs are thought to be written in the late 1930s and early 1940s , and the very existence of the genre is traditionally originated from the amateur activities of the soviet intelligentsia , namely mass backpacking movement and the students ' song movement of the 1950s and 1960s . many bards performed their songs in small groups of people using a russian guitar , rarely if ever would they be accompanied by other musicians or singers . though , bards using piano or accordion are also known . those who became popular held modest concerts . the first nationwide-famous bards ( starting their career in the 1950s ) are traditionally referred to as the first five : mikhail ancharov , alexander gorodnitsky , novella matveyeva , bulat okudzhava , yuri vizbor . in the 1960s , they were joined by vladimir vysotsky , victor berkovsky , yuliy kim , and many others . in the course of the 1970s , the shift to the classical 6-string guitar took place , and now , a russian guitar is a rare bird with the bards . in the same period , the movement of ksp ( kluby samodeyatelnoy pesni – amateur song fan clubs ) emerged , providing the bards with highly educated audience , and up to the end of the 1980s being their key promotion engine . bards were rarely permitted to record their music , partly given the political nature of many songs , partly due to their vague status in the strictly organised state-supported show business establishment of the ussr . as a result , bard tunes usually made their way around as folk lore , from mouth to mouth , or via the copying of amateur recordings ( sometimes referred as magnitizdat ) made at concerts , particularly those songs that were of political nature . bard poetry differs from other poetry mainly in the fact that it is sung along with a simple guitar melody as opposed to being spoken . another difference is that this form of poetry focuses less on style and more on meaning . this means that fewer stylistic devices are used , and the poetry often takes the form of narrative . what separates bard poetry from other songs is the fact that the music is far less important than the lyrics ; chord progressions are often very simple and tend to repeat from one bard song to another . on the other hand , in the ussr the chief bard supporter was the state union of composers , and the main bard hater was the state union of writers . a far more obvious difference was the commerce-free nature of the genre : songs were written to be sung and not to be sold . the similar genre dominated by singers-songwriters is known as sung poetry in other post-soviet countries . bulgaria . singer-songwriters are popular in bulgaria under the name '' bards '' , or '' poets with guitars '' . their tradition is a mixture of traditional folk motifs , city folklore from the early 20th century , and modern influences . in the 1960s , 1970s , and 1980s , the communist regime in the country started to tolerate the bulgarian '' bards '' , promoting the so-called '' political songs '' , performed usually by one-man bands . a national festival tradition was established , under the title '' alen mak '' ( red poppy ) , a symbol with strong communist meaning in bulgaria . at the same time , there were some prominent underground figures which were against the official communist party line , such as angel '' jendema '' angelov , yavor '' yavkata '' rilov , and velizar '' valdes '' vankov . after the collapse of communism in 1989 , the singer-songwriters ' tradition was re-established . currently , the bulgarian '' bards '' enjoy several festivals ( local and international ) per year , namely the poki festival ( poets with guitars , poetic strings ) in the town of harmanli , the bardfest in lovech , the sofia evenings of singer-songwriters , and others . major figures in the bulgarian tradition are dimitar taralezhkov , angel '' jendema '' angelov , yavor '' yavkata '' rilov , velizar '' valdes '' vankov , dimitar dobrev , andro stubel , branimir '' bunny '' stoykov , dorothea tabakova , mihail belchev , assen maslarski , grisha trifonov , plamen stavrev , vladimir levkov , margarita drumeva , maria batchvarova , plamen sivov , and krasimir parvanov . romania . despite the communism isolation , the tradition of the singer-songwriter in romania flourished beginning with the end of the 1960s and it was put in the context of folk music , with its three main styles in romania : ethno folk , american-style folk and lyrical ( cult ) folk . the framework for many of these initiatives came under the form of cenaclul flacăra , a series of mass cultural events with an inevitable ideological touch . still , with the merit of supporting great opening initiatives : the appropriation of western artists like bob dylan , joan baez and others from the woodstock generation , the public performance of gospel-like music , the opening to big international issues ( pop culture , accountability of the leadership , tension surging during the cold war-with surprisingly neutral positions etc . ) . overall , the romanian folk , in general , could be marked as an underground cultural movement , somewhere between non-aligned and protest music . liedermacher , the german tradition . rooted in the european bänkelsang ( '' bench-singing '' ) and moritat traditions while also taking immediate inspiration from the french chanson scene and the american folk music revival , the 1960s and 1970s saw the emergence of a whole generation of german-language singer-songwriters called liedermacher ( '' songmakers '' ) , among them hannes wader , franz josef degenhardt , reinhard mey and konstantin wecker from west germany , wolf biermann from east germany as well as ludwig hirsch and georg danzer from austria . with regards to content and style , the liedermacher spectrum ranges from political balladeering to rather observational storytelling and love songs . the lyrics often deal with topics such as social injustice , militarism , consumerism , environmental issues or the repercussions of the nazism , often expressing technoskepticism and anti-establishment views . huff , hartmut : liedermacher , ( 1980 ) , munich : heyne ; henke , matthias : die großen chansonniers und liedermacher ( 1987 ) , düsseldorf : econ . . sweden . in the mid-1960s , sweden witnessed the renaissance of the '' trubadur '' , the swedish version of the singer-songwriter . cornelis vreeswijk and fred åkerström were particularly influential in their efforts to blend the heritage of the '' visa '' ( a specific way to render simple stanzaic poems or songs , given distinction by artists such as carl michael bellman and evert taube ) with modern approaches to balladeering . alf björnberg , thomas bossius , eds . , made in sweden : studies in popular music , ( 2016 ) , new york : routledge , pp . 53–4 . . netherlands . ede staal ( warffum ) ( 1941–1986 ) , was a dutch singer-songwriter from the northern province of groningen who sang mainly in the groninger dialect of dutch .