USS Thresher (SSN-593)

alternative theory of the sinking : electrical failure . on 8 april 2013 , bruce rule , an acoustic data expert , published his own analysis of the data collected by uss skylark and atlantic sosus arrays in a paper '' what sank the thresher '' , bruce rule , 10 april 2013 in the navy times . '' 50 years later , a look at what really sank the thresher '' , bruce rule and norman polmar , 4 april 2013 ( navy times link ) '' what sank the thresher '' , bruce rule and norman polmar , 8 april 2013 rule based his analysis on sosus data that was highly classified in 1963 and was not discussed in open session of the court of inquiry and was not revealed at the congressional hearings . a retired navy captain and former commanding officer of the same class of submarine as thresher , citing rule 's findings , has called for the u.s . government to declassify the data associated with the boat 's sinking , and presented an alternative disaster sequence based upon the acoustic data . rule concluded that the primary cause of the sinking was a failure of the electrical bus that powered the main coolant pumps . according to rule , sosus data indicates that after two minutes of electrical instability , the bus failed at 09:11 & nbsp ; a.m . , causing the main coolant pumps to trip off . this caused an immediate reactor scram , resulting in a loss of propulsion . thresher could not be deballasted because ice had formed in the high-pressure air pipes , and so she sank . rule 's analysis holds that flooding ( whether from a silver brazed joint or anywhere else ) played no role in the reactor scram or the sinking , and that thresher was intact until she imploded . in addition to the sosus data that does not record any sound of flooding , the crew of skylark did not report hearing any noise that sounded like flooding , and skylark was able to communicate with thresher , despite the fact that , at test depth , even a small leak would have produced a deafening roar . additionally , the previous commander of thresher testified that he would not have described flooding , even from a small-diameter pipe , as a '' minor problem '' . rule interprets the communication '' 900 '' from thresher at 09:17 & nbsp ; a.m . as a reference to test depth , signifying that thresher was below her test depth of , or below sea level . according to rule the sosus data indicates an implosion of thresher at 09:18:24 , at a depth of , below her predicted collapse depth . the implosion took 0.1 seconds , too fast for the human nervous system to perceive . . subsafe legacy . when the court of inquiry delivered its final report , it recommended that the navy implement a more rigorous program of design review and safety inspections during construction . that program , launched in december 1963 , was known as subsafe . from 1915 to 1963 , the u.s . navy lost a total of 16 submarines to non-combat accidents . since the inception of subsafe only one submarine has suffered a similar fate , and that was , which sank in 1968 for reasons still undetermined . scorpion was not subsafe certified . . memorials . permanent . the chapel at portsmouth navy yard , where the submarine was built , was renamed thresher memorial chapel . in portsmouth , new hampshire , there is a stone memorial with a plaque honoring all who were lost on thresher . it is outside the museum . just outside the main gate of the naval weapons station , seal beach , california , a thresher–scorpion memorial honors the crews of the two submarines . in eureka , missouri , there is a marble stone at the post office on thresher drive honoring the '' officers and crew of the uss thresher , lost 10 april 1963 . '' park board minutes 04-10-2007 ( pdf file ) salisbury , massachusetts , named robert e . steinel memorial park in honor of thresher crewman and salisbury resident sonarman first class robert edwin steinel . in nutley , new jersey , there is a monument to thresher crewmember pervis robison , jr . in denville , new jersey , there is a monument to thresher crewmember robert d . kearney at the gardner field recreation area . thresher avenue , named for the submarine , serves a residential area in naval base kitsap in washington state . a flagpole at kittery memorial circle in the town of kittery , maine , was dedicated on 7 april 2013 , the 50th anniversary of the loss of thresher , to honor the 129 lost souls . there is also a thresher monument in memorial park next to the kittery town hall . there is a memorial monument to the submariners lost in the thresher and scorpion located on point pleasant road in mount pleasant , south carolina . naval submarine base new london in groton , connecticut , named an enlisted barracks '' thresher hall '' after the submarine , and mounted a plaque in its lobby displaying the names of the crew members , shipyard government employees and contractors that were lost . a joint resolution was introduced during the 107th united states congress in 2001 calling for the erection of a memorial in arlington national cemetery . the formal commemorative monument approval process for arlington , which began in 2012 , received final approval in january 2019 . the memorial was approved on january 28 , 2019 , by the secretary of the army , mark esper . while a few crew members already had memorials at arlington , this became the first tribute there to the boat 's entire crew and her other passengers . the memorial was dedicated on september 26 , 2019 . ; former in carpentersville , illinois , the dundee township park district named a swimming facility ( now closed and demolished ) in honor of thresher . . other . on 12 april 1963 , president john f . kennedy issued paying tribute to the crew of thresher by ordering all national flags to half-staff . five folk music groups or artists have produced songs memorializing thresher ; '' ballad of the thresher '' , by the kingston trio , '' the thresher disaster '' , by tom paxton ; '' the thresher '' , by phil ochs , '' the thresher '' , by pete seeger , and '' thresher '' , by shovels & rope . the fear-makers , an episode in the 1964 season of the television series voyage to the bottom of the sea is inspired by the loss of the uss thresher . anthony wilson , a writer for the series , was fascinated by the loss of the uss thresher , and he wrote a teleplay for the series . in wilson 's teleplay , the submarine , the seaview , searches for a missing submarine , the polidor . . see also . ship characteristics board uss thresher loss deep submergence rescue vehicle , the only other american nuclear-powered submarine to be lost at sea john p . craven , a key individual in the search for thresher kursk submarine disaster , next largest loss of life on a submarine list of sunken nuclear submarines list of lost united states submarines . footnotes . references . one of the earliest and most comprehensive accounts of the loss of the thresher was written by vice admiral e.w . grenfell , commander submarine force atlantic , and published in march 1964 in the u.s . navy 's professional journal proceedings ; on 1 april 2013 , on the occasion of the 50th anniversary , the u.s . naval institute has re-posted admiral grenfell 's detailed account : loss of uss thresher thresher–scorpion memorial world war ii national submarine memorial & nbsp ; – west world war ii national submarine memorial & nbsp ; – east first published 1964 ; reissued in 2001 by lyons press ( guilford , conn ) as the death of the uss thresher mccoole 's statement re : shutting main steam valves during reactor scram . further reading . u.s . atlantic fleet . staff , deputy commander submarine force . ( 1964 ) united states ship thresher ( ssn 593 ) : in memoriam 10 april 1963 . u.s . navy atlantic fleet . no available isbn . threshers ship number 593 is interesting as a '' good '' prime number , as discussed at 593 . external links . on eternal patrol : uss thresher photo gallery of thresher at navsource.org memorial video on youtube