Aluminium hydroxide

structure . al ( oh ) 3 is built up of double layers of hydroxyl groups with aluminium ions occupying two-thirds of the octahedral holes between the two layers . four polymorphs are recognized . all feature layers of octahedron aluminium hydroxide units , with hydrogen bonds between the layers . the polymorphs differ in terms of the stacking of the layers . all forms of al ( oh ) 3 crystals are hexagonal : gibbsite is also known as γ-al ( oh ) 3 or α-al ( oh ) 3 bayerite is also known as α-al ( oh ) 3 or β-alumina trihydrate citation needed nordstrandite is also known as al ( oh ) 3 doyleite hydrargillite , once thought to be aluminium hydroxide , is an aluminium phosphate . nonetheless , both gibbsite and hydrargillite refer to the same polymorphism of aluminium hydroxide , with gibbsite used most commonly in the united states and hydrargillite used more often in europe . hydrargillite is named after the greek words for water and clay . properties . aluminium hydroxide is amphoteric . in acid , it acts as a brønsted–lowry base . it neutralizes the acid , yielding a salt : : 3 hcl + al ( oh ) 3 → alcl 3 + 3 h 2 o in bases , it acts as a lewis acid by binding hydroxide ions : : al ( oh ) 3 + oh − → al ( oh ) 4 − . production . virtually all the aluminium hydroxide used commercially is manufactured by the bayer process which involves dissolving bauxite in sodium hydroxide at temperatures up to . the waste solid , bauxite tailings , is removed and aluminium hydroxide is precipitated from the remaining solution of sodium aluminate . this aluminium hydroxide can be converted to aluminium oxide or alumina by calcination . the residue or bauxite tailings , which is mostly iron oxide , is highly caustic due to residual sodium hydroxide . it was historically stored in lagoons ; this led to the ajka alumina plant accident in 2010 in hungary , where a dam bursting led to the drowning of nine people . an additional 122 sought treatment for chemical burns . the mud contaminated of land and reached the danube . while the mud was considered non-toxic due to low levels of heavy metals , the associated slurry had a ph of 13 . . uses . fire retardant filler . aluminium hydroxide also finds use as a fire retardant filler for polymer applications . it is selected for these applications because it is colorless ( like most polymers ) , inexpensive , and has good fire retardant properties . magnesium hydroxide and mixtures of huntite and hydromagnesite are used similarly it decomposes at about , absorbing a considerable amount of heat in the process and giving off water vapour . in addition to behaving as a fire retardant , it is very effective as a smoke suppressant in a wide range of polymers , most especially in polyesters , acrylics , ethylene vinyl acetate , epoxies , pvc and rubber . . precursor to al compounds . aluminium hydroxide is a feedstock for the manufacture of other aluminium compounds : speciality calcined aluminas , aluminium sulfate , polyaluminium chloride , aluminium chloride , zeolites , sodium aluminate , activated alumina , and aluminium nitrate . freshly precipitated aluminium hydroxide forms gels , which are the basis for the application of aluminium salts as flocculants in water purification . this gel crystallizes with time . aluminium hydroxide gels can be dehydrated ( e.g . using water-miscible non-aqueous solvents like ethanol ) to form an amorphous aluminium hydroxide powder , which is readily soluble in acids . heating converts it to activated aluminas , which are used as desiccants , adsorbent in gas purification , and catalyst supports . . pharmaceutical . under the generic name '' algeldrate '' , aluminium hydroxide is used as an antacid in humans and animals ( mainly cats and dogs ) . it is preferred over other alternatives such as sodium bicarbonate because al ( oh ) 3 , being insoluble , does not increase the ph of stomach above 7 and hence , does not trigger secretion of excess acid by the stomach . brand names include alu-cap , aludrox , gaviscon or pepsamar . it reacts with excess acid in the stomach , reducing the acidity of the stomach content , which may relieve the symptoms of ulcers , heartburn or dyspepsia . such products can cause constipation , because the aluminium ions inhibit the contractions of smooth muscle cells in the gastrointestinal tract , slowing peristalsis and lengthening the time needed for stool to pass through the colon . some such products are formulated to minimize such effects through the inclusion of equal concentrations of magnesium hydroxide or magnesium carbonate , which have counterbalancing laxative effects . this compound is also used to control hyperphosphatemia ( elevated phosphate , or phosphorus , levels in the blood ) in people and animals suffering from kidney failure . normally , the kidneys filter excess phosphate out from the blood , but kidney failure can cause phosphate to accumulate . the aluminium salt , when ingested , binds to phosphate in the intestines and reduce the amount of phosphorus that can be absorbed . precipitated aluminium hydroxide is included as an adjuvant in some vaccines ( e.g . anthrax vaccine ) . one of the well-known brands of aluminium hydroxide adjuvant is alhydrogel , made by brenntag biosector . since it absorbs protein well , it also functions to stabilize vaccines by preventing the proteins in the vaccine from precipitating or sticking to the walls of the container during storage . aluminium hydroxide is sometimes called '' alum '' , a term generally reserved for one of several sulfates . vaccine formulations containing aluminium hydroxide stimulate the immune system by inducing the release of uric acid , an immunological danger signal . this strongly attracts certain types of monocytes which differentiate into dendritic cells . the dendritic cells pick up the antigen , carry it to lymph nodes , and stimulate t cells and b cells . it appears to contribute to induction of a good th2 response , so is useful for immunizing against pathogens that are blocked by antibodies . however , it has little capacity to stimulate cellular ( th1 ) immune responses , important for protection against many pathogens , nor is it useful when the antigen is peptide-based . . safety . in the 1960s and 1970s it was speculated that aluminium was related to various neurological disorders , including alzheimer 's disease . since then , multiple epidemiology studies have found no connection between exposure to environmental or swallowed aluminium and neurological disorders , though injected aluminium was not looked at in these studies . . references . external links . international chemical safety card 0373 '' some properties of aluminum hydroxide precipitated in the presence of clays '' , soil research institute , r c turner , department of agriculture , ottawa effect of ageing on properties of polynuclear hydroxyaluminum cations a second species of polynuclear hydroxyaluminum cation , its formation and some of its properties