Frederick III of Sicily

name . although the second frederick of sicily , he chose to call himself '' frederick iii '' ( being one of the rare medieval monarchs who actually used a regnal number ) & nbsp ; & ndash ; presumably because only some fifty years before , his well-known and remembered great-grandfather had reigned sicily and also used an official ordinal : fridericus secundus , imperator etc . thus , fridericus tertius was better in line with the precedent of his ancestor 's ordinal . however , an anecdote attributes frederick 's choice of numeral to him being the third son of peter . the next man called frederick to occupy the sicilian throne was dubbed by later generations of historians as frederick iii : frederick iii the simple , though he himself did not use an ordinal . biography . early years . frederick was born in barcelona to peter iii of aragon and constance of sicily , daughter of king manfred of sicily . when his father died in 1285 , he left the kingdom of aragon to his eldest son , alfonso , and that of sicily to his second son , james . when alfonso died in 1291 , james became king of aragon and left frederick as regent in sicily . the war between the angevins , who contested the title to sicily from their peninsular possessions centred on naples ( the so-called kingdom of naples ) , and the crown of aragon for the possession of the island was still in progress , and although the crown of aragon was successful in italy , james ’ position in spain became very insecure due to internal troubles and france attacks . peace negotiations were begun with charles ii of naples , but were interrupted by the successive deaths of two popes . at last , under the auspices of pope boniface viii , james concluded a shameful treaty , by which , in exchange for being left undisturbed in the rest of the territories belonging to the crown of aragon and promised possession of sardinia and corsica , he gave up sicily to the church , for whom it was to be held by the angevins ( treaty of anagni , 10 june 1295 ) . the sicilians refused to be made over once more to the hated french they had expelled in 1282 ( in the sicilian vespers ) , and found a national leader in the regent frederick . in vain the pope tried to bribe him with promises and dignities ; he was determined to stand by his subjects , and was crowned king by the nobles at palermo in 1296 . when frederick heard that james was preparing to go to war with him , he sent a messenger , mountainer pérez de sosa , to catalonia in an effort to stir up the barons and cities against james in 1298 . riquer , 1687 & ndash ; 1688 . mountainer carried with him an occitan poem , ges per guerra no.m chal aver consir , intended as a communication with his supporters in catalonia . this communiqué seems to have had in mind ponç hug as a recipient , for the count penned a response ( under the title con d'empuria ) , a l'onrat rei frederic terz vai dir , in which he praised frederick 's tact and diplomacy , but told him bluntly that he would not abandon his sovereign . this poetic transaction is usually dated to january & ndash ; march , spring , or august 1296 , but gerónimo zurita in the seventeenth century specifically dated the embassy of mountainer to 1298 . reign . frederick reformed the administration and extended the powers of the sicilian parliament , which was composed of the barons , the prelates , and the representatives of the towns . his refusal to comply with the pope 's injunctions led to a renewal of the war . frederick landed in calabria , where he seized several towns , encouraged revolt in naples , negotiated with the ghibellines of tuscany and lombardy , and assisted the house of colonna against pope boniface . in the meanwhile james , who received many favours from the church , married his sister yolanda to robert , the third son of charles ii . unfortunately for frederick , a part of the catalan-aragonese nobles of sicily favoured king james , and both john of procida and roger of lauria , the heroes of the war of the vespers , went over to the angevins , and the latter completely defeated the sicilian fleet off capo d'orlando . charles 's sons robert and philip landed in sicily , but after capturing catania were defeated by frederick , philip being taken prisoner ( 1299 ) , while several calabrian towns were captured by the sicilians . for two years more the fighting continued with varying success , until charles of valois , who had been sent by boniface to invade sicily , was forced to sue for peace , his army being decimated by the plague . in august 1302 the treaty of caltabellotta was signed , by which frederick was recognized king of trinacria ( the name sicily was not to be used ) for his lifetime , and was to marry eleanor of anjou , daughter of charles ii of naples and maria arpad of hungary . at frederick 's death , the kingdom was to revert to the angevins ( this clause was inserted chiefly to allow charles to save face ) and frederick 's children would receive compensation elsewhere . boniface tried to induce king charles to break the treaty , but the latter was only too anxious for peace . finally , in may 1303 , the pope ratified the treaty , albeit with changes and additions , which included frederick agreeing to pay him a tribute . for a few years sicily enjoyed peace , and the kingdom was reorganized . however , on the descent of the emperor henry vii , holy roman emperor into italy , frederick entered into an alliance with him , and in violation of the pact of caltabellotta made war on the angevins again ( 1313 ) and captured reggio . he set sail for tuscany to cooperate with the emperor , but on the latter 's death he returned to sicily . robert , who had succeeded charles ii in 1309 , made several raids into the island , which suffered much material injury . a truce was concluded in 1317 , but as the sicilians had helped the north italian ghibellines in the attack on genoa , and frederick had seized some church revenues for military purposes , pope john xxii excommunicated him and placed the island under an interdict ( 1321 ) which lasted until 1335 . an angevin fleet and army , under robert 's son charles , was defeated at palermo by giovanni da chiaramonte in 1325 , and in 1326 and 1327 there were further angevin raids on the island , until the descent into italy of the next holy roman emperor louis the bavarian distracted their attention . the election of pope benedict xii ( 1334 ) , who was friendly to frederick , promised a respite ; but after fruitless negotiations the war broke out once more , and chiaramonte went over to robert , owing to a private feud . in 1337 frederick died at paternò , and in spite of the peace of caltabellotta his son peter ii of sicily succeeded him . family . from his marriage ( 1303 ) with eleanor of anjou were born : peter ( 1304–1342 ) , successor roger ( 1305–died young ) . manfred ( 1306–1317 ) , duke of athens and neopatria constance ( 1307 & nbsp ; – after 19 june 1344 ) , married in 1317 to henry ii of cyprus ; on 29 december 1331 to leo v of armenia ; and in 1343 to john of lusignan , brother of peter i of cyprus . she died childless . elisabeth ( 1310–1349 ) , married ( 1328 ) stephen ii of bavaria william ( 1312–1338 ) , prince of taranto , duke of athens and neopatria john ( 1317–1348 ) , duke of randazzo , duke of athens and neopatria , regent of sicily ( from 1338 ) catherine ( 1320–1342 ) , abbess of santa chiara at messina . margaret ( 1331–1377 ) , married ( 1348 ) rudolf ii of the palatinate to his mistress sibilla sormella was born : alfonso fadrique ( 1294–1334 ) , regent of athens and neopatria roland ( 1296–1361 ) . elisabeth ( 1297–1341 ) , married firstly ponce maugalin , count of ampurias and secondly ramon de peralta , count of caltabellota . eleanor ( 1298– ? ) , married juan de chiarmonte , count of modica . sancho ( 1300–1334 ) , married lucia palizzi and had issue : vinciguerra d'aragona grand chancellor of sicily , count of novara & cammarata , baron of militello & san marco , lord of termini ; his son was bartolomeo d'aragona . sanchiolo ; his son was mattiotto . notes . sources . bozzo , s.v . note storiche siciliano del secolo xiv . palermo , 1882 . riquer , martín de . los trovadores : historia literaria y textos . 3 vol . barcelona : planeta , 1975 .