Rosetta (spacecraft)

instruments . nucleus . the investigation of the nucleus was done by three optical spectrometers , one microwave radio antenna and one radar : alice ( an ultraviolet imaging spectrograph ) . the ultraviolet spectroscopy searched for and quantified the noble gas content in the comet nucleus , from which the temperature during the comet creation could be estimated . the detection was done by an array of potassium bromide and caesium iodide photocathodes . the instrument used 2.9 watts , with an improved version onboard new horizons . it operated in the extreme and far ultraviolet spectrum , from . alice was built and operated by the southwest research institute for nasa 's jet propulsion laboratory . osiris ( optical , spectroscopic , and infrared remote imaging system ) . the camera system had a narrow-angle lens ( 700 & nbsp ; mm ) and a wide-angle lens ( 140 & nbsp ; mm ) , with a 2048×2048 pixel ccd chip . the instrument was constructed in germany . development and construction of the instrument was led by the max planck institute for solar system research ( mps ) . virtis ( visible and infrared thermal imaging spectrometer ) . the visible and ir spectrometer was able to make pictures of the nucleus in the ir and also search for ir spectra of molecules in the coma . the detection was done by a mercury cadmium telluride array for ir and with a ccd chip for the visible spectrum range . the instrument was produced in italy , and improved versions were used for dawn and venus express . miro ( microwave instrument for the rosetta orbiter ) . the abundance and temperature of volatile substances like water , ammonia and carbon dioxide could be detected by miro via their microwave emissions . the radio antenna along with the rest of the instrument was built by nasa 's jet propulsion laboratory with international contributions by the max planck institute for solar system research ( mps ) , among others . consert ( comet nucleus sounding experiment by radiowave transmission ) . the consert experiment provided information about the deep interior of the comet using radar . the radar performed tomography of the nucleus by measuring electromagnetic wave propagation between the philae lander and the rosetta orbiter through the comet nucleus . this allowed it to determine the comet 's internal structure and deduce information on its composition . the electronics were developed by france and both antennas were constructed in germany . development was led by the laboratoire de planétologie de grenoble with contributions by the ruhr-universität boch and the max planck institute for solar system research ( mps ) . rsi ( radio science investigation ) . rsi made use of the probe 's communication system for physical investigation of the nucleus and the inner coma of the comet . . gas and particles . rosina ( rosetta orbiter spectrometer for ion and neutral analysis ) . the instrument consisted of a double-focus sector instrument ( dfms ) and a reflectron type time of flight ( rtof ) . the dfms had a high resolution ( could resolve nitrogen from co ) for molecules up to 300 amu . the rtof was highly sensitive for neutral molecules and for ions . the max planck institute for solar system research ( mps ) has contributed to the deveplopment and construction of the instrument . rosina was developed at the university of bern in switzerland . midas ( micro-imaging dust analysis system ) . the high-resolution atomic force microscopy investigated several physical aspects of the dust particles which are deposited on a silicon plate . cosima ( cometary secondary ion mass analyser ) . cosima analysed the composition of dust particles by secondary ion mass spectrometry , using indium ions . it could detect ions up to a mass of 6500 & nbsp ; amu . cosima was built by the max planck institute for extraterrestrial physics ( mpe , germany ) with international contributions . the cosima team is led by the max planck institute for solar system research ( mps , germany ) . giada ( grain impact analyser and dust accumulator ) . giada analysed the dust environment of the comet coma by measuring the optical cross section , momentum , speed and mass of each grain entering inside the instrument . . solar wind interaction . rpc ( rosetta plasma consortium ) . . search for organic compounds . previous observations have shown that comets contain complex organic compounds . these are the elements that make up nucleic acids and amino acids , essential ingredients for life as we know it . comets are thought to have delivered a vast quantity of water to earth , and they may have also seeded earth with organic molecules . rosetta and philae also searched for organic molecules , nucleic acids ( the building blocks of dna and rna ) and amino acids ( the building blocks of proteins ) by sampling and analysing the comet 's nucleus and coma cloud of gas and dust , helping assess the contribution comets made to the abiogenesis on earth . before succumbing to falling power levels , philae cosac instrument was able to detect organic molecules in the comet 's atmosphere . ; amino acids upon landing on the comet , philae should have also tested some hypotheses as to why essential amino acids are almost all '' left-handed '' , which refers to how the atoms arrange in orientation in relation to the carbon core of the molecule . most asymmetrical molecules are oriented in approximately equal numbers of left- and right-handed configurations ( chirality ) , and the primarily left-handed structure of essential amino acids used by living organisms is unique . one hypothesis that will be tested was proposed in 1983 by william a . bonner and edward rubenstein , stanford university professors emeritus of chemistry and medicine respectively . they conjectured that when spiralling radiation is generated from a supernova , the circular polarisation of that radiation could then destroy one type of '' handed '' molecules . the supernova could wipe out one type of molecules while also flinging the other surviving molecules into space , where they could eventually end up on a planet . . preliminary results . the mission has yielded a significant science return , collecting a wealth of data from the nucleus and its environment at various levels of cometary activity . the virtis spectrometer on board the rosetta spacecraft has provided evidence of nonvolatile organic macromolecular compounds everywhere on the surface of comet 67p with little to no water ice visible . preliminary analyses strongly suggest the carbon is present as polyaromatic organic solids mixed with sulfides and iron-nickel alloys . solid organic compounds were also found in the dust particles emitted by the comet ; the carbon in this organic material is bound in '' very large macromolecular compounds '' , analogous to those found in carbonaceous chondrite meteorites . however , no hydrated minerals were detected , suggesting no link with carbonaceous chondrites . in turn , the philae lander 's cosac instrument detected organic molecules in the comet 's atmosphere as it descended to its surface . measurements by the cosac and ptolemy instruments on the philae lander revealed sixteen organic compounds , four of which were seen for the first time on a comet , including acetamide , acetone , methyl isocyanate and propionaldehyde . the only amino acid detected thus far on the comet is glycine , along with the precursor molecules methylamine and ethylamine . one of the most outstanding discoveries of the mission was the detection of large amounts of free molecular oxygen gas surrounding the comet . . timeline of major events and discoveries . ; 2004 2 march – rosetta was successfully launched at 07:17 utc ( 04:17 local time ) from kourou , french guiana . ; 2005 4 march – rosetta executed its first planned close swing-by ( gravity assist passage ) of earth . the moon and the earth 's magnetic field were used to test and calibrate the instruments on board of the spacecraft . the minimum altitude above the earth 's surface was . 4 july – imaging instruments on board observed the collision between the comet tempel 1 and the impactor of the deep impact mission . ; 2007 25 february – mars flyby . 8 november – catalina sky survey briefly misidentified the rosetta spacecraft , approaching for its second earth flyby , as a newly discovered asteroid . 13 november – second earth swing-by at a minimum altitude of , travelling at . ; 2008 5 september – flyby of asteroid 2867 šteins . the spacecraft passed the main-belt asteroid at a distance of and the relatively slow speed of . ; 2009 13 november – third and final swing-by of earth at . ; 2010 16 march – observation of the dust tail of asteroid p/2010 a2 . together with observations by hubble space telescope it could be confirmed that p/2010 & nbsp ; a2 is not a comet , but an asteroid , and that the tail most likely consists of particles from an impact by a smaller asteroid . 10 july – flew by and photographed the asteroid 21 lutetia . ; 2014 may to july – starting on 7 may , rosetta began orbital correction manoeuvres to bring itself into orbit around 67p . at the time of the first deceleration burn rosetta was approximately away from 67p and had a relative velocity of + ; by the end of the last burn , which occurred on 23 july , the distance had been reduced to just over with a relative velocity of + . in total eight burns were used to align the trajectories of rosetta 67p with the majority of the deceleration occurring during three burns : delta-v of on 21 may , on 4 june , and on 18 june . 14 july – the osiris on-board imaging system returned images of comet 67p which confirmed the irregular shape of the comet . 6 august – rosetta arrives at 67p , approaching to and carrying out a thruster burn that reduces its relative velocity to . commences comet mapping and characterisation to determine a stable orbit and viable landing location for philae . 4 september – the first science data from rosetta alice instrument was reported , showing that the comet is unusually dark in ultraviolet wavelengths , hydrogen and oxygen are present in the coma , and no significant areas of water-ice have been found on the comet 's surface . water-ice was expected to be found as the comet is too far from the sun to turn water into vapour . 10 september 2014 – rosetta enters the global mapping phase , orbiting 67p at an altitude of . 12 november 2014 – philae lands on the surface of 67p . 10 december 2014 – data from the rosina mass spectrometers show that the ratio of heavy water to normal water on comet 67p is more than three times that on earth . the ratio is regarded as a distinctive signature , and the discovery means that earth 's water is unlikely to have originated from comets like 67p . ; 2015 14 april 2015 – scientists report that the comet 's nucleus has no magnetic field of its own . 2 july 2015 – scientists report that active pits , related to sinkhole collapses and possibly associated with outbursts , have been found on the comet . 11 august 2015 – scientists release images of a comet outburst that occurred on 29 july 2015 . 28 october 2015 – scientists publish an article in nature reporting high levels of dioxygen around 67p . november 2014 to december 2015 – rosetta escorted the comet around the sun and performed riskier investigations . ; 2016 27 july 2016 – esa switched off the electrical support system processor unit ( ess ) aboard rosetta , disabling any possibility of further communications with the philae lander . 2 september 2016 - rosetta photographs the philae lander for the first time after its landing , finding it wedged against a large overhang . 30 september 2016 - mission ended in an attempt to slow land on the comet 's surface near a wide pit called deir el-medina . the walls of the pit contain wide so-called '' goose bumps '' , believed to represent the building blocks of the comet . although philae sent back some data during its descent , rosetta has more powerful and more varied sensors and instruments , offering the opportunity to get some very close-in science to complement the more distant remote sensing it has been doing . the orbiter descended more slowly than philae did . . public image . once upon a time . cartoon . as part of the european space agency 's media campaign in support of the rosetta mission , both the rosetta and philae spacecraft were given anthropomorphic personalities in an animated web series titled once upon a time . the series depicts various stages in the rosetta mission , involving the personified rosetta and philae on '' a classic road trip story into the depths of our universe '' , complemented with various visual gags presented in an educational context . produced by animation studio design & data gmbh , the series was initially conceived by the esa as a four-part fantasy-like series with a sleeping beauty theme that promoted community involvement in rosettas wake up from hibernation in january 2014 . after the success of the series , however , the esa commissioned the studio to continue producing new episodes in the series throughout the course of the mission . a total of twelve videos in the series were produced from 2013 to 2016 , with a 25-minute compilation of the series released in december 2016 , after the end of the mission . in 2019 , design & data adapted the series into a 26-minute planetarium show that was commissioned by the swiss museum of transport , and solicited to eighteen planetariums across europe , with an aim '' to inspire the young generation to explore the universe . '' the rosetta and philae characters featured in once upon a time . , designed by esa employee and cartoonist carlo palazzari , became a central part of public image of the rosetta mission , appearing in promotional material for the mission such as posters and merchandise , and often credited as a major factor in the popularity of the mission among the public . esa employees also role-played as the characters on twitter throughout the course of the mission . the characters were inspired by the jaxa 's '' kawaii '' characters , whom portrayed a number of their spacecraft , such as hayabusa2 and akatsuki , with distinct anime-like personalities . the script for each episode of the series is written by science communicators at the european space research and technology centre , who kept close with mission operators and the producers at design & data . canonically , rosetta and philae are depicted as siblings , with rosetta being the older sister , inspired by the spacecraft 's feminine name , of philae , her younger brother . the giotto spacecraft is also depicted as the duo 's grandfather , whereas others in the halley armada as well as nasa 's deep impact and stardust spacecraft are depicted as their cousins . . ambition . to promote the spacecraft 's arrival at comet 67p/churyumov–gerasimenko and the landing of philae in 2014 , a short film was produced by the european space agency with polish visual effects production company platige image . titled ambition , the film , shot in iceland , stars irish actor aidan gillen , known for his roles in game of thrones and the wire , and irish actress aisling franciosi , also of game of thrones fame , and was directed by oscar-nominated polish director tomasz bagiński . set in the far future , ambition centers around a discussion between a master , played by gillen , discussing the importance of ambition with his apprentice , played by franciosi , using the rosetta mission as an example of such . ambition was premiered at the british film institute 's sci-fi : days of fear and wonder film festival in london on 24 october 2014 , three weeks before the landing of philae on 67p/churyumov–gerasimenko . british science fiction author and former esa employee alastair reynolds spoke about the film 's message at the premiere , stating to the audience that '' our distant descendants may look back to rosetta with the same sense of admiration that we reserve for , say , columbus or magellan . '' the film 's conception was the result of the bfi 's inquiry to the esa for a contribution to their celebration of science fiction , with the esa taking the opportunity to promote the rosetta mission through the festival . critical reception of the film upon its premiere was mostly positive . tim reyes of universe today complimented the titular theme of ambition in the film , stating that it '' shows us the forces at work in and around esa '' , and that the it '' might accomplish more in 7 minutes than gravity did in 90 . '' ryan wallace of ibt media also gave praise to the film , writing , '' whether you 're a sci-fi fanatic , or simply an interested humble astronomer , the short clip will undoubtedly give you a new view of our solar system , and the research out there in space today . '' . media coverage . the entire mission was featured heavily in social media , with a facebook account for the mission and both the satellite and the lander having an official twitter account portraying a personification of both spacecraft . the hashtag '' cometlanding '' gained widespread traction . a livestream of the control centres was set up , as were multiple official and unofficial events around the world to follow philae landing on 67p . on 23 september 2016 , vangelis released the studio album rosetta in honour of the mission , which was used on 30 september in the '' rosetta 's final hour '' streaming video of the esa livestream event '' rosetta grand finale '' . . gallery . file : chasing a comet - the rosetta mission.webm about rosetta mission ( 9 min . , 1080p hd , english ) file : landing on a comet - the rosetta mission.webm about philae landing ( 10 min . , 1080p hd , english )