Radiative cooling

terrestrial radiative cooling . mechanism . infrared radiation can pass through dry , clear air in the wavelength range of 8–13 & nbsp ; µm . materials that can absorb energy and radiate it in those wavelengths exhibit a strong cooling effect . materials that can also reflect 95 % or more of sunlight in the 200 nanometres to 2.5 & nbsp ; µm range can exhibit cooling even in direct sunlight . . earth 's energy budget . the earth-atmosphere system uses radiative cooling to emit long-wave ( infrared ) radiation to balance the absorption of short-wave ( visible light ) energy from the sun . convective transport of heat , and evaporative transport of latent heat are both important in removing heat from the surface and distributing it in the atmosphere . pure radiative transport is more important higher up in the atmosphere . diurnal and geographical variation further complicate the picture . the large-scale circulation of the earth 's atmosphere is driven by the difference in absorbed solar radiation per square meter , as the sun heats the earth more in the tropics , mostly because of geometrical factors . the atmospheric and oceanic circulation redistributes some of this energy as sensible heat and latent heat partly via the mean flow and partly via eddies , known as cyclones in the atmosphere . thus the tropics radiate less to space than they would if there were no circulation , and the poles radiate more ; however in absolute terms the tropics radiate more energy to space . nocturnal surface cooling . radiative cooling is commonly experienced on cloudless nights , when heat is radiated into space from the surface of the earth , or from the skin of a human observer . the effect is well-known among amateur astronomers . the effect can be experienced by comparing skin temperature from looking straight up into a cloudless night sky for several seconds , to that after placing a sheet of paper between the face and the sky . since outer space radiates at about a temperature of 3 kelvins ( −270 degrees celsius or −450 degrees fahrenheit ) , and the sheet of paper radiates at about 300 kelvins ( room temperature ) , the sheet of paper radiates more heat to the face than does the darkened cosmos . the effect is blunted by earth 's surrounding atmosphere , and particularly the water vapor it contains , so the apparent temperature of the sky is far warmer than outer space . the sheet does not block the cold ; instead , the sheet reflects heat to the face and radiates the heat of the face that it just absorbed . the same radiative cooling mechanism can cause frost or black ice to form on surfaces exposed to the clear night sky , even when the ambient temperature does not fall below freezing . kelvin 's estimate of the earth 's age . the term radiative cooling is generally used for local processes , though the same principles apply to cooling over geological time , which was first used by kelvin to estimate the age of the earth ( although his estimate ignored the substantial heat released by radioisotope decay , not known at the time , and the effects of convection in the mantle ) . astronomy . radiative cooling is one of the few ways an object in space can give off energy . in particular , white dwarf stars are no longer generating energy by fusion or gravitational contraction , and have no solar wind . so the only way their temperature changes is by radiative cooling . this makes their temperature as a function of age very predictable , so by observing the temperature , astronomers can deduce the age of the star . . applications . nocturnal ice making in early india and iran . in india before the invention of artificial refrigeration technology , ice making by nocturnal cooling was common . the apparatus consisted of a shallow ceramic tray with a thin layer of water , placed outdoors with a clear exposure to the night sky . the bottom and sides were insulated with a thick layer of hay . on a clear night the water would lose heat by radiation upwards . provided the air was calm and not too far above freezing , heat gain from the surrounding air by convection was low enough to allow the water to freeze . a similar technique was used in iran . . architecture . cool roofs combine high solar reflectance with high thermal emittance , thereby simultaneously reducing heat gain from the sun and increasing heat removal through radiation . radiative cooling thus offers potential for passive cooling for residential and commercial buildings . traditional building surfaces , such as paint coatings , brick and concrete have high emittances of up to 0.96 . consequently , they radiate heat into the sky to passively cool buildings at night . if made sufficiently reflective to sunlight , these materials can also achieve radiative cooling during the day . the most common radiative coolers found on buildings are white cool-roof paint coatings , which have solar reflectances of up to 0.94 , and a thermal emittances of up to 0.96 . the solar reflectance of the paints arises from optical scattering by the dielectric pigments embedded in the polymer paint resin , while the thermal emittance arises from the polymer resin . however , because typical white pigments like titanium dioxide and zinc oxide absorb ultraviolet radiation , the solar reflectances of paints based on such pigments do not exceed 0.95 . in 2014 , researchers developed the first daytime radiative cooler using a multi-layer thermal photonic structure that selectively emits long-wave infrared into space , and can achieve 5 & nbsp ; °c sub-ambient cooling under direct sunlight . later researchers developed paintable porous polymer coatings , whose pores scatter sunlight to give solar reflectance of 0.96-0.99 and thermal emittance of 0.97 . in experiments under direct sunlight , the coatings achieve 6 & nbsp ; °c sub-ambient temperatures and cooling powers of 96 w/m 2 . other notable radiative cooling strategies include dielectric films on metal mirrors , and polymer or polymer composites on silver or aluminum films . silvered polymer films with solar reflectances of 0.97 and thermal emittance of 0.96 , which remain 11 & nbsp ; °c cooler than commercial white paints under the mid-summer sun , were reported in 2015 . researchers explored designs with dielectric silicon dioxide or silicon carbide particles embedded in polymers that are translucent in the solar wavelengths and emissive in the infrared . in 2017 , an example of this design with resonant polar silica microspheres randomly embedded in a polymeric matrix , was reported . the material is translucent to sunlight and has infrared emissivity of 0.93 in the infrared atmospheric transmission window . when backed with silver coating , the material achieved a midday radiative cooling power of 93 w/m 2 under direct sunshine along with high-throughput , economical roll-to-roll manufacturing . heat shields . high emissivity coatings that facilitate radiative cooling may be used in heat shield ( rtps ) in spacecraft and hypersonic aircraft . in such heat shields a high emissivity material , such as molybdenum disilicide ( mosi 2 ) is applied on a thermally insulating ceramic substrate in such heat shields high levels of total emissivity , typically in the range 0.8 - 0.9 , need to be maintained across a range of high temperatures . planck 's law dictates that at higher temperatures the radiative emission peak shifts to lower wavelengths ( higher frequencies ) , influencing material selection as a function of operating temperature . in addition to effective radiative cooling , radiative thermal protection systems should provide damage tolerance and may incorporate self-healing functions through the formation of a viscos glass at high temperatures . see also . heat shield optical solar reflector , used for thermal control of spacecraft passive cooling radiative forcing stefan-boltzmann law albedo urban heat island urban thermal plume . references .