Janet Malcolm

background and personal . malcolm was born in prague in 1934 , one of two daughters—the other is the author marie winn—of a psychiatry father ( josef wiener a.k.a . joseph a . winn ) and hanna ( née taussig ) . she has resided in the united states since her family emigrated from czechoslovakia in 1939 . malcolm was educated at the university of michigan and lives in new york city . her first husband , donald malcolm , reviewed books for the new yorker in the 1950s and 1960s . her second husband , whom she wed in 1975 , was long-time new yorker editor gardner botsford who died at age 87 in september , 2004 . early malcolm book jackets report her '' living in new york with her husband and daughter . '' her daughter is also mentioned in the text of the crime of sheila mcgough . masson case . articles written by malcolm , published in the new yorker and in malcolm 's subsequent book in the freud archives , triggered a 10 million legal challenge by psychoanalyst jeffrey moussaieff masson , the former project director for the freud archives . in his 1984 lawsuit , masson claimed that malcolm had libelled him by fabricating quotations attributed to him ; these quotes , masson contended , had brought him into disrepute . malcolm claimed that masson had called himself an '' intellectual gigolo '' , and that he had slept with over 1,000 women . she also claimed that he said he wanted to turn the freud estate into a haven of '' sex , women and fun '' ; and claimed that he was , '' after freud , the greatest analyst that ever lived . '' malcolm was unable to produce all the disputed material on tape . the case was partially adjudicated before the supreme court , which held , against malcolm , that the case could go forward for trial by jury . after a decade of proceedings , a jury finally decided in malcolm 's favor on november 2 , 1994 , on the grounds that , whether or not the quotations were genuine , more evidence would be needed to rule against malcolm . in august 1995 , malcolm claimed to have discovered a misplaced notebook containing three of the disputed quotes . as reported in the new york times , the author '' declared in an affidavit under penalty of perjury that the notes were genuine . '' . the journalist and the murderer . the thesis of the journalist and the murderer is contained in its first sentence : '' every journalist who is not too stupid or too full of himself to notice what is going on knows that what he does is morally indefensible . '' malcolm , janet , the journalist and the murderer , new york : knopf , 1990 . malcolm 's example was the popular non-fiction writer joe mcginniss , author of the selling of the president 1968 , among others ; while researching his non-fiction , true crime book fatal vision , mcginniss lived with the defense team of former green beret doctor jeffrey macdonald , then on trial for the 1970 murders of his two daughters and pregnant wife . in the published fatal vision , mcginniss concluded that macdonald was a sociopath and had been unbalanced by amphetamines when he slew his family . mcginniss drew upon the work of the social critic christopher lasch to construct a portrait of macdonald as a '' pathological narcissist '' . malcolm , the journalist and the murderer , pp . 28 , 72-3 . malcolm contended that mcginniss was pressed into this strategy for professional and structural reasons — by macdonald 's '' lack of vividness '' malcolm , p.68 as a real-life character who would be carrying the book . '' as every journalist will confirm , '' malcolm writes , malcolm , pps . 71-3 . macdonald 's uninterestingness is not unusual at all . when a journalist fetches up against someone like him , all he can do is flee and hope that a more suitable subject will turn up soon . in the macdonald-mcginniss case we have an instance of a journalist who apparently found out too late that the subject of his book was not up to scratch — not a member of the wonderful race of auto-fictionalizers , like joseph mitchell 's joe gould and truman capote 's perry smith , on whom the '' non-fiction novel '' depends for its life . the solution that mcginniss arrived at for dealing with macdonald 's characterlessness was not a satisfactory one , but it had to do . per malcolm , it was to conceal this deficit that mcginniss quoted liberally from lasch 's 1979 study the culture of narcissism . this , to her , was a professional sin . mcginniss 's moral sin , his '' indefensible '' act in her view , was to pretend to a belief in macdonald 's innocence , long after he 'd become convinced of the man 's guilt . malcolm 's book created a sensation when in march 1989 it appeared in two parts in the new yorker magazine . scardino , albert , the new york times . '' ethic , reporters and the new yorker '' , march 21 . 1989 . '' janet malcolm , a staff writer for the new yorker , returned her magazine to the center of the long-running debate over ethics in journalism this month . her declarations provoked outrage among authors , reporters and editors , who rushed last week to distinguish themselves from the journalists miss malcolm was describing . '' roundly criticized upon first publication , see friendly , fred w . , the new york times book review , '' was trust betrayed ? '' , february 25 , 1990 , and lehmann-haupt , christopher , the new york times , '' deception and journalism : how far to go for the story '' , february 22 , 1990 . the book is still controversial , although it has come to be regarded as a classic , according to douglas mccollum . mccollum , douglas , columbia journalism review , '' you have the right to remain silent '' , january , february , 2003 . it ranks ninety-seventh in the modern library 's list of the twentieth century 's '' 100 best works of nonfiction '' . mccollum wrote in the columbia journalism review , '' in the decade after malcolm 's essay appeared , her once controversial theory became received wisdom . '' . psychoanalysis : the impossible profession . the freud scholar peter gay wrote of malcolm 's study of the modern psychoanalysis profession , '' janet malcolm 's witty and wicked psychoanalysis : the impossible profession has been praised by psychoanalysts ( with justice ) as a dependable introduction to analytic theory and technique . it has the rare advantage over more solemn texts of being funny as well as informative '' . peter gay , freud : a life for our times ( london 1988 ) p . 763 in his 1981 new york times review , joseph edelson wrote that psychoanalysis : the impossible profession '' is an artful book . it succeeds in part because miss malcolm brings to her work a keen eye for the surfaces - clothing , speech and furniture - that express character and social role . ( she is the photography critic for the new yorker ) . it succeeds because she has instructed herself so carefully in the technical literature . above all , it succeeds because she has been able to engage aaron green in a simulacrum of the psychoanalytic encounter - he confessing to her , she ( i suspect ) to him , the two of them joined in an intricate minuet of revelation . '' . public reputation . malcolm 's penchant for controversial subjects and tendency to insert her beliefs and opinions into her narratives has brought her both admirers and critics . '' leaning heavily on the techniques of psychoanalysis , she probes not only actions and reactions but motivations and intent ; she pursues literary analysis like a crime drama and courtroom battles like novels , '' wrote cara parks in the new republic . parks praised malcolm 's '' intensely intellectual style '' as well as her '' sharpness and creativity . '' but in esquire , tom junod characterized malcolm as '' a self hater whose work has managed to speak for the self-hatred ( not to mention the class issues ) of a profession that has designs on being 'one of the professions ' but never will be . '' junod found her to be devoid of '' journalistic sympathy '' and observed , '' very few journalists are more animated by malice than janet malcolm . '' he concluded that malcolm is both '' self-serving '' and '' utterly full of shit . '' . works . non-fiction . psychoanalysis : the impossible profession ( 1981 ) in the freud archives ( 1984 ) the journalist and the murderer ( 1990 ) silent woman ( book ) ( 1994 ) the crime of sheila mcgough ( 1999 ) reading chekhov : a critical journey ( 2001 ) two lives : gertrude and alice ( 2007 ) iphigenia in forest hills : anatomy of a murder trial ( 2011 ) . essay collections . diana & nikon : essays on the aesthetic of photography ( 1980 ) the purloined clinic : selected writings ( 1992 ) , which contains the essays '' a girl of the zeitgeist '' and '' the window washer '' forty-one false starts : essays on artists and writers ( 2013 ) nobody 's looking at you : essays ( 2019 ) . photography . burdock ( 2008 ) . awards and honors . 2008 pen/jacqueline bograd weld award for biography , two lives : gertrude and alice 2013 national book critics circle award ( criticism ) shortlist for forty-one false starts . references . sources . janet malcolm by craig seligman , salon.com , february 29 , 2000 . external links . nothing but the truth ? the lives they lived : kurt eissler , b . 1908 ; keeper of freud 's secrets , by janet malcolm , published : january 2 , 2000 malcolm archive from the new york review of books janet malcom papers . yale collection of american literature , beinecke rare book and manuscript library .