1991 in music

specific locations . 1991 in british music 1991 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1991 in country music 1991 in heavy metal music 1991 in hip hop music 1991 in latin music 1991 in jazz . events . summary . although the year 1991 is the year that grunge music made its popular breakthrough , heavy metal was still the dominant form of rock music for the year . so , nirvana 's nevermind , led by the surprise hit single '' smells like teen spirit '' , was not the most popular u.s . album of the year . that award goes to heavy metal band metallica and their self-titled 'black ' album . nirvana 's success was eventually followed by other grunge bands like pearl jam , soundgarden , in 1992 by alice in chains and stone temple pilots , grunge climbed the u.s . charts for the next few years . its success eventually ended the reign of the glam metal and other hard rock groups that enjoyed massive success in the 1980s like mötley crüe , poison , warrant , cinderella , and ratt whose sales were still going strong by 1991 . also during the year , the rock band guns n ' roses 's popularity flourished with the release of their albums use your illusion i & use your illusion ii , both selling over 15 million copies total . def leppard 's next album adrenalize , released in march 1992 , would go on to reach multi-platinum status and prove to be the last major commercial success for 1980s glam metal . a tribe called quest 's low end theory is released this year ; it would go on to be considered one of the best hip hop albums of the 1990s . a tribe called quest , along with de la soul , dream warriors , gang starr and the poor righteous teachers , help define what comes to be known as alternative rap with important releases this year . on 24 november , queen frontman freddie mercury died . mercury was at home in london on 24 november , due to aids complications . rumors had been circulating that mercury had aids and he confirmed it to the press a day before his death , but the death comes as a shock to millions of fans and the music industry . the remaining members of queen form the mercury phoenix trust and the following year , a tribute concert is staged in wembley stadium . a sell-out crowd in attendance witness the three surviving members reuniting to play along with performances by the likes of david bowie , elton john , guns n ' roses , def leppard , metallica , annie lennox , and george michael . queen 's '' bohemian rhapsody '' goes to number one for the second time in the u.k . , which is one of the few times a single has gone to number one in the same version more than once ( another example is chubby checkers ' '' the twist , '' which was no . 1 in 1960 & 1962 ) . it is also the only time a single has gone to number one more than once on the uk christmas charts . it has now spent a total of 14 weeks on top of the uk charts . during the year , billboard magazine started using nielsen soundscan for its sales source for the music charts . nielsen soundscan began tracking sales data for nielsen on 1 march 1991 . the 25 may issue of billboard published billboard 200 and country album charts based on soundscan '' piece count data , '' and the first hot 100 chart to debut with the system was released on 30 november 1991 . previously , billboard tracked sales by calling stores across the u.s . and asking about sales – a method that was inherently error-prone and open to outright fraud . indeed , while transitioning from the calling to tracking methods , the airplay and sales charts ( already monitored by nielsen ) and the hot 100 ( then still using the calling system ) often did not match ( for instance paula abdul 's '' promise of a new day '' and roxette 's '' fading like a flower '' reached much higher hot 100 peaks than their actual sales and airplay would have allowed them to ) . although most record company executives conceded that the new method was far more accurate than the old , the chart 's volatility and its geographical balance initially caused deep concern , before the change and the market shifts it brought about were accepted across the industry . tower records , the country 's second-largest retail chain , was originally not included in the sample because its stores are equipped with different technology to measure sales . at first , some industry executives complained that the new system – which relied on high-tech sales measurement rather than store employee estimates – was based on an inadequate sample , one that favored established and mainstream acts over newcomers . 1991 is also the year ccm , or contemporary christian music , reaches a new peak . amy grant , who had already crossed back and forth between ccm and contemporary pop in the mid-80s , achieves her first solo no . 1 hit on the pop charts with the hit single '' baby baby , '' becoming the first single by a ccm artist to reach no . 1 ( despite the fact the song was a pop song and was void of any christian references ) . another single , '' that 's what love is for , '' would also top the charts , this time in the adult contemporary field . meanwhile , grant 's album heart in motion reaches no . 11 on the pop chart and no . 1 on the christian chart despite its non-religious objective , and quickly becomes a best-seller . another ccm crossover artist in 1991 is michael w . smith , who achieves a top ten pop hit with his single '' place in this world . '' the subsequent album , go west young man , is also a hit . jon gibson 's hit '' jesus loves ya '' still holds the record as the longest playing hit single in christian music history . the track spent eleven weeks at no . 1 and became the top selling ccm single of 1991 . only three artists received more airplay on christian radio stations in that year other than gibson ; amy grant , michael w . smith and bebe & cece winans . the massive success of garth brooks in this year sets the stage for the mid-1990s influx of pop-oriented country musicians . in addition , several soon-to-be pivotal bands form or release debuts , including dave matthews band , live , phish , spin doctors and stoner metal ( kyuss , sleep , the obsessed ) . massive attack 's blue lines , while unique at the time , pioneers the sound that would eventually become known as trip hop . entombed 's clandestine and dismember 's like an ever flowing stream are early releases from the scandinavian metal scene . on the other side of the atlantic , new york death metal band suffocation release their debut full-length effigy of the forgotten , often considered one of the most influential extreme metal albums ever recorded . trance music rises to prominence in the underground dance scene of frankfurt , germany , pioneered by such producers as dance 2 trance and resistance d . u2 release their seventh album achtung baby , considered by many of their fans to be their best album . metallica also release their most commercially successful metallica ( album ) , and the red hot chili peppers break through to the mainstream with their critically and commercially acclaimed blood sugar sex magik . r.e.m . release their massive commercial breakthrough album out of time . 1991 also brought us the revolutionary sailing the seas of cheese , the first release of a primus album on a major label . when it came to music , 1991 was one of the most successful years of the 1990s . january–march . 15 january – a new all-star rendition of the john lennon song '' give peace a chance '' is released , featuring yoko ono , lenny kravitz , peter gabriel , alannah myles , tom petty , bonnie raitt and many more , billed as '' the peace choir '' . the single has been rushed to market in response to the imminent gulf war . 16 january – the sixth annual rock and roll hall of fame induction ceremony is held in new york . the event goes forward despite a tense atmosphere due to the president 's announcement of the gulf war the same evening . the inductees are ike & tina turner , jimmy reed , john lee hooker , lavern baker , the byrds , the impressions , wilson pickett and howlin ' wolf . 18 january – three people are crushed to death during an ac/dc concert in salt lake city , utah , when audience members rush the stage . 18–27 january – the massive nine-day festival rock in rio ii is held in rio de janeiro , brazil . the headliners are a-ha , prince , inxs , guns n ' roses , new kids on the block , george michael and happy mondays . 19 january – janet jackson with seventh single from janet jackson 's rhythm nation 1814 , '' love will never do ( without you ) '' , making her the only artist to have seven singles from the same album chart in the top five . 27 january – whitney houston sings '' the star-spangled banner '' at the super bowl . the recording is then released and becomes a hit single . 31 january – dj magazine is founded . 5 february – queen release their final album while freddie mercury is still alive , entitled innuendo . this album includes hit singles such as the show must go on , headlong , these are the days of our lives and innuendo . 20 february – the 33rd annual grammy awards are presented in new york , hosted by garry shandling . quincy jones ' back on the block wins album of the year , phil collins ' '' another day in paradise '' wins record of the year and bette midler 's version of '' from a distance '' wins song of the year . mariah carey wins best new artist . 27 february – james brown is granted an early parole and released from jail , following his arrest after a high-speed car chase through two states in 1989 . pop will eat itself documented the affair with their song , '' not now james , we 're busy '' . 28 february – hollywood 's record plant studios recording studio closes down . among the albums recorded at the record plant were the eagles ' hotel california , fleetwood mac 's rumours and stevie wonder 's songs in the key of life . 1 march – nielsen soundscan began tracking sales data for nielsen . 11 march – janet jackson signs a us 30 million contract with virgin records , making her the highest paid female recording artist ever . 12 march – r.e.m . release their seventh studio album , out of time . the album would serve as the band 's breakthrough , catapulting the georgia alternative rock band from cult status to a massive international act . 16 march – seven members of country music singer reba mcentire 's band and her road manager are killed when their private plane crashes in california , near the u.s.-mexico border . mcentire travels on a separate plane . 20 march michael jackson signs a contract with sony for 1 billion dollars . eric clapton 's four-year-old son , conor , dies after falling 49 stories from a new york city apartment window , which would inspire clapton to write the hit single '' tears in heaven '' . 24 march – the black crowes are dropped as the opening act of zz top 's tour for repeatedly insulting the tour 's sponsor , miller beer . 27 march – new kids on the block star donnie wahlberg is arrested in louisville , kentucky for allegedly setting his hotel room on fire . 28 march – george harrison , phil collins and others attend funeral services for eric clapton 's late son , conor . april–june . 17 april – nirvana performs the demo of '' smells like teen spirit '' at the ok hotel in seattle , washington . 28 april – bonnie raitt marries actor michael o'keefe in new york . 4 may – the eurovision song contest 1991 is held in rome , italy and , after a highly controversial voting segment , sweden 's fångad av en stormvind by carola is declared the winner . 7 may – in macon , georgia , a judge dismisses a wrongful death lawsuit against ozzy osbourne . the suit was filed by a local couple that believed their son was inspired to attempt suicide by osbourne 's music . 10 may – truth or dare , a documentary chronicling singer madonna 's 1990 blond ambition tour , is released to theatres . 24 may – guns n ' roses kick off their 26-month world use your illusion tour in alpine valley in east troy . 25 may – the billboard 200 album chart starts incorporating electronically monitored sales data provided by nielsen soundscan , thus beginning what chart aficionados tag as the '' soundscan era '' . 28 may – the smashing pumpkins releases their debut album gish , establishing the band as one of the most important of the alternative scene . 7 june – abc revives the late-night rock performance series in concert . 21 june – the mérida state symphony orchestra is founded in venezuela . 28 june – paul mccartney 's classical composition , the liverpool oratorio , receives its première at the liverpool anglican cathedral . july–september . 2 july launch of the australian festival of chamber music . hollywood bowl orchestra gives its first public performance . during the use your illusion tour , axl rose assaults a member of the audience watching the show on camera , after security fails to respond to the singer 's orders to confiscate the camera . after the attack , rose angrily says , '' thanks to the lame-ass security , i 'm goin ' home ! '' and storms off the stage . 9 july – american rock singer-songwriter jimi jamison ( survivor ) releases his debut solo album when love comes down . 13 july – pianist keith jarrett records his vienna concert at the vienna staatsoper . 18 july – perry farrell launches the first lollapalooza tour as a farewell for his just-dissolved band , jane 's addiction . other acts appearing on the tour include siouxsie and the banshees , nine inch nails , rollins band , fishbone and rage against the machine . 12 august – metallica releases their most successful album , metallica ( also called '' the black album '' ) . something of a departure from the thrash metal sound they helped pioneer , it becomes one of the best-selling albums of all time riaa.com diamond certified albums 13 august – jermaine jackson 's '' word to the badd ! ! '' reaches 78 on the billboard hot 100 15 august – paul simon 's concert in the park takes place in central park . the free concert is broadcast live on hbo . 20 august – the six-day international pop underground convention opens in olympia , washington . 27 august pearl jam release their debut album , ten . while initially slow to sell , it becomes no . 2 on the billboard charts within a year and has since become certified thirteen times platinum in the united states . dr . dre pleads no contest to charges that he beat up a woman at a west hollywood nightclub . dr . dre is sentenced to 24 months probation . 3 september – primal scream releases screamadelica . 10 september – nirvana released their hit song '' smells like teen spirit '' that trailblazed grunge rock . 17 september – rock band guns n ' roses release their first full length follow up to their debut album appetite for destruction in the form of the double album use your illusion i & use your illusion ii . both go on to sell a combined excess of 1.3 million on their first week of sale in the usa alone . 23 september the tv series baywatch begins the second season with a new theme song performed and co-written by former survivor member jimi jamison , '' i 'm always here '' . bryan adams releases his sixth album waking up the neighbours produced by mutt lange , achieving diamond status in his native canada for the second time . 24 september – seattle-based band nirvana release their second album nevermind , that in the beginning of 1992 replaces michael jackson 's album dangerous at number one on the billboard charts . nevermind would then make the grunge movement explode and become one of the most famous rock albums of all time . it is considered the emblem of the generation x . blood sugar sex magik , the red hot chili peppers album , was also released on this date , as well as soundgarden 's badmotorfinger . the hip-hop group a tribe called quest also released their second album , the low end theory , on this day . october–december . 3 november – a free tribute concert is held at golden gate park in memory of concert promoter bill graham , killed in a helicopter crash three weeks earlier at the age of 60 . performers include santana , grateful dead , journey and crosby , stills , nash & young . 7 november bryan adams 's 16-week stay at the top of the uk singles chart with '' everything i do ( i do it for you ) '' is finally ended by u2 single '' the fly '' , having already set a new record for the longest consecutive stay at the top of the uk singles chart . izzy stradlin quits guns n ' roses . frank zappa 's children , dweezil and moon , announce to an audience in new york that their father is unable to attend the tribute concert to his music because he is seriously ill with prostate cancer . 14 november – the new michael jackson music video '' black or white '' premieres simultaneously in 27 different countries to an audience of 500 million people . controversy is immediately generated by the video 's last four minutes in which jackson smashes windows , vandalizes a car and causes a building to explode , as well as suggestively grabs his crotch repeatedly while dancing . 19 november u2 releases album achtung baby . luis miguel releases romance which revitalized the popularity of boleros in the 1990s . 24 november – freddie mercury , lead singer of queen , dies from aids-related complications at the age of 45 one day after making the disease public . the same day , eric carr , formerly of kiss , also dies from complications of heart cancer . 26 november – michael jackson releases his worldwide hit album dangerous . 30 november – following in the steps of the billboard 200 , the billboard hot 100 also begins a new era by incorporating and merging electronically measured sales and airplay data from soundscan and bds respectively . 1 december a carnegie hall christmas concert , featuring kathleen battle and frederica von stade , a jazz band led by wynton marsalis , and orchestra and chorus conducted by andré previn , is recorded for television . george harrison plays yokohama , japan . the brief japanese tour with eric clapton marks his first set of formal concert performances since 1974 . 4 december – the judds give their final concert performance as a duo . 31 december – the twentieth annual new year 's rockin ' eve special airs on abc , with appearances by boyz ii men , simply red , vanessa l . williams , another bad creation , restless heart , michael bivins and barry manilow . also in 1991 . aerosmith signs a new deal with sony music worth an estimated 30 million . the rolling stones sign a new contract with virgin records . country music legend kenny rogers starts his restaurant chain , kenny rogers roasters . tupac shakur 's solo career begins with his first album , 2pacalypse now . six-year-old qa'id walker-teal is shot dead by a stray bullet during a confrontation between tupac 's entourage and a rival group . approximate date – mangue bit is originated in recife , brazil . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1991 . bands disbanded . see musical groups disestablished in 1991 . bands reformed . the knack procol harum . albums released . january–march . . top hits . top best albums of the year . all albums have been named albums of the year for their hits in the charts . ' nirvana – nevermind pearl jam – ten my bloody valentine – loveless u2 – achtung baby red hot chili peppers – blood sugar sex magik metallica – metallica primal scream – screamadelica slint – spiderland a tribe called quest – the low end theory massive attack – blue lines talk talk – laughing stock . published popular music . '' dreamland '' w . alan bergman & marilyn bergman m . dave grusin '' look around '' w . betty comden & adolph green m . cy coleman from the musical the will rogers follies '' moja domovina '' . classical music . john corigliano – symphony no . 1 george crumb – easter dawning for carillon mario davidovsky – simple dances for flute , two percussion , piano , and cello joël-françois durand – un feu distinct for flute , clarinet , piano , violin and cello lorenzo ferrero concerto for piano and orchestra parodia , for chamber ensemble zaubermarsch , for small orchestra sofia gubaidulina gerade und ungerade ( чет и нечет ) for seven percussionists , including cymbalom silenzio for bayan , violin , and cello angelo gilardino musica per l'angelo della melancholia , for guitar variazioni sulla fortuna , for guitar karel goeyvaerts opbouw ( construction ) , for orchestra de zang van aquarius , version for symphony orchestra jan klusák – stesk po mozartovi ulrich leyendecker – symphony no . 3 witold lutosławski – chantefleurs et chantefables pehr henrik nordgren going on for double bass and percussion , op . 77 odotus ( awaiting ) for male choir , op . 78 cronaca for string orchestra , op . 79 streams for chamber orchestra , op . 80 kaija saariaho – . à la fumée john serry sr . – a savior is born , for organ and voice dreams trilogy , for piano la culebra , for solo flute karlheinz stockhausen – elufa , for flute and basset horn , with electronic music ad lib . , 9 . ex nr . 64 freia , for flute ex 9½ nr . 64 joan tower – concerto for orchestra takashi yoshimatsu sagittarius ecologue for bassoon and harp symphony no . 2 '' at terra '' for orchestra fuzzy bird sonata for saxophone and piano 3 white landscapes for flute , bassoon , and harp wind color vector for guitar . opera . john adams – the death of klinghoffer , first performance on 19 march at the la monnaie , brussels , belgium harrison birtwistle – gawain , first performance on 30 may at the royal opera house , london daniel catán – rappaccini ’ s daughter ( la hija de rappaccini ) john corigliano – the ghosts of versailles meredith monk – atlas . jazz . musical theater . miss saigon ( claude-michel schönberg and alain boublil ) – broadway production opened at the broadway theatre on 11 april and ran for 4097 performances the secret garden – broadway production opened at the st . james theatre on 25 april and ran for 706 performances song of singapore – off-broadway production opened at the irving plaza on 7 may and ran for 459 performances will rogers follies – broadway production opened at the palace theatre on 1 may and ran for 983 performances . musical films . beauty and the beast ( animated feature ) the commitments the five heartbeats for the boys kilukkam stepping out stones at the max the supporter thalapathi . births . 8 january asuka hinoi japanese singer shin ji-min , south korean singer and rapper 9 january – 3lau , american dj and producer 11 january – hyolyn , south korean singer and dj 12 january – pixie lott , british singer , songwriter and actress 13 january – goo hara , member of kara , korean singer 14 january – cat torres , australian singer-songwriter , musician , contestant on the voice australia 23 january – torres ( musician ) , american independent singer , songwriter , musician and artist 28 january – c.j . harris , american singer 1 february – martha heredia , dominican singer 7 february – gabbie hanna , american rapper , singer , musician , comedienne and author 10 february ceng de ping , taiwanese singer emma roberts , american actress and singer 11 february – never shout never ( christofer ingle ) , american musician 12 february – casey abrams , american singer-songwriter and guitarist 17 february – ed sheeran , british singer-songwriter and businessmen ( taylor swift , nina nesbitt , camilla cabello , tori kelly , kacey chambers ) 11 february – allday , australian musician , rapper , singer-songwriter ( the veronicas , troye sivan ) 24 february – tyler bryant , american rock musician ( tyler bryant & the shakedown , dead cool dropouts , lisa origliasso ) 26 february cl ( singer ) , south korean singer/songwriter/rapper lee chang-sub , south korean singer 6 march – tyler , the creator , american rapper and record producer 8 march – devon werkheiser , american actor and musician 11 march chingiz mustafayev , azerbaijani singer-songwriter and guitarist qian lin , chinese singer 13 march - luan santana , brazilian singer-songwriter 16 march – wolfgang van halen , american bassist 25 march liang bo , chinese singer-songwriter kevin garrett ( musician ) , american musician , worked with alessia cara 28 march – amy bruckner , american actress and singer 29 march – irene , korean singer , member of red velvet 30 march – nf ( rapper ) , american rapper 2 april – quavo , american rapper ( migos ) 3 april – hayley kiyoko , american singer , songwriter , advocate and dancer 4 april – jamie lynn spears , american country music singer , actress 7 april – anne-marie , british singer songwriter 8 april – andrea ross , american singer and actress 10 april – amanda michalka ( aj ) , american singer-songwriter , musician and actress 15 april – daiki arioka , japanese singer ( hey ! say ! jump ) 18 april – joey gaydos , american actor and guitarist 30 april – lindsay pearce , american singer and actress 10 may – ray dalton , american singer-songwriter 12 may – jennifer damiano , american actress and singer 17 may daniel curtis lee , american actor and rapper adil omar , pakistani rapper and producer 19 may – jordan pruitt , american singer 20 may – bastian baker , swiss singer , songwriter , and performer . 22 may – brooke simpson , american singer-songwriter 23 may – lena meyer-landrut , german singer-songwriter and dancer 24 may – erika umeda , japanese singer 26 may – amber bondin , maltese singer 27 may – channii , dutch singer-songwriter 29 may kristen alderson , american actress and singer matoma , norwegian dj and record producer . 31 may – azealia banks , american rapper , singer and songwriter 7 june – fetty wap american rapper 12 june – jessie reyez , colombian-canadian singer-songwriter 14 june – jesy nelson , english singer-songwriter , dancer and member of little mix 16 june – joe mcelderry , british singer 17 june – shura , british singer-songwriter , musician and producer 23 june – katie armiger , american singer . 24 june -max ehrich , american singer , actor and dancer 28 june – seohyun , member of k-pop girl group girls ' generation 29 june – naomi ( singer-songwriter ) , british singer-songwriter 30 june – mc davo , mexican rapper , singer and composer 1 july – sanah moidutty , indian singer songwriter 7 july – alesso , swedish producer and dj 9 july mitchel musso , american actor and musician clara hagman , former ace of base member and singer 10 july maría chacón , mexican actress and singer angel haze , american rapper and singer-songwriter 12 july – dexter roberts , american singer 15 july – yuki kashiwagi , japanese idol singing group member 17 july – mann , american rapper 18 july – karina pasian , american russian multi lingual classical musician and singer 21 july – lucy spraggan , british musician 26 july – nathan hartono , singaporean singer and actor 29 july – miki ishikawa , american actress and singer 30 july david carreira , portuguese singer , model and actor diana vickers , british singer 31 july – abhay jodhpurkar , indian singer 9 august candela vetrano , argentine actress , singer and model heize , korean singer , rapper , and songwriter 13 august – dave days , american singer-songwriter and guitarist 21 august tess gaerthé , dutch singer and actress jesse rutherford , american singer and musician 26 august – alok , brazilian producer and dj 8 september – nicole dollanganger , canadian singer , songwriter , activist and artist ( lana del rey , grimes ) 9 september – hunter hayes , american country singer 11 september – kygo , norwegian producer and dj 12 september – imri ziv , israeli singer-songwriter 16 september – noname ( rapper ) , american singer-songwriter , rapper , musician & poet 22 september – chelsea tavares , american actress and singer 23 september – key ( singer ) south korean singer , actor 1 october – via vallen , indonesian dangdut singer 4 october – nicolai kielstrup , danish singer leigh-anne pinnock , english singer-songwriter , dancer and member of little mix 5 october – betty who , australian singer-songwriter 10 october gabriella cilmi , australian-italian blues and pop singer-songwriter lali espósito , argentine actress , singer , dancer , model , and songwriter . 17 october – brenda asnicar , argentine actress and singer 18 october – tyler posey , american musician and actor 29 october – parris goebel , new zealand-born choreographer , dancer , singer , director and actress 31 october – jordan-claire green , american actress and musician 5 november – flume ( musician ) , australian record producer , musician and dj 8 november – riker lynch , american actor , singer and bassist 11 november – emma blackery british singer-songwriter , musician , beauty blogger , comedienne , and youtuber 13 november – matt bennett , american actor and singer ( victorious , ariana grande ) 14 november – gallant ( singer ) , american musician 18 november – tommy cash ( rapper ) , estonian rapper 22 november – saki shimizu , japanese singer 23 november – harley '' kicks '' alexander-sule of rizzle kicks , and sometimes working under the name : jimi charles moody 25 november – kevin woo , american-south korean singer and dancer ( u-kiss and xing ) 28 november – hannah diamond , english singer-songwriter , photographer , musician , producer and visual artist . ( charlie xcx , a g cook ) 2 december charlie puth , american singer , musician , songwriter and record producer . ainsley melham , australian singer , dancer and actor 7 december – dori sakurada , japanese actor and singer 9 december – pnb rock , american hip hop recording artist 11 december – anna bergendahl swedish irish singer 13 december jay greenberg , american composer dermot kennedy – irish singer-songwriter and musician 14 december offset ( rapper ) , american rapper of the team ( migos ) stefflon don , british-jamaican rapper , singer and songwriter . 15 december – alana mychal haim , american guitarist , singer and keyboardist , member of sisterhood and band haim ( haim , american pop rock band from los angeles ) 19 december tom walker ( singer ) , scottish singer-songwriter ( zara larsson , dodie ) jack river , australian singer-songwriter , musician and producer 19 december declan galbraith , british singer keiynan lonsdale , australian actor , dancer and singer-songwriter 23 december – youngstacpt , south african rapper 24 december – louis tomlinson , english singer , songwriter and television personality . ( british singer in the band one direction ) 27 december – chloe bridges , american actress , singer and pianist 30 december – tyler carter , american singer , rapper and songwriter ( issues , woe is me ) dallask , american music producer and songwriter . deaths . 1 january – buck ram , american singer and songwriter ( the platters ) , 83 6 january – ahmed adnan saygun , turkish composer and musicologist , 83 8 january – steve clark , guitarist of def leppard , 30 ( overdose of codeine ) 14 january – chitragupta , film composer , 73 20 january – stan szelest american keyboard player ( the band ) , 47 6 february – danny thomas , singer and actor , 79 9 february – james cleveland , gospel singer , 59 13 february – flaviano labò , operatic tenor , 64 17 february – gitta alpár , operatic soprano , 88 20 february – isabelle delorme , pianist , composer and music teacher , 90 21 february – margot fonteyn , ballerina , 71 26 february – slim gaillard , jazz musician , 75 2 march – serge gainsbourg , singer and songwriter , 62 ( heart attack ) 13 march – jimmy mcpartland , 83 , jazz musician 14 march jerome doc pomus , songwriter , 65 howard ashman , lyricist , 40 ( aids-related ) 15 march – bud freeman , jazz musician , 84 18 march – dezider kardoš , slovak composer , 76 21 march – leo fender , inventor of the electric guitar , 81 25 march – eileen joyce , pianist , 83 1 april – martha graham , 96 , american dancer and choreographer 4 april – louis guglielmi , 75 , french composer 7 april henry glover , american songwriter , producer and trumpet player , 69 ruth page , american dancer and choreographer , 92 8 april – per yngve ohlin , aka 'dead ' , vocalist of mayhem , 22 ( suicide ) 13 april – wilhelm lanzky-otto , horn virtuoso , 82 17 april – jack yellen , 98 , american lyricist 18 april – barry rogers , 55 , american jazz and salsa trombonist 20 april – steve marriott , singer , songwriter and guitarist ( small faces and humble pie ) , 44 ( killed in house fire ) 21 april – willi boskovsky , conductor , 81 23 april – johnny thunders , rock guitarist and singer , 38 ( drug-related ) 26 april leo arnaud , composer , 86 carmine coppola , flautist and composer , 80 28 april – ken curtis , american singer and actor , 74 29 april – gonzaguinha , brazilian singer and composer , 45 ( car accident ) 3 may – mohammed abdel wahab , egyptian singer and composer ( b . 1907 ) 8 may jean langlais , composer , 84 rudolf serkin , pianist , 88 9 may ? – yanka dyagileva , poet and singer , 24 ( drowned ) 19 may – odia coates , singer , 49 ( breast cancer ) 23 may – wilhelm kempff , pianist and composer , 95 24 may dirk schoufs , a member of belgian band vaya con dios ( aids-related ) gene clark , singer-songwriter ( the byrds ) , 46 ( heart attack ) 27 may – leopold nowak , musicologist , 86 1 june – david ruffin , singer ( the temptations ) , 50 ( overdose of cocaine ) 4 june – mc trouble , rapper , 20 ( epileptic seizure ) 6 june – stan getz , us saxophonist , 64 9 june – claudio arrau , pianist , 88 14 june – joy finzi , founder of the finzi trust , 84 6 july – herminio giménez , composer , 86 11 july – honorata de la rama , singer , 89 15 july – bert convy , american game show host , actor , and singer , 57 ( brain tumor ) 28 august – vince taylor , rock and roll singer , 52 ( cancer ) 4 september charlie barnet , us bandleader , 77 dottie west , american country singer , 58 ( car accident ) 8 september – alex north , composer , 80 17 september zino francescatti , violinist , 89 rob tyner , lead singer of mc5 , 46 ( heart attack ) 20 september – tom anderson , shetland fiddler 25 september – sydney macewan , singer of traditional scottish and irish songs , 82 28 september miles davis , jazz trumpeter and composer , 65 ( stroke ) eugène bozza , composer , 86 6 october – igor talkov , russian singer/songwriter , 34 ( murdered ) 9 october – roy black , 48 , singer and actor ( heart failure ) 16 october – ole beich , guitarist and bassist , 36 ( drowned ) 17 october – tennessee ernie ford , country musician , 72 25 october – bill graham , rock concert promoter , 60 ( helicopter crash ) 27 october – sir andrzej panufnik , polish composer , 75 31 october joseph papp , broadway producer , 70 garvin bushell , multi-instrumentalist 2 november – mort shuman , songwriter , 54 ( complications following a liver operation ) 3 november – chris bender , r & b singer , 19 ( murdered ) 8 november – frances faye , singer , 79 11 november – morton stevens , film composer , 62 15 november – jacques morali , disco composer , 44 ( aids ) 24 november freddie mercury , singer , 45 ( aids ) eric carr , drummer , 41 ( cancer ) 10 december – headman shabalala , member of ladysmith black mambazo , 46 ( shot ) 13 december – stuart challender , conductor , 44 ( aids-related ) 22 december – édouard woolley , tenor , actor , composer and music educator . awards . country music hall of fame inductees : felice and boudleaux bryant rock and roll hall of fame inductees : lavern baker , the byrds , john lee hooker , the impressions , wilson pickett , jimmy reed and ike and tina turner 1991 grammy awards 1991 mtv video music awards eurovision song contest 1991 kumar sanu – filmfare best male playback award 33rd japan record awards . see also . 1991 in music ( uk ) record labels established in 1991