Nicolas Boileau-Despréaux

family and education . boileau was the fifteenth child of gilles boileau , a clerk in the parlement . two of his brothers attained some distinction : gilles boileau , the author of a translation of epictetus ; and jacques boileau , who became a canon of the sainte-chapelle , and made valuable contributions to church history . the surname '' despréaux '' was derived from a small property at crosne near villeneuve-saint-georges . his mother died when he was two years old ; and nicolas boileau , who had a delicate constitution , seems to have suffered something from want of care . sainte-beuve puts down his somewhat hard and unsympathetic outlook quite as much to the uninspiring circumstances of these days as to the general character of his time . he can not be said to have been early disenchanted , for he never seems to have had any illusions ; he grew up with a single passion , '' the hatred of stupid books . '' he was educated at the collège de beauvais , and was then sent to study theology at the sorbonne . he exchanged theology for law , however , and was called to the bar on december 4 , 1656 . from the profession of law , after a short trial , he recoiled in disgust , complaining bitterly of the amount of chicanery which passed under the name of law and justice . his father died in 1657 , leaving him a small fortune , and thenceforward he devoted himself to letters . . 1660s . such of boileau 's early poems as have been preserved hardly contain the promise of what he ultimately became . the first piece in which his peculiar powers were displayed was the first satire ( 1660 ) , in imitation of the third satire of juvenal ; it embodied the farewell of a poet to the city of paris . this was quickly followed by eight others , and the number was at a later period increased to twelve . a twofold interest attaches to the satires . in the first place the author skilfully parodies and attacks writers who at the time were placed in the very first rank , such as jean chapelain , the abbé charles cotin , philippe quinault and georges de scudéry ; he openly raised the standard of revolt against the older poets . but in the second place he showed both by precept and practice what were the poetical capabilities of the french language . prose in the hands of such writers as rené descartes and blaise pascal had proved itself a flexible and powerful instrument of expression , with a distinct mechanism and form . but except with francois de malherbe , there had been no attempt to fashion french versification according to rule or method . in boileau for the first time appeared terseness and vigour of expression , with perfect regularity of verse structure . his admiration for molière found expression in the stanzas addressed to him ( 1663 ) and in the second satire ( 1664 ) . in 1664 or 1665 , he composed his prose dialogue sur les héros de roman , a satire on the elaborate romances of the time , which may be said to have once for all abolished the lucubrations of la calprenède , mlle de scudéry and their fellows . though fairly widely read in manuscript and also released in an unauthorized edition in 1668 , the book was not published till 1713 , out of regard , it is said , for mlle de scudéry . to these early days belong the reunions at the mouton blanc and the pomme du pin , where boileau , molière , jean racine , jean de la chapelle and antoine furetière met to discuss literary questions . to molière and racine he proved a constant friend , and supported their interests on many occasions . in 1666 , prompted by the publication of two unauthorized editions , he published satires du sieur d . , containing seven satires and the discours au roi . from 1669 onwards appeared his epistles , graver in tone than the satires , maturer in thought , more exquisite and polished in style . the épîtres gained for him the favour of louis xiv , who desired his presence at court . the king asked him which he thought his best verses . whereupon boileau diplomatically selected as his '' least bad '' some still unprinted lines in honour of the grand monarch and proceeded to recite them . he received forthwith a pension of 2000 livres . . 1670s . in 1674 boileau 's l'art poétique ( in imitation of the ars poetica of horace ) and le lutrin were published with some earlier works as the l'œuvres diverses du sieur d . boileau rules on the language of poetry , and analyses various kinds of verse composition . he influenced english literature through the translation of l'art poétique by sir william soame and john dryden , and their imitation in alexander pope 's essay on criticism . of the four books of l'art poétique , the first and last consist of general precepts , inculcating mainly the great rule of bon sens ; the second treats of the pastoral , the elegy , the ode , the epigram and satire ; and the third of tragic and epic poetry . though the rules laid down are of value , their tendency is rather to hamper and render too mechanical the efforts of poetry . boileau himself , a great , though , by no means infallible critic in verse , can not be considered a great poet . he rendered the utmost service in destroying the exaggerated reputations of the mediocrities of his time , but his judgment was sometimes at fault . the lutrin , a mock heroic poem , of which four cantos appeared in 1674 , is sometimes said to have furnished alexander pope with a model for the rape of the lock , but the english poem is superior in richness of imagination and subtlety of invention . the fifth and sixth cantos , afterwards added by boileau , rather detract from the beauty of the poem ; the last canto in particular is quite unworthy of his genius . in 1674 boileau published his translation of longinus ' on the sublime , making longinus ' ideas available to a wider audience , and influencing edmund burke 's work on the same subject . in 1693 he added some critical reflections to the translation , chiefly directed against the theory of the quarrel of the ancients and the moderns as advanced by charles perrault . boileau was made historiographer to the king in 1677 . from this time the amount of his production diminished . to this period of his life belong the satire , sur les femmes , the ode , sur la prise de namur , the epistles , a mes vers and sur l'amour de dieu , and the satire sur l'homme . the satires had raised up a crowd of enemies against boileau . the 10th satire , on women , provoked an apologie des femmes from charles perrault . antoine arnauld in the year of his death wrote a letter in defence of boileau , but when at the desire of his friends he submitted his reply to bossuet , the bishop pronounced all satire to be incompatible with the spirit of christianity , and the 10th satire to be subversive of morality . the friends of antoine arnauld had declared that it was inconsistent with the dignity of a churchman to write on any subject so trivial as poetry . the epistle , sur l'amour de dieu , was a triumphant vindication on the part of boileau of the dignity of his art . it was not until april 15 , 1684 that he was admitted to the académie française , and then only by the king 's wish . in 1687 he retired to a country-house he had bought at auteuil , which jean racine , because of the numerous guests , calls his hôtellerie d'auteuil . . 1700–1711 . in 1705 boileau sold his house and returned to paris , where he lived with his confessor in the cloisters of notre dame . in the 12th satire , sur l'équivoque , he attacked the jesuits in verses which sainte-beuve called a recapitulation of the lettres provinciales of pascal . this was written about 1705 . he then gave his attention to the arrangement of a complete and definitive edition of his works . but the jesuit fathers obtained from louis xiv the withdrawal of the privilege already granted for the publication , and demanded the suppression of the 12th satire . these annoyances are said to have hastened his death , which took place on the 13th of march 1711 . he was a man of warm and kindly feelings , honest , outspoken and benevolent . many anecdotes are told of his frankness of speech at court , and of his generous actions . he holds a well-defined place in french literature , as the first who reduced its versification to rule , and taught the value of workmanship for its own sake . his influence on english literature , through pope and his contemporaries , was not less strong , though less durable . after much undue depreciation , boileau 's critical work has been rehabilitated by recent writers , perhaps to the extent of some exaggeration in the other direction . it has been shown that in spite of undue harshness in individual cases most of his criticisms have been substantially adopted by his successors . numerous editions of boileau 's works were published during his lifetime . the last of these , l'œuvres diverses ( 1701 ) , known as the '' favourite '' edition of the poet , was reprinted with variants and notes by alphonse pauly ( 2 vols . , 1894 ) . the critical text of his works was established by berriat saint-prix , œuvres de boileau ( 4 vols . , 1830–1837 ) , who made use of some 350 editions . this text , edited with notes by paul chéron , with the boloeana of 1740 , and an essay by sainte-beuve , was reprinted by garnier frères ( 1860 ) . . references . sources . sainte-beuve , causeries du lundi , vol . vi . ; f . brunetière , '' l'esthétique de boileau '' ( revue des deux mondes , june 1889 ) , and an exhaustive article by the same critic in la grande encyclopédie ; gustave lanson , boileau ( 1892 ) , in the series of grands écrivains français . . further reading . doran , robert . '' boileau '' in the theory of the sublime from longinus to kant . cambridge : cambridge university press , 2015 . boileau 's works , ( in french ) illustrated by rémy lejeune ( ladoré ) , edited by pierre et berthe bricage ( 1961 ) , in 5 volumes . external links .