Institut Le Rosey

accreditation . international . institut le rosey is fully accredited by the new england association of schools and colleges , the international baccalaureate , the ministry of national education of france and the council of international schools.38 le rosey is also a member of the european council of international schools . overview . le rosey 's philosophy is inspired by what harvard educationalist howard gardner has called '' multiple intelligences '' : '' its aim is to develop all roseans ’ talents through academic , sporting and artistic programmes . '' the school offers a demanding bilingual and bicultural education with the language of instruction being french or english depending on the student 's academic program ; however , students may take many language classes while at le rosey . students may sit either the international baccalaureate , the most widely recognized pre-university educational program , or the francophone-oriented french baccalaureate . to sustain an international atmosphere at le rosey , there exists a quota where no more than 10 % of the students may come from a single country . the student body , ages 7 through 18 , is composed of pupils from approximately 58 different countries , with 60 % of the students being european . the school 's current enrollment , over 400 pupils , is equally divided between male and female . the majority of students are between the ages of 14 and 18 . the student-teacher ratio is 5:1 with the average class size being fewer than 20 students , and the average teacher 's length of stay at le rosey is over ten years . students at le rosey are nicknamed '' roséens '' ( in french ) or '' roseans '' ( in english ) , and former students are labeled '' les anciens roséens '' . the school 's campus has of landscaped grounds . the school 's sailing center , the '' fleur d'eau '' , is situated along 100 & nbsp ; meters of shoreline on lake geneva . le rosey is reportedly the only boarding school in the world to change campuses seasonally . in spring and autumn , classes are held at the château du rosey campus in the village of rolle in the canton of vaud , located between geneva and lausanne in southwestern switzerland . for the winter months of january through march , the entire student body moves to a group of chalets in the ski resort town of gstaad in the canton of berne . le rosey offers a wide range of sports , including : football ( soccer ) , basketball , volleyball , cross-country running , sailing , rowing , competitive swimming , and water skiing during the spring and autumn terms . during the winter term , sports options are skiing , snowboarding , ice-hockey , curling and snowshoeing . . history . château du rosey , a feudal chateau located on le rosey 's main campus at rolle , dates to the middle ages and houses le rosey 's central reception area . in 1880 , the site of the le rosey campus was chosen by the school 's founder , paul-emile carnal , '' a lover of nature , history and the countryside '' . the le rosey campus at rolle is situated adjacent to the famous lake geneva . in 1911 , the founder passed the ownership of le rosey to his son , henri-paul carnal . in 1917 , the school began to go to gstaad in the german-speaking canton of berne for the winter months to escape the dense fog that settles in on lake geneva . in 1947 , the third generation of directors , louis johannot and helen schaub , assumed ownership of le rosey . under the same ownership , in 1967 , le rosey admitted girls for the first time and opened a separate girls ' campus . in 1980 , the current owners , philippe and anne gudin de la sablonnière , became the fourth generation of directors at le rosey . louis johannot , in an interview with life magazine in 1965 , made a comment that received considerable attention : '' the only reason i always try to meet and know the parents better is because it helps me to forgive their children . '' prior to the introduction of the 10 % quota , wherein no more than 10 % of the student body may come from one country , different nationalities made up the majority of students at le rosey . in the 1950s and 1960s , the majority of students were americans , italians , and greeks , in the 1970s came the arabs and iranians , in the 1980s came the japanese and koreans , and in the 1990s came the russians . during the 1990s , the children of russian oligarchs , who made up a third of the student body , gained notoriety for '' terrorizing '' other students , something that is disputed , resulting in the withdrawal of at least one non-russian student . . academic curriculum . institut le rosey 's academic curriculum is designed to '' provide education of breadth , depth and quality for an international student body . '' le rosey offers a rigorous bilingual and bicultural education with the principal language of instruction being french or english depending on the student 's academic program . beginning in class 9 ( us 3rd grade ) and ending in class 7 ( us 5th grade ) , junior students at le rosey follow the primary bilingual programme . the programme follows the french national curriculum for classes taught in french and the british national curriculum for classes taught in english , which are both complemented by the international primary curriculum to create an international education . le rosey students in classes 6–2 ( us 6th–10th grade ) choose their principal language and continue their studies in french or english . if possible , students may study their mother tongue and a third or even a fourth language in addition to their principal language of instruction . over 20 different languages have been taught at le rosey in the past five years . during the secondary bilingual programme , english and french classes are obligatory , and upon entering class 3 ( us 9th grade ) , students begin the two-year '' pre-bac '' programme to prepare the students for either the internationally recognized international baccalaureate ( ib ) diploma programme or the francophone-oriented french baccalaureate . at le rosey , the ib diploma programme and the french baccalaureate cover the last two years of schooling ( class 1 and class t ) . . facilities . rolle campus . le rosey 's main campus , near rolle , is situated on 28 hectares of land adjacent to lake geneva . it is divided into two campuses , one for boys situated on the main campus and one for girls called la combe . the boarding houses contain a total of 179 bedrooms with en suite bathrooms , and all together the academic buildings contain : 53 classrooms , 8 science laboratory , 14 specially-equipped rooms , 48 apartments for le rosey teachers , 2 hospital , a library/media centre with about 20,000 to 30,000 literary and reference works , a theatre , 3 dining rooms and 2 cafeterias , an auditorium , 2 gymnasiums , and an ecumenical chapel . sports and arts facilities at le rosey include : 10 clay tennis courts , a 25-meter indoor pool and wellness centre , a 25-meter outdoor pool , 3 football pitches , 1 synthetic rugby pitch , 1 wood chip running track , a shooting and archery range , an open-air theatre , and a computer-regulated greenhouse . off-campus le rosey owns : a private equestrian centre housing 30 horses , 1 indoor riding school , 1 dressage area , and a clubhouse . also off-campus is the le rosey sailing centre equipped with : 10 dinghy , 3 motorboats , 3 yawls and a yacht . . gstaad campus . the school 's winter campus , at the ski resort of gstaad in the bernese oberland , is composed of several traditional chalets within the town . the girls ' campus , at schönried , is situated a 10-minute train ride away from gstaad and is composed of 5 chalets used solely for boarding and dining . the students utilize local facilities , including : swimming pool , fitness centre , tennis courts , ice-hockey rink , a bowling alley , curling , of alpine ski slopes and of cross-country ski tracks , of snowshoeing trails , climbing walls , and via ferratas . . tuition fees . , the annual boarding and academic fees are chf 125,000 ( approximately 133,000 usd ) , without extra fees such as those for sports , etc . application form 2013-14 brochure . ( 2013-14 ) . rolle , switzerland : le rosey . this makes le rosey the most expensive school in the world . the rosey foundation , which oversees the financing of le rosey 's carnal hall , makes scholarships possible to '' particularly deserving '' students , and the four-member rosey scholarship committee allots them to the approved students . however , institut le rosey does not directly offer scholarships to any person , as scholarships are only made available through the rosey foundation . . associations . l'association internationale des anciens roséens ( aiar ) , the international association of former roseans , is le rosey 's alumni association , the members of which have been major contributors to 20th-century world history . the aiar , a prestigious network of former students , has alumni representatives in most countries and in many major cities across the world . le rosey 's first alumni association , the '' old rosey association '' , was created on 21 july 1922 by a small group of alumni in the presence of the son of the school 's founder , henri carnal . in 1926 , the '' belgian old rosey association '' was founded ; however , like the old rosey association , it was declining due to slow international communication between alumni . the current alumni association , the aiar , was established in 1964 . the school 's list of alumni is not published and access to aiar events and meetings is exclusive to former students . institut le rosey is fully accredited by the new england association of schools and colleges , the international baccalaureate , the ministry of national education ( france ) and the council of international schools . le rosey is also a member of the european council of international schools . the rosey-abantara project . in 2004 , institut le rosey 's charity committee undertook a humanitarian program to construct and maintain a private school , the rosey-abantara school , in the suburbs of bamako , the capital city of mali , in saharan africa . rosey-abantara is considered the most important charity project in le rosey 's history . the project is entirely financed by the le rosey charity committee , with costs amounting to chf 1,200,000 ( approximately 1 million usd ) . an additional chf 200,000 ( approximately 167,000 usd ) will be needed to purchase additional land for sports fields . by the summer of 2007 , primary construction work on the school was completed . by autumn of 2007 , an estimated 1,500 mali children will attend rosey-abantara . an independent construction report , by alfrique expertises , was published in may 2007 , with the report finding the rosey-abantara school 's structure to be solid . le rosey students and teachers undertake humanitarian missions throughout the year to the rosey-abantara project to teach malian students . . notable alumni . institut le rosey , has over 5,000 former students , le rosey has educated generations of dynastic families , including hohenzollern , cavendish , rothschilds , metternichs , borgheses , hohenlohes , rockefellers , du ponts and radziwiłłs . the school has also famously educated royalty and high society from around the world : alexander , crown prince of yugoslavia , edward , duke of kent , the muhammad ali dynasty of egypt , the house of glücksburg of greece , and the house of savoy of italy . le rosey has educated several monarchs , including the aga khan iv , albert ii of belgium , baudouin i of belgium , fuad ii of egypt , ntare v of burundi , shah mohammad reza pahlavi of iran , prince rainier iii of monaco , princess ashi euphelma choden wangchuck , prince dasho ugyen jigme wangchuck of bhutan , and the future grand duke of luxembourg , prince guillaume , princess fawzia-latifa of egypt , marie-chantal , crown princess of greece , and her sisters pia getty and alexandra von fürstenberg . other alumni include john lennon 's son sean lennon , heiress tatiana santo domingo , the strokes ' julian casablancas and albert hammond jr , and actress tracee ellis ross . in fiction and popular culture . in fiction , the school is most commonly mentioned in novels relating to the rich and famous , and usually takes the role of being the choice of education for different characters . le rosey has been mentioned in judith krantz 's novels princess daisy ( 1980 ) and till we meet again ( 1988 ) , as well as in several romance novels by karen robards . the school is also mentioned in master of the game ( 1982 ) by sidney sheldon , answered prayers : the unfinished novel ( 1975 ) by truman capote , any woman 's blues ( 1990 ) by erica jong , for love alone ( 1992 ) by ivana trump , and what became of her ( 2002 ) by marijane meaker . similarly , le rosey is mentioned in bret easton ellis ' novel american psycho ( 1991 ) , as the alma mater of evelyn williams , who is the protagonist 's fiancée . in a 2002 episode of law & order : criminal intent , affluent character martha strick , played by veanne cox , says she attended le rosey . in non-fiction , alumni michael korda and james laughlin have written about their experiences and memories at le rosey . columnist taki theodoracopulos has written extensively on the school and its alumni , and was in the middle of a mild controversy when in 1998 he jokingly wrote in the spectator that osama bin laden had attended le rosey . the story resulted in an outcry from american readers , inquiries from several magazines , and the school publicly and '' vehemently '' denying that bin laden had attended le rosey . in 1999 , american journalist paul klebnikov ( murdered in 2004 ) wrote an exposé on le rosey in forbes magazine detailing the problems the school was experiencing with its majority russian student body . richard rené silvin released his book '' i survived swiss boarding schools '' in 2006 and a second edition in 2018 , chronicling his time at le rosey in the 50s and 60s . plans to leave gstaad . in january 2008 , swiss economics magazine bilanz , a subsidiary of edipresse , published an interview with le rosey director-general philippe gudin that revealed the school is seeking to sell its gstaad winter campus and build a new campus in another location . gudin is in negotiations with the local authorities in schönried , a suburb of gstaad located a few minutes away , to construct a new main campus on an undeveloped piece of land , but has run into difficulties due to zoning restrictions . reasons for moving to a new campus , according to the director-general , include the fact that the school 's personnel , who typically live on campus , are at maximum capacity , and that the student body can no longer increase in size due to the lack of space . gudin stated that for the moment the new winter campus location will be in switzerland , but he has not ruled out the french alps . the of prime real estate that the school occupies on ried hill in the centre of gstaad is estimated to be worth several hundreds of millions of usd , considering the international herald tribune reports that the price per square meter in gstaad starts at 20,000 chf ( 19,000 us ) and can rise to 45,000 chf ( 43,000 us ) . gudin asserts that the high value of the gstaad winter campus has nothing to do with its planned sale . . paul & henri carnal hall . in october 2014 , rosey inaugurated a new concert hall , the paul & henri carnal hall , dedicated to classical music . the building , shaped as a dome , was created by the architect bernard tschumi using stainless steel and wood . the concert hall is named after the institut founder paul-émile carnal , and his son and second director henri carnal .