Steppenwolf (novel)

background and publication history . in 1924 hermann hesse married singer ruth wenger . after several weeks , however , he left basel germany , only returning near the end of the year . upon his return he rented a separate apartment , adding to his isolation . after a short trip to germany with wenger , hesse stopped seeing her almost completely . the resulting feeling of isolation and inability to make lasting contact with the outside world led to increasing despair and return of hesse 's suicidal thoughts . hesse began writing steppenwolf in basel , and finished it in zürich . in 1926 he published a precursor to the book , a collection of poems titled the crisis : from hermann hesse 's diary . the novel was later released in 1927 . the first english edition was published in 1929 by martin secker in the united kingdom and by henry holt and company in the united states . that version was translated by basil creighton . 1926 was also the year when hesse became acquainted with jazz music , attending swiss performances of the revue nègre featuring josephine baker and sidney bechet ; steven c . tracy , professor of afro-american studies at the university of massachusetts , writes that '' the character of pablo . was inspired by bechet 's playing '' . plot summary . the book is presented as a manuscript written by its protagonist , a middle-aged man named harry haller , who leaves it to a chance acquaintance , the nephew of his landlady . the acquaintance adds a short preface of his own and then has the manuscript published . the title of this '' real '' book-in-the-book is harry haller 's records ( for madmen only ) . as the story begins , the hero is beset by reflections on his being ill-suited for the world of everyday , regular people , specifically for frivolous bourgeois society . in his aimless wanderings about the city he encounters a person carrying an advertisement for a magic theatre who gives him a small book , treatise on the steppenwolf . this treatise , cited in full in the novel 's text as harry reads it , addresses harry by name and strikes him as describing himself uncannily . it is a discourse on a man who believes himself to be of two natures : one high , the spiritual nature of man ; the other is low and animalistic , a '' wolf of the steppes '' . this man is entangled in an irresolvable struggle , never content with either nature because he can not see beyond this self-made concept . the pamphlet gives an explanation of the multifaceted and indefinable nature of every man 's soul , but harry is either unable or unwilling to recognize this . it also discusses his suicidal intentions , describing him as one of the '' suicides '' : people who , deep down , knew they would take their own life one day . but to counter that , it hails his potential to be great , to be one of the '' immortals '' . by chance , harry encounters the man who gave him the book , just as the man has attended a funeral . he inquires about the magic theater , to which the man replies , '' not for everybody . '' when harry presses further for information , the man recommends him to a local dance hall , much to harry 's disappointment . when returning from the funeral , harry meets a former academic friend with whom he had often discussed oriental mythology , and who invites harry to his home . while there , harry is disgusted by the nationalistic mentality of his friend , who inadvertently criticizes a column harry wrote . in turn , harry offends the man and his wife by criticizing the wife 's bust of goethe , which harry feels is too thickly sentimental and insulting to goethe 's true brilliance . this episode confirms to harry that he is , and will always be , a stranger to his society . trying to postpone returning home , where he fears all that awaits him is his own suicide , harry walks aimlessly around the town for most of the night , finally stopping to rest at the dance hall where the man had sent him earlier . he happens upon a young woman , hermine , who quickly recognizes his desperation . they talk at length ; hermine alternately mocks harry 's self-pity and indulges him in his explanations regarding his view of life , to his astonished relief . hermine promises a second meeting , and provides harry with a reason to live ( or at least a substantial excuse to continue living ) that he eagerly embraces . during the next few weeks , hermine introduces harry to the indulgences of what he calls the '' bourgeois '' . she teaches harry to dance , introduces him to casual drug use , finds him a lover ( maria ) and , more importantly , forces him to accept these as legitimate and worthy aspects of a full life . hermine also introduces harry to a mysterious saxophonist named pablo , who appears to be the very opposite of what harry considers a serious , thoughtful man . after attending a lavish masquerade ball , pablo brings harry to his metaphorical '' magic theatre '' , where the concerns and notions that plagued his soul disintegrate as he interacts with the ethereal and phantasmal . the magic theatre is a place where he experiences the fantasies that exist in his mind . the theater is described as a long horseshoe-shaped corridor with a mirror on one side and a great number of doors on the other . harry enters five of these labeled doors , each of which symbolizes a fraction of his life . major characters . harry haller & ndash ; the protagonist , a middle-aged man pablo & ndash ; a saxophonist hermine & ndash ; a young woman haller meets at a dance maria & ndash ; hermine 's friend . critical analysis . in the preface to the novel 's 1960 edition , hesse wrote that steppenwolf was '' more often and more violently misunderstood '' than any of his other books . hesse felt that his readers focused only on the suffering and despair that are depicted in harry haller 's life , thereby missing the possibility of transcendence and healing . halkin , p . 126 . critical reception . from the very beginning , reception was harsh and it has had a long history of mixed critical reception and opinion . already upset with hesse 's novel siddhartha , political activists and patriots railed against him , and against the book , seeing an opportunity to discredit hesse . even close friends and longtime readers criticized the novel for its perceived lack of morality in its open depiction of sex and drug use , a criticism that indeed remained the primary rebuff of the novel for many years . mileck , p . 184 however , as society changed and formerly taboo topics such as sex and drugs became more openly discussed , critics came to attack the book for other reasons ; mainly that it was too pessimistic , and that it was a journey in the footsteps of a psychotic and showed humanity through his warped and unstable viewpoint , a fact that hesse did not dispute , although he did respond to critics by noting the novel ends on a theme of new hope . american novelist jack kerouac dismissed it in big sur ( 1962 ) , though popular interest was renewed in the 1960s – specifically in the psychedelic movement – primarily because it was seen as a counterculture book , and because of its depiction of free love and explicit drug use . it was also introduced in many new colleges for study , and interest in the book and in hermann hesse was feted in america for more than a decade afterwards . english translations . 1929 : basil creighton 1963 : joseph mileck revision of the creighton translation 2010 : thomas wayne 2012 : david horrocks . references in popular culture . hesse 's 1928 short story '' harry , the steppenwolf '' forms a companion piece to the novel . it is about a wolf named harry who is kept in a zoo , and who entertains crowds by destroying images of german cultural icons such as goethe and mozart . a paragraph in hesse 's 1943 novel the glass bead game states that the term 'magic theater ' is another name of the glass bead game itself . the name steppenwolf has become notable in popular culture for various organizations and establishments . in 1967 , the band steppenwolf , headed by german-born singer john kay , took their name from the novel . the belgian band daau ( die anarchistische abendunterhaltung ) is named after one of the advertising slogans of the novel 's magical theatre . the innovative magic theatre company , founded in 1967 in berkeley and which later became resident in san francisco , takes its name from the '' magic theatre '' of the novel , and the steppenwolf theatre company in chicago , founded in 1974 by actors terry kinney , jeff perry , and gary sinise , took its name from the novel . the lengthy track '' steppenwolf '' appears on english rock band hawkwind 's album astounding sounds , amazing music and is directly inspired by the novel , including references to the magic theatre and the dual nature of the wolfman-manwolf ( lutocost ) . robert calvert had initially written and performed the lyrics on '' distances between us '' by adrian wagner in 1974 . the song also appears on later , live hawkwind cds and dvds . danish acid rock band steppeulvene ( 1967–68 ) also took their name from this novel . '' he was a steppenwolf '' is a song by boney m . from the album nightflight to venus . zbigniew brzezinski includes a quote from steppenwolf as an epigraph to his 1970 book between two ages . the united states of america 's eponymous album features the track '' the american metaphysical circus '' , which has lyrical references to the novel ( '' and the price is right/the cost of one admission is your mind '' ) . be here now ( 1971 ) , by author and spiritual teacher richard alpert ( ram dass ) , contains an illustration of a door bearing a sign that reads '' magic theatre – for madmen only – price of admission – your mind '' . this references an invitation that steppenwolfs harry haller receives to attend an '' anarchist evening at the magic theatre , for madmen only , price of admission your mind '' . the black ice , by michael connelly , has j . michael haller making a reference to the author when he mentioned that , if his illegitimate son took his surname , he would be '' harry haller '' instead of harry bosch . paula cole references the concept of the steppenwolf in her song '' pearl '' on her 1999 album amen . french singer alizée sings her song '' gourmandises '' to '' le loup des steppes '' , literally '' the wolf of the steppes '' ( 2001 ) . steppenwolf was also referenced in the film mall ( 2014 ) . it is also read by the female lead , maria , throughout the film manny lewis ( 2015 ) . '' lobo da estepe '' by the brazilian band os cascavelletes was also inspired by the book . the lyrics on the album finisterre ( 2017 ) by the german black metal band der weg einer freiheit are largely based on this book . '' жълти стъкла '' ( julti stukla , or '' yellow glass '' from bulgarian ) released a song '' страстите хесови '' on youtube on 6 august 2019 . it largely and directly references steppenwolf in its lyrics and description . film adaptation . the novel was adapted into the 1974 film steppenwolf . it starred max von sydow and dominique sanda and was written and directed by fred haines .