ATI Technologies

history . lee ka lau , university of toronto division of university advancement page . retrieved february 28 , 2008 . francis lau , benny lau , and kwok yuen ho founded ati in 1985 as array technology inc . working primarily in the oem field , ati produced integrated graphics cards for pc manufacturers such as ibm and commodore . by 1987 , ati had grown into an independent graphics-card retailer , introducing ega wonder and vga wonder card product lines that year . history of amd at amd.com in the early nineties , they released products able to process graphics without the cpu : in may 1991 , the mach8 , in 1992 the mach32 , which offered improved memory bandwidth and gui acceleration . ati technologies inc . went public in 1993 , with shares listed on nasdaq and on the toronto stock exchange . in 1994 , the mach64 accelerator debuted , powering the graphics xpression and graphics pro turbo , offering hardware support for yuv-to-rgb color space conversion in addition to hardware zoom ; early techniques of hardware-based video acceleration . ati introduced its first combination of 2d and 3d accelerator under the name 3d rage . this chip was based on the mach 64 , but it featured elemental 3d acceleration . the ati rage line powered almost the entire range of ati graphics products . in particular , the ati rage was one of the first viable 2d-plus-3d alternatives to 3dfx 's 3d-only voodoo chipset . 3d acceleration in the rage line advanced from the basic functionality within the initial 3d rage to a more advanced directx accelerator in 1999 ati rage . the all-in-wonder product line , introduced in 1996 , was the first combination of integrated graphics chip with tv tuner card and the first chip that enabled display of computer graphics on a tv set . history of amd – 1996 at amd.com the cards featured 3d acceleration powered by ati 's 3d rage ii , 64-bit 2d performance , tv-quality video acceleration , analog video capture , tv tuner functionality , flicker-free tv-out and stereo tv audio reception . ati entered the mobile computing sector by introducing 3d-graphics acceleration to laptops in 1996 . the mobility product line had to meet requirements different from those of desktop pcs , such as minimized power usage , reduced heat output , tmds output capabilities for laptop screens , and maximized integration . in 1997 , ati acquired tseng labs 's graphics assets , which included 40 engineers . the radeon line of graphics products was unveiled in 2000 . the initial radeon graphics processing unit offered an all-new design with directx 7.0 3d acceleration , video acceleration , and 2d acceleration . technology developed for a specific radeon generation could be built in varying levels of features and performance in order to provide products suited for the entire market range , from high-end to budget to mobile versions . in 2000 , ati acquired artx , which engineered the flipper graphics chip used in the nintendo gamecube game console . they also created a modified version of the chip ( codenamed hollywood ) for the successor of the gamecube , the wii . microsoft contracted ati to design the graphics core ( codenamed xenos ) for the xbox 360 . later in 2005 , ati acquired terayon 's cable modem silicon intellectual property , strengthening their lead in the consumer digital television market . press release k . y . ho remained as chairman of the board until he retired in november 2005 . dave orton replaced him as the president and ceo of the organization . on july 24 , 2006 , a joint announcement revealed that advanced micro devices would acquire ati in a deal valued at 5.6 billion . the acquisition consideration closed on october 25 , 2006 , and included over 2 billion financed from a loan and 56 million shares of amd stock . ati 's operations became part of the amd graphics product group ( gpg ) , and ati 's ceo dave orton became the executive vice president of visual and media businesses at amd until his resignation in 2007 . the top-level management was reorganized with the senior vice president and general manager , and the senior vice president and general manager of consumer electronics group , both of whom would report to the ceo of amd . on 30 august 2010 , john trikola announced that amd would retire the ati brand for its graphics chipsets in favor of the amd name . . products . right in addition to developing high-end gpus ( originally called a vpu , visual processing unit , by ati ) for pcs and apple macs , ati also designed embedded versions for laptops ( mobility radeon ) , pdas and mobile phones ( imageon ) , integrated motherboards ( radeon igp ) , and others . '' ruby '' , a fictional female character described as a '' mercenary for hire '' , was created by ati to promote some of its products . computer-animated videos produced by rhinofx about ruby on a mission ( being a sniper , saboteur , hacker and so on ) appeared at large technology shows such as cebit and ces . computer graphics chipsets . ati wonder series – series of 8-bit isa cards with mda , hercules , cga and plantronics color+ compatibility using the united microelectronics corporation ( umc ) motorola 6845 . later versions added ega support . ega / vga wonder – ibm '' ega/vga-compatible '' display adapters ( 1987 ) mach series – introduced ati 's first 2d gui '' windows accelerator '' . as the series evolved , gui acceleration improved dramatically and early video acceleration appeared . rage series – ati 's first 2d and 3d accelerator chips . the series evolved from rudimentary 3d with 2d gui acceleration and mpeg-1 capability , to a highly competitive direct3d 6 accelerator with then '' best-in-class '' dvd ( mpeg2 ) acceleration . the various chips were very popular with oems of the time . the rage ii was used in the first ati all-in-wonder multi-function video card , and more advanced all-in-wonders based on rage series gpus followed . ( 1995–2004 ) rage mobility – designed for use in low-power environments , such as notebooks . these chips were functionally similar to their desktop counterparts but had additions such as advanced power management , lcd interfaces , and dual monitor functionality . radeon series – ati launched the radeon line in 2000 , as their consumer 3d accelerator add-in cards , its flagship product line and the direct competitor to nvidia 's geforce . the original radeon ddr was ati 's first directx 7 3d accelerator , introducing their first hardware t & l engine . ati often produced 'pro ' versions with higher clock speeds , and sometimes an extreme 'xt ' version , and even more recently 'xt platinum edition ( pe ) ' and 'xtx ' versions . the radeon series was the basis for many ati all-in-wonder boards . radeon – a series of power-optimized versions of radeon graphics chips for use in laptops . they introduced innovations such as modularized ram chips , dvd ( mpeg2 ) acceleration , notebook gpu card sockets , and '' powerplay '' power management technology . amd recently announced directx 11-compatible versions of its mobile processors . amd crossfirex – this technology was ati 's response to nvidia 's sli platform . it allowed , by using a secondary video card and a dual pci-e motherboard based on an ati crossfire compatible chipset , the ability to combine the power of the two , three or four video cards to increase performance through a variety of different rendering options . there is an option for additional pci-e video card plugging into the third pci-e slot for gaming physics , or another option to do physics on the second video card . firegl/firepro – launched in 2001 , following ati 's acquisition of firegl graphics from diamond multimedia . workstation cad/cam video card , based on the radeon series . firemv – for workstations , featuring '' multi-view '' , for multiple displays with 2d acceleration only , usually based on low-end products of the radeon series ( now integrated into firepro series ) . although amd strongly considered making the functional part of the ati drivers '' open source '' , before the merger with amd , ati had no plans to release their graphics drivers as free software : . personal computer platforms and chipsets . igp 3x0 , radeon r100 – ati 's first chipsets . included a directx 7-level 3d graphics processor . 9100 igp – 2nd generation system chipset . ixp250 southbridge . it was notable for being ati 's first complete motherboard chipset , including an ati-built southbridge . it included an updated directx 8.1 class graphics processor gavrichenkov , ilya . ati radeon 9100 igp integrated chipset review , x-bit labs , december 1 , 2003 . xpress 200 – pci express-based athlon 64 and pentium 4 chipset . supports sata as well as integrated graphics with directx 9.0 support , the first integrated graphics chipset to do so wasson , scott . ati 's radeon xpress 200 chipset , tech report , november 8 , 2004 . xpress 3200 – similar to xpress 200 , but designed for optimal crossfire performance . in addition to the above chipset , ati struck a deal in 2005 , with cpu and motherboard manufacturers , particularly asus and intel , to create onboard 3d graphics solutions for intel 's range of motherboards released with their range of intel pentium m-based desktop processors , the intel core and intel core 2 processors , the d101ggc and d101ggc2 chipset ( codenamed '' grand county '' intel boxed desktop board quick guide ( december 2006 ) ) based on the xpress 200 chipset . however , high-end boards with integrated graphics processor ( igp ) still used intel gma graphics processing units . the deal with intel ended with the purchase of ati by amd in 2006 , with intel announcing sis igp chipset ( d201gly chipset , codenamed '' little valley '' ) for entry-level desktop platform , replacing the '' grand county '' series chipsets . multimedia and digital tv products . all-in-wonder series – a series of multimedia graphics cards which incorporating tv tuner and radeon family video cards onto one add-in card , which , after being seemingly discontinued was relaunched as all-in-wonder hd on june 26 , 2008 . tv tuners tv wonder and hdtv wonder – a chipset family providing tv reception of various analog tv and digital tv signals ( pal , ntsc , atsc , dvb-t and so on ) with first generation avivo technology , also supporting cablecard , and qam tuner technologies . theater – a family of qam and vsb demodulators for the digital cable ready and atsc environments . remote wonder , wireless remote control series for ati multimedia products . operates using radio frequency , away from mainstream implementations using infrared . console graphics products . flipper – the nintendo gamecube ( codenamed '' dolphin '' during production ) contains a 3d accelerator developed by artx , inc , a company acquired by ati during the development of the gpu . flipper was similar in capability to a direct3d 7 accelerator chip . it consisted of four rendering pipelines , with hardware t & l , and some limited pixel shader support . innovatively the chip has 3 & nbsp ; mib of embedded 1t-sram for use as ultra-fast low-latency ( 6.2 & nbsp ; ns ) texture and framebuffer/z-buffer storage allowing 10.4 gb/second bandwidth ( extremely fast for the time ) . flipper was designed by members of the nintendo 64 reality coprocessor team who moved from sgi . the flipper team went on to have a major hand in the development of the radeon 9700 . xenos – microsoft 's xbox 360 video game console contains a custom graphics chip produced by ati , known as '' r500 '' , '' c1 '' , or more often as xenos . some of these features include the embedded dram ( edram ) . the xenos also features the “ true unified shader architecture ” which dynamically loads and balances pixel and vertex processing amongst a bank of identically capable processing units . this differs greatly from pc graphics chips of previous generations that have separate banks of processors designed for their individual task ( vertex/fragment ) . another feature presented in xenos is the hardware surface tessellation to divide a surface into smaller triangles , similar to truform in terms of functionality , which is an advanced feature as it is not presented even in the directx 10 specification . the recent generation radeon r600 gpu core inherited most of the features presented in xenos , except edram . hollywood – successor to flipper . part of nintendo 's gaming console , wii . handheld chipsets . imageon – system-on-a-chip ( soc ) design introduced in 2002 , to bring integrated 2d and 3d graphics to handhelds devices , mobile phones and tablet pcs . the imageon 2298 included dvd quality recording and playback , tv output , and supported up to a 12-megapixel camera , with another line of imageon products , the 2300 series supporting opengl es 1.1+ extensions . the imageon line was rebranded under amd , and sold to qualcomm in 2009 . imageon – announced in february 2006 , allowing handhelds devices to receive digital broadcast tv ( dvb-h ) signals and enables watching tv programs on these devices , the chipset includes tuner , demodulator , decoder , and a full software stack , operates alongside the imageon chip . besides full products , ati also supplied 3d and 2d graphics components to other vendors , specifically the qualcomm page 10 and 15 msm7000 series soc chips of handheld and upcoming freescale i . mx processors dailytech report . retrieved september 17 , 2007 . ati claimed in may 2006 , that it had sold over 100 million 'cell phone media co-processors ' , significantly more than ati 's rival nvidia , and announced in february 2007 , that the firm had shipped a total of 200 million of imageon products since 2003 . amd press release . retrieved july 27 , 2007 after the amd acquisition , the imageon and xilleon were sold off to qualcomm and broadcom , respectively . high-performance computing . ati firestream , using the stream processing concept , together with close to metal ( ctm ) hardware interface . after the amd acquisition , it was succeeded by amd firestream in 2006 , rebranded as amd stream processor until 2012 . . see also . comparison of ati chipsets comparison of ati graphics processing units fglrx – linux display driver used for ati video cards radeon radeon r800 video card video in video out . competing companies . nvidia matrox 3dfx interactive . references . external links . ati corporate milestones firingsquad 's history of ati