Slogan

etymology . the word slogan is derived from slogorn which was an anglicisation of the scottish gaelic and irish sluagh-ghairm ( sluagh '' army '' , '' host '' + gairm '' cry '' ) . merriam-webster ( 2003 ) , p . 1174 . irish slogans vary from the written and the visual to the chanted and the vulgar . their simple rhetorical nature usually leaves little room for detail and a chanted slogan may serve more as social expression of unified purpose than as communication to an intended audience . george e . shankel 's ( 1941 , as cited in denton jr . , 1980 ) research states that , '' english-speaking people began using the term by 1704 . '' the term at that time meant '' the distinctive note , phrase or cry of any person or body of persons . '' slogans were common throughout the european continent during the middle ages ; they were used primarily as passwords to ensure proper recognition of individuals at night or in the confusion of battle . . likability . crimmins ' ( 2000 , as cited in dass , kumar , kohli , & thomas , 2014 ) research suggests that brands are an extremely valuable corporate asset , and can constitute much of a business 's total value . with this in mind , if we take into consideration keller 's ( 1993 , as cited in dass , kumar , kohli , & thomas , 2014 ) research , which suggests that a brand is made up of three different components . these include , name , logo and slogan . brands names and logos both can be changed by the way the receiver interprets them . therefore , the slogan has a large job in portraying the brand ( dass , kumar , kohli , & thomas , 2014 ) . therefore , the slogan should create a sense of likability in order for the brand name to be likable and the slogan message very clear and concise . dass , kumar , kohli , & thomas ' ( 2014 ) research suggests that there are certain factors that make up the likability of a slogan . the clarity of the message the brand is trying to encode within the slogan . the slogan emphasizes the benefit of the product or service it is portraying . the creativity of a slogan is another factor that had a positive effect on the likability of a slogan . lastly , leaving the brand name out of the slogan will have a positive effect on the likability of the brand itself . advertisers must keep into consideration these factors when creating a slogan for a brand , as it clearly shows a brand is a very valuable asset to a company , with the slogan being one of the three main components to a brands ' image . usage . the original usage refers to the usage as a clan motto among gaelic armies . marketing slogans are often called taglines in the united states or straplines in the united kingdom . europeans use the terms baselines , signatures , claims or pay-offs . '' sloganeering '' is a mostly derogatory term for activity which degrades discourse to the level of slogans . slogans are used to convey a message about the product , service or cause that it is representing . it can have a musical tone to it or written as a song . slogans are often used to capture the attention of the audience it is trying to reach . if the slogan is used for commercial purposes , often it is written to be memorable/catchy in order for a consumer to associate the slogan with the product it is representing . ke . wang 2013 , p . 276 . a slogan is part of the production aspect that helps create an image for the product , service or cause it is representing . a slogan can be a few simple words used to form a phrase that can be used in a repetitive manner . in commercial advertising , corporations will use a slogan as part of promotional activity . slogans can become a global way of identifying good or service , for example nike 's slogan 'just do it ' helped establish nike as an identifiable brand worldwide . slogans should catch the audience 's attention and influence the consumer 's thoughts on what to purchase . ke . wang 2013 , p . 277 . the slogan is used by companies to affect the way consumers view their product compared to others . slogans can also provide information about the product , service or cause it is advertising . the language used in the slogans is essential to the message it wants to convey . current words used can trigger different emotions that consumers will associate that product with . the use of good adjectives makes for an effective slogan ; when adjectives are paired with describing nouns , they help bring the meaning of the message out through the words . ke . wang 2013 , p . 278 . when a slogan is used for advertising purposes its goal is to sell the product or service to as many consumers through the message and information a slogan provides . ke . wang 2013 , p . 279 . a slogan 's message can include information about the quality of the product . examples of words that can be used to direct the consumer preference towards a current product and its qualities are : good , beautiful , real , better , great , perfect , best , and pure . ke . wang 2013 , pp . 278–280 . slogans can influence that way consumers behave when choosing what product to buy . slogans offer information to consumers in an appealing and creative way . a slogan can be used for a powerful cause where the impact of the message is essential to the cause . kohl f . david . ( 2011 ) . getting the slogan right . the journal of academic librarianship , 37 ( 3 ) , 195–196 kohl 2011 , p . 195 . the slogan can be used to raise awareness about a current cause ; one way is to do so is by showing the truth that the cause is supporting . a slogan should be clear with a supporting message . slogans , when combined with action , can provide an influential foundation for a cause to be seen by its intended audience . colla , e . ( 2014 ) . the people want . middle east research and information project . retrieved from www.merip.org/mer/mer263/people-want . slogans , whether used for advertising purpose or social causes , deliver a message to the public that shapes the audiences ' opinion towards the subject of the slogan . '' it is well known that the text a human hears or reads constitutes merely 7 % of the received information . as a result , any slogan merely possesses a supportive task . '' ( rumšienė & rumšas , 2014 ) . looking at a slogan as a supportive role to a brand 's image and portrayal is helpful to understand why advertisers need to be careful in how they construct their slogan , as it needs to mold with the other components of the brand image , being logo and name . for example , if a slogan was pushing towards '' environmentally friendly , '' yet the logo and name seemed to show very little concern for the environment , it would be harder for the brand to integrate these components into a successful brand image , as they would not integrate together towards a common image . references . further reading . . external links . coronavirus slogans list of slogans slogans directory