Sinicization

modern examples . kuomintang . the kuomintang pursued a sinicization policy , which foreign observers understood as '' the time had come to set about the business of making all natives either turn chinese or get out . '' it was noted that '' chinese colonization '' of '' mongolia and manchuria '' led to the conclusion '' to a conviction that the day of the barbarian was finally over . '' . ma clique . hui muslim general ma fuxiang created an assimilationist group and encouraged the integration of muslims into chinese society . ma fuxiang was a hardcore assimilationist and said that hui should assimilate into han . . xinjiang . the hui muslim 36th division ( national revolutionary army ) governed the southern region of east turkestan ( named xinjiang by the chinese government ) in 1934–1937 . the administration that was set up was colonial in nature , importing han cooks and baths , changing into chinese the street signs and names that used to be in only uyghur language . the hui also switched carpet patterns from uyghur to han in state-owned carpet factories . strict surveillance and mass detentions of uyghurs in the xinjiang re-education camps is a part of the ongoing sinicization policy by the chinese communist party ( ccp ) . since 2015 , it has been estimated that over a million uyghurs have been detained in these camps . the camps were established under ccp general secretary xi jinping 's administration with the main goal of ensuring adherence to national ideology . critics of china 's treatment of uyghurs have accused the chinese government of propagating a policy of sinicization in xinjiang in the 21st century , calling this policy a cultural genocide , or ethnocide , of uyghurs . . taiwan . after the republic of china took control of taiwan in 1945 and relocated its capital to taipei in 1949 , the intention of chiang kai-shek was to eventually go back to mainland china and retake control of it . chiang believed that to retake mainland china , it would be necessary to re-sinicize taiwan 's inhabitants who had undergone assimilation under japanese rule . examples of this policy included the renaming of streets with mainland geographical names , use of mandarin chinese in schools and punishments for using other regional languages ( such as the fāngyán of hakka and hokkien ) , and teaching students to revere traditional ethics , develop pan-chinese nationalism , and view taiwan from the perspective of china . other reasons for the policy were to combat the japanese influences on the culture that had occurred in the previous 50 years , and to help unite the recent immigrants from mainland china that had come to taiwan with the kmt and among whom there was a tendency to be more loyal to ancestral home ( chinese ) than to china as a nation . the process of re-asserting non-chinese identity , as in the case of ethnic groups in taiwan , is sometimes known as desinicization . this is an issue in , for example , the taiwan independence movement and taiwanization . tibet . the sinicization of tibet is the change of tibetan society to han chinese standards by means of state propaganda , police presence , cultural assimilation , religious persecution , immigration , population transfer , land development , land transfer , and political reform . burbu , dawa ( 2001 ) china 's tibet policy , routledge , , pp . 100–124 samdup , tseten ( 1993 ) chinese population—threat to tibetan identity it has been underway since the chinese invasion of tibet in 1951 . in present-day tibet , traditional tibetan festivals have '' been turned into a platform for propaganda and political theater ” where '' government workers and retirees are barred from engaging in religious activities , and government workers and students in tibetan schools are forbidden from visiting local monasteries . ” according to president of the central tibetan administration , lobsang sangay , with the ongoing expulsion of monks and nuns from monasteries and nunneries , and destruction of the larung gar monastery , tibet 's largest buddhist institution , '' unfortunately what is happening is that the chinese government is reviving something akin to cultural revolution in tibet . '' . religion . in april 2016 , ccp general secretary xi jinping declared that in order to “ actively guide the adaptation of religions to socialist society , an important task is supporting china ’ s religions ’ persistence in the direction of sinicization . ” he later reiterated this plan to the 19th communist party congress saying “ we will fully implement the party ’ s basic policy on religious affairs , insist on the sinicization of chinese religions , and provide active guidance for religion and socialism to coexist . ” . protestantism . the three-self patriotic movement ( tspm ) of protestant churches in china has described the boxer rebellion and the anti-christian movement of 1922-27 as early efforts to sinicize christianity . the tspm and china christian council arranged a conference in shanghai on august 4–6 , 2014 , commemorating the anniversary of the tspm . this conference included a seminar on the sinicizaton of christianity , with fu xianwei , chairman of the tspm , saying “ churches in china will continue to explore the sinicization of christianity and ensure christianity takes root in the soil of chinese culture , ethnicity , and society . to advance the sinicization of christianity , churches will need guidance and support from government agencies in charge of religious affairs . ” in 2019 , tspm chairman xu xiaohong made a pledge to eliminate any western '' imprint '' from chinese faith saying '' we must recognise that chinese churches are surnamed ‘ china ’ , not ‘ the west ’ '' and '' no matter how much effort or time it takes , our resolution in upholding the sinicisation of protestantism will never change , and our determination to walk a path that is adapted to a socialist society will never waver . '' . catholicism . in december 2016 , the ninth national congress of the chinese catholic representatives reaffirmed their plan for the chinese patriotic catholic association to uphold the principle of independence and self-governance , along with the promotion of sinicization . in march 2018 , archbishop paul gallagher , secretary for relations with states within the holy see 's secretariat of state , said that '' two expressions or , more precisely , two principles stand out , which should interact with each other , namely “ sinicization ” and “ inculturation . ” i am convinced that an important intellectual and pastoral challenge arises in an almost natural way from the bringing together of these two terms , which indicate two real visions of the world . '' in june 2018 , the bishops ' conference of the catholic church in china and the chinese catholic patriotic association issued a '' five-year plan on carrying forward the catholic church 's adherence to the direction of sinicization in our country '' . this document includes provisions forbidding worship outside of designated church structures and government-authorized times , as well as participation of minors under the age of 18 in any religious services . churches in hebei province and the yibin diocese of sichuan province began holding training seminars immediately . . islam . in 2015 , paramount leader xi jinping first raised the issue of '' sinicization of islam '' . in 2018 , a confidential directive was issued ordering local officials to '' prevent islam from interfering with secular life and the state ’ s functions '' . yang faming , leader of the islamic association of china , said in a 2018 speech that '' we must allow traditional chinese culture to permeate islam and jointly guard the spiritual homeland of the chinese people . '' he encouraged chinese characteristics to be present in religious ceremony , culture , and architecture . in 2018 , over one million chinese government workers began forcibly living in the homes of uyghur muslim families to monitor and assess resistance to assimilation , and to watch for frowned-upon religious or cultural practices . these government workers were trained to call themselves '' relatives '' and have been described in chinese state media as being a key part of enhancing '' ethnic unity '' . , it was estimated that chinese authorities may have detained one and a half million people in secretive re-education camps . the vast majority of those forcibly interned are muslim uyghurs but others including kazakhs , kyrgyz and other ethnic turkic muslims , christians as well as some foreign citizens such as kazakhstanis , are being held in these secretive internment camps as well . . in popular culture . in some forms of fiction , due to china 's communist statehood , soviet-themed characters are de-sovietized and switched over to become chinese to fit modern ( post-cold war ) times . the original cut of the 2012 red dawn remake depicted a chinese invasion before having said information leaked to global times , sparking controversy in china and threatening its airing in the country ( the invaders were changed to north koreans ) . in 2006 , chinese versions of the marvel comics ' crimson dynamo and chang lam were created and made members of the liberators in the ultimates 2 . see also . sinocentrism desinicization east asian cultural sphere east asian buddhism sinicization of tibet taiwanization conquest dynasty new qing history arabization russification westernization japanization americanization korean wave taiwanese wave