1970 in music

specific locations . 1970 in british music 1970 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1970 in country music 1970 in heavy metal music 1970 in jazz . events . january 3 – ex-pink floyd frontman syd barrett releases his first solo album the madcap laughs . january 4 – the who drummer keith moon fatally runs over his chauffeur with his bentley trying to escape a mob outside a pub . the death is later ruled an accident . january 7 – max yasgur , owner of the new york farm where the 1969 woodstock festival was held , is sued for 35,000 in property damages by neighboring farmers . january 9 – led zeppelin performs at the royal albert hall . john bonham plays a fifteen minute rendition of '' moby dick '' . january 14 – the supremes perform for the last time together at the frontier hotel in las vegas . january 16 – john lennon 's london art gallery exhibit of lithographs , bag one , is shut down by scotland yard for displaying '' erotic lithographs '' . january 24 – james '' shep '' sheppard , of the heartbeats and shep and the limelites , is found murdered in his car on the long island expressway . january 26 – simon & garfunkel release their final album together , bridge over troubled water . the title track and album stay 1 on the billboard charts for six weeks and go on to win a record six grammys at the 13th grammy awards , including '' record of the year '' , '' song of the year '' , and '' album of the year . '' in britain it tops the album chart at regular intervals over the next two years , and becomes the best-selling album in britain during the 1970s . january 27 – miles davis makes the final recordings for his experimental album circle in the round , featuring sitar and tabla . january 28 – the newly formed band of gypsies breaks up when guitarist jimi hendrix walks out after playing just two songs , telling the audience '' i 'm sorry we just ca n't get it together '' . february 11 – the film the magic christian , starring peter sellers and ringo starr , is premiered in new york city . the film 's soundtrack album , including badfinger 's '' come and get it '' ( written and produced by paul mccartney ) , is released on apple records . february 13 – english band black sabbath release their black sabbath ( album ) in the u.k . , credited as the first major album in the heavy metal genre . february 14 – the who records live at leeds in yorkshire , england . the grateful dead plays an equally historic concert on the same date at the fillmore east , new york city . february 17 – joni mitchell announces that she is retiring from live performances , following her show at london 's royal albert hall . she would be back performing concerts within a year . february 23 – ringo starr appears on the television show rowan & martin 's laugh-in . february 27 – jefferson airplane is fined 1,000 for using profanity during a concert in oklahoma city , oklahoma . february 28 – led zeppelin perform in copenhagen under the pseudonym the nobs , to avoid a threatened lawsuit by count eva von zeppelin , descendant of airship designer ferdinand von zeppelin . march 4 – janis joplin is fined 200 for using obscene language during a concert performance in tampa , florida . march 6 – cult leader and suspected murderer charles manson releases an album titled lie : the love and terror cult to help finance his defense . march 7 – mountain , one of the many bands credited as having influence in the development of heavy metal music , releases climbing ! , their debut album . march 11 – the 12th annual grammy awards are presented in chicago , los angeles , nashville , new york and atlanta . blood , sweat & tears ' self-titled album wins album of the year , the 5th dimension 's '' aquarius/let the sunshine in '' wins record of the year and joe south 's '' games people play '' wins song of the year . crosby , stills & nash win best new artist . march 15 – west german pavilion at expo '70 in osaka features 5½ hours ' daily live performances of the music of karlheinz stockhausen ( to september 13 ) . march 19 – david bowie marries model angela bowie . march 21 – in amsterdam , dana wins the 15th annual eurovision song contest for ireland with the song all kinds of everything . she is elected to the european parliament some 29 years later . march 25 – josé josé gives a masterful performance of the song '' el triste '' at the '' latin song festival ii '' , predecessor of the oti festival . march 26 – peter yarrow ( of peter , paul and mary ) pleads guilty to '' taking immoral liberties '' with a 14-year-old girl in washington , d.c . , on august 31 , 1969 . april 2 – the london magistrate 's court hears arguments on john lennon 's indecency summons for his exhibition of erotic lithographs during his art exhibit on january 16 . april 3 – minneapolis nightclub the depot opens , eventually renamed to first avenue . april 10 – paul mccartney publicly announces that he has left the beatles in a press release , written in mock-interview style , that is included in promotional copies of his first solo album and headlined in the daily mirror newspaper in the united kingdom . april 14 – michael nesmith announces he has left the monkees . april 17 – johnny cash performs at the white house at the invitation of president richard nixon . april 20 – paul mccartney 's first solo album , mccartney , is released . april 24 – grace slick of jefferson airplane is invited to a tea party at the white house by tricia nixon , daughter of u.s . president richard nixon . slick arrives at the party with abbie hoffman , who is on trial for conspiring to riot at the 1968 democratic national convention . the pair planned to spike nixon 's tea cup with a heavy dose of lsd . slick is recognized ( although hoffman is not ) and told to leave because she is on the fbi list . may 4 – charles wuorinen , 32 , becomes the youngest composer ever to win the pulitzer prize for music . may 8 – the beatles ' last lp , let it be , is released . may 16 randy bachman leaves the guess who to start up brave belt . the who release live at leeds which is their first live album . since its initial reception , live at leeds has been cited by several music critics as the best live rock recording of all time . may 20 – the beatles ' film let it be premières in london and liverpool . none of the four band members are present at either screening . may 23–24 – grateful dead make their first british appearance at hollywood festival , newcastle-under-lyme , on a bill also featuring black sabbath , free , and josé feliciano . everyone is completely upstaged by the previously unknown mungo jerry , whose debut single '' in the summertime '' becomes the best-selling hit of the year . june – australian composer peter sculthorpe receives the mbe in the queen 's birthday honours . june 3 – kinks singer ray davies makes a 6000-mile round trip from new york to london and back- interrupting the band 's american tour- to re-record one word on their latest single '' lola '' . in order to get any airplay in great britain he has to change the word '' coca-cola '' to a more subtle '' cherry cola '' . june 7 – the who play two shows of tommy , at the new york metropolitan opera house . june 13 '' the long and winding road '' becomes the beatles ' last u.s . number 1 song , though it is never released as a single in britain . the long and winding road the stooges play at the cincinnati pop festival , midsummer rock . july 4 – the music countdown show american top 40 debuts . july 17 – the guess who perform at the white house for richard nixon and his guest the prince of wales . at pat nixon 's request , they do not play their breakthrough hit '' american woman '' due to the song 's supposed anti-american lyrics . july 26 – guitarist jimi hendrix plays at his hometown of seattle at sicks stadium where , under the influence of drugs , he starts verbally abusing members of the audience . august 3 – janis joplin makes her final tv appearance , on the dick cavett show . august 26–30 – the isle of wight festival 1970 takes place on east afton farm off the coast of england . some 600,000 people attend the largest rock festival of all time . artists include the moody blues , jimi hendrix , the who , the doors , chicago , leonard cohen , miles davis , richie havens , john sebastian , joan baez , ten years after , emerson , lake & palmer and jethro tull . august 30 – the rolling stones open their european tour in malmö , sweden . september 6 – during his final european tour , guitarist jimi hendrix is greeted by booing and jeering by german fans as a result of his late appearance on stage and incoherent stage performance . bassist billy cox quits the tour and returns to the united states . september 17 – jimi hendrix makes his last appearance , with eric burdon & war jamming at ronnie scotts club in london . hendrix , aged 27 , dies the following day from a barbiturate overdose at his london hotel . october 4 – janis joplin is found dead in her bedroom in the landmark motor hotel in hollywood . she died from a heroin overdose , at the age of 27 . october 10 – newly independent fiji adopts god bless fiji as its national anthem . october 30 – jim morrison of the doors , found guilty of indecent exposure and profanity because of his behavior during a march 1 , 1969 , concert , is sentenced to eight months of hard labor and a 500 fine . jim morrison bares all jim morrison encore music entertainment weekly november 9 – the blues rock studio double album layla and other assorted love songs , the only album by derek and the dominos , is released , initially in the united states , the first presentation of the classic title track , '' layla '' , by english guitarist eric clapton and american drummer jim gordon . november 12 – after yehudi menuhin accepts honorary citizenship from switzerland , he receives a letter from the united states state department telling him that both he and his son will lose their us citizenship as a result . '' citizenship in peril , us advises menuhin '' , milwaukee journal , december 7 , 1970 . accessed august 8 , 2014 november 20 – kinks singer ray davies flies to a london studio to re-record one word in a new kinks single for the second time in 1970 . this time , he has to change a line in '' apeman '' - '' the air pollution is a-foggin ' up my eyes '' which sounds too much like '' a-fuckin ' '' . november 23 – the electric factory concert venue in philadelphia , pennsylvania ' closes its doors . december 8 – john lennon conducts a lengthy and intensely candid interview with jann wenner of rolling stone magazine . he discusses his new solo album and the influence of primal therapy on its creation , as well as his personal traumas dating back to childhood . he also makes many revelations about his time in the beatles , including his account of the group 's breakup . december 12 – the doors play their final concert with singer jim morrison at the warehouse in new orleans , louisiana . after the concert the doors decide that they will not play live anymore due to morrisons unpredictable live persona . december 31 the beatles officially and finally split up after 10 years . . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1970 . bands disbanded . the beatles break up permanently . the nice disband . bonzo dog doo-dah band split , with reunions in 1972 , 1988 , and 2006 . simon & garfunkel – both members of the duo go on to solo careers , although they have reunited and performed together numerous times since breaking up . the turtles ( reform in 1983 ) dave clark 5 many members would leave and new members formed 'dave clark & friends ' which lasted until 1973 . see also musical groups disestablished in 1970 . albums released . in 1970 , 4,000 albums and 5,700 singles were released in the us . solid gold : the popular record industry r . serge denisoff . january . . top hits – us and uk singles . published popular songs . '' an american trilogy '' medley written & arranged by mickey newbury '' bein ' green '' w.m . joe raposo , from the tv series sesame street '' have you ever seen the rain ? '' w.m . john fogerty '' i love youuuuuu '' w.m . jeff moss , from the tv series sesame street '' if not for you '' w.m . bob dylan '' kentucky rain '' w.m . eddie rabbitt & dick heard '' the ladies who lunch '' w.m . stephen sondheim . introduced by elaine stritch in the musical company . '' lookin ' out my back door '' w.m . john fogerty '' people in your neighborhood '' w.m . jeff moss , from the tv series sesame street '' rubber duckie '' w.m . jeff moss , from the tv series sesame street '' teach your children '' w.m . graham nash '' ( they long to be ) close to you '' w . hal david m . burt bacharach '' who 'll stop the rain '' w.m . john fogerty '' where do i begin '' ( love story ) – w . carl sigman , m . francis lai . classical music . sir arthur bliss – concerto for cello and orchestra george crumb ancient voices of children for mezzo-soprano , boy soprano , oboe , mandolin , harp , amplified piano ( and toy piano ) , and percussion ( three players ) black angels ( images i ) for electric string quartet mario davidovsky – synchronisms no . 6 for piano and electronic sound charles dodge – earth 's magnetic field henri dutilleux – figures de résonances for two pianos morton feldman madame press died last week at ninety the viola in my life 1 , 2 and 3 luc ferrari – presque rien no . 1 '' le lever du jour au bord de la mer '' miloslav kabeláč – symphony no . 8 ( kabeláč ) györgy ligeti – continuum witold lutosławski – concerto for cello and orchestra olivier messiaen – la fauvette des jardins allan pettersson – symphony no . 9 poul ruders – piano sonata no . 1 karlheinz stockhausen expo for three players with short-wave radios , and sound projectionist mantra for two pianos and live electronics pole for two players with short-wave radios , and sound projectionist . opera . herman d . koppel – macbeth . jazz . musical theater . 1776 , london production applause ( book : betty comden & adolph green , lyrics : lee adams , music : charles strouse ) – broadway production opened at the palace theater and ran for 896 performances the boy friend ( sandy wilson ) – broadway revival cabaret ( kander and ebb ) – vienna production company ( stephen sondheim ) – broadway production opened at the alvin theater and ran for 705 performances dames at sea , broadway revival georgy , broadway production opened at the winter garden theater and ran for four performances golden bat off-broadway production opened at the sheridan square playhouse on july 21 and ran for 152 performances the great waltz , london production look to the lilies ( jule styne and sammy cahn ) – broadway production opened at the lunt-fontanne theatre and ran for 25 performances the me nobody knows , started as an off-broadway production , then moved to broadway , where it ran for 378 performances minnie 's boys , broadway production opened at the imperial theatre and ran for 80 performances purlie , broadway production opened at the broadway theatre and ran for 688 performances the rothschilds ( book : sherman yellen , lyrics : sheldon harnick , music : jerry bock ) , broadway production opened at the lunt-fontanne theatre on october 19 and ran for 507 performances . starring hal linden , jill clayburgh and paul hecht . two by two , broadway production opened at the imperial theatre and ran for ten months . musical films . the aristocats , animated feature film with the voices of phil harris , eva gabor , thurl ravenscroft , hermione baddeley and sterling holloway darling lili , starring julie andrews , rock hudson , lance percival and jeremy kemp dastak , hindi film starring sanjeev kumar johny mera naam , hindi film starring dev anand and pran let it be , a documentary film featuring the beatles on a clear day you can see forever starring barbra streisand , yves montand and bob newhart peau d'âne , starring catherine deneuve and jean marais , with music by michel legrand scrooge , starring albert finney , alec guinness , kenneth more , suzanne neve and anton rodgers song of norway , starring toralv maurstad , florence henderson and harry secombe . woodstock , a documentary film featuring jimi hendrix , the who , jefferson airplane , canned heat and others . births . january – frank mullen , american rock singer ( suffocation ) january 2 eric whitacre , composer karen kamensek , orchestra conductor january 9 carl bell , american singer-songwriter , guitarist , and producer lara fabian , canadian-belgian singer mia x , rapper alex staropoli , italian keyboard player and songwriter january 12 zack de la rocha ( rage against the machine ) raekwon , rapper january 18 – dj quik , rapper and record producer january 20 – edwin mccain , american singer-songwriter and guitarist january 23 – brendan o'connor , irish singer and television host january 26 – kirk franklin , gospel singer january 27 – mark trojanowski ( sister hazel ) january 31 minnie driver , english singer-songwriter and actress danny michel , canadian singer-songwriter and producer february 18 susan egan , american actress and singer raine maida , canadian musician and beat poet february 26 – linda brava , finnish violinist february 28 – daniel handler , accordionist and arranger ( the magnetic fields ) march 5 – john frusciante , american guitarist , singer , producer and composer ( red hot chili peppers ) march 7 – vladislav adelkhanov , russian classical violinist and writer march 9 la india , salsa singer shannon leto , american drummer and songwriter ( thirty seconds to mars ) march 12 – roy khan , norwegian singer-songwriter march 17 – gene ween , guitarist and vocalist ( ween ) march 18 – queen latifah , american rapper , singer and actress march 21 – jaya , filipino singer and television personality march 24 – sharon corr , irish musician march 25 – teri moïse , american singer march 27 brendan hill , drummer ( blues traveler ) mariah carey , american singer and songwriter april 4 – sean kelly , canadian musician april 5 – miho hatori , japanese singer and songwriter ( cibo matto ) april 6 – joe gittleman , guitarist ( the mighty mighty bosstones ) april 10 – mike mushok , guitarist ( staind ) april 11 – delroy pearson , british singer ( five star ) april 12 – nick hexum , american singer and guitarist april 13 eduardo capetillo , mexican actor and singer seagram , american rapper ( d . 1996 ) april 17 – redman , rapper april 18 – greg eklund , american rock drummer ( everclear ) april 19 – luis miguel , mexican singer april 20 – phife dawg , rapper april 22 – regine velasquez , filipino singer , actress , model and record producer april 26 – tionne '' t-boz '' watkins , singer and songwriter tlc may 4 – gregg alexander , american singer , songwriter and producer ( new radicals ) may 9 – ghostface killah , american rapper may 10 – perry blake , irish singer-songwriter may 15 – attrell cordes ( p.m . dawn ) may 17 – jordan knight , american singer ( new kids on the block ) may 18 – billy howerdel , guitarist , songwriter and producer ( a perfect circle ) june 2 – b-real , rapper ( cypress hill ) june 3 – peter tägtgren , swedish musician ( hypocrisy ) june 8 – seu jorge , brazilian pop samba singer songwriter june 10 – mike doughty , american singer june 13 – rivers cuomo , american singer , guitarist and songwriter ( weezer ) june 15 – claus norreen , danish musician and record producer ( aqua ) june 17 – sasha sokol , mexican singer june 19 mj hibbett , english singer-songwriter brian welch , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( korn and love and death ) june 20 – jason robert brown , american playwright and composer june 21 eric reed , american pianist and composer ( black note ) pete rock , american rapper and producer ( pete rock & cl smooth ) june 22 – steven page , canadian singer and songwriter ( barenaked ladies ) june 23 – yann tiersen , breton musician june 24 – glenn medeiros , american singer july 4 – christian giesler , american bass player ( kreator ) july 6 – morten ryelund sørensen , danish violinist and conductor july 8 – beck , american singer , songwriter , rapper , record producer , and multi-instrumentalist july 10 gary levox , american singer jason orange , british singer ( take that ) july 12 – juba kalamka , american rapper ( deep dickollective ) july 14 – thomas lauderdale , american pianist ( pink martini ) july 15 – chi cheng ( musician ) , american rock bassist july 26 – joan as police woman ( joan wasser ) , american singer-songwriter august 3 – itamar golan , israeli pianist august 11 – andy bell , british bassist , guitarist , singer-songwriter , and producer august 19 – fat joe , american rapper august 23 – river phoenix , american actor and singer of aleka 's attic ( d . 1993 ) august 24 – kristyn robyn osborn , american country singer ( shedaisy ) august 28 – sherrié austin , australian actress and singer august 30 – guang liang , malaysian singer august 31 debbie gibson , american singer-songwriter epic mazur , american vocalist , rapper , and record producer september 4 – daisy dee , dutch singer september 5 – liam lynch , songwriter and music video director september 6 cheyne coates , australian edm-pop singer-songwriter and producer ( madison avenue ) kim english , american electronica , soul , gospel , and house music singer ( d . 2019 ) september 7 – chad sexton , drummer ( 311 ) september 8 benny ibarra , mexican singer neko case , american singer-songwriter ( k d lang , case/lang/veirs , the new pornographers ) september 9 – macy gray , american r & b and soul singer-songwriter , musician , record producer and actress september 10 jeff marx , american broadway composer ménélik , french rapper september 14 – craig montoya , bassist ( everclear ) september 15 – jukka jokikokko , finnish musician and studio engineer september 19 – takanori nishikawa , singer and actor ( t.m . revolution ) september 23 – ani difranco , american singer , multi-instrumentalist , poet , songwriter , feminist icon and businesswoman october 5 – south park mexican , chiacno rapper october 6 – amy jo johnson , american actress and singer october 13 – paul potts , british tenor october 15 eric benét , american singer ginuwine , american singer , songwriter , dancer and actor . october 21 – tony mortimer , british singer ( east 17 ) october 24 – jarkko martikainen , finnish rock musician october 27 – adrian erlandsson , swedish drummer october 31 – linn berggren , swedish musician ( ace of base ) november 2 – ely buendia , filipino rock lead singer and rhythm guitarist ( the eraserheads ) november 7 – neil hannon , northern irish musician ( the divine comedy ) november 9 susan tedeschi , american musician and singer scarface , american rapper november 12 – sarah harmer , canadian singer-songwriter and guitarist november 15 – jack ingram , american singer-songwriter and guitarist november 20 – q-tip , rapper december 1 – jonathan coulton , american folk rock singer-songwriter december 2 sergei krylov , violinist treach , american rapper ( naughty by nature ) december 6 – ulf ekberg , swedish musician ( ace of base ) december 9 – kara dioguardi , american singer-songwriter , producer , television judge , musician , record producer , music publisher , a & r executive , composer and tv personality december 14 – beth orton , british singer-songwriter december 16 – benjamin kowalewicz , canadian musician december 18 dmx , american rapper cowboy troy , american singer and rapper december 24 – will oldham , american musician december 29 – aled jones , welsh boy soprano , later baritone date unknown – ralph farris , american violist , violinist , composer , arranger , producer and conductor ( ethel ) . deaths . january 5 – roberto gerhard , composer , 73 january 9 – jani christou , composer , 44 ( car accident ) january 17 simon kovar , bassoonist billy stewart , scat singer , 32 ( car accident ) january 25 – jane bathori , opera singer , 92 january 31 – slim harpo , blues musician , 46 ( heart attack ) february 1 – blaž arnič , composer , 69 ( car crash ) february 12 ishmon bracey , blues musician , 69 nick pantas , guitarist ( elf ) ( car accident ) andré souris , composer and writer , 70 february 19 – pavel ludikar , operatic bass , 87 february 20 – albert wolff , conductor , 86 march 1 – lucille hegamin , blues singer , 75 march 16 – tammi terrell , singer , 24 ( brain tumor ) april 12 – kerstin thorborg , operatic contralto , 73 april 20 – shakeel badayuni , songwriter , 53 ( diabetes-related ) april 21 – earl hooker , blues musician , 41 ( tuberculosis ) april 23 – adeline genée , ballerina april 24 – otis spann , blues musician , 40 ( liver cancer ) april 26 – gypsy rose lee , burlesque entertainer , 59 ( cancer ) may 11 – johnny hodges , jazz musician may 14 – jack fina , pianist and bandleader , 56 ( heart attack ) may 22 – john waterhouse , canadian violinist , conductor , and music educator , 92 may 23 – nydia westman , actress and singer june – calvin boze , trumpeter and bandleader june 11 – earl grant , pianist and singer , 39 ( car accident ) june 16 heino eller , composer and music teacher lonnie johnson , blues and jazz musician july 7 – charles tobias , us songwriter and singer july 12 – l . wolfe gilbert , russian-born us songwriter july 13 – roger edens , composer and arranger , 64 july 14 – luis mariano , singer and actor july 17 – stanley wilson , conductor , arranger and film composer , 54 ( heart attack ) july 23 – leith stevens , composer , 60 ( heart attack ) july 29 – sir john barbirolli , conductor and cellist , 70 ( heart attack ) july 29 – jonel perlea , romanian conductor , 69 july 30 – george szell , conductor and composer , 73 ( cancer ) july 31 – booker ervin , jazz musician , 39 ( kidney failure ) august 10 – bernd alois zimmermann , german composer , 52 ( suicide ) september 2 mercedes llopart , operatic soprano , 75 kees van baaren , composer and music teacher , 63 september 3 – alan wilson , singer of canned heat , 27 ( drug overdose ) september 18 jimi hendrix , guitarist and singer , 27 ( pulmonary aspiration ) maxwell davis , saxophonist , 54 september 25 – yefim golyshev , ukrainian violinist , painter and composer , 73 october 2 – bo linde , swedish composer , 37 october 4 janis joplin , singer , 27 ( heroin overdose ) george frederick mckay , composer , 71 october 13 – julia culp , operatic soprano ( '' the dutch nightingale '' ) , 90 october 22 pauline donalda , operatic soprano , 88 samson françois , pianist , 46 october 28 – baby huey , singer , 26 ( heart attack ) october 31 – arvid andersen , violinist , conductor and composer november 6 – agustín lara , composer , 73 november 7 – eddie peabody , banjo player , 68 november 19 – maria yudina , pianist , 71 november 25 – albert ayler , saxophonist and composer , 34 december 19 – giulia recli , composer and writer , 80 december 23 – mimi benzell , operatic soprano , 46 ( cancer ) december 31 ray henderson , songwriter , 74 cyril scott , composer , 91 date unknown efisio melis , folk musician rokneddin mokhtari , iranian violinist . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1970 . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1970