Very Large Telescope

general information . the vlt consists of an arrangement of four large ( 8.2 metre diameter ) telescopes ( called unit telescopes or uts ) with optical elements that can combine them into an astronomical interferometer ( vlti ) , which is used to resolve small objects . the interferometer also includes a set of four 1.8 meter diameter movable telescopes dedicated to interferometric observations . the first of the uts started operating in may 1998 and was offered to the astronomical community on 1 april 1999 . the other telescopes became operational in 1999 and 2000 , enabling multi-telescope vlt capability . four 1.8-metre auxiliary telescopes ( ats ) have been added to the vlti to make it available when the uts are being used for other projects . these ats were installed and became operational between 2004 and 2007 . the vlt 's 8.2-meter telescopes were originally designed to operate in three modes : as a set of four independent telescopes ( this is the primary mode of operation ) . as a single large coherent interferometric instrument ( the vlt interferometer or vlti ) , for extra resolution . this mode is used for observations of relatively bright sources with small angular extent . as a single large incoherent instrument , for extra light-gathering capacity . the instrumentation required to obtain a combined incoherent focus was not originally built . in 2009 , new instrumentation proposals were put forward to potentially make that observing mode available . multiple telescopes are sometimes independently pointed at the same object , either to increase the total light-gathering power or to provide simultaneous observations with complementary instruments . unit telescopes . . interferometry . in its interferometric operating mode , the light from the telescopes is reflected off mirrors and directed through tunnels to a central beam combining laboratory . in the year 2001 , during commissioning , the vlti successfully measured the angular diameters of four red dwarfs including proxima centauri . during this operation it achieved an angular resolution of ±0.08 milli-arc-seconds ( 0.388 nano-radians ) . this is comparable to the resolution achieved using other arrays such as the navy prototype optical interferometer and the chara array . unlike many earlier optical and infrared interferometers , the astronomical multi-beam recombiner ( amber ) instrument on vlti was initially designed to perform coherent integration ( which requires signal-to-noise greater than one in each atmospheric coherence time ) . using the big telescopes and coherent integration , the faintest object the vlti can observe is magnitude 7 in the near infrared for broadband observations , similar to many other near infrared / optical interferometers without fringe tracking . in 2011 , an incoherent integration mode was introduced called amber '' blind mode '' , which is more similar to the observation mode used at earlier interferometer arrays such as coast , iota and chara . in this '' blind mode '' , amber can observe sources as faint as k 10 in medium spectral resolution . at more challenging mid-infrared wavelengths , the vlti can reach magnitude 4.5 , significantly fainter than the infrared spatial interferometer . when fringe tracking is introduced , the limiting magnitude of the vlti is expected to improve by a factor of almost 1000 , reaching a magnitude of about 14 . this is similar to what is expected for other fringe tracking interferometers . in spectroscopic mode , the vlti can currently reach a magnitude of 1.5 . the vlti can work in a fully integrated way , so that interferometric observations are actually quite simple to prepare and execute . the vlti has become worldwide the first general user optical/infrared interferometric facility offered with this kind of service to the astronomical community . because of the many mirrors involved in the optical train , about 95 percent of the light is lost before reaching the instruments at a wavelength of 1 & nbsp ; µm , 90 percent at 2 & nbsp ; µm and 75 percent at 10 & nbsp ; µm . this refers to reflection off 32 surfaces including the coudé train , the star separator , the main delay line , beam compressor and feeding optics . additionally , the interferometric technique is such that it is very efficient only for objects that are small enough that all their light is concentrated . for instance , an object with a relatively low surface brightness such as the moon can not be observed , because its light is too diluted . only targets which are at temperatures of more than 1,000°c have a surface brightness high enough to be observed in the mid-infrared , and objects must be at several thousands of degrees celsius for near-infrared observations using the vlti . this includes most of the stars in the solar neighborhood and many extragalactic objects such as bright active galactic nuclei , but this sensitivity limit rules out interferometry observations of most solar-system objects . although the use of large telescope diameters and adaptive optics correction can improve the sensitivity , this can not extend the reach of optical interferometry beyond nearby stars and the brightest active galactic nuclei . because the unit telescopes are used most of the time independently , they are used in the interferometric mode mostly during bright time ( that is , close to full moon ) . at other times , interferometry is done using 1.8 meter auxiliary telescopes ( ats ) , which are dedicated to full-time interferometric measurements . the first observations using a pair of ats were conducted in february 2005 , and all the four ats have now been commissioned . for interferometric observations on the brightest objects , there is little benefit in using 8 meter telescopes rather than 1.8 meter telescopes . the first two instruments at the vlti were vinci ( a test instrument used to set up the system , now decommissioned ) and midi , which only allow two telescopes to be used at any one time . with the installation of the three-telescope amber closure-phase instrument in 2005 , the first imaging observations from the vlti are expected soon . deployment of the phase referenced imaging and microarcsecond astrometry ( prima ) instrument started 2008 with the aim to allow phase-referenced measurements in either an astrometric two-beam mode or as a fringe-tracker successor to vinci , operated concurrent with one of the other instruments . after falling drastically behind schedule and failing to meet some specifications , in december 2004 the vlt interferometer became the target of a second eso '' recovery plan '' . this involves additional effort concentrated on improvements to fringe tracking and the performance of the main delay lines . note that this only applies to the interferometer and not other instruments on paranal . in 2005 , the vlti was routinely producing observations , although with a brighter limiting magnitude and poorer observing efficiency than expected . , the vlti had already led to the publication of 89 peer-reviewed publications and had published a first-ever image of the inner structure of the mysterious eta carinae . in march 2011 , the pionier instrument for the first time simultaneously combined the light of the four unit telescopes , potentially making vlti the biggest optical telescope in the world . however , this attempt was not really a success . the first successful attempt was in february 2012 , with four telescopes combined into a 130-meter diameter mirror . in march 2019 , eso astronomers , employing the instruments on their very large telescope interferometer ( vlti ) , announced the first direct detection of an exoplanet , hr 8799 e , using interferometry . . in popular culture . one of the large mirrors of the telescopes was the subject of an episode of the national geographic channel 's reality series world 's toughest fixes , where a crew of engineers removed and transported the mirror to be cleaned and re-coated with aluminium . the job required battling strong winds , fixing a broken pump in a giant washing machine and resolving a rigging issue . the area surrounding the very large telescope has also been featured in a blockbuster movie . the eso hotel the residencia is an award-winning building , and served as a backdrop for part of the james bond movie quantum of solace . the movie producer , michael g . wilson , said : “ the residencia of paranal observatory caught the attention of our director , marc forster and production designer , dennis gassner , both for its exceptional design and its remote location in the atacama desert . it is a true oasis and the perfect hide out for dominic greene , our villain , whom 007 is tracking in our new james bond film . ” . see also . cerro tololo inter-american observatory european extremely large telescope extremely large telescope la silla observatory list of largest optical reflecting telescopes llano de chajnantor observatory mauna kea observatories overwhelmingly large telescope paranal observatory roque de los muchachos observatory . references . external links . eso vlt official site for the 8 m and 1.8 m telescopes . eso vlti official site for the interferometer ( combining the telescopes ) auxiliary telescopes - very large telescope interferometer full list of the vlt instruments including those of vlti worldwide telescope web client including archives from the vlt vlt images eso interferometry delay lines for the very large telescopes dutch space travelogue vlt visit world 's toughest fixes bond paranal website .