Peripheral membrane protein

binding to the lipid bilayer . thumb peripheral membrane proteins may interact with other proteins or directly with the lipid bilayer . in the latter case , they are then known as amphitropic proteins . some proteins , such as g-proteins and certain protein kinases , interact with transmembrane proteins and the lipid bilayer simultaneously . some polypeptide hormones , antimicrobial peptides , and neurotoxins accumulate at the membrane surface prior to locating and interacting with their cell surface receptor targets , which may themselves be peripheral membrane proteins . the phospholipid bilayer that forms the cell surface membrane consists of a hydrophobic inner core region sandwiched between two regions of hydrophilicity , one at the inner surface and one at the outer surface of the cell membrane ( see lipid bilayer article for a more detailed structural description of the cell membrane ) . the inner and outer surfaces , or interfacial regions , of model phospholipid bilayers have been shown to have a thickness of around 8 to 10 å , although this may be wider in biological membranes that include large amounts of gangliosides or lipopolysaccharides . the hydrophobic inner core region of typical biological membranes may have a thickness of around 27 to 32 å , as estimated by small angle x-ray scattering ( saxs ) . the boundary region between the hydrophobic inner core and the hydrophilic interfacial regions is very narrow , at around 3å , ( see lipid bilayer article for a description of its component chemical groups ) . moving outwards away from the hydrophobic core region and into the interfacial hydrophilic region , the effective concentration of water rapidly changes across this boundary layer , from nearly zero to a concentration of around 2 m . the phosphate groups within phospholipid bilayers are fully hydrated or saturated with water and are situated around 5 å outside the boundary of the hydrophobic core region ( see figures ) . some water-soluble proteins associate with lipid bilayers irreversibly and can form transmembrane alpha-helical or beta-barrel channels . such transformations occur in pore forming toxins such as colicin a , alpha-hemolysin , and others . they may also occur in bcl-2 like protein . these proteins are usually described as peripheral as one of their conformational states is water-soluble or only loosely associated with a membrane . . membrane binding mechanisms . image:1poc.png thumb right 250px bee venom phospholipase a2 ( 1poc ) . middle plane of the lipid bilayer – black dots . boundary of the hydrocarbon core region – red dots ( extracellular side ) . layer of lipid phosphates – yellow dots . the association of a protein with a lipid bilayer may involve significant changes within tertiary structure of a protein . these may include the folding of regions of protein structure that were previously unfolded typical amphitropic proteins must interact strongly with the lipid bilayer in order to perform their biological functions . it has been shown that the membrane binding affinities of many peripheral proteins depend on the specific lipid composition of the membrane with which they are associated . . non-specific hydrophobic association . amphitropic proteins associate with lipid bilayers via various hydrophobic anchor structures . such as amphiphilic α-helixes , exposed nonpolar loops , post-translationally acylated or lipidated amino acid residues , or acyl chains of specifically bound regulatory lipids such as phosphatidylinositols . hydrophobic interactions have been shown to be important even for highly cationic peptides and proteins , such as the polybasic domain of the marcks protein or histactophilin , when their natural hydrophobic anchors are present . . covalently bound lipid anchors . lipid anchored proteins are covalently attached to different fatty acid acyl chains on the cytoplasmic side of the cell membrane via palmitoylation , myristoylation , or prenylation . on the exoplasmic face of the cell membrane , lipid anchored proteins are covalently attached to the lipids glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( gpi ) and cholesterol . protein association with membranes through the use of acylated residues is a reversible process , as the acyl chain can be buried in a protein 's hydrophobic binding pocket after dissociation from the membrane . this process occurs within the beta-subunits of g-proteins . perhaps because of this additional need for structural flexibility , lipid anchors are usually bound to the highly flexible segments of proteins tertiary structure that are not well resolved by protein crystallography . specific protein–lipid binding . thumb some cytosolic proteins are recruited to different cellular membranes by recognizing certain types of lipid found within a given membrane . binding of a protein to a specific lipid occurs via specific membrane-targeting structural domains that occur within the protein and have specific binding pockets for the lipid head groups of the lipids to which they bind . this is a typical biochemical protein–ligand interaction , and is stabilized by the formation of intermolecular hydrogen bonds , van der waals force , and hydrophobic between the protein and lipid ligand . such complexes are also stabilized by the formation of ionic bridges between the aspartate or glutamate residues of the protein and lipid phosphates via intervening calcium ions ( ca 2+ ) . protein–lipid electrostatic interactions . any positively charged protein will be attracted to a negatively charged membrane by nonspecific electrostatic interactions . however , not all peripheral peptides and proteins are cationic , and only certain sides of membrane are negatively charged . these include the cytoplasmic side of cell membranes , the outer leaflet of outer bacterial membranes and mitochondrial membranes . therefore , electrostatic play an important role in protein targeting of electron carriers such as cytochrome c , cationic toxins such as charybdotoxin , and specific membrane-targeting domains such as some ph domains , c1 domains , and c2 domains . electrostatic interactions are strongly dependent on the ionic strength of the solution . these interactions are relatively weak at the physiological ionic strength ( 0.14m nacl ) : ~3 to 4 kcal/mol for small cationic proteins , such as cytochrome c , charybdotoxin or hisactophilin . . spatial position in membrane . orientations and penetration depths of many amphitropic proteins and peptides in membranes are studied using site-directed spin labeling , chemical labeling , measurement of membrane binding affinities of protein mutants , fluorescence spectroscopy , solution or solid-state nmr spectroscopy , atr ftir spectroscopy , x-ray or neutron diffraction , and computational methods . two distinct membrane-association modes of proteins have been identified . typical water-soluble proteins have no exposed nonpolar residues or any other hydrophobic anchors . therefore , they remain completely in aqueous solution and do not penetrate into the lipid bilayer , which would be energetically costly . such proteins interact with bilayers only electrostatically , for example , ribonuclease and poly-lysine interact with membranes in this mode . however , typical amphitropic proteins have various hydrophobic anchors that penetrate the interfacial region and reach the hydrocarbon interior of the membrane . such proteins '' deform '' the lipid bilayer , decreasing the temperature of lipid fluid-gel transition . the binding is usually a strongly exothermic reaction . association of amphiphilic α-helices with membranes occurs similarly . intrinsically unstructured or unfolded peptides with nonpolar residues or lipid anchors can also penetrate the interfacial region of the membrane and reach the hydrocarbon core , especially when such peptides are cationic and interact with negatively charged membranes . . categories . enzymes . peripheral enzymes participate in metabolism of different membrane components , such as lipids ( phospholipases and cholesterol oxidases ) , cell wall oligosaccharides ( glycosyltransferase and transglycosidases ) , or proteins ( signal peptidase and palmitoyl protein thioesterases ) . lipases can also digest lipids that form micelles or nonpolar droplets in water . see also . antimicrobial peptides lipoproteins membrane proteins transmembrane proteins . references . general references . seaton b.a . and roberts m.f . peripheral membrane proteins . pp . & nbsp ; 355–403 . in biological membranes ( eds . k . mertz and b.roux ) , birkhauser boston , 1996 . benga g . protein-lipid interactions in biological membranes , pp . & nbsp ; 159–188 . in structure and properties of biological membranes , vol . 1 ( ed . g . benga ) boca raton crc press , 1985 . kessel a . and ben-tal n . 2002 . free energy determinants of peptide association with lipid bilayers . in current topics in membranes 52 : 205–253 . . external links . peripheral membrane proteins in opm database dolop genomics-oriented database of bacterial lipoproteins peptaibol database antimicrobial peptide database