Thrombosis

signs and symptoms . thrombosis is generally defined by the type of blood vessel affected ( arterial or venous thrombosis ) and the precise location of the blood vessel or the organ supplied by it . venous thrombosis . . deep vein thrombosis . deep vein thrombosis ( dvt ) is the formation of a blood clot within a deep vein . it most commonly affects leg veins , such as the femoral vein . three factors are important in the formation of a blood clot within a deep vein—these are the rate of blood flow , the thickness of the blood and qualities of the vessel wall . classical signs of dvt include swelling , pain and redness of the affected area . paget-schroetter disease . paget-schroetter disease or upper extremity dvt ( uedvt ) is the obstruction of an arm vein ( such as the axillary vein or subclavian vein ) by a thrombus . the condition usually comes to light after vigorous exercise and usually presents in younger , otherwise healthy people . men are affected more than women . budd-chiari syndrome . budd-chiari syndrome is the blockage of a hepatic vein or of the hepatic part of the inferior vena cava . this form of thrombosis presents with abdominal pain , ascites and hepatomegaly . treatment varies between therapy and surgical intervention by the use of shunts . portal vein thrombosis . portal vein thrombosis affects the hepatic portal vein , which can lead to portal hypertension and reduction of the blood supply to the liver . it usually happens in the setting of another disease such as pancreatitis , cirrhosis , diverticulitis or cholangiocarcinoma . renal vein thrombosis . renal vein thrombosis is the obstruction of the renal vein by a thrombus . this tends to lead to reduced drainage from the kidney . cerebral venous sinus thrombosis . cerebral venous sinus thrombosis ( cvst ) is a rare form of stroke which results from the blockage of the dural venous sinuses by a thrombus . symptoms may include headache , abnormal vision , any of the symptoms of stroke such as weakness of the face and limbs on one side of the body and seizures . the diagnosis is usually made with a ct or mri scan . the majority of persons affected make a full recovery . the mortality rate is 4.3 % . . jugular vein thrombosis . jugular vein thrombosis is a condition that may occur due to infection , intravenous drug use or malignancy . jugular vein thrombosis can have a varying list of complications , including : sepsis , pulmonary embolism , and papilledema . though characterized by a sharp pain at the site of the vein , it can prove difficult to diagnose , because it can occur at random . emedicine article on internal jugular vein thrombosis by dale k . mueller . cavernous sinus thrombosis . cavernous sinus thrombosis is a specialised form of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis , where there is thrombosis of the cavernous sinus of the basal skull dura , due to the retrograde spread of infection and endothelial damage from the danger triangle of the face . the facial veins in this area anastomose with the superior and inferior ophthalmic veins of the orbit , which drain directly posteriorly into the cavernous sinus through the superior orbital fissure . staphyloccoal or streptococcal infections of the face , for example nasal or upper lip pustules may thus spread directly into the cavernous sinus , causing stroke-like symptoms of double vision , squint , as well as spread of infection to cause meningitis . arterial thrombosis . arterial thrombosis is the formation of a thrombus within an artery . in most cases , arterial thrombosis follows rupture of atheroma ( a fat-rich deposit in the blood vessel wall ) , and is therefore referred to as atherothrombosis . arterial embolism occurs when clots then migrate downstream , and can affect any organ . alternatively , arterial occlusion occurs as a consequence of embolism of blood clots originating from the heart ( '' cardiogenic '' emboli ) . the most common cause is atrial fibrillation , which causes a blood stasis within the atria with easy thrombus formation , but blood clots can develop inside the heart for other reasons too . stroke . a stroke is the rapid decline of brain function due to a disturbance in the supply of blood to the brain . this can be due to ischemia , thrombus , embolus ( a lodged particle ) or hemorrhage ( a bleed ) . in thrombotic stroke , a thrombus ( blood clot ) usually forms around atherosclerotic plaques . since blockage of the artery is gradual , onset of symptomatic thrombotic strokes is slower . thrombotic stroke can be divided into two categories—large vessel disease and small vessel disease . the former affects vessels such as the internal carotids , vertebral and the circle of willis . the latter can affect smaller vessels such as the branches of the circle of willis . myocardial infarction . myocardial infarction ( mi ) or heart attack , is caused by ischemia , ( restriction in the blood supply ) , often due to the obstruction of a coronary artery by a thrombus . this restriction gives an insufficient supply of oxygen to the heart muscle which then results in tissue death ( infarction ) . a lesion is then formed which is the infarct . mi can quickly become fatal if emergency medical treatment is not received promptly . if diagnosed within 12 hours of the initial episode ( attack ) then thrombolysis is initiated . limb ischemia . an arterial thrombus or embolus can also form in the limbs , which can lead to acute limb ischemia . . other sites . hepatic artery thrombosis usually occurs as a devastating complication after liver transplantation . . causes . thrombosis prevention is initiated with assessing the risk for its development . some people have a higher risk of developing thrombosis and its possible development into thromboembolism . some of these risk factors are related to inflammation . '' virchow 's triad '' has been suggested to describe the three factors necessary for the formation of thrombosis : stasis of blood , vessel wall injury , and altered blood coagulation . some risk factors predispose for venous thrombosis while others increase the risk of arterial thrombosis . mechanism . pathogenesis . the main causes of thrombosis are given in virchow 's triad which lists thrombophilia , endothelial cell injury , and disturbed blood flow . hypercoagulability . hypercoagulability or thrombophilia , is caused by , for example , genetic disorder or autoimmune diseases . recent studies indicate that white blood cells play a pivotal role in deep vein thrombosis , mediating numerous pro-thrombotic actions . . endothelial cell injury . any inflammatory process , such as trauma , surgery or infection , can cause damage to the endothelium of the vessel 's wall . the main mechanism is exposure of tissue factor to the blood coagulation system . labtestsonline > hypercoagulable disorders this article was last reviewed on may 23 , 2007 and was last modified on march 6 , 2010 . inflammatory and other stimuli ( such as hypercholesterolemia ) can lead to changes in gene expression in endothelium producing to a pro-thrombotic state . when this occurs , endothelial cells downregulate substances such as thrombomodulin , which is a key modulator of thrombin activity . the end result is a sustained activation of thrombin and reduced production of protein c and tissue factor inhibitor , which furthers the pro-thrombotic state . endothelial injury is almost invariably involved in the formation of thrombi in arteries , as high rates of blood flow normally hinder clot formation . in addition , arterial and cardiac clots are normally rich in platelets–which are required for clot formation in areas under high stress due to blood flow . . disturbed blood flow . causes of disturbed blood flow include stagnation of blood flow past the point of injury , or venous stasis which may occur in heart failure , or after long periods of sedentary behaviour , such as sitting on a long airplane flight . also , atrial fibrillation , causes stagnant blood in the left atrium ( la ) , or left atrial appendage ( laa ) , and can lead to a thromboembolism . cancers or malignancies such as leukemia may cause increased risk of thrombosis by possible activation of the coagulation system by cancer cells or secretion of procoagulant substances ( paraneoplastic syndrome ) , by external compression on a blood vessel when a solid tumor is present , or ( more rarely ) extension into the vasculature ( for example , renal cell cancers extending into the renal veins ) . also , treatments for cancer ( radiation , chemotherapy ) often cause additional hypercoagulability . there are scores that correlate different aspects of patient data ( comorbidities , vital signs , and others ) to risk of thrombosis , such as the pompe-c , which stratifies risk of mortality due to pulmonary embolism in patients with cancer , who typically have higher rates of thrombosis . also , there are several predictive scores for thromboembolic events , such as padua , khorana , and throly score . . pathophysiology . . natural history . fibrinolysis is the physiological breakdown of blood clots by enzymes such as plasmin . organisation : following the thrombotic event , residual vascular thrombus will be re-organised histologically with several possible outcomes . for an occlusive thrombus ( defined as thrombosis within a small vessel that leads to complete occlusion ) , wound healing will reorganise the occlusive thrombus into collagenous scar tissue , where the scar tissue will either permanently obstruct the vessel , or contract down with myofibroblastic activity to unblock the lumen . for a mural thrombus ( defined as a thrombus in a large vessel that restricts the blood flow but does not occlude completely ) , histological reorganisation of the thrombus does not occur via the classic wound healing mechanism . instead , the platelet-derived growth factor degranulated by the clotted platelets will attract a layer of smooth muscle cells to cover the clot , and this layer of mural smooth muscle will be vascularised by the blood inside the vessel lumen rather than by the vasa vasorum . ischemia/infarction : if an arterial thrombus can not be lysed by the body and it does not embolise , and if the thrombus is large enough to impair or occlude blood flow in the involved artery , then local ischemia or infarction will result . a venous thrombus may or may not be ischemic , since veins distribute deoxygenated blood that is less vital for cellular metabolism . nevertheless , non-ischemic venous thrombosis may still be problematic , due to the swelling caused by blockage to venous drainage . in deep vein thrombosis this manifests as pain , redness , and swelling ; in retinal vein occlusion this may result in macular oedema and visual acuity impairment , which if severe enough can lead to blindness . embolization . a thrombus may become detached and enter circulation as an embolus , finally lodging in and completely obstructing a blood vessel , which unless treated very quickly will lead to tissue necrosis ( an infarction ) in the area past the occlusion . venous thrombosis can lead to pulmonary embolism when the migrated embolus becomes lodged in the lung . in people with a '' shunt '' ( a connection between the pulmonary and systemic circulation ) , either in the heart or in the lung , a venous clot can also end up in the arteries and cause arterial embolism . arterial embolism can lead to obstruction of blood flow through the blood vessel that is obstructed by it , and lack of oxygen and nutrients ( ischemia ) of the downstream tissue . the tissue can become irreversibly damaged , a process known as necrosis . this can affect any organ ; for instance , arterial embolism of the brain is one of the cause of stroke . prevention . the use of heparin following surgery is common if there are no issues with bleeding . generally , a risk-benefit analysis is required , as all anticoagulants lead to an increased risk of bleeding . in people admitted to hospital , thrombosis is a major cause for complications and occasionally death . in the uk , for instance , the parliamentary health select committee heard in 2005 that the annual rate of death due to thrombosis was 25,000 , with at least 50 % of these being hospital-acquired . hence thromboprophylaxis ( prevention of thrombosis ) is increasingly emphasized . in patients admitted for surgery , graded compression stockings are widely used , and in severe illness , prolonged immobility and in all orthopedic surgery , professional guidelines recommend low molecular weight heparin ( lmwh ) administration , mechanical calf compression or ( if all else is contraindicated and the patient has recently suffered deep vein thrombosis ) the insertion of a vena cava filter . in patients with medical rather than surgical illness , lmwh too is known to prevent thrombosis , and in the united kingdom the chief medical officer has issued guidance to the effect that preventative measures should be used in medical patients , in anticipation of formal guidelines . . treatment . the treatment for thrombosis depends on whether it is in a vein or an artery , the impact on the person , and the risk of complications from treatment . anticoagulation . warfarin and vitamin k antagonists are anticoagulants that can be taken orally to reduce thromboembolic occurrence . where a more effective response is required , heparin can be given ( by injection ) concomitantly . as a side effect of any anticoagulant , the risk of bleeding is increased , so the international normalized ratio of blood is monitored . self-monitoring and self-management are safe options for competent patients , though their practice varies . in germany , about 20 % of patients were self-managed while only 1 % of u.s . patients did home self-testing ( according to one 2012 study ) . other medications such as direct thrombin inhibitors and direct xa inhibitors are increasingly being used instead of warfarin . thrombolysis . thrombolysis is the pharmacological destruction of blood clots by administering thrombolytic drugs including tissue plasminogen activator , which enhances the normal destruction of blood clots by the body 's enzymes . this carries an increased risk of bleeding so is generally only used for specific situations ( such as severe stroke or a massive pulmonary embolism ) . surgery . arterial thrombosis may require surgery if it causes acute limb ischemia . endovascular treatment . mechanical clot retrieval and catheter-guided thrombolysis are used in certain situations . . antiplatelet agents . arterial thrombosis is platelet-rich , and inhibition of platelet aggregation with antiplatelet drugs such as aspirin may reduce the risk of recurrence or progression . . targeting ischemia/reperfusion injury . with reperfusion comes ischemia/reperfusion ( ir ) injury ( iri ) , which paradoxically causes cell death in reperfused tissue and contributes significantly to post-reperfusion mortality and morbidity . for example , in a feline model of intestinal ischemia , four hours of ischemia resulted in less injury than three hours of ischemia followed by one hour of reperfusion . in st-elevation myocardial infarction ( stemi ) , iri contributes up to 50 % of final infarct size despite timely primary percutaneous coronary intervention . this is a key reason for the continued high mortality and morbidity in these conditions , despite endovascular reperfusion treatments and continuous efforts to improve timeliness and access to these treatments . hence , protective therapies are required to attenuate iri alongside reperfusion in acute ischemic conditions to improve clinical outcomes . therapeutic strategies that have potential to improve clinical outcomes in reperfused stemi patients include remote ischemic conditioning ( ric ) , exenatide , and metoprolol . these have emerged amongst a multitude of cardioprotective interventions investigated with largely neutral clinical data . of these , ric has the most robust clinical evidence , especially in the context of stemi , but also emerging for other indications such as acute ischemic stroke and aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage .