Differential heat treatment

introduction . differential heat treatment is a method used to alter the properties of various parts of a steel object differently , producing areas that are harder or softer than others . this creates greater toughness in the parts of the object where it is needed , such as the tang or spine of a sword , but produces greater hardness at the edge or other areas where greater impact resistance , wear resistance , and strength is needed . differential heat treatment can often make certain areas harder than could be allowed if the steel was uniformly treated , or '' through treated '' . there are several techniques used to differentially heat treat steel , but they can usually be divided into differential hardening and differential tempering methods . during heat treating , when red-hot steel ( usually between and is quenched , it becomes very hard . however , it will be too hard , becoming very brittle like glass . quenched-steel is usually heated again , slowly and evenly ( usually between and in a process called tempering , to soften the metal , thereby increasing the toughness . however , although this softening of the metal makes the blade less prone to breaking , it makes the edge more susceptible to deformation such as dulling , peening , or curling . knife talk ii : the high performance blade by ed fowler – krause publications 2003 p . 115 differential hardening is a method used in heat treating swords and knife to increase the hardness of the edge without making the whole blade brittle . to achieve this , the edge is cooled faster than the spine by adding a heat insulator to the spine before quenching . clay or another material is used for insulation . to prevent cracking and loss of surface carbon , quenching is usually performed before beveling , shaping , and sharpening the edge . it can also be achieved by carefully pouring water ( perhaps already heated ) onto the edge of a blade as is the case with the manufacture of some kukri . differential hardening technology originated in china and later spread to korea and japan . this technique is mainly used in later chinese jian , chinese dao , and the katana , the traditional japanese sword , and the khukuri , the traditional nepalese knife . most blades made with this technique have visible temper lines . earlier chinese jian from the ancient era ( eg . warring states to han dynasty ) used tempering rather than differential heat treatment . this method is sometimes called differential tempering , but this term more accurately refers to a different technique , which originated with the broadswords of europe . modern versions of differential hardening were developed when sources of rapidly heating the metal were devised , such as an oxy-acetylene torch or induction heating . with flame hardening and induction hardening techniques , the steel is quickly heated to red-hot in a localized area and then quenched . this hardens only part of the object , but leaves the rest unaltered . differential tempering was more commonly used to make cutting tools , although it was sometimes used on knives and swords as well . differential tempering is obtained by quenching the sword uniformly , then tempering one part of it , such as the spine or the center portion of double edged blades . this is usually done with a torch or some other directed heat source . the heated portion of the metal is softened by this process , leaving the edge at the higher hardness . how to make your own steel knifes ( sic ) . primitiveways.com . retrieved on 2012-11-11 . . differential hardening . bladesmithing . differential hardening ( also called differential quenching , selective quenching , selective hardening , or local hardening ) is most commonly used in bladesmithing to increase the toughness of a blade while keeping very high hardness and strength at the edge . this helps to make the blade very resistant to breaking , by making the spine very soft and bendable , but allows greater hardness at the edge than would be possible if the blade was uniformly quenched and tempered . this helps to create a tough blade that will maintain a very sharp , wear-resistant edge , even during rough use such as found in combat . insulation coatings . a differentially hardened blade will usually be coated with an insulating layer , like clay , but leaving the edge exposed . when it is heated to red-hot and quenched , the edge cools quickly , becoming very hard , but the rest cools slowly , becoming much softer . knife talk ii : the high performance blade by ed fowler – krause publications 2003 pp . 114–115 nova secrets of the samurai sword . pbs.org . retrieved on 2012-11-11 . the insulation layer is quite often a mixture of clays , ashes , polishing stone powder , and salts , which protects the back of the blade from cooling very quickly when quenched . japanse swordmaking process ~ www.samuraisword.com . samuraisword.com . retrieved on 2012-11-11 . smith , p . 49 the clay is often applied by painting it on , coating the blade very thickly around the center and spine , but leaving the edge exposed . this allows the edge to cool very quickly , turning it into a very hard microstructure called martensite , but causes the rest of the blade to cool slowly , turning it into a soft microstructure called pearlite . this produces an edge that is exceptionally hard and brittle , but is backed-up by softer , tougher metal . the edge , however , will usually be too hard , so after quenching the entire blade is usually tempered to around for a short time , to bring the hardness of the edge down to around hrc60 on the rockwell hardness scale . the exact composition of the clay mixture , the thickness of the coating , and even the temperature of the water were often closely guarded secrets of the various bladesmithing schools . with the clay mixture , the main goal was to find a mixture that would withstand high temperatures and adhere to the blade without shrinking , cracking , or peeling as it dried . sometimes the back of the blade was coated with clay , leaving the edge exposed . other times the entire blade was coated and then the clay was cut away from the edge . another method was to apply the clay thickly at the back but thinly at the edge , providing a lesser amount of insulation . by controlling the thickness of the edge-coating along with the temperature of the water , the cooling rate of each part of the blade can be controlled to produce the proper hardness upon quenching without the need for further tempering . . quenching . once the coating has dried , the blade is heated slowly and evenly , to prevent the coating from cracking or falling off . after the blade is heated to the proper temperature , which is usually judged by the cherry-red glow ( blackbody radiation ) of the blade , it will change into a phase called austenite . both to help prevent cracking and to produce uniformity in the hardness of each area , the smith will need to ensure that the temperature is even , lacking any hot spots from sitting next to the coals . to prevent this , the blade is usually kept in motion while heating , to distribute the heat more evenly . quenching is often done in low-light conditions , to help accurately judge the color of the glow . typically , the smith will also try to avoid overheating the blade to prevent the metallic crystals from growing too large . at this time the blade will usually be plunged into a vat of water or oil , to quickly remove the heat from the edge . the clay , in turn , insulates the back of the blade , causing it to cool slower than the edge . when the edge cools fast a diffusionless transformation occurs , turning the austenite into very hard martensite . this requires a temperature drop from around 750 °c ( cherry-red ) to 450 °c ( at which point the transformation is complete ) in less than a second to prevent the formation of soft pearlite . because the rest of the blade cools slowly , the carbon in the austenite has time to precipitate , becoming pearlite . the diffusionless transformation causes the edge to '' freeze '' suddenly in a thermal expansion state , but allows the back to contract as it cools slower . this typically causes the blade to bend or curve during quenching , as the back contracts more than the edge . this gives swords like katana and wakizashi their characteristic curved shapes . the blade is usually straight when heated but then bows as it cools ; first curving toward the edge as it contracts , and then away from the edge as the spine contracts more . with slashing-type swords , this curvature helps to facilitate cutting , but increases the chances of cracking during the procedure . up to one third of all swords are often ruined during the quenching process . however , when the sword does not crack , the internal stresses created help increase the toughness of the blade , similar to the increased toughness in tempered glass . the sword may need further shaping after quenching and tempering , to achieve the desired curvature . care must be taken to plunge the sword quickly and vertically ( edge first ) , for if one side enters the quenching fluid before the other the cooling may be asymmetric and cause the blade to bend sideways ( warp ) . because quenching in water tends to cause a sudden loss of surface carbon , the sword will usually be quenched before the edge is beveled and sharpened . after quenching and tempering , the blade was traditionally given a rough shape with a draw knife before sending to a polisher for sharpening , smith , pp . 49–52 although in modern times an electric belt sander is often used instead . metallography . differential hardening will produce two different zones of hardness , which respond differently to grinding , sharpening , and polishing . the back and center of the blade will grind away much quicker than the edge , so the polisher will need to carefully control the angle of the edge , which will affect the geometry of the blade . an inexperienced polisher can quickly ruin a blade by applying too much pressure to the softened areas , rapidly altering the blade 's shape without much change to the hardened zone . smith although both the pearlite and martensite can be polished to a mirror-like shine , only the back and spine are usually polished to such an extent . the hardened portion of the blade ( yakiba ) and the center portion ( hira ) are often given a matte finish instead , to make the differences in the hardness stand out . this causes the various microstructures to reflect light differently when viewed from different angles . the pearlite takes on longer , deeper scratches , and either appears shiny and bright , or sometimes dark depending on the viewing angle . the martensite is harder to scratch , so the microscopic abrasions are smaller . the martensite usually appears brighter yet flatter than the pearlite , and this is less dependent on the viewing angle . when polished or etched with acid to reveal these features , a distinct boundary is observed between the martensite portion of the blade and the pearlite . this boundary is often called the '' temper line '' , or the commonly used japanese term , the '' hamon '' . between the hardened edge and the hamon lies an intermediate zone , called the ' '' nioi '' in japanese , which is usually only visible at long angles . the nioi is about a millimeter or two wide , following the hamon , which is made up of individual martensite grains ( niye ) surrounded by pearlite . the nioi provides a very tough boundary between the yakiba and the hira . smith , pp . 49–52 . decorative hardening . in japan , from the legendary time of the famous smith amakuni , hamons were originally straight and parallel to the edge , but by the twelfth century ad , smiths such as shintogo kunimitsu began producing hamons with very irregular shapes , which provided both mechanical and decorative benefits . by the sixteenth century ad , the japanese smiths often overheated their swords slightly before quenching , to produce rather large niye for aesthetic purposes , even though a larger grain size tended to weaken the sword a bit . during this time , great attention began to be paid in japan to making decorative hamons , by carefully shaping the clay . it became very common during this era to find swords with wavy hamons , flowers or clovers depicted in the temper line , rat 's feet , trees , or other shapes . by the eighteenth century , decorative hamons were often being combined with decorative folding techniques to produce entire landscapes , complete with specific islands , crashing waves , hills , mountains , rivers , and sometimes low spots were cut in the clay to produce niye far away from the hamon , creating effects such as birds in the sky . smith , pp . 41 , 50–51 . benefits and drawbacks . although differential hardening produces a very hard edge , it also leaves the rest of the sword rather soft , which can make it prone to bending under heavy loads , such as parrying a hard blow . it can also make the edge more susceptible to chipping or cracking . swords of this type can usually only be resharpened a few times before reaching the softer metal underneath the edge . however , if properly protected and maintained , these blades can usually hold an edge for long periods of time , even after slicing through bone and flesh , or heavily matted bamboo to simulate cutting through body parts , as is in iaido . the medieval sword in the modern world by michael 'tinker ' pearce – 2007 p . 39 . modern differential hardening . flame hardening . flame hardening is often used to harden only a portion of an object , by quickly heating it with a very hot flame in a localized area , and then quenching the steel . this turns the heated portion into very hard martensite , but leaves the rest unchanged . usually , an oxy-gas torch is used to provide such high temperatures . flame hardening is a very common surface hardening technique , which is often used to provide a very wear-resistant surface . a common use is for hardening the surface of gears , making the teeth more resistant to erosion . the gear will usually be quenched and tempered to a specific hardness first , making a majority of the gear tough , and then the teeth are quickly heated and immediately quenched , hardening only the surface . afterward , it may or may not be tempered again to achieve the final differential hardness . prabhudev , pp . 394–400 this process is often used for knife making , by heating only the edge of a previously quenched and tempered blade . when edge turns the proper color temperature , it is quenched , hardening only the edge , but leaving most of the rest of the blade at the lower hardness . the knife is then tempered again to produce the final differential hardness . blades guide to making knives by joe kertzman – krause publications 2005 p . 47 however , unlike a blade that has been evenly heated and differentially quenched , flame hardening creates a heat-affected zone . unlike the nioi , the boundary between the hot and cold metal formed by this heat-affected zone causes extremely rapid cooling when quenched . when combined with the stresses formed , this creates a very brittle zone between the hard and softer metal , which usually makes this method unsuitable for swords or tools that may be subjected to shear and impact stresses . steel metallurgy for the non-metallurgist by john d . verhoeven – asm international 2007 p . 51 . induction hardening . induction hardening is a surface hardening technique which uses induction coils to provide a very rapid means of heating the metal . with induction heating , the steel can be heated very quickly to red-hot at the surface , before the heat can penetrate any distance into the metal . the surface is then quenched , hardening it , and is often used without further tempering . this makes the surface very resistant to wear , but provides tougher metal directly underneath it , leaving the majority of the object unchanged . a common use for induction hardening is for hardening the bearing surfaces , or '' journals '' , on automotive crankshafts or the rods of hydraulic cylinders . prabhudev , pp . 400–407 . differential tempering . for tempering cutting instruments , softening the back , shaft , or spine , but simultaneously tempering the edge to a very high hardness . the process was very common in ancient europe , for making tools , but soon was applied to knives and swords as well . prabhudev , p . 101 . blacksmithing . the most common use for differential tempering was for heat treating cutting tools , such as axes and chisels , where an extremely hard edge is desired , but some malleability and springiness is needed in the rest of the tool . a chisel with a very hard edge can maintain that edge longer and cut harder materials , but , if the entire chisel was too hard , it would shatter under the hammer blows . differential tempering was often used to provide a very hard cutting edge , but to soften parts of the tool that are subject to impact and shock loading . the complete modern blacksmith by alexander weygers – ten speed press 1997 before a tool is differentially tempered , it is first heated to red-hot and then quenched , hardening the entire tool . this makes the tool much too hard for normal use , so the tool is tempered to reduce the hardness to a more suitable point . however , unlike normal tempering , the tool is not heated evenly . instead , the heat is applied to only a part of the tool , allowing the heat to thermally conduct toward the cooler cutting edge . the quenched-steel is first sanded or polished , to remove any residual oxidation , revealing the bare metal underneath . the steel is then heated in a localized area , such as the hammering-end of a chisel or the handle-end of an axe . the smith then carefully gauges the temperature by watching the tempering colors of the steel . as the steel is heated , these colors will form , ranging from yellow to brown , purple , and blue , and many shades in between , and will indicate the temperature of the steel . as heat is applied , the colors will form near the heat source , and then slowly move across the tool , following the heat as it conducts toward the edge . blacksmithing basics for the homestead by joe delaronde – gibbs smith 2008 p . 101 before the yellow or '' light-straw '' color reaches the edge , the smith removes the heat . the heat will continue to conduct , moving the colors toward the edge for a short time after the heat is removed . when the light-straw color reaches the edge , the smith will usually dip the steel in water , to stop the process . this will generally produce a very hard edge , around hrc58-60 on the rockwell scale , but will leave the opposite end of the tool much softer . the hardness of the cutting edge is generally controlled by the chosen color , but will also be affected primarily by the carbon content in the steel , plus a variety of other factors . the exact hardness of the soft end depends on many factors , but the main one is the speed at which the steel was heated , or how far the colors spread out . the light-straw color is very hard , brittle steel , but the light-blue is softer and very springy . beyond the blue color , when the steel turns grey , it is more likely to be very malleable , which is usually undesirable in a chisel . if the steel is too soft it can bend or mushroom , plastic deformation under the force of the hammer . . grade of temper . unlike with differential hardening , in differential tempering there is no distinct boundary between the harder and softer metals , but the change from hard to soft is very gradual , forming a continuum , or '' grade '' ( gradient ) , of hardness . however , higher heating temperatures cause the colors to spread less , creating a much steeper grade , while lower temperatures can make the change more gradual , using a smaller portion of the entire continuum . the tempering colors only represent a fraction of the entire grade , because the metal turns grey above , making it difficult to judge the temperature , but the hardness will continue to decrease as the temperature rises . fracture mechanics : fourteenth symposium – stp 791 by the american society for testing and materials – astm 1983 pp . 148–150 heat treater 's guide : practices and procedures for irons and steels by harry chandler – asm international pp . 98–99 . guiding the heat . , because the steel may lose too much heat before it can conduct to the edge . sometimes the steel is heated evenly to just below the desired temperature , and then differentially tempered , making it easier to control the temperature change . another way is to partially embed the steel in an insulator , like sand or lime , preventing too much heat loss during tempering . bladesmithing . eventually , this process was applied to swords and knives , to produce mechanical effects that were similar to differential hardening , but with some important differences . to differentially temper a blade , it is first quenched to harden the entire blade evenly . the blade is then heated in a localized area , allowing the heat to flow toward the edge . with single-edged blades , the blade may be tempered with fire or a torch . the blade is heated along the spine and tang only , allowing the heat to conduct to the edge . the heat will need to be applied evenly , allowing the colors to spread evenly across the blade . however , with double-edged blades , the heat source will usually need to be more precisely localized because the heat must be applied evenly along the center of the blade , allowing it to conduct to both edges . often , a red or yellow-hot bar is used to supply the heat , placing it along the center of the blade , typically fitted into a fuller . the art of blacksmithing by dan w . bealer -- castle books 1969 page 359 modern gas torches often have the ability to produce very precise flames . to prevent too much heat loss in the blade , it may be preheated , partially insulated , or sandwiched between two red-hot bars . when the proper color reaches the edge , it is immersed in water to stop the process . the wonder of knifemaking by wayne goddard – krause publications 2011 pp . 47–48 . guiding the heat . differential tempering can be made more difficult by the shape of the blade . when tempering a double-edged sword with a taper along its length , the tip may reach the proper temperature before the shank does . the smith may need to control the temperature by using methods like pouring water along certain parts of the edge , or cooling it with ice , causing the proper temperature to reach the entire edge at the same time . in this way , although it is less time-consuming than differential hardening with clay , once the process starts the smith must be vigilant , carefully guiding the heat . this leaves little room for error , and mistakes in shaping the hardened zone can not easily be corrected . this is made even more difficult if the knife or sword has a curve , an odd shape , or a sharply tapered tip . swords tempered in this manner , especially double-edged swords , will generally need to be rather wide , allowing room for a gradient to form . however differential tempering does not alter the blade 's shape . the medieval sword in the modern world by michael 'tinker ' pearce – 2007 pp . 39 , 112 . metallurgy . when a sword , knife or tool is evenly quenched , the entire object turns into martensite , which is extremely hard , without the formation of soft pearlite . tempering reduces the hardness in the steel by gradually changing the martensite into a microstructure of various carbides , such as cementite , and softer ferrite ( iron ) , forming a microstructure called '' tempered martensite '' . when tempering high-carbon steel in the blacksmith method , the color provides a general indication of the final hardness , although some trial-and-error is usually required to match the right color to the type of steel to achieve the exact hardness , because the carbon content , the heating speed , and even the type of heat source will affect the outcome . without the formation of pearlite , the steel can be incrementally tempered to achieve the proper hardness in each area , ensuring that no area is too soft . advanced materials & processes , volume 149 by the american society of metals – asm international p . 114 in arming swords , for instance , because the blade is typically rather wide and thin , a blade can be prone to bending during combat . if the center of the blade is too soft , this bending may likely be permanent . however , if the sword is tempered to a springy hardness , it will be more likely to return to its original shape . . benefits and drawbacks . a sword tempered this way can not usually have an edge as hard as a differentially-hardened sword , like a katana , because there is no softer metal directly underneath the edge to back-up the harder metal . this makes the edge more likely to chip away in larger pieces . therefore , such an extremely hard edge is not always desirable , as greater hardness makes the edge more brittle and less resistant to impacts , such as cutting through bones , shafts of pole-arms , hitting shields or blocking and parrying . the sword will often be tempered to slightly higher temperatures to increase the impact resistance at a cost in the ability to hold a sharp edge when cutting . the edge may need to be tempered to dark-straw or brown to achieve this , and the center tempered to a blue or purple color . this may leave very little difference between the edge and the center , and the benefits of this method , over tempering the sword evenly at a point somewhere in the middle , may not be very substantial . when a sword tempered in this way is resharpened the hardness will decrease with each sharpening , although the reduction in hardness will usually not be noticeable until a large amount of steel has been removed . . see also . case hardening shot peening . references . bibliography . . external links . claying blades – differential hardening with clay