Tiswas

overview . tiswas began life as a 'links ' strand between many 'filler ' programmes , such as cartoons and old films . the popularity of the presenters ' links soon eclipsed the staple diet of filler . the correct meaning of the tiswas initials - today is saturday : watch and smile - was confirmed by chris tarrant on the tiswas reunited special of 2007 , although today is saturday : wear a smile had also been often cited , albeit incorrectly . it was originally produced as a midlands regional programme by atv , and was first broadcast live on 5 january 1974 . the then federal structure of itv , with its independent regional companies , meant that not all of these stations broadcast the show when it became available for networked transmission . over time most itv regions chose to broadcast it , with granada television and southern television being among the last to pick up the show , in 1979 . tyne tees and ulster eventually decided to take tiswas for its final series in 1981 . the smallest broadcaster in the network , channel television , did not carry the programme . most famously hosted by chris tarrant between 1974 and 1981 , and later sally james , it also featured the young lenny henry and occasionally jim davidson together with bob carolgees and his puppet , spit the dog . john gorman , former member of 1960s cult band the scaffold , was also a presenter . on the programme , birmingham folk-singer and comedian jasper carrott was to introduce the nation to the '' dying fly dance '' —and also to many local hospital casualty wards , for the dance at one point soared high in the rospa list of common causes of household injury . like its cleaner bbc counterpart , multi-coloured swap shop , it had a running order but no script ( with the exception of some specific sketches ) . the programme was broadcast from studio 3 at atv centre in birmingham ; this was the weekday home for the company 's regional news magazine , atv today . the show was a stitch-together of competitions , film clips and pop promos , just about held together by sketches and links from the cast . the show also regularly featured spoofs of bbc children 's programming . a feature of tiswas was '' the cage '' wherein initially the child audience , later their parents and , finally , members of the public could apply were confined and periodically doused in water ( one spin-off of the series was the hit '' the bucket of water song '' , performed by the four bucketeers ) . this became so popular that the 100th show ( broadcast from the hednesford hills raceway ) featured several hundred fans lining the racetrack whilst a fire-engine of the local brigade drove around the track and hosed them down with water . another feature of tiswas was its spoof gardening segment compost corner , which chris tarrant later revealed was a ruse to get an audience callback in the style of crackerjack . this feature regularly featured lenny henry - complete with khaki shorts ; hawaiian shirt ; and ginger fake beard - performing a rather poor impersonation of david bellamy , with gardening-based puns and jokes . lenny henry also performed a regular slot of newsflashes as trevor mcdoughnut - a rather poor impersonation of itn newsreader trevor mcdonald - in which he performed news-based puns and jokes , punctuated by buckets of water being thrown at him . henry also regularly performed an impersonation of tommy cooper , in which he either told a joke ( which often ended with the phantom flan flinger - standing behind henry - slapping two flans into either side of henry 's head ) ; or performed a spoof magic trick . the series was also frequently visited by the phantom flan flinger , who would throw custard pies ( '' flans '' ) around the studio at all and sundry . both tarrant and the flan flinger would take great delight in trying to 'flan ' cameramen who would go to great lengths to avoid being hit . the logo . the original logo featured the word '' tiswas '' in chunky letters . a later version of this logo featured a circle going round the edge with '' today is saturday watch and smile '' embossed upon it . the classic '' zig-zag '' logo designed by stuart kettle appeared in 1977 - this initially featured a mechanical bird flying above it , but later , chris wroe ( who drew all of the classic caricatures of the tiswas team ) replaced this with a drawing of the phantom flan flinger . series . series 1 . the first series was intended to be eleven episodes , purely acting as links between the usual staple fillers of old films and cartoons that atv would transmit on saturday mornings . presented by chris tarrant and john asher from merely a desk in a continuity studio , the pair had to rely on ad-libs and jokes sent in by viewers . within a few weeks , the show was moved to studio 3 at atv centre ( a studio usually reserved for amongst other programmes , the news magazine programme , atv today ) from which tiswas was produced for the majority of its run . due to an industrial dispute by technicians at atv , this initial run was only nine programmes in length , but was so well-received that a second series was commissioned . billed in tv times as '' today is saturday or the tis-was show '' , the title sequence features both '' today is saturday '' and the original '' tiswas '' chunky letters logo , shown over a background very similar to that of the golden shot . the sequence featured clips from various films and disney cartoons , backed by a funky jazz number known as '' atomic butterfly '' ( which also seems to have been used for sports arena , an htv wales sports programme in the early 1970s ) . series 2 . series 2 of tiswas began from late 1974 , and spanned almost every saturday in 1975 , finishing in early 1976 . the presenting team was doubled to four presenters , and these were usually culled from atv 's presentation department . chris tarrant and john asher retained their roles as the main presenters , although john would leave during this series . from the ranks at atv , other regular presenters were established , notably sports reporter trevor east ( later director of sport at setanta sports ) and announcer peter tomlinson ( later to become managing director of saga radio west midlands and high sheriff of the west midlands ) . producer peter harris left the show in the summer , to help produce fellow cult tv success the muppet show at atv 's london-orientated operation in elstree . series 3 . running from late 1976 to early 1977 , chris tarrant , peter tomlinson and trevor east were the main presenters . almost all these shows were produced by sid kilbey . the 2 april 1977 show was a landmark edition , as part of the programme was broadcast outside the midlands for the first time , on htv cymru wales and htv west , filling up their 'round-the-regions ' compilation of saturday morning programmes called ten on saturday . series 4 . this series , running from 10 september 1977 to may 1978 , marked an end to the provincial micro-budget shows of the previous series , as the initial edition of this series brought significant changes . sally james was drafted in as the series ' first regular female presenter . she had been the presenter of a regional saturday morning show in london called saturday scene , produced by lwt . comedian jim davidson was intended to be a regular presenter but left after only a few editions , although he would return for cameo appearances . peter tomlinson was axed as a regular , which came as a surprise to him . chris tarrant was retained as the anchor presenter , and behind the scenes was annoyed with the changes , particularly the inclusion of a woman as presenter . however , he later retracted this view , having witnessed the progress tiswas had made with james 's contribution . one significant change almost never happened . atv management were displeased with the visual slapstick element - the hurling of custard pies and water . they believed this was setting a bad example to the young viewers . newly drafted producer/director glyn edwards managed to retain this vital , messy element by drawing on his experience as a punch & judy puppeteer to create a 'villain ' character called 'the phantom flan flinger ' , who would be the black-clad masked nemesis of the presenting team , and the main instigator of pie-throwing chaos . the '' phantom '' was later revealed to be ben mills , a taxi driver from cheswick green near solihull . john gorman made his debut in this series , but with just four appearances , it would not be until series 5 that he became a regular visitor to the tiswas studios . likewise , child performer paul hardin made sporadic appearances . the programme expanded its footprint further outside its home region . as well as appearing in part on htv , anglia , border , granada and scottish television began to screen tiswas in its entirety . anglia dropped the series a number of times to pick up other regions ' saturday morning programmes throughout tiswass history . series 5 . this series ran from september 1978 to may 1979 . john gorman became a regular performer from november onwards . stv and granada dropped the series in 1978 in favour of showing other programmes but began carrying the series again in 1979 . htv continued to opt in and out of the programme during ten on saturday . bob carolgees made his debut in early 1979 , having been told to go on the programme by irish comic frank carson . carolgees appeared again two weeks later , and chris was so pleased with his contribution that he decided to make a regular fixture out of bob . lenny henry made sporadic appearances throughout this series , but was not established as a regular . child performer paul hardin increased his visits to the studios , and could well be considered as a series 5 team member , likewise sylveste mccoy ( who added an '' r '' to his first name later in his career ) who performed surreal comic interludes . series 6 . itv had been off the air across the nation since august due to a massive strike by technicians . tiswas returned to the screens in november 1979 for its sixth series , as part of itv 's comeback ; this was directly referenced in the first edition of the new series , when the '' welcome home to itv '' jingle was played to usher the programme in and out of the advert breaks , albeit replacing the vocals by the mike sammes singers with a group of deliberately out-of-tune children . many itv regions took the programme for the first time , establishing the show strongly in the nation 's consciousness . london-based viewers tended to complain to the independent broadcasting authority ( iba ) about some of the edgier moments the show had . with an almost national audience , the show became inclusive of its increased viewership by making a bigger role out of specially invited viewer performances . many of these were children who sang songs or performed dance routines . chris tarrant , now producer as well as presenter , found most of these contributions to be of little value , until he came across a unique act by a five-year-old boy , matthew butler . encouraged by his tiswas-obsessed mother , butler auditioned for the series wearing a rabbit costume and sang the song '' bright eyes '' made famous by the animated film watership down , although his own singing ability was rather poor . tarrant found this so amusing that he arranged for him to appear on the following tiswas , as well as many subsequent editions . also appearing a number of times in this series was norman collier , the yorkshire comedian best known for his broken microphone routine and chicken impressions . another by-product of tiswass increased audience was the boost to merchandise sales : an annual book was established , and there was a tour of universities ( recognising their adult and teenaged audience ) by the tiswas team , under the name of the four bucketeers , which tied in with their spin-off album on cbs records . this was all born out of one feature of the sixth series - '' the bucket of water song '' , which was such a hit with the viewers that it evolved from an intended one-off to an almost regular part of tiswas . series 7 . by now , atv had increased the budget for tiswas , and chris tarrant had more of a say in the programme 's production than ever before . a proper theme tune was created , and the studio set was based around atv cartoonist chris wroe 's caricatures of the presenting team . this series can be considered as the definitive series , due to the material drawn from this era that usually gets an airing on documentaries and clips shows when tiswas is the subject . in addition , the three video compilations that have been released for sale have been packaged around a seventh series theme , with the bulk of the clips also being from this age . midway through this series , chris tarrant decided to leave upon its conclusion . bob carolgees , lenny henry and john gorman also left after the final edition of series 7 . they had decamped to start work on o.t.t . , a late-night version of tiswas intended for an adult audience , which would debut in 1982 . the only regular tiswas presenter left was sally james , who stayed on for series 8 . series 8 . the last series of tiswas , beginning in september 1981 and ending in april 1982 , had its format heavily tinkered with by atv management . they believed that the adult audience should be avid viewers of chris ' 'late-night tiswas , and therefore tiswas itself should focus on its child audience . it was also the first time tyne tees and ulster started to screen the series . the new presenting team consisted of midlands dj gordon astley , former darts frontman den hegarty and comic impressionist fogwell flax . veteran tiswas presenter sally james stayed on and became the series ' music editor , but decided to leave towards the series ' end . this was likely to be a factor in central television 's decision not to bring the programme back for a ninth series . semi-regulars were dwarf actor david rappaport who played characters such as 'green nigel ' ( in a pastiche of bbc programme blue peter ) and the fonz-like 'shades ' , emil wolk and puppeteer trevor james with a giant parrot , presumably to fill the void left by bob carolgees . at the end of 1981 , a restructure of itv 's broadcast franchises saw atv win back the franchise for the midlands on condition of changes in management , regional output and branding . thus , the first part of the series was produced by atv and the second part by central television . the decision by tvs , the new itv station in the south and south-east of england , to drop the central-produced half of the last series in favour of its own saturday morning programme no . 73 saw fans of tiswas picket outside its studios in southampton . the eighth series was broadcast on tvs upon the conclusion of no . 73s first series . during its atv days the chairman of the station , lew grade , was said to have taken a personal dislike to the show but was persuaded to let it continue , even arguing in its defence to criticism from the iba . it was believed that the new management at central frowned upon the anarchy of tiswas ( and the common popularity of another production , the soap opera crossroads ) and in a desire to make the station more upmarket than its previous incarnation took the evidence of declining audiences for the new format as justification to axe tiswas after series 8 . missing episodes . almost every edition of tiswas was transmitted live , and only recorded in case of any future iba investigation ( as was standard practice at the time ) . accordingly they suffered the same fate as a number of 1970s children 's series , in that they were thought to have no further commercial use ( the idea of home video entertainment was still in its infancy ) , and therefore many master tapes were wiped for re-use . as a result , very few programmes officially exist in their entirety . those that were kept were often stored in poor conditions , which led to severe picture deterioration , so they are no longer of broadcast quality . however , some did survive ; many viewers made their own recordings and in many cases these are the only existing copies of the programmes . members of the production team and performers on the show would also record their appearances , leading to many episodes existing in private hands . in 2006 , itv began a search for many missing itv programmes , including tiswas , for their raiders of the lost archive series broadcast in 2007 . their website reveals that only 22 episodes are known to officially exist in their entirety : episode 60 from 30 august 1975 , four episodes from 1978 , two episodes from 1979 , two episodes from 1980 , five episodes from 1981 and nine episodes from 1982 . incomplete segments from show 151 ( broadcast on 10 december 1977 ) , an episode from 1978 and two episodes from 1979 are also known to have survived . the prolific tiswasonline fansite features an in-depth episode guide for the whole series , detailing where an episode is known to exist , whether as a private home recording or in the official archive . itv plc has confirmed to tiswasonline that many more programme elements ( other than those officially known to exist ) have been kept , but as yet these have not been fully catalogued . this may include insert material such as animations and graphics or filmed clips . furthermore , the tiswas reunited programme in 2007 resulted in the discovery of further footage . related programmes . o.t.t . on 2 january 1982 tarrant , carolgees , gorman , randolph sutherland and henry launched a late-night show - with the up-and-coming comics alexei sayle and helen atkinson-wood called o.t.t . ( standing for '' over the top '' ) which was effectively an '' adult '' version of tiswas - in other words , it attempted to be just as anarchic , but with swearing and occasional topless women . it was not such a success , running for just one series , and is today chiefly remembered for the naked 'balloon dance ' performed by the greatest show on legs , including comedian malcolm hardee . the theme tune was recorded by roy wood and was released as a single . saturday stayback . saturday stayback was a short-lived ( january–february 1983 ) late night comedy show based in a pub . although intended as some sort of sequel to o.t.t . , this differed quite a lot , for it was all recorded rather than the live chaos of its predecessor . it mainly consisted of comedy sketches , with some live music acts - usually thin lizzy and roy wood . saturday stayback received much less controversy than o.t.t . , and also introduced new talent such as phil cool and tony slattery . it lasted only six episodes . chris tarrant and bob carolgees were the only ex-tiswas personnel regularly seen on screen , and john gorman helped out on writing duty . tiswas reunion . a definitive line-up of tiswas presenters regrouped for a resurrection of tiswas on the itv telethon of 1988 . this took place in lwt 's south bank studios in london , culminating in an outside performance of the bucket of water song . ministry of mayhem . in late 2005 , itv 's saturday morning show ministry of mayhem had a special edition featuring presenters from past saturday morning shows , including tiswas . representing tiswas was sally james , although chris tarrant did a video link-up for a brief interview during the show . out of the cult saturday morning shows that were focused on , tiswas was significantly the most prominent , with many clips shown from it , and even a re-enactment of two tiswas staples - the cage and the pass the pie game . tiswas on dick and dom in da bungalow . in december 2005 , bbc saturday morning show dick and dom in da bungalow featured a thirty-year-old man singing '' bright eyes '' with his friends as part of a talent spot . this person was matthew lewis , formerly known as matthew butler , who performed his unique rendition of the song back in 1980 on tiswas when he was aged five . presenters richard mccourt and dominic wood took the opportunity to praise matthew , as they are fans of tiswas , and also to dispel recent tabloid rumours of dick and dom resurrecting tiswas on itv . however , wood did present one episode of dick and dom in da bungalow wearing a tiswas t-shirt . lenny henry on it started with swap shop . lenny henry appeared on the bbc 's it started with swap shop programme in 2006 , in which he spoke to noel edmonds about tiswas being the rival of swap shop during the entire era . tiswas reunited – the 2007 special . a new programme to celebrate 25 years since the final tiswas show was broadcast by itv1 on 16 june 2007 , it started with the traditional atv logo and jingle . this programme had been delayed from may in order to allow for an extended transmission slot . celebrities and 'old tiswas mates ' alike joined in the fun . in an interview publicising this , chris tarrant put out an appeal to the public to submit any surviving video footage of the series to be included in the new programme - which resulted in the discovery of further footage . a dvd release of the programme , featuring an extended edition plus a short featurette on the history of tiswas , was released shortly after transmission . from the official press release : for one night only , itv1 brings you tiswas reunited , a one-off special reuniting the stars of the iconic groundbreaking children ’ s show tiswas . with a wealth of clips and reminiscences from the many stars who appeared on the series , the team will recreate the chaos and mayhem of those heady days of the show that broke the mould . tiswas reunited is new and exclusive to itv1 , spring 2007 . the producers of the programme looked for people who were involved in the original series , whether they were in the audience , appeared as a guest , won a competition ( '' pulled up by the ears '' ) or in any other capacity . the tiswasonline website helped with these searches ( and numerous other aspects of the new programme ) , and people could submit their details directly to the production team and apply to be in the cage . a new logo for the programme was produced - it features the regular 'zig-zag ' logo ( including the phantom flan flinger ) with '' reunited '' rubber-stamped across it . the official tiswas reunited 'mini-site ' features exclusive material about the making of the programme , as well as blogs by those who took part in the programme itself ( guests and residents of the cage ! ) the itv broadcast referred only briefly to john asher and trevor east , the programme 's original presenters , and omitted to make any reference to the eighth and final series ( possibly because it was the one series in which reuniteds executive producer chris tarrant was not involved . ) . merchandise . tiswas was a pioneer for children 's television , making its way to shop shelves . books , t-shirts , a regular magazine , an album , various singles and even a ceramic money box have all been daubed with the tiswas logo . magazine . a magazine counterpart was produced with interviews with cast , quizzes and letters . this appeared initially as tiswas family fun book at the beginning of 1981 and developed into tiswas magazine from september 1981 to coincide with the final series . annuals . four annual hardbook books were produced in tiswass later years . presenter/performer john gorman wrote the first three ( published in the autumn of 1979 , 1980 , 1981 ) , and ollie spencer the 1983 edition ( prepared in spring 1982 and published that autumn , featuring presenters and characters from the final 1981-82 series ) . video compilations . in the early 1990s , three vhs compilations were made available . the majority of tiswas never survived as recordings , but among collectors , some with the earliest domestic vcrs , and some studio copies of later editions . these compilations were not like ordinary editions of tiswas , in that 'non-original ' content such as music videos , film clips and cartoons were stripped out . original features like competition spots and pop interviews were also excluded , in favour of highlighting the show 's legacy to comedy and visual slapstick . best of the best bits . the first compilation , lasting about an hour , and purely full of comedy sketches from the series . some of the most repeated clips from the series have made the grade for this compilation - notably some news flash sketches with lenny henry as 'trevor mcdoughnut ' ( including one where the target of the spoof - trevor mcdonald - takes over as a surprise ) and the 'viewer 's letters ' clip where sally james is pied and drenched in semolina , baked beans and custard . moving slightly away from comedy , the music video for the four bucketeers ' '' bucket of water song '' is included . more of the best bits . the second compilation continued in the same vein as the first . frank carson being soaked unexpectedly is a running gag , and there is a full rendition of 'bright eyes ' from matthew butler . a music video for the four bucketeers ' water is wonderful ends the compilation . comedy capers . this was targeted at the stand-up comedy vhs market at the time , and the inlay cover made great mention of comic legends ' appearances , such as spike milligan , michael palin and bernard manning . content-wise , it is very similar to the previous two compilations , with many sketches being performed by the tiswas team . however , this compilation has no contribution from the four bucketeers . dvd . apart from the tiswas reunited dvd , released by itv dvd a week after transmission of the 2007 programme , the only other tiswas dvd available is the best of tiswas . issued in october 2005 by network dvd , the best of tiswas was a straight dvd issuing of the three vhs compilations - best of the best bits , more of the best bits and comedy capers . being on dvd format , it has better picture quality than the vhs version . however , due to the rarity of some tiswas material ( many episodes surviving only on off-air recordings ) there is some understandably rough-looking footage here and there . additionally , the more of the best bits compilation is entirely sourced from a vhs copy , for the original vhs release 's master tape could not be located in time for transfer . plans for a second volume are pending , based on sales of the first dvd . references . external links . tiswas on paul morris ' satkids british film institute screen online listing for tiswas tv cream - tiswas a brief history and glossary of tiswas birmingham site contains a comment on the similarity of the logo for the london 2012 summer olympics to tiswass logo . tiswas producer glyn edwards talks about his days on the show