Random House

acquisition by bertelsmann . in 1998 , bertelsmann ag bought random house and merged it with bantam doubleday dell and it soon went global . random house company history , from fundinguniverse.com . retrieved april 13 , 2008 . in 1999 , random house acquired the children 's audiobook publisher listening library . phyllis e . grann joined random house as vice-chairman in 2001 . grann was the ceo for putnam and had grown that house from 10 & nbsp ; million in revenue in 1976 , to over 200 & nbsp ; million by 1993 and without increasing their title output . a publishing insider commented that then ceo peter olson was , '' i think maybe instead of buying a company he bought a person . '' coinciding with the 2007–2008 financial crisis , the publishing industry was hit hard with weak retail sales . in may 2008 , random house ceo peter olson stepped down and bertelsmann replaced olson with marcus dohle . by october of that year , doubleday , a division of random house announced that they would lay off 16 people or about 10 % of its workforce . in early december , what became known as black wednesday in publishing circles , many publishers including random house took steps by restructuring their divisions and laying off employees . the reorganization consolidated and created three divisions—random house publishing group , knopf doubleday publishing group and crown publishing group . susan kamil , was named editorial director for dial press and editor-in-chief of random house imprints reporting to gina centrello , the president and publisher of the random house publishing group . there were layoffs in the doubleday imprint ( now part of alfred a . knopf ) and dial press , bantam dell , and spiegel & grau were moved from doubleday over to the random house imprints . random house also has an entertainment production arm for film and television , random house studio ; one release in 2011 was one day . the company also creates story content for media including video games , social networks on the web , and mobile platforms . it is one of the largest english-language publishers , along with the group formerly known as the '' big 6 '' , now known as the '' big five '' . the big six publishers , which have since been reduced to the '' big five '' by the merger on july 1 , 2013 of penguin and random house , were georg von holtzbrinck publishing group/macmillan , hachette , harpercollins , penguin books , random house ; and simon & schuster . . merger with penguin . in october 2012 , bertelsmann entered into talks with rival conglomerate pearson plc , over the possibility of combining their respective publishing companies , random house and penguin group . the merger was completed on july 1 , 2013 , and the new company is penguin random house . when founded , bertelsmann owned 53 % of the joint venture while pearson owned 47 % . pearson sold 22 % of its shares to bertelsmann in july 2017 , and since april 2020 , it is a wholly owned subsidiary of bertelsmann , making random house division again wholly owned by german parent . at the time of the acquisition the combined companies controlled 25 % of the book business with more than 10,000 employees and 250 independent publishing imprints and with about 3.9 & nbsp ; billion in annual revenues . the move to consolidate was to provide leverage against amazon.com and battle the shrinking state of bookstores . in october 2018 , penguin random house merged two of its most known publishing lines , random house and the crown publishing group . according to madeline mcintosh , chief executive of penguin random house u.s . , the two lines '' will retain their distinct editorial identities . '' mcintosh explained some of the motivation behind the merger in a memo to employees , writing , '' book discovery and buying patterns continue to shift , resulting in growth opportunities in the nonfiction categories in which crown in particular already has a strong foothold : food , lifestyle , health , wellness , business , and christian . '' '' we must invest even more aggressively in title-level and scaled marketing programs , capabilities and partnerships , '' she added . detailing additional growth strategies , mcintosh explained of the merger , '' we will need to do two things simultaneously . first , we must expand and strengthen the expert publishing teams who are specialized in and dedicated to each category . second , we must invest even more aggressively in title-level and scaled marketing programs , capabilities , and partnerships . this will ensure that we not only maximize the sales for each individual book but also keep pace with consumer trends . '' . organization . headquarters . the publisher 's main office in the united states is located at 1745 broadway in manhattan , in the 684-foot - 210 m penguin random house tower , completed in 2009 and spanning the entire west side of the block between west 55th street and west 56th . its lobby showcases floor-to-ceiling glassed-in bookcases filled with books published by the company 's many imprints . earlier addresses were 457 madison avenue , new york 22 , ny ; 20 east 57th street , new york 22 , ny ; and 201 east 50th street , new york , ny 10022 . international branches . random house , inc . maintains several independently managed subsidiaries around the world . the random house group is one of the largest general book publishing companies in the uk and is based in london . the group comprises five publishing companies : cornerstone publishing , vintage books , ebury publishing , random house children 's publishers uk and transworld publishers , with more than 40 diverse imprints . its distribution business services its own imprints as well as 60 other uk publishers . the random house archive and library is located in rushden in northamptonshire . the random house group also operates branches in australia , new zealand , south africa ( as a joint venture under the name random house struik ) , and india as part of its overseas structure . in australia offices are in sydney and melbourne . in new zealand it is based in glenfield , auckland , while random house 's indian headquarters are located in new delhi . verlagsgruppe random house was established after bertelsmann 's 1998 acquisition of random house , grouping its german imprints ( until then operating as verlagsgruppe bertelsmann ) under the new name ; before april 2020 , it has explicitly no legal part of the worldwide penguin random house company and a hundred percent subsidiary of bertelsmann instead but de facto is led by the same management . it is the second largest book publisher in germany with more than 40 imprints , including historic publishing houses goldmann and heyne verlag , as well as c . bertelsmann , the publishing house from which today 's bertelsmann se & co . kgaa would eventually evolve . verlagsgruppe random house is headquartered in munich ( with additional locations in gütersloh ( where bertelsmann is headquartered ) , cologne , and aßlar ) , employs about 850 people , and publishes roughly 2,500 titles per year . following the formation of penguin random house , a penguin verlag ( with no legal connection to penguin books ) was founded for the german market in 2015 , as part of the verlagsgruppe random house . with bertelsmann acquiring full ownership of penguin random house in april 2020 , verlagsgruppe random house is being reintegrated with the main penguin random house company . penguin random house grupo editorial is random house 's spanish-language division , targeting markets in spain and hispanic america . it is headquartered in barcelona with locations in argentina , chile , colombia , mexico , venezuela , uruguay , and the united states . from 2001 until november 2012 , it was a joint venture with italian publisher mondadori ( random house mondadori ) . upon bertelsmann 's acquisition of mondadori 's stake in the jv , the name was kept temporarily four months . some spanish-language authors published by penguin random house grupo editorial include roberto bolaño , javier marías , mario vargas llosa and guillermo arriaga . random house of canada random house of canada was established in 1944 as the canadian distributor of random house books . in 1986 the company established its own indigenous canadian publishing program that has become one of the most successful in canadian history . until january 2012 , it used to hold a 25 % stake in mcclelland & stewart , with the remaining 75 % being controlled by the university of toronto . it is now the sole owner of mcclelland & stewart . takeda random house japan was founded in may 2003 as a joint venture between kodansha and random house . in 2009 , random house discontinued the joint venture . the company filed for bankruptcy on december 14 , 2012 . in 2006 , random house invested in random house korea . in 2010 , random house divested their ownership . in april 2010 , the company announced that random house australia managing director , margie seale , would take on the responsibilities of exploring and evaluating potential business opportunities in asia . . see also . western publishing list of english language book publishers list of largest uk book publishers media of new york city . references . external links . official website finding aid to random house records at columbia university . rare book & manuscript library . who speaks for the negro vanderbilt documentary website