Stockbroker

history of stock broking . the first recorded buying and selling of shares occurred in rome in the 2nd century bc . after the fall of the western roman empire , stockbroking did not become a profession until after the renaissance , when government bonds were traded in italian city-states such as genoa and venice . in 1602 , the amsterdam stock exchange ( now euronext amsterdam ) became the first official stock market with trading in shares of the dutch east india company , the first company to issue stock . in 1698 , the london stock exchange , opened at the jonathan 's coffee-house . on may 17 , 1792 , the new york stock exchange opened under a platanus occidentalis ( buttonwood tree ) in new york city , as 24 stockbrokers signed the buttonwood agreement , agreeing to trade five securities under that buttonwood tree . . licensing and training requirements . australia . up until january 1 , 2019 , investment professionals that offer financial advice in australia had to pass training pursuant to rg146 . they must hold an australian financial services licence that is overseen by the australian securities and investments commission . they are subject to fiduciary obligations . as of 2019 , australia ’ s biggest online stockbroker was commonwealth securities , other large brokers were anz share investing , nabtrade and westpac . . canada . in canada , to be licensed as a '' registered representative '' or an '' investment advisor '' and thus be qualified to offer investment advice and trade all instruments with the exception of derivatives , an individual employed by an investment firm must have completed the canadian securities course , the conduct & practices handbook , and the 90-day investment advisor training program . within 30 months of obtaining designation as a '' registered representative '' , the registrant is further required to meet the post-licensing proficiency requirement to complete the wealth management essentials course . a registered representative is also required to complete 30 hours of professional development ( product knowledge ) and 12 hours of compliance training every three year continuing education cycle as set out by the investment industry regulatory organization of canada . to trade options and/or futures , a registered representative must pass the derivatives fundamentals course in addition to the options licensing course and/or the futures licensing course , or alternatively , the derivatives fundamentals options licensing course for options . . hong kong . in hong kong , to become a representative one has to work for a licensed firm and pass 3 exams to prove competency . passing a fourth exam results in obtaining a 'specialist ' license . all tests can be taken with the hong kong securities institute . after passing all tests , approval must be received by the securities and futures commission . india . share brokers in india are governed by the securities and exchange board of india act , 1992 and brokers must register with the securities and exchange board of india . the national stock exchange of india and the bombay stock exchange via brokers , provide an ecosystem to investors to trade in capital markets through various channels- broker offices , investment advisor or screen-based electronic trading system . an individual employed by an investment firm must complete the national institute of securities markets ( nism ) exam and apply to sebi for registration as an investment advisor . . ireland . the recognized benchmark designation for investment professionals in ireland is the qfa ( '' qualified financial adviser '' ) designation , which is awarded to those who pass the professional diploma in financial advice and agree to comply with the ongoing '' continuous professional development '' ( cpd ) requirements . the qualification , and attaching cpd program , meets the '' minimum competency requirements '' specified by the financial regulator , for advising on and selling five categories of retail financial products : stock shares , bonds , and other investment instruments savings , investments , and pensions mortgage loans consumer credit life insurance as of 2019 , davy and goodbody were irish largest stockbrokers . . new zealand . in new zealand , the new zealand qualifications authority oversees qualifications . the new zealand certificate in financial services ( level 5 ) is the minimum level of qualification necessary to offer investment advice . . singapore . in singapore , becoming a trading representative requires passing 4 exams , modules 1a , 5 , 6 and 6a , from the institute of banking and finance and applying for the license through mas and sgx . south africa . the johannesburg securities exchange rules require that member firms must be under the control of a '' qualified stockbroker '' , who is also an executive director of the firm . sais gazette report the south african institute of stockbrokers ( sais ) south african institute of stockbrokers , sais.co.za offers the six exams required to become such , a certified stockbroker , or csb ( sa ) , following 3 years ' work experience , and with other educational requirements met . becoming a stockbroker , sais.co.za see also re . '' regulated positions '' and '' registered persons '' at the south african institute of financial markets . ( sais also offers the financial markets practitioner vocational certification . financial markets practitioner , sais.co.za ) . south korea . in south korea , the korea financial investment association oversees the licensing of investment professionals . united kingdom . stockbroking is a regulated profession in the united kingdom and brokers must achieve a recognised qualification from the appropriate qualifications list of the financial conduct authority ( fca ) . the chartered institute for securities & investment ( cisi ) , established in 1992 , is the largest uk professional body for investment professionals . it evolved from the london stock exchange , has around 40,000 members in over 100 countries and delivers more than 37,000 exams each year . cfa uk also offers qualifications . it represents the interests of around 12,000 investment professionals and is part of the worldwide network of members of the cfa institute . qualifications include : the cisi level 4 diploma in investment advice and the cisi level 7 diploma in wealth management . united states . the financial industry regulatory authority , a self-regulatory organization , regulates investment professionals in the united states . exams that individuals may take for accreditation include the series 7 exam , the uniform securities agent state law exam ( series 63 ) , the uniform combined state law exam ( series 66 ) , and the uniform investment adviser law exam ( series 65 ) . individuals holding some of those licenses , such as the series 6 exam , can not be called stockbrokers since they are prohibited from selling stocks . selling variable products , such as a variable annuity contract or variable universal life insurance policy , typically requires the broker to also have one or another state insurance department licenses . individuals and firms are regulated by the u.s . securities and exchange commission and laws related to the investment advisers act of 1940 , including laws related to fiduciary . see also . boiler room ( business ) electronic trading platform floor broker mutual fund prime brokerage securities market stock exchange stock market stock market data systems stock valuation . references .