Margarita

origin . according to cocktail historian david wondrich , the margarita is related to a popular mexican drink , the daisy ( margarita is spanish for '' daisy '' ) , remade with tequila instead of brandy . ( daisies are a family of cocktails that include a base spirit , liqueur , and citrus . a sidecar and gin daisy are other related drinks . ) it became popular during prohibition as u.s . residents travelled to mexico for alcohol . there is an account from 1936 of iowa newspaper editor james graham finding such a cocktail in tijuana , years before any of the other margarita '' creation myths '' . 1937 cafe royal cocktail book contains a recipe for a picador using the same concentrations of tequila , triple sec and lime juice as a margarita . one of the earliest stories is of the margarita being invented in 1938 by carlos '' danny '' herrera at his restaurant rancho la gloria , halfway between tijuana and rosarito , baja california , created for customer and former ziegfeld dancer marjorie king , who was allergic to many spirits , but not to tequila . paul chavez , '' danny herrera , inventor of margarita , dies at age 90 , '' los angeles times , may 14 , 1992 . this story was related by herrera and also by bartender albert hernandez , acknowledged for popularizing a margarita in san diego after 1947 , at the la plaza restaurant in la jolla . there are also claims that the margarita was first mixed in juárez , chihuahua at tommy 's place bar on july 4 , 1942 by francisco '' pancho '' morales . morales later left bartending in mexico to become a us citizen , where he worked as a milkman for 25 years . mexico 's official news agency notimex and many experts have said morales has the strongest claim to having invented the margarita . '' francisco morales ; credited with inventing margarita , '' los angeles times , january 8 , 1997 . others say the inventor was dallas socialite margarita sames , when she concocted the drink for her guests at her acapulco , guerrero vacation home in 1948 . tommy hilton reportedly attended , bringing the drink back to the hilton chain of hotels . however , jose cuervo was already running ad campaigns for the margarita three years earlier , in 1945 , with the slogan , '' margarita : it 's more than a girl 's name . '' according to jose cuervo , the cocktail was invented in 1938 by a bartender in honor of mexican showgirl rita de la rosa . lisa bramen , '' the history of the margarita '' , smithsonian , may 5 , 2009 . stacy finz , '' mastering the margarita : tequila aside , even experts ca n't agree on what goes into the legendary cocktail '' , san francisco chronicle , july 25 , 2008 . another common origin tale begins the cocktail 's history at the legendary balinese room in galveston , texas where , in 1948 , head bartender santos cruz created the margarita for singer peggy lee . he supposedly named it after the spanish version of her name , margarita . rosenberg library museum '' lost treasure : the balinese room '' balinese room . the first known publication of a margarita recipe was in the december 1953 issue of esquire , with a recipe calling for an ounce of tequila , a dash of triple sec and the juice of half a lime or lemon . a recipe for a tequila-based cocktail first appeared in the 1930 book my new cocktail book by g . f . steele . without noting a specific recipe or inventor , a drink called the tequila daisy was mentioned in the syracuse herald as early as 1936 . margarita is spanish for daisy , which is a nickname for margaret . '' once upon a time in mexico '' , imbibe , march/april 2010 . a later , certainly false , story is that the margarita was invented in october 1961 , at a party in houston , texas , by party goer robert james '' rusty '' thomson while acting as bartender . he concocted a mixture of equal parts tequila , controy orange liqueur , lime , and crushed ice in a salt-rimmed glass . however , thomson 's recipe was made with damiana liqueur , not cointreau orange liqueur . it is said that the idea was an experiment after running out of rum while making frozen daiquiris . variations . the iba ( iba official cocktail ) standard is 10:4:3 , that is tequila : triple sec : fresh lime juice . the '' original margarita '' recipe as given by cointreau on their website has slightly more of their own sweet liqueur : 1 part white tequila , part cointreau , and part fresh squeezed lime juice . . flavored tequila . apple-cinnamon tequila , triple sec , cranberry juice , fresh lime juice , and an apple wedge or lemon twist for garnish combine to form the cranberry margarita with apple-cinnamon tequila , a fall seasonal drink . . flavored liqueurs . besides cointreau , other orange-flavored liqueurs that might be used include grand marnier ( yielding the '' cadillac margarita '' ) , gran gala , other brands of triple sec , or blue curaçao ( yielding the blue margarita ) . when sweeter fruit juices or freshly puréed fruits are added to the margarita , the orange-flavored liqueur is often reduced or eliminated entirely . in addition to orange-flavored liqueurs , secondary liqueurs may occasionally be added to a cocktail , including melon-flavored or black raspberry-flavored . other flavors include pineapple and watermelon . fresh lime juice . freshly squeezed lime juice is the key ingredient . the most common lime in the united states is the thick-skinned persian lime . however , margaritas in mexico are generally made with mexican limes ( key limes ) . these are small , thin-skinned limes and have more tart and an often bitter flavor compared to persian limes . . frozen margarita . the frozen margarita is a margarita served as an ice slush , similar to other tropical-inspired frozen mixed drinks like the hurricane or piña colada . the ingredients can be processed with ice in a kitchen blender , or for larger output , a slush or soft-serve ice cream machine is used : a cooled , horizontal cylinder has a rotating impeller which churns the mix so it will not freeze solid , and the thick half-frozen slush is dispensed from a spout . frozen margaritas were first served in la jolla , when albert hernandez sr . stopped using crushed ice and instead combined the ingredients in a blender in 1947 . the dedicated frozen margarita machine was introduced by mariano martinez in dallas in 1971 . franz lidz , '' the uniquely texan origins of the frozen margarita '' , smithsonian magazine , july 2018 a lemonade or limeade margarita can be quickly whipped up by using frozen lemonade or limeade concentrate in place of lime juice . . fruit sodas and sports drinks . fruity sodas such as fruit punch , lime , pineapple , or mandarin orange jarritos , or sports drinks such as blue or orange gatorade , can substitute for triple sec . a margarita made with orange soda and beer is a sunrise beer margarita ; if it is made with carbonated fruit punch soda , it is a sunset margarita . the variant that uses grapefruit soda is called a paloma . other fruits and vegetables . alternate fruits and juice mixtures can also be used in a margarita . fruits like mango , peach , strawberry , banana , melon , raspberry , or avocado are suitable for creating this drink . orange juice and pomegranate juice ( poured down the inner side of the glass ) can make a sunset margarita ( so named because the orange is at the top and the red at the bottom ) . many recipes call for a splash of orange juice . these days , margarita can be prepared in many different ways . when the word '' margarita '' is used by itself , it typically refers to the lime or lemon juice margarita , but when other juices are used , the fruits are typically added as adjectives in the name ; with lime juice or lemon juice added to give it a characteristic margarita flavor ( a wedge of lime is often added to the glass ) . other varieties of margarita include fruit margarita , top-shelf margarita and virgin margarita . coconut cream , coconut milk , and coconut water can also be added to margaritas , e.g . skinny margaritas that substitute , e.g . , pineapple juice for liqueurs . margaritas can also be made with vegetables such as carrots , beets , cucumber , and celery . file : blended margarita.jpg a blended margarita . beer cocktails . a beermarita ( or coronarita ) is a beer cocktail that has a bottle of corona beer or other light-flavored beer poured upside down into a margarita on the rocks . . skinny . a skinny margarita is a two-ingredient cocktail that leaves out the liqueur and only has tequila and a hint of rose 's lime juice , shaken over ice and served optionally with salt . . related drinks . a margarita with vodka substituted for tequila is a kamikaze . glass . margaritas may be served in a variety of glasses , most notably the eponymous margarita glass , a variant of the classic champagne coupe ; this is particularly associated with blended fruit margaritas , and the glass is also used for dishes such as guacamole or shrimp cocktails . in formal settings margaritas are often served in a standard cocktail glass , while in informal settings , particularly with ice , margaritas may be served in an old fashioned glass . popularity . the margarita cocktail was the '' drink of the month '' in esquire magazine , december 1953 , p . 76 : :1 ounce tequila : dash of triple sec : juice of lime or lemon : pour over crushed ice , stir . rub the rim of a stem glass with rind of lemon or lime , spin in salt—pour , and sip . it was further popularized by the 1977 song '' margaritaville '' by jimmy buffett , and in 2004 it was described as '' the most popular mixed drink in america '' . another reason that has been given for the margarita 's popularity is that it feels more complete than a drink that only has sweet and sour flavors , since it engages a third primary taste , salt . . see also . list of cocktails mexican martini paloma tommy 's margarita . references . external links .