Ernie (Sesame Street)

characteristics . ernie has a characteristic chuckling laugh ( a trait he shares with his baby cousin , ernestine ) , and he also has his signature pronunciation of the word '' again '' ( ay-gain ) . he is a loving friend to bert , who he lives with . his appearance and clothing contrast with bert , as he is the shorter and more rotund of the pair , wears a shirt with horizontal stripes as opposed to bert 's vertical ones , and has a head that is wider than it is high . in addition , ernie has no visible eyebrows , while bert displays a unibrow . ernie is known for his fondness for baths with his rubber duckie , and for trying to learn to play the saxophone . ernie is also known for keeping bert awake at night , for reasons such as wanting to play the drums , wanting to count something ( like sheep ) , to observe something like a blackout , or even because he is waiting for his upstairs neighbor to drop his shoes . appearances . sesame street . many ernie and bert sketches involve ernie wanting to play a game with bert , who would much rather do something else ( like read ) . ernie keeps irking bert with the game until bert joins — and usually , by the time bert starts enjoying the game , ernie is tired of playing the game and wants to do something else . other sketches have involved them sharing some food by dividing it equally , only for one of them to have a bit more than the other , leading ernie to make it even by eating the extra piece . ernie makes appearances without bert , usually within the framework of another double act . he has regularly appeared in skits with grover , cookie monster , sherlock hemlock and lefty the salesman . journey to ernie . from season 33 ( 2002 ) until season 36 ( 2005 ) , he and big bird starred in a daily segment called '' journey to ernie '' . ernie was one of the hosts of the show play with me sesame , where he was performed by john tartaglia during the second season . one regular segment that he hosted was '' ernie says '' , a variation of '' simon says '' . role in other projects . ernie sang about his affection for rubber duckie in a skit , which aired during the first season of sesame street . the song from that skit – titled '' rubber duckie '' – became a modest mainstream hit , reaching no . 16 on the billboard hot 100 in september 1970 . whitburn , joel , '' top pop singles : 1955–2006 '' , 2007 . ernie has appeared in both of the sesame street movies . in follow that bird , he and bert searched for big bird by plane . ernie piloted the plane , and eventually , after they found big bird , he flew the plane upside-down , singing '' upside down world '' . however , after they lost big bird , ernie blamed bert . ernie and bert also appeared in out to lunch , and were the host of this crossover special . ernie appears in the special 123 count with me teaching humphrey and ingrid at the furry arms hotel as to how counting can be very useful . a typical bert and ernie skit has ernie coming up with a harebrained idea , and bert trying to talk him out of it ending with bert losing his temper , while ernie becomes oblivious to his own bad idea . other sketches have involved bert and ernie sharing a snack by division , but finding that one of them has a bit more ; ernie humorously decides to try to make it even by eating the extra piece , which goes forth until the entire snack is all eaten up . others have also involved ernie eating part of bert 's snack he prepares for himself , and when bert comes back from somewhere , ernie tries to make several attempts to cover up the crime in front of bert , which is not successful mostly . some other plotlines involved ernie wanting to play a game with bert who wants to do something else ; he continues playing until he gets bert in , but when bert finally wants to continue playing the game , ernie is tired of playing , and wants to do something else . the age of bert and ernie are 15 and 49 . nothing official has ever been said , but most consider the duo adults , as they do not appear to be highly dependent on others . one sesame street live performer has commented that '' i just kind of try to think like a six year old or a seven year old , because that 's how old bert is . '' macon.com however , bert 's twin brother bart is depicted as a traveling salesman , which would mean bert ( and probably ernie ) are both adults . ernie also appeared in the finales of the muppet movie and the muppets take manhattan , in the last of which he got a line . in christmas eve on sesame street , ernie decided to buy bert a cigar box to store his paper clips in . however , as he did not have any money , he traded his own rubber duckie for it . at the same time , bert decided to get ernie a soap dish to put his rubber duckie in , so that it would n't keep falling into the tub , but had to trade his paper clips for it . however , mr . hooper could tell that neither of them really wanted to give up their prized possessions , so mr . hooper gave them their things back as presents . ernie and bert introduced a montage of sesame street clips in the muppets : a celebration of 30 years . ernie also narrated a christmas pageant , twas the night before christmas , in a muppet family christmas . in that same special , ernie and bert had a conversation with doc , making them the only sesame street characters ( not counting kermit the frog ) to have interacted with doc . in sesame street . 20 years & still counting , he and bert got a new video camera , and he talked bert into using the camera to record footage of sesame street so that they could watch sesame street on television . jim henson 's original ernie puppet is currently on display at the center for puppetry arts in atlanta , georgia . performing ernie . ernie is a '' live hand muppet , '' meaning that while operating the head of the puppet with his right hand , the puppeteer inserts his left hand into a t shaped sleeve , capped off with a glove that matches the fabric '' skin '' of the puppet , thus '' becoming '' the left arm of the puppet . a second puppeteer usually provides the right arm , although sometimes the right arm is simply stuffed and pinned to the puppet 's chest or the second puppeteer will perform both arms . the original segment of the song '' i do n't want to live on the moon '' was one of the rare instances when ernie 's full body was shown . it reportedly took three puppeteers to perform ernie in this segment : jim henson performed ernie 's head and left hand , while two other puppeteers operated ernie 's right hand and feet respectively . other puppets of this type include cookie monster , fozzie bear , beaker , and bunsen honeydew . in other media . theme parks . ernie was one of the first characters to appear at sesame place theme park as a costumed character , in may 1983 . ( they had previously appeared at the attraction 's groundbreaking event . ) . international . sesame street is localized for some different markets , and ernie is often renamed . for instance , in episodes that are aired in portugal , ernie 's name has been changed to egas , in brazil , his name is ênio , in spain , he is renamed '' epi '' , in latin america , his name is '' enrique '' , on egyptian alam simsim ( sesame world ) ernie 's name is given as '' shadi '' ( rhyming with bert 's which is '' hadi '' ) , in russia , he also known as yenik ( еник ) , in turkey , he is named '' edi '' , in israel , he is called '' arik '' ( אריק ) and in norway , he is known as '' erling '' . see also . bert bert and ernie . references . de : sesamstraße ernie und bert sv : ernie ( mupp )