Juniper

description . junipers vary in size and shape from tall trees , tall , to columnar or low-spreading shrubs with long , trailing branches . they are evergreen with needle-like and/or scale-like leaf . they can be either monoecious or dioecious . the female seed cones are very distinctive , with fleshy , fruit-like coalescing scales which fuse together to form a '' berry '' -like structure ( galbulus ) , long , with one to 12 unwinged , hard-shelled seeds . in some species , these '' berries '' are red-brown or orange , but in most they are blue ; they are often aromatic and can be used as a spice . the seed maturation time varies between species from 6 to 18 months after pollination . the male cones are similar to those of other cupressaceae , with six to 20 scales . in zones 7 through 10 , junipers can bloom and release pollen several times each year . a few species of junipers bloom in autumn , while most species pollinate from early winter until late spring . many junipers ( e.g . j . chinensis , j . virginiana ) have two types of leaves ; seedlings and some twigs of older trees have needle-like leaves long , and the leaves on mature plants are ( mostly ) tiny , overlapping , and scale-like . when juvenile foliage occurs on mature plants , it is most often found on shaded shoots , with adult foliage in full sunlight . leaves on fast-growing 'whip ' shoots are often intermediate between juvenile and adult . in some species ( e.g . j . communis , j . squamata ) , all the foliage is of the juvenile needle-like type , with no scale leaves . in some of these ( e.g . j . communis ) , the needles are jointed at the base , while in others ( e.g . j . squamata ) the needles merge smoothly with the stem . the needle-leaves of junipers are hard and sharp , making the juvenile foliage very prickly to handle . this can be a valuable identification feature in seedlings , as the otherwise very similar juvenile foliage of cypresses ( cupressus , chamaecyparis ) and other related genera is soft and not prickly . juniper is the exclusive food plant of the larvae of some lepidoptera , including bucculatrix inusitata , juniper carpet , chionodes electella , chionodes viduella , juniper pug , and pine beauty . those of the tortrix moth cydia duplicana feed on the bark around injuries or canker . junipers are gymnosperms , which means they have seeds , but no flowers or fruits . depending on the species , the seeds they produce take 1–3 years to develop . the impermeable coat of the seed keeps water from getting in and protects the embryo when being dispersed . it can also result in a long dormancy that is usually broken by physically damaging the seed coat . dispersal can occur from being swallowed whole by frugivores and mammals . the resistance of the seed-coat allows it to be passed down through the digestive system and out without being destroyed along the way . these seeds last a long time , as they can be dispersed long distances over the course of a few years . . classification . the number of juniper species is in dispute , with two studies giving very different totals : farjon ( 2001 ) accepted 52 species and adams ( 2004 ) accepted 67 species . the junipers are divided into several sections , though ( particularly among the scale-leaved species ) which species belong to which sections is still far from clear , with research still ongoing . juniperus sect . juniperus – needle-leaf junipers ; the adult leaves are needle-like , in whorls of three , and jointed at the base juniperus sect . juniperus subsect . juniperus – cones with 3 separate seeds ; needles with one stomatal band juniperus communis – common juniper juniperus communis subsp . alpina – alpine juniper juniperus conferta – shore juniper juniperus rigida – temple juniper or needle juniper juniperus sect . juniperus subsect . oxycedrus – cones with 3 separate seeds ; needles with two stomatal bands juniperus brevifolia – azores juniper juniperus cedrus – canary islands juniper juniperus formosana – chinese prickly juniper juniperus lutchuensis – ryukyu juniper juniperus oxycedrus – western prickly juniper , cade juniper juniperus macrocarpa – large-berry juniper juniperus sect . juniperus subsect . caryocedrus – cones with 3 seeds fused together ; needles with two stomatal bands juniperus drupacea – syrian juniper juniperus sect . sabina – scale-leaf junipers ; adult leaves are mostly scale-like , similar to those of cupressus species , in opposite pairs or whorls of three , and the juvenile needle-like leaves are not jointed at the base ( including in the few that have only needle-like leaves ; see below right ) . provisionally , all the other junipers are included here , though they form a paraphyletic group . old world species juniperus chinensis – chinese juniper juniperus convallium – mekong juniper juniperus excelsa – greek juniper juniperus excelsa polycarpos – persian juniper juniperus foetidissima – stinking juniper juniperus indica – black juniper juniperus komarovii – komarov 's juniper juniperus phoenicea – phoenicean juniper juniperus pingii – ping juniper juniperus procera – east african juniper juniperus procumbens – ibuki juniper juniperus pseudosabina – xinjiang juniper juniperus recurva – himalayan juniper juniperus sabina – savin juniper juniperus saltuaria – sichuan juniper juniperus semiglobosa – russian juniper juniperus seravschanica-pashtun juniper adams , r.p . , al-farsi , a . & schwarzbach , a.e . ( 2014 ) . confirmation of the southern-most population of juniperus seravschanica in oman by dna sequencing of nrdna and four cpdna regions phytologia 96 : 218-224 . juniperus squamata – flaky juniper juniperus thurifera – spanish juniper juniperus tibetica – tibetan juniper juniperus indica – himalayan black juniper new world species juniperus angosturana – mexican one-seed juniper juniperus ashei – ashe juniper juniperus arizonica – redberry juniper , roseberry juniper juniperus barbadensis – west indies juniper juniperus bermudiana – bermuda juniper juniperus blancoi – blanco 's juniper juniperus californica – california juniper juniperus coahuilensis – coahuila juniper juniperus comitana – comitán juniper juniperus deppeana – alligator juniper juniperus durangensis – durango juniper juniperus flaccida – mexican weeping juniper juniperus gamboana – gamboa juniper juniperus grandis – sierra juniper juniperus horizontalis – creeping juniper juniperus jaliscana – jalisco juniper juniperus maritima – seaside juniper juniperus monosperma – one-seed juniper juniperus monticola – mountain juniper juniperus occidentalis – western juniper juniperus osteosperma – utah juniper juniperus pinchotii – pinchot juniper juniperus saltillensis – saltillo juniper juniperus scopulorum – rocky mountain juniper juniperus standleyi – standley 's juniper juniperus virginiana – eastern juniper , eastern redcedar juniperus virginiana subsp . silicicola – southern juniper juniperus zanonii ( proposed ) . ecology . juniper plants thrive in a variety of environments . the junipers from lahaul valley can be found in dry , rocky locations planted in stony soils . these plants are being rapidly used up by grazing animals and the villagers . there are several important features of the leaves and wood of this plant that cause villagers to cut down these trees and make use of them . additionally , the western juniper plants , a particular species in the juniper genus , are found in woodlands where there are large , open spaces . junipers are known to encompass open areas so that they have more exposure to rainfall . decreases in fires and a lack of livestock grazing are the two major causes of western juniper takeover . this invasion of junipers is driving changes in the environment . for instance , the ecosystem for other species previously living in the environment and farm animals has been compromised . when junipers increase in population , there is a noticeable decrease in woody species like mountain big sagebrush and aspen . among the juniper trees themselves , there is a lot of competition . the cost of this is a decrease in berry production . herbaceous cover decreases , and junipers are often mistaken for weeds . as a result , several farmers have thinned the juniper trees or removed them completely . however , this reduction did not result in any significant difference on wildlife survival . some small mammals found it advantageous to have thinner juniper trees , while cutting down the entire tree was not favorable . some junipers are susceptible to gymnosporangium rust disease , and can be a serious problem for those people growing apple trees , an alternate host of the disease . cultivation and uses . timber . some junipers are given the common name '' cedar , '' including juniperus virginiana , the '' red cedar '' that is used widely in cedar drawers and closets . the lack of space or a hyphen between the words '' red '' and '' cedar '' is sometimes used to indicate that this species is not a true cedar , cedrus . juniper in weave is a traditional cladding technique used in northern europe , e.g . at havrå , norway . . culinary use . juniper berries are a spice used in a wide variety of culinary dishes and best known for the primary flavoring in gin ( and responsible for gin 's name , which is a shortening of the dutch word for juniper , jenever ) . a juniper based spirit is made by fermenting juniper berries and water to create a '' wine '' that is then distilled . this is often sold as a juniper brandy in eastern europe . juniper berries are also used as the primary flavor in the liquor jenever and sahti-style of beers . juniper berry sauce is often a popular flavoring choice for quail , pheasant , veal , rabbit , venison , and other game dishes . essential oil . juniper berries are steam distilled to produce an essential oil that may vary from colorless to yellow or pale green . some of its chemical components are terpenoids and aromaticity , such as cadinene , a sesquiterpene . . ethnic and herbal use . most species of juniper are flexible and have a high compression strength-to-weight ratio . this has made the wood a traditional choice for the construction of hunting bows among some of the native american cultures in the great basin region . these bow staves are typically backed with sinew to provide tension strength that the wood may lack . some indigenous peoples of the americas use juniper in traditional medicine ; for instance the dineh , who use it for diabetes . juniper ash has also been historically consumed as a source of calcium by the navajo people . juniper is traditionally used in scottish folkloric and gaelic polytheist saining rites , such as those performed at hogmanay ( new year ) , where the smoke of burning juniper , accompanied by traditional prayers and other customary rites , is used to cleanse , bless , and protect the household and its inhabitants . . wood and leaves . local people in lahaul valley present juniper leaves to their deities as a folk tradition . it is also useful as a folk remedy for pains and aches , as well as epilepsy and asthma . they are reported to collect large amounts of juniper leaves and wood for building and religious purposes . . ornamental use . junipers are among the most popular conifers to be cultivated as ornamental subjects for parks and gardens . they have been bred over many years to produce a wide range of forms , in terms of colour , shape and size . they include some of the dwarfest ( miniature ) cultivars . they are also used for bonsai . some species found in cultivation include : juniperu chinensis juniperus communis juniperus horizontalis juniperus × pfitzeriana juniperus procumbens juniperus rigida juniperus scapulorum juniperus squamata . allergenic potential . in drier areas , juniper pollen easily becomes airborne and can be inhaled into the lungs . this pollen can also irritate the skin and cause contact dermatitis . cross-allergenic reactions are common between juniper pollen and the pollen of all species of cypress . monoecious juniper plants are highly allergenic , with an opals allergy scale rating of 9 out of 10 . completely male juniper plants have an opals rating of 10 , and release abundant amounts of pollen . conversely , all-female juniper plants have an opals rating of 1 , and are considered '' allergy-fighting '' . . references . further reading . adams , r . p . ( 2004 ) . junipers of the world : the genus juniperus . victoria : trafford . farjon , a . ( 2001 ) . world checklist and bibliography of conifers . kew . farjon , a . ( 2005 ) . monograph of cupressaceae and sciadopitys . royal botanic gardens , kew . . external links . junipers of the world gymnosperm database – juniperus arboretum de villardebelle photos of cones and foliage of selected species