Max Tegmark

biography . early life . tegmark was born in sweden to karin tegmark and american-born professor of mathematics harold s . shapiro , with his mother ’ s surname . sveriges befolkning 1980 , cd-rom , version 1.02 , sveriges släktforskarförbund ( 2004 ) . while in high school , tegmark and a friend created and sold a word processor written in pure machine code for the swedish eight-bit computer abc 80 , and a 3d tetris-like game called frac . tegmark left sweden in 1990 after receiving his m.sc . in engineering physics from the royal institute of technology . ( he had earned a b.a . in economics the previous year at the stockholm school of economics . ) his first academic venture beyond scandinavia brought him to california , where he studied physics at the university of california , berkeley , earning his m.a . in 1992 , and ph.d . in 1994 under the supervision of joseph silk . he worked as an assistant professor at the university of pennsylvania receiving tenure in 2003 . in 2004 , he joined massachusetts institute of technology department of physics . career . his research has focused on cosmology , combining theoretical work with new measurements to place constraints on cosmological models and their free parameters , often in collaboration with experimentalists . he has over 200 publications , of which nine have been cited over 500 times . he has developed data analysis tools based on information theory and applied them to cosmic microwave background experiments such as cobe , qmap , and wmap , and to galaxy redshift surveys such as the las campanas redshift survey , the 2df survey and the sloan digital sky survey . with daniel eisenstein and wayne hu , he introduced the idea of using baryon acoustic oscillations as a standard ruler . with angelica de oliveira-costa and andrew hamilton , he discovered the anomalous multipole alignment in the wmap data sometimes referred to as the '' axis of evil '' . with anthony aguirre , he developed the cosmological interpretation of quantum mechanics . his 2000 paper on quantum decoherence of neurons concluded that decoherence seems too rapid for roger penrose 's orchestrated objective reduction to be viable . tegmark has also formulated the '' mathematical universe hypothesis '' , whose only postulate is that '' all structures that exist mathematically exist also physically '' . this simple theory , with no free parameters at all , suggests that in those structures complex enough to contain self-aware substructures ( sass ) , these sass will subjectively perceive themselves as existing in a physically '' real '' world . this idea is formalized as the mathematical universe hypothesis , a short version of which is available at shut up and calculate . ( in reference to david mermin 's famous quote '' shut up and calculate '' described in his book our mathematical universe . tegmark was elected fellow of the american physical society in 2012 for , according to the citation , '' his contributions to cosmology , including precision measurements from cosmic microwave background and galaxy clustering data , tests of inflation and gravitation theories , and the development of a new technology for low-frequency radio interferometry '' . aps archive ( 1990-present ) he was awarded the royal swedish academy of engineering science gold medal in 2019 for , according to the citation , '' his contributions to our understanding of humanity ’ s place in the cosmos and the opportunities and risks associated with artificial intelligence . he has courageously tackled these existential questions in his research and , in a commendable way , succeeded in communicating the issues to a wider public . '' tegmark is interviewed in the 2018 documentary on artificial intelligence do you trust this computer ? he is also known for his seminal paper on the mathematical universe hypothesis , in which he claims that our physical world is an abstract mathematical structure with an infinite number of initial random conditions . he points to fractals as proof that the equations used to describe all possible mathematical multiverses would fit on a single t-shirt . . personal life . he married astrophysicist angelica de oliveira-costa in 1997 , and divorced in 2009 . they have two sons . on august 5 , 2012 , tegmark married meia chita . . in the media . in 2006 , tegmark was one of fifty scientists interviewed by new scientist about their predictions for the future . his prediction : '' in 50 years , you may be able to buy t-shirts on which are printed equations describing the unified laws of our universes . '' tegmark appears in the documentary parallel worlds , parallel lives in which he is interviewed by mark oliver everett , son of the founder of the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics , hugh everett . tegmark also appears in '' who 's afraid of a big black hole ? '' , '' what time is it ? '' , '' to infinity and beyond '' , '' is everything we know about the universe wrong ? '' , '' what is reality ? '' and '' which universe are we in ? '' , all part of the bbc 's horizon scientific series of programmes . he appears in several episodes of sci fi science : physics of the impossible , an american documentary television series on science which first aired in the united states on december 1 , 2009 . the series is hosted by theoretical physicist michio kaku . tegmark participated in the episode '' zooming out '' of bbc world service 's the forum , which first aired on bbc radio 4 on april 26 , 2014 . the forum episode guide . bbc radio 4 . accessed 2014-04-28 . in 2014 , tegmark co-authored an op-ed in the huffington post with stephen hawking , frank wilczek and stuart russell on the movie transcendence , '' transcending complacency on superintelligent machines '' . in 2014 , '' the perpetual earth program , '' a play based on tegmark 's book our mathematical universe , was mounted in new york city as part of the planet connections theatre festival . the perpetual earth program in 2014 , featured in '' the principle '' , a documentary examining the copernican principle . in 2015 , tegmark participated in an episode of sam harris ' sam harris podcast entitled '' the multiverse & you ( & you & you & you . ) '' where they discussed topics such as artificial intelligence and the mathematical universe hypothesis . in 2017 , tegmark gave a talk entitled '' effective altruism , existential risk & existential hope '' at the world 's largest annual conference of the effective altruism . in 2017 , tegmark participated in an episode of sam harris ' sam harris podcast entitled '' the future of intelligence '' where they discussed topics such as artificial intelligence and definitions of life . in 2018 , tegmark took part in a conversation with ai researcher lex fridman about artificial general intelligence as part of a mit course on agi . . books . our mathematical universe life 3.0 : being human in the age of artificial intelligence . references . external links .