Law of the instrument

history . the english expression '' a birmingham screwdriver , '' meaning a hammer , refers to the practice of using the one tool for all purposes , and predates both kaplan and maslow by at least a century . in 1868 , a london periodical , once a week , contained this observation : '' give a boy a hammer and chisel ; show him how to use them ; at once he begins to hack the doorposts , to take off the corners of shutter and window frames , until you teach him a better use for them , and how to keep his activity within bounds . '' . abraham kaplan . the first recorded statement of the concept was abraham kaplan 's , in 1964 : '' i call it the law of the instrument , and it may be formulated as follows : give a small boy a hammer , and he will find that everything he encounters needs pounding . '' in february 1962 kaplan , then a professor of philosophy , gave a banquet speech at a conference of the american educational research association that was being held at ucla . an article in the june 1962 issue of the journal of medical education stated that '' the highlight of the 3-day meeting . was to be found in kaplan 's comment on the choice of methods for research . he urged that scientists exercise good judgment in the selection of appropriate methods for their research . because certain methods happen to be handy , or a given individual has been trained to use a specific method , is no assurance that the method is appropriate for all problems . he cited kaplan ’ s law of the instrument : 'give a boy a hammer and everything he meets has to be pounded . in the conduct of inquiry : methodology for behavioral science ( 1964 ) , kaplan again mentioned the law of the instrument saying , '' it comes as no particular surprise to discover that a scientist formulates problems in a way which requires for their solution just those techniques in which he himself is especially skilled . '' and in a 1964 article for the library quarterly , he again cited the law and commented : '' we tend to formulate our problems in such a way as to make it seem that the solutions to those problems demand precisely what we already happen to have at hand . '' . tomkins and colby . in a 1963 essay collection , computer simulation of personality : frontier of psychological theory , silvan tomkins wrote about '' the tendency of jobs to be adapted to tools , rather than adapting tools to jobs '' . he wrote : '' if one has a hammer one tends to look for nails , and if one has a computer with a storage capacity , but no feelings , one is more likely to concern oneself with remembering and with problem solving than with loving and hating . '' in the same book , kenneth mark colby explicitly cited the law , writing : '' the first law of the instrument states that if you give a boy a hammer , he suddenly finds that everything needs pounding . the computer program may be our current hammer , but it must be tried . one can not decide from purely armchair considerations whether or not it will be of any value . '' . abraham maslow . maslow 's hammer , popularly phrased as '' if all you have is a hammer , everything looks like a nail '' and variants thereof , is from abraham maslow 's the psychology of science , published in 1966 . maslow wrote : '' i remember seeing an elaborate and complicated automatic washing machine for automobiles that did a beautiful job of washing them . but it could do only that , and everything else that got into its clutches was treated as if it were an automobile to be washed . i suppose it is tempting , if the only tool you have is a hammer , to treat everything as if it were a nail . '' . robert kagan . in his 2003 book , of paradise and power , historian robert kagan suggested a corollary to the law : '' when you do n't have a hammer , you do n't want anything to look like a nail . '' according to kagan , the corollary explains the difference in views on the use of military force the united states and europe have held since the end of world war ii . . lee loevinger . in 1967 , lee loevinger of the federal communications commission dubbed the law '' loevinger 's law of irresistible use '' , and applied it to government : '' the political science analogue is that if there is a government agency , this proves something needs regulating . '' in 1984 , investor warren buffett criticized academic studies of financial markets that made use of inappropriate mathematical approaches : '' it is n't necessarily because such studies have any utility ; it 's simply that the data are there and academicians have worked hard to learn the mathematical skills needed to manipulate them . once these skills are acquired , it seems sinful not to use them , even if the usage has no utility or negative utility . as a friend said , to a man with a hammer , everything looks like a nail . '' . manifestations . psychiatry . the law of the instrument has been seen in the prescription of anti-psychotic drugs . during maslow 's era , the only medicines available for psychiatric patients were the anti-psychotics stelazine and thorazine , so other mental illnesses were often treated as if they were psychoses . computer programming . the notion of a golden hammer , '' a familiar technology or concept applied obsessively to many software problems '' , was introduced into information technology literature in 1998 as an anti-pattern : a programming practice to be avoided . software developer josé m . gilgado has written that the law is still relevant in the 21st century and is highly applicable to software development . many times software developers , he observed , '' tend to use the same known tools to do a completely new different project with new constraints '' . he blamed this on '' the comfort zone state where you do n't change anything to avoid risk . the problem with using the same tools every time you can is that you do n't have enough arguments to make a choice because you have nothing to compare to and is limiting your knowledge . '' the solution is '' to keep looking for the best possible choice , even if we are n't very familiar with it '' . this includes using a computer language with which one is unfamiliar . he noted that the product rubymotion enables developers to '' wrap '' unknown computer languages in a familiar computer language and thus avoid having to learn them . but gilgado found this approach inadvisable , because it reinforces the habit of avoiding new tools . . education . one observer stated in 2016 that the law of the instrument may be '' the least discussed law when talking about education '' , but is '' the most important to warn for in educational discussions '' . he asked : '' how many times do you read : this tool will change everything in education ? we know that it won ’ t , but most of the time the person expressing this is really convinced of his hammer . '' some educators say : '' let ’ s teach all children how to code '' . . related concepts . other forms of narrow-minded instrumentalism include : déformation professionnelle , a french term for '' looking at things from the point of view of one 's profession '' , and regulatory capture , the tendency for regulators to look at things from the point of view of the profession they are regulating . see also . confirmation bias einstellung effect functional fixedness panacea . notes . references .