Borduria

appearances in tintin books . in king ottokar 's sceptre , tintin reads a syldavian tourist pamphlet that reveals the early history of syldavia and its relationship with borduria . in 1195 , syldavia was annexed by neighbouring borduria due to the weakness of king muskar ii , and was under its rule until 1275 , when baron almaszout drove the bordurians away and established himself as king ottokar i . in the later tintin stories , this ancient rivalry continues with the bordurians continually trying to invade or undermine syldavia . king ottokar 's sceptre ( written in 1939 by hergé ) depicts an unsuccessful bordurian attempt at staging a coup d'état against syldavia , trying to remove the king and invade the country with the support from syldavian sympathizers . the sceptre is stolen , which would force the king to abdicate , however tintin returns it in time . the bordurians then withdraw their troops 15 miles from the borders to prove their peaceful intentions . in the calculus affair ( 1956 ) , borduria is depicted as a stereotypical eastern bloc country with its own secret police ( zep ) ( led by colonel sponsz ) and a military dictator , marshal kûrvi-tasch . a statue of kûrvi-tasch appears in front of a government building , in which he wears a moustache similar to joseph stalin 's and gives a nazi-like salute . the bordurian military of this period is depicted as technologically inept—unable to stop a stolen tank commandeered by tintin and his companions as a result of defective mines and anti-tank guns . professor calculus is kidnapped by the bordurians after developing an ultrasonic weapon but is rescued in the end . in tintin and the picaros ( 1976 ) , the south american banana republic of san theodoros , ruled by general tapioca , has formed an alliance with the bordurian government , which has sent him military advisors , including colonel sponsz . in an unpublished page drawn by hergé for this book , a bust of kûrvi-tasch can even be seen in the office of a san theodorean colonel . eventually , tapioca is deposed by tintin 's friend general alcazar , and sponsz is offered to return to borduria . geography . the bordurian countryside is set in dramatic mountainous terrain . the craggy landscape and towering peaks are most similar to the balkan mountains in moesia . therefore , it is possible that borduria is set roughly in the present-day locations of bulgaria and serbia . the capital of borduria is szohôd , which is also the seat of government . government and military . borduria is a fascist country with a semi totalitarian government . several central european countries such as hungary , croatia , albania and romania were run by fascist governments before and during world war ii . all became client states of the soviet union after the war ; borduria may be presumed to be in a similar situation . in tintin post-war stories it is depicted as a typical eastern bloc country . the fact that the president of state bears the military rank of marshal is a reference to soviet leader joseph stalin , romania 's wartime leader ion antonescu and yugoslavia 's post-war president josip broz tito . however , the leader 's cult of personality most resembles joseph stalin . the army in pre-war king ottokar 's sceptre is depicted as german-supplied , the main aircraft being bf-109 . in post-war stories it has all the characteristics of the soviet military . in tintin and the picaros the san theodoros army is supplied by borduria with beretta ar70/90 assault-rifles and mil mi-1 helicopters . also the government state limousine with kurvi-tasch 's mustaches is inspired by the soviet zil-114 . in king ottokar 's sceptre , the bordurian flag is black with a red circle and two black triangles , reminiscent of the stark , eye-catching symbols used by several fascist movements . in the calculus affair , it is red , with the emblem of kurvi-tasch 's mustache inside a white circle , resembling it closer to the nazi flag , and this was also worn as military armbands by the bordurian military personnel . in king ottokar 's sceptre , the bordurian army uses the gewehr 98 , vz . 24 and karabiner 98k bolt action rifles . in the calculus affair , bordurian soldiers and agents were armed with italian beretta model 38 submachine guns . due to the nature of its government and its military 's weaponry , borduria was most likely an affiliate of the axis during world war ii , although there is no explicit mention of that in the books . the post-war emblem of borduria is similar to the circumflex symbol , and is modelled in the likeness of the mustache of marshal kûrvi-tasch . in the calculus affair , evidence of the cult of personality surrounding the marshal can be found in countless objects in borduria , from the lettering on signs and buildings to the logos of bordurian companies and even certain characteristics and details on cars , including the car bumpers , include the shape in their designs . language . the tintin books depict the country 's language , bordurian , only in fragments . like syldavian , the language seems to be based on the dutch brussels dialect marols , such as for '' mister '' or '' sir '' ( cf . dutch . unlike syldavian , it uses the latin alphabet exclusively , and makes heavy use of the digraph sz ( possibly borrowed from hungarian ) , as well as ô . people and history . ( although the history and people of borduria have not been described in detail by hergé in tintin , the comics leave creative license to imagine possible narratives for these aspects of the fictional nation . ) nomadic slavs inhabited the modern-day regions of borduria and syldavia during the days of the byzantine empire until the arrival of the ottoman turks during the 16th century under suleiman the magnificent . all this followed the turkish defeat at the hand of the syldavians during the 12th century . although the turks allowed the bordurians to retain their own slavic identity , the turkish language , ottoman architecture , and culture quickly assimilated into the bordurian slavic culture , and created an identity strikingly turko-slavic . throughout the tintin comics , the bordurians are portrayed as a typical balkan ethnicity with both ottoman and slavic influences , not unlike the bosnians or albanians ( in the calculus affair , middle eastern architecture is presented in the background of tasch platz when tintin is being driven to his hotel ) . following a wake of extreme national self-determination against the austro-hungarians , who had invaded the balkans during phase of weakness of the ottoman empire prior to the first world war , borduria 's position in the crossfire between the austro-hungarian and serbian conflict in 1914 severely unsettled its economy and still emerging democracy . over-extending their power , the bordurian government supported a movement to overthrow king ottokar of syldavia , and establish themselves as a hegemonial power in the balkans in order to create a unified southern slavic kingdom . references .