Kshatriya

origins . early rigvedic tribal monarchy . the administrative machinery in the vedic india was headed by a tribal king called rajan whose position was not hereditary.the king was elected in a tribal assembly ( called samiti ) which included women.the rajan protected the tribe and cattle ; was assisted by a priest ; and did not maintain a standing army , though in the later period the rulership appears to have risen as a class . the concept of the fourfold varna system is not yet recorded . . later vedic period . the hymn purusha sukta to the rigveda describes the symbolic creation of the four varna-s through cosmic sacrifice ( yajña ) . some scholars consider the purusha sukta to be a late interpolation into the rigveda based on the neological character of the composition , as compared to the more archaic style of the vedic literature . since not all indians were fully regulated under the varna in the vedic society , david kean ( 2007 ) . caste-based discrimination in international human rights law , p . 26 . ashgate publishing ltd . the purusha sukta was supposedly composed in order to secure vedic sanction for the heredity caste scheme . an alternate explanation is that the word 'shudra ' does not occur anywhere else in the rig-veda except the purusha sukta , leading some scholars to believe the purusha sukta was a composition of the later rig-vedic period itself to denote , legitimize and sanctify an oppressive and exploitative class structure that had already come into existence . jayantanuja bandyopadhyaya ( 2007 ) . class and religion in ancient india , pp . 37–47 . anthem press . although the purusha sukta uses the term rajanya , not kshatriya , it is considered the first instance in the extant vedic texts where four social classes are mentioned for the first time together . kumkum roy ( 2011 ) . insights and interventions : essays in honour of uma chakravarti , p . 148 . primus books . usage of the term rajanya possibly indicates the 'kinsmen of the rajan ' ( i.e . , kinsmen of the ruler ) had emerged as a distinct social group then , such that by the end of the vedic period , the term rajanya was replaced by kshatriya ; where rajanya stresses kinship with the rajan and kshatriya denotes power over a specific domain . the term rajanya unlike the word kshatriya essentially denoted the status within a lineage . whereas kshatra , means '' ruling ; one of the ruling order '' . jaiswal points out the term brahman rarely occurs in the rig-veda with the exception of the purusha sukta and may not have been used for the priestly class . based on the authority of panini , patanjali , katyayana and the mahabharata , jayaswal believes that rajanya was the name of political people and that the rajanyas were , therefore , a democracy ( with an elected ruler ) . radhakrishna choudhary ( 1964 ) . the vrātyas in ancient india , volume 38 of chowkhamba sanskrit studies , p . 125 . sanskrit series office . some examples were the andhaka and vrsni rajanyas who followed the system of elected rulers . ram sharan sharma details how the central chief was elected by various clan chiefs or lineage chiefs with increasing polarisation between the rajanya ( aristocracy helping the ruler ) and the vis ( peasants ) leading to a distinction between the chiefs as a separate class ( raja , rajanya , kshatra , kshatriya ) on one hand and vis ( clan peasantry ) on the other hand . ram sharan sharma ( 1991 ) . aspects of political ideas and institutions in ancient india , p . 172 . motilal banarsidass publications . the term kshatriya comes from kshatra and implies temporal authority and power which was based less on being a successful leader in battle and more on the tangible power of laying claim to sovereignty over a territory , and symbolising ownership over clan lands . this later gave rise to the idea of kingship . the srimad bhagavata gita has the following quoted lines by sri krishna : in the period of the brahmanas ( 800 bce to 700 bce ) there was ambiguity in the position of the varna . in the panchavimsha brahmana ( 13,4,7 ) , the rajanya are placed first , followed by brahmana then vaishya . in shatapatha brahmana 13.8.3.11 , the kshatriya are placed second . in shatapatha brahmana 1.1.4.12 the order is—brahmana , vaishya , rajanya , shudra . the order of the brahmanical tradition—brahmana , kshatriya , vaishya , shudra—became fixed from the time of dharmasutras ( 450 bce to 100 bce ) . upinder singh ( 2008 ) . a history of ancient and early medieval india : from the stone age to the 12th century , p . 202 . pearson education india . the kshatriya were often considered pre-eminent in buddhist circles . even among hindu societies they were sometimes at rivalry with the brahmins , but they generally acknowledged the superiority of the priestly class . . modern era . writing in the context of how the jajmani system operated in the 1960s , pauline kolenda noted that the '' caste function of the kshatriya is to lead and protect the village , and with conquest to manage their conquered lands . the kshatriyas do perform these functions today to the extent possible , by distributing food as payments to kamins and providing leadership . '' . symbols . in rituals , the nyagrodha ( ficus indica or india fig or banyan tree ) danda , or staff , is assigned to the kshatriya class , along with a mantra , intended to impart physical vitality or 'ojas' . brian k . smith . reflections on resemblance , ritual , and religion , motilal banarsidass publishe , 1998 . lineage . the vedas do not mention kshatriya ( or varna ) of any vansha ( lineage ) . the lineages of the itihasa-purana tradition are : the solar dynasty ( suryavanshi ) ; and the lunar dynasty ( chandravansi/ somavanshi ) . there are other lineages , such as agnivanshi ( '' fire lineage '' ) , in which an eponymous ancestor rises out of agni ( fire ) , indian history : ancient and medieval , p . 22 . volume 1 of indian history , encyclopædia britannica ( india ) pvt . ltd , 2003 . and nagavanshi ( snake-born ) , claiming descent from the nāgas . the nagavanshi , not attested in the itihasa-purana tradition , were naga tribes whose origin can be found in scriptures . omacanda hāṇḍā . naga cults and traditions in the western himalaya , p . 251 . . see also . indian caste system forward castes sanskritisation ajgar . references . further reading . ramesh chandra majumdar , bharatiya vidya bhavan . history and culture of indian people , the vedic age . bharatiya vidya bhavan , 1996 . pp . & nbsp ; 313–314