Anya Jenkins

character history . backstory . anyanka 'anya jenkins ' was born as aud in the 9th century in sjornjost , a small scandinavian village . aud grew up raising rabbits and became an outsider in her community , which dismissed her as '' odd '' , because of her strange mannerisms and out-of-the-ordinary ideas ( such as not wanting to sell the rabbits she had been breeding , but instead giving them to people in the village as gifts ) . she eventually falls in love with the boorish olaf , a viking warrior who enjoys hunting trolls and drinking at the bar . in 880 , a furious aud discovers that olaf has cheated on her with a bar matron named rannveig , and takes her revenge on him by using magic to transform him into a troll . aud had previously used magic against her past lovers as well , casting spells to create boils on the penis , for example , but this act of vengeance against olaf attracts the attention of the demon d'hoffryn , who offers to transform her into a vengeance demon for scorned women . d'hoffryn gives aud the new name anyanka , patron saint of scorned women , and a pendant which gives her the power to grant wishes . around 1199 , anyanka goes to the koskov valleys above the urals to curse an unfaithful man . she witnesses a sorcerer 's ascension into pure demon form . the death and carnage — only a few people survive — shock even her . around 1580 , anyanka meets ( and dates ) dracula , and later is in salem , massachusetts , during the witch trials of 1692 . in the 19th century , anyanka becomes a close friend and fierce competitor of the vengeance demon known as halfrek , whose specialty is avenging wronged children . they spend time together during the crimean war . anyanka impresses '' hallie '' with a granted wish in saint petersburg , russia , that sparks a revolution in 1905 . in 1914 , anyanka travels to chicago , illinois , to exact vengeance on a man named stewart burns , turning him into a demon and sending him to a hell dimension to be tortured for all eternity . storylines as a recurring character . anyanka arrives at sunnydale high in 1998 ( in the episode '' the wish '' ) as a student named anya emerson . the surname '' emerson '' is given in the sunnydale high yearbook she came to sunnydale in response to the distress of cordelia , who is upset after catching her boyfriend , xander harris , kissing their friend willow . after some prompting , cordelia states : '' i wish that buffy summers had never come to sunnydale . '' anya shows her true demon face to cordelia and says , '' done . '' and the world changes . now they are in an alternative reality in which buffy has not come to sunnydale and the vampire population has multiplied and gained in power . giles meets with cordelia before she dies and manages to discern what has happened . he subsequently summons anyanka and destroys her necklace . as a result , anya is made a mortal and powerless human again and the world returns to normal . caulfield said , '' as far as i know , i do n't think joss whedon ever intended to have anya around for more than one episode . '' however , anya returns in the episode '' doppelgangland '' , duping willow into assisting in a failed magical attempt to recover the necklace which was her power center , lost when giles destroyed it to reverse the wish granted for cordelia . when these efforts fail , she is forced to continue living as a typical high school student . now with human feelings , she yearns to attend the school prom in spite of her abhorrence of all men ; ironically , her only hope for a date is the last man she was sent to punish , xander . caulfield says , '' whedon found this great way to have her interact with the storylines that had developed throughout the entire third season . '' springer , matt , '' hollywood zen '' , from buffyverse magazines ( uk ) 11 ( uk , august 2000 ) , page 12 . anya develops feelings for xander and asks him out again just before graduation . even though xander showed no interest in anya . her romantic plans are foiled when he tells her of the mayor 's plan for his own '' ascension '' , a transformation into pure demon , at the graduation ceremony . anya decides to flee sunnydale and invites xander to join her , saying when she thinks something could happen to him , she '' feels bad inside , like she might vomit '' . xander refuses because he 's got '' friends on the line '' , and ca n't abandon them . she leaves without him . anya returns to sunnydale early in season four , still infatuated with xander . she seduces him ( in the episode '' the harsh light of day '' ) . her lack of experience with people causes her to make straightforward , often tactless remarks , which soon put her at odds with other scooby gang members , especially willow , who has little trust for the ex-demon . anya 's tactlessness is played both for humor and to highlight the truth in situations where others are reluctant to be frank . this is seen most poignantly in '' the body '' when her inability to comprehend buffy 's mother 's death leads to inappropriate remarks which at first make others angry , but then allow for catharsis and comfort . storylines as a regular cast member . anya becomes a regular in season five of the show . while playing the game of life , she discovers her love for money and capitalism ( as opposed to her belief in communism during the early 20th century and her charitable attitude of her years as aud ) . anya 's budding retail skills encourage giles to hire her as a cashier at the magic box . in the episode , '' checkpoint '' , anya is questioned by members of the watchers ' council , and invents the full name anya christina emmanuella jenkins , and claims to have been born on the fourth of july in indiana . during an impending apocalypse , brought about by glory at the end of season five , xander proposes to anya and they are engaged for most of season six . xander 's doubts grow , however , and it is not difficult for stewart burns - escaped from hell and impersonating xander 's future self - to persuade him to leave anya at the wedding by showing him an illusionary life where anya apparently cheats on xander and is later killed in an argument between the two ( '' hell 's bells '' ) . grief-stricken , anya is vulnerable to d'hoffryn 's coaxing , and becomes a vengeance demon again . in the season six episode '' entropy '' anya returns to sunnydale . the audience can see her as a vengeance demon but the other characters are unaware until '' villains '' . anya can not find anyone who wishes vengeance on xander and so she takes comfort in sex with spike , an act which puts her relationship and friendship with xander and buffy in jeopardy . spike nearly wishes for some kind of vengeance upon xander , but after seeing how much her actions hurt him , anya stops him , unable to go through with it . in the season six finale , willow destroys the magic box , leaving anya jobless in the mortal world . anya does not enjoy her return to being a vengeance demon—her experience as a human has led to empathy , which makes exacting vengeance too painful for her to manage . she spends a summer granting half-hearted wishes and gains a reputation among demons as '' miss soft-serve '' . when asked what direction she would like to see anya 's character go , emma caulfield said she hoped that in season seven anya would become '' kind of a badass '' . caulfield said that anya has always been strong in unorthodox ways , but '' i 'd like to see a more blatant display of her strength . '' appropriately , after halfrek encourages anya to return to her former level of work , anya exacts a terrible vengeance on a group of college boys by unleashing a spider-like grimslaw demon on them . this results in a battle with buffy , in which they are almost evenly matched . the battle is interrupted when willow shows up and summons d'hoffryn . d'hoffryn asks anya what she wants , and she asks that her vengeance be reversed . d'hoffryn tells her the price will be the life of a vengeance demon ; anya agrees , assuming it is she who will die , but d'hoffryn summons halfrek , incinerating her before anya . '' never go for the kill , when you can go for the pain '' he tells the distressed anya , and strips her of her powers , making her once again mortal . anya decides that she has been too dependent on others and resolves to find an independent purpose in life for herself . she eventually rejoins the scooby gang as season seven focuses on the long fight against the first evil and eventually becomes friends with xander ; although xander and anya still love each other , they never officially resume their relationship . in the series finale , '' chosen '' , anya fights with the others in the climactic battle against the first evil and is brutally slain from behind , bisected by a bringer 's sword . her body lies in the school 's remains although xander attempts to locate her while fleeing the collapsing building . after sunnydale collapses into the hellmouth , andrew wells comforts xander by telling him that anya had died saving his life , to which xander tearfully replies , '' that 's my girl , always doing the stupid thing . '' in an interview with buffy the vampire slayer/angel magazine 93 , emma caulfield stated that she was okay with her character 's abrupt death , stating , '' she did n't get a big , maudlin send-off , it was very quick and to the point - very anya in that respect . '' although later , at wizard world philadelphia 2009 she said she did n't realize it was going to be abrupt and without fanfare , and would have appreciated a little something more . joss whedon joked at the nocturnal convention in 2001 anya was originally supposed to die during the season five finale , '' the gift '' , but he had to keep her alive because emma caulfield could n't keep still while xander was carrying anya 's supposedly lifeless body . . comic book series . it was stated that anya would return in the buffy the vampire slayer season eight comic book series , even with joss whedon telling mtv that she was '' definitely dead . but that does n't mean she 's gone . '' however , dark horse comics editor scott allie stated that there were no current plans for anya to appear . in the first issue of buffy the vampire slayer season ten , anya returns as a ghost , having a conversation with xander during a battle with both a mindless breed of vampires , which xander has dubbed '' zompires , '' and another new breed who are stronger and has abilities of withstanding sunlight and shape-shifting . currently , she is only visible to her former fiancé , and xander has n't yet informed the gang about anya . it soon turns out she was a fake ghost who was created by d'hoffryn who wanted revenge on xander . anya 's fake ghost realizes that the one thing anya wanted before she died was taking care of d'hoffryn . d'hoffryn was pulling anya 's strings for a long time , even when she was human . she never cut her strings and finally got her vengeance on d'hoffryn and knew that xander felt bad about what happened between him and anya . before departing , she assures xander that he is a good man and that the original anya would forgive him as well . . powers and abilities . anyanka has the power to grant wishes made by women seeking revenge against men who have wronged them , even changing reality to accommodate these wishes , a gift which is supported by her ability to detect women 's emotional pain at a distance . she has supernatural strength , teleportation ( although in '' same time , same place '' she mentions that her use of teleportation is temporarily limited and requires bureaucratic paperwork ) , telekinesis and rapid healing , being able to survive impalement . as a demon she will not die of old age , having lived over a thousand years , but can be killed if her body is sufficiently damaged . with over a thousand years of experience as a former vengeance demon , anya 's knowledge of demonology and various dimensions is immense , surpassing both giles and his successor wesley wyndam-pryce , but not as skilled as them in research . although her native language is old norse , anyanka/anya speaks fluent english as well as some french , latin and can read and speak ancient sumerian . it is implied that she can speak any human language , as she has granted wishes in many countries all over the world throughout many centuries . despite being human , anya still has contacts with some of her former associates . anya also exhibits some basic knowledge of magic , often commenting on willow 's spellcasting and interest in magic with a reasonable degree of insight , and she occasionally participates in the casting of spells herself ( '' doppelgangland '' ) . as a human , anya 's experience and practice of combat from her time as a demon allows her to be an effective fighter , as seen in the series finale . as a ghost , anya is incorporeal and invisible to everyone except xander . personality . commenting on the personality of her character , caulfield said , '' anya remains mortal and ambivalent . she 's just struggling with being human , and really , do n't we all struggle with that from time to time ? she 's very indifferent - and definitely sarcastic and bitter at times . '' anya states in the '' selfless '' flashback that she likes to bowl and she 's '' good with math '' . bunny phobia . anya 's irrational fear of rabbits ( leporiphobia ) is established for the first time in the season four halloween episode '' fear , itself '' , in which she appears in a bunny costume after xander tells her to come to the party as something '' scary '' . her phobia becomes a running joke for the remainder of the series . in '' the gift '' , anya sees a stuffed rabbit in the basement of the magic box ( while looking for the dagon sphere with xander ) , causing her to scream and exclaim , '' who would put something like that there ? ! '' in '' once more , with feeling '' , anya sings , '' bunnies are n't just cute like everybody supposes . they got them hoppy legs and twitchy little noses , and what 's with all the carrots ? what do they need such good eyesight for anyway ? '' , a verse reminiscent of willow 's speech about spiders ( '' nightmares '' ) . in '' tabula rasa '' , while suffering from memory loss , she repeatedly casts a spell that does nothing more than cause rabbits to appear in increasing numbers . the phobia also manifests itself in her final moments . as the final battle approaches , andrew wells suggests she '' picture happy things : a lake , candy canes , bunnies . '' the change is drastic and instantaneous . she confidently raises her sword , saying grimly , '' bunnies . floppy , hoppy , bunnies . '' in her '' origins '' episode , '' selfless '' , anya ( then known as aud ) , is surrounded by rabbits without showing any signs of distress over their presence . academic analysis . anya has been the subject of at least one academic article . for tamy burnett , '' anya . stands alone as the only woman in the buffyverse to remain unshamed and unpunished for her expressions of sexuality '' . burnett argues that , among buffys female characters , despite their varying versions of personal and/or mental strength , anya is the only one who is truly sexually liberated . buffy and her friends tend to be '' girly girls '' , who learn that '' sex is bad '' and have their transgressions of traditional gender performance punished ; burnett cites the loss of angel 's soul , punitive interpretations of tara 's death , and willow 's transformation into warren among other consequences . faith comes '' the closest '' after anya to breaking these traditional patterns because , while she is '' just as sexual and outspoken '' as anya , she pivotally does not achieve anya 's acceptance within the group ; for anya , this '' legitimizes her perspective '' . she identifies this motif with typical traits of horror fiction , citing dawn heinecken 's feminist analysis in warrior women of television . anya frankly admits to masturbation and to her favourite sexual activities with xander , and assumes that others share her attitudes . to burnett , anya 's death in '' chosen '' positions anya as '' failing to achieve her ultimate narrative legitimacy '' . burnett concludes that '' anya 's attitude toward sexual desire marks her as transgressing traditional forms of female sexuality , a significant break to the pattern by which other women on the show are constrained . '' . appearances . ; buffy the vampire slayer : anya appeared in 81 canon episodes . anya was a series regular from seasons five through seven ( 2000–2003 ) , but did not appear in '' normal again '' , '' help '' ( her scenes were cut ) , '' conversations with dead people '' , and '' dirty girls '' . prior to season five , anya was a recurring character for seasons three to four , appearing in the following episodes : season three ( 1998–1999 ) : '' the wish '' , '' doppelgangland '' , '' the prom '' and '' graduation day , part one '' . season four ( 1999–2000 ) : '' the harsh light of day '' , '' fear , itself '' , '' pangs '' , '' something blue '' , '' hush '' , '' a new man '' , '' the i in team '' , '' goodbye iowa '' , '' who are you '' , '' superstar '' , '' where the wild things are '' , '' new moon rising '' , '' the yoko factor '' , '' primeval '' , and '' restless '' . anya has also appeared in a number of comics including past lives , ugly little monsters , and reunion , and in novels including unseen , wisdom of war and monster island . she also makes a brief appearance in the 2003 video game buffy the vampire slayer : chaos bleeds . merchandise . in 2005 , diamond select toys produced several action figures in the likeness of emma caulfield for their buffy the vampire slayer line . each figure featured a '' real-scan '' likeness of caulfield and episode/character specific outfit . figures produced were : '' season 5 anya '' in red top and black skirt , '' hell 's bells anya '' in wedding dress , '' once more , with feeling anya '' in butterfly top and green skirt , '' anyanka '' in demon dress , and '' bunny suit anya '' in removable bunny suit . a repaint of '' bunny suit anya '' was featured in the vengeance book box-set . references . external links . anya on imdb