Arnold Toynbee

life and career . toynbee was born in london , the son of the physician joseph toynbee , a pioneering otolaryngology . his sister was the bacteriologist grace frankland . cohen , s . ( 2004-09-23 ) . frankland née toynbee , grace coleridge ( 1858–1946 ) , bacteriologist . oxford dictionary of national biography . retrieved 30 jan . 2018 , see link toynbee was the uncle , via his brother harry valpy toynbee , of universal history arnold j . toynbee ( 1889–1975 ) . the two are often confused for each other due to the similarity of their names . toynbee attended public schools in blackheath and woolwich . in 1873 he began to study political economy at oxford university , first at pembroke college and from 1875 at balliol college , where he went on to teach after his graduation in 1878 . he was deeply influenced by john ruskin while at oxford . w.g . collingwood states that he was one of ruskin 's warmest admirers and ablest pupils . he further notes that the philanthropic work of toynbee truly illustrated the teaching of one of ruskin 's greatest books unto this last . the life and work of john ruskin . w.g.collingwood . methuen and co . 1893 . vol 1 , page 150 . his lectures on the history of the industrial revolution in 18th- and 19th-century britain proved widely influential ; in fact , toynbee coined , susan j . winter and s . lynn taylor , the role of information technology in the transformation of work : a comparison of postindustrial , industrial and protoindustrial organization , in desanctis , gerardine , janet fulk . shaping organization form : communication , connection , and community , sage publications inc , 1999 , p.105 . or at least effectively popularised , the term '' industrial revolution '' in the anglophone world—in germany and elsewhere it had been brought into circulation earlier by friedrich engels , also under the impression of the industrial changes in britain . he married charlotte atwood , 12 years his senior and a cousin of harold davidson , the famous rector of stiffkey . toynbee died in 1883 , at age 30 . his health had rapidly deteriorated , probably due to exhaustion by excessive work . frederick rogers notes that the publication of henry george 's progress and poverty may be said to have brought about toynbee 's death : . toynbee genealogy . the toynbees have been prominent in british intellectual society for several generations ( this diagram is not a comprehensive toynbee family tree ) : . economic history . according to toynbee , applying the historical method in economics would reveal how supposedly universal economic laws were , in fact , relative . for example , he argued that , despite commonly held beliefs , free trade was not generally advantageous in itself , but only under certain circumstances , which should not be considered absolute . toynbee considered few laws universally true , such as the law of diminishing returns . therefore , there were no universal rules as to how strongly the state should interfere in the marketplace ; all depended on the situation and varying degrees of regulation could be appropriate . another idea toynbee dismissed was that free competition was universally beneficial to economic and societal progress , especially as reflected in its apotheosis in social darwinism , which promoted laissez-faire capitalism . toynbee did not equate '' a struggle for mere existence and a struggle for a particular kind of existence '' . from the very beginning of history , he argued , all human civilisation was essentially designed to '' interfere with this brute struggle . we intend to modify the violence of the fight , and to prevent the weak being trampled under foot . '' lectures on the industrial revolution of the 18th century in england , 2nd ed . , london , rivington 's ( 1887 ) , p . 86 . although economic competition does have its advantages , being the driving force behind technical progress , these were '' gained at the expense of an enormous waste of human life and labour , which might be avoided by regulation '' . toynbee suggested a differentiation between competition in production on the one hand , and competition in the distribution of goods on the other : . the struggle of men to outvie one another in production is beneficial to the community ; their struggle over the division of the joint produce is not . the stronger side will dictate its own terms ; and as a matter of fact , in the early days of competition , the capitalists used all their power to oppress the labourers , and drove down wages to starvation point . this kind of competition has to be checked ; there is no historical instance of its having lasted long without being modified either by combination or legislation , or both . in england both remedies are in operation , the former through trades unions , the latter through factory legislation . lectures on the industrial revolution of the 18th century in england , 2nd ed . , london , rivington 's ( 1887 ) , p . 87 . in itself , a market based on competition was neither good nor bad , but like '' a stream whose strength and direction have to be observed , that embankments may be thrown up within which it may do its work harmlessly and beneficially '' . however , in the early phase of industrial capitalism '' it came to be believed in as a gospel , . from which it was regarded as little long of immoral to depart '' . social commitment . for toynbee , early industrial capitalism and the situation of the working class in it was not just a subject of ivory-tower studies ; he was actively involved in improving the living conditions of the labourer . he read for workers in large industrial centres and encouraged the creation of trade unions and co-operatives . a focal point of his commitment was the slum of whitechapel , in east london , where he helped to establish public libraries for the working-class population . toynbee also encouraged his students to offer free courses for working-class audiences in their own neighbourhoods . inspired by his ideas , samuel augustus barnett and henrietta barnett founded the first settlement house in 1884 , shortly after toynbee 's death ; it was named toynbee hall in his honour . a centre for social reform , toynbee hall was on commercial street , whitechapel . it remains active today . the concept was to bring upper and middle class students into lower-class neighbourhoods , not only to provide education and social aid , but to actually live and work together with their inhabitants . this soon inspired a worldwide movement of university settlements . the idea was to help members of the future elite understand the problems of british society ; this was especially important at a time when class divisions were much stronger , social mobility was minimal , and the living conditions of the poor were completely unknown to many members of the upper class . early chairs of trustees included philip lyttelton gell and lord alfred milner . toynbee hall attracted many students , especially from oxford 's wadham college and balliol college , where toynbee had taught . in 1916 , the arnold toynbee house in new york was founded by a group of young adults who were part of the stevenson club at madison house and with the help of philanthropist rose gruening . eight years later , the settlement house was renamed grand street settlement . views on the industrial revolution . toynbee is widely accepted as the historian who ushered the expression '' the industrial revolution '' into the english language . although french and german commentators had used this term in the early nineteenth century , english use had been rare and inconsistent until the posthumous publication of toynbee 's lectures on the industrial revolution in england . according to toynbee , '' the essence of the industrial revolution '' was '' the substitution of competition for the medieval regulations which had previously controlled the production and distribution of wealth '' . among its components were an '' agrarian revolution '' that produced '' the alienation between farmer and labourer '' and in the manufacturing world , the appearance of a '' new class of great capitalist employers '' . '' the old relations between masters and men disappeared , and a 'cash nexus ' was substituted for the human tie . '' summing up his interpretation , toynbee wrote , '' the wealth of nations and the steam-engine.destroyed the old world and built a new one . '' for toynbee , this coupling seemed self-evident . steam-powered factories , the wealth of nations , competition , the cash-nexus and the rise of pauperism formed part of a single phenomenon . in response to this bleak scenario , toynbee proposed a test for when the state should become involved in the regulation of an economic or social sphere of society to even the balance between industry and labour . he proposed the '' radical creed '' , which , as i understand it , is this : we have not abandoned our old belief in liberty , justice , and self-help , but we say that under certain conditions the people can not help themselves , and that then they should be helped by the state representing directly the whole people . in giving this state help , we make three conditions : first , the matter must be one of primary social importance ; next , it must be proved to be practicable ; thirdly , the state interference must not diminish self-reliance . even if the chance should arise of removing a great social evil , nothing must be done to weaken those habits of individual self-reliance and voluntary association which have built up the greatness of the english people . arnold toynbee and prof benjamin jowett , lectures on the industrial revolution in england ; popular addresses , notes and other fragments ( 1884 ) , pp . 85 , 88 , 92–93 , 189 , 219 . . works . 1884 : lectures on the industrial revolution in england : public addresses , notes and other fragments , together with a short memoir by b . jowett , london , rivington 's ( 1884 ) ; whitefish , montana : kessinger publishing ( pb 2004 ) . 1908 : 1908 edition , revised and expanded new frontiers of knowledge ; a symposium by distinguished writers , notable scholars & public figures by arnold toynbee et al . ( washington : public affairs press , 1957 ) . see also . industrial revolution settlement movement toynbee hall university extension . references . sources . . external links . arnold toynbee 's the industrial revolution : a translation into modern english ( isr economic growth & performance studies book 8 ) kindle edition , 2020 alfred marshall , '' on arnold toynbee '' , ed . john k . whitaker , marshall studies bulletin 6 ( 1996 ) : 45–48 . sociosite : toynbee links great thinkers : rana mitter fba on arnold toynbee fba podcast , the british academy