Courland

geography and climate . image : latvian regions and latvians.png thumb right 350px historical regions of latvia , together with latvian cultural groups ; courland ( kurzeme ) and semigallia ( zemgale ) in yellow image : rundale pilsrundale eingangsportal.jpg thumb 275px entrance to the rundale palace , the seat of the dukes of courland situated in western latvia , courland roughly corresponds to the former latvian districts of kuldīga , liepāja , saldus , talsi , tukums and ventspils . when combined with semigallia and selonia , courland 's northeastern boundary is the river daugava , which separates it from the regions of latgale and vidzeme . to the north , courland 's coast lies along the gulf of riga . on the west it is bordered by the baltic sea , and on the south by lithuania . it lies between 55° 45′ and 57° 45′ north and 21° and 27° east . the area comprises 27,286 & nbsp ; km² ( 10,535 sq.mi . ) , of which 262 & nbsp ; km² ( 101 sq.mi . ) is made up of lakes . the landscape generally has a low and undulating character , with flat and marshy coastlands . the interior features wooded dunes , covered with pine , spruce , birch , and oak , with swamps and lakes , and fertile patches between . courland 's elevation never rises more than 213 & nbsp ; m ( 700 & nbsp ; ft ) above sea level . the jelgava plain divides courland into two parts , the western side , which is fertile and densely inhabited , except in the north , and the eastern side , less fertile and thinly inhabited . nearly one hundred rivers drain courland , but only three of these rivers – the daugava , the lielupe and the venta – are navigable . they all flow northwestward and discharge into the baltic sea . owing to its numerous lakes and marshes , courland has a damp , often foggy , and changeable climate ; its winters are severe . history . early history . in ancient times the curonians , a pagan tribe , inhabited courland . the brethren of the sword , a german military order , subdued the curonians and converted them to christianity in the first quarter of the 13th century . thus in 1230 the curonian king lammekinus ( lamikis ) made peace directly with the papal legate . he accepted baptism , and became a vassal of the pope . in 1237 the area passed into the rule of the teutonic knights owing to the amalgamation of this order with that of the brethren of the sword . livonian confederation . the livonian confederation was a loosely organized confederation formed by the german-led livonian order and various bishoprics that encompassed much of present-day estonia and latvia . it existed from 1228 to the 1560s , when it was dismembered during the livonian wars . duchy of courland and the polish–lithuanian commonwealth , 1561–1795 . image : duchy of courland & semigallia 1740.svg thumb right 340px the duchy of courland and semigallia and the district of pilten as it appeared in 1740 the duchy of courland and semigallia was a semi-independent duchy that existed from 1561 until 1795 , encompassing the areas of courland and semigallia . although nominally a vassal state of the polish–lithuanian commonwealth , the dukes operated autonomously . in the 18th century russia acquired great influence over the duchy ; the future empress anna of russia served as regent there from 1711 until her accession the russian throne in 1730 . after the last of the ketteler into which she had married died in 1737 , she arranged for the duchy to be given to her lover , ernst johann von biron instead . the duchy was one of the smallest european nations to colonize overseas territories , establishing short-lived outposts on the caribbean islands of tobago and trinidad and at the mouth of the gambia river in africa on what was then known as james island . in 1795 , the last duke , peter von biron , ceded the duchy to the russian empire . the former bishopric of courland was directly incorporated into the polish–lithuanian commonwealth as the district of pilten of the wenden and later inflanty voivodeship . courland as part of the russian empire . after annexation by the russian empire , the territory of the former duchy formed the courland governorate . from the time of the northern crusades in the early 13th century , most land was owned by nobles descended from the german invaders . in 1863 , the russian authorities issued laws to enable latvians , who formed the bulk of the population , to acquire the farms which they held , and special banks were founded to help them . by this means , some occupants bought their farms , but the great mass of the population remained landless , and lived as hired labourers , occupying a low position in the social scale . agriculture was the chief occupation , with the principal crops being rye , barley , oats , wheat , flax , and potatoes . the large estates conducted agriculture with skill and scientific knowledge . fruit grew well . excellent breeds of cattle , sheep and pigs were kept . liepāja and jelgava operated as the principal industrial centres , with ironworks , agricultural machinery works , tanneries , glass and soap works . flax spinning took place mostly as a domestic industry . iron and limestone were the chief minerals ; a little amber was found on the coast . the only seaports were liepāja , ventspils and palanga , there being none on the courland coast of the gulf of riga . population . the soviet army occupied latvia in conformity with the terms of 1939 molotov–ribbentrop pact on 17 june 1940 . on 5 august 1940 , the soviet union annexed the region along with the rest of latvia which was made a republics of the soviet union , the latvian ssr . at the start of operation barbarossa in the summer of 1941 , the german wehrmacht 's army group north headed by field marshal wilhelm ritter von leeb overran courland , along with the rest of the baltic littoral . in 1944 the red army lifted the siege of leningrad and re-conquered the baltic area along with much of ukraine and belarus . however , some 200,000 german troops held out in courland . with their backs to the baltic sea , they remained trapped in what became known as the courland pocket , blockaded by the red army and by the red baltic fleet . colonel-general heinz guderian , the chief of the german general staff , pleaded with adolf hitler to allow evacuation of the troops in courland by sea for use in the defense of germany . hitler refused , and ordered the wehrmacht , waffen-ss , luftwaffe and kriegsmarine forces in courland to continue the defence of the area . hitler believed them necessary to protect kriegsmarine submarine bases along the baltic coast . on january 15 , 1945 , army group courland ( heeresgruppe kurland ) formed under colonel-general dr . lothar rendulic . the blockade by elements of the leningrad front remained until may 8 , 1945 , when army group courland , then under its last commander , colonel-general carl hilpert , surrendered to marshal leonid govorov , the commander of the leningrad front ( reinforced by elements of the 2nd baltic front ) on the courland perimeter . at this time the group consisted of the remnants of some 31 divisions . after may 9 , 1945 , approximately 203,000 troops of army group courland began to be moved to soviet prison camps to the east . the majority of them never returned to germany ( haupt , 1997 ) . courland remained part of the latvian ssr within the soviet union following world war ii . courland was no longer an administrative unit under the soviets but an early liepāja oblast , one of three oblasts in latvia , roughly corresponded to courland . with the dissolution of the soviet union , courland became part of independent latvia once more and it remains so to this day . although courland is not an administrative entity today , the kurzeme planning region , with an area of and a population of 301,621 in 2008 , includes much of the traditional region . the remainder of courland is part of the planning regions of riga and semigallia ( zemgale ) . notable residents . george henry loskiel ( 1740–1814 ) , born in angermuende in courland , moravian clergyman who obtained complete separation of the european and american branches of the church . dorothea von medem ( 1761–1821 ) , duchess of courland , wife of the last duke of courland . katharina friederike wilhelmine benigna ( 1781–1839 ) , princess of courland , duchess of sagan , eldest daughter of last duke , born 8 february 1781 in mitau , duchy of courland and semigallia ; died 29 november 1839 in vienna . wilhelmine is mainly known for her relationship with klemens metternich , statesman of the austrian empire . dorothea ( 1793–1862 ) , youngest daughter of last duke , wife of edmond de talleyrand-périgord ( 1787–1872 ) , nephew of the french statesman talleyrand , becoming talleyrand 's devoted attendant , political aide , and possible lover . ephraim deinard ( 1846–1930 ) , born in valdemarpils , publisher and author . see also . elisa von der recke . notes .