1990 in music

specific locations . 1990 in british music 1990 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1990 in country music 1990 in heavy metal music 1990 in hip hop music 1990 in latin music 1990 in jazz . events . january–march . january 18 – eric clapton plays the first of eighteen shows in a three-week span at london 's royal albert hall . january 21 – mtv 's unplugged is broadcast for the first time , on cable television , with british band squeeze . february 6 billy idol is involved in a serious motorcycle accident , resulting in several broken bones . idol had been scheduled to have a major role in oliver stone 's film the doors , but due to his injuries , the role was reduced almost to a bit part . the role of the t-1000 in terminator 2 : judgment day , originally intended for idol , was recast entirely as a result of the accident . bob marley 's birthday is a national holiday in jamaica for the first time . february 14 – 50,000 fans watch the rolling stones play the first of 10 concerts at tokyo 's korakuen dome , the beginning of the stones ' first ever tour of japan . the group was originally scheduled to perform there in 1973 but a drug conviction prevented mick jagger from obtaining a visa at the time . february 16 – ike turner is sentenced to 4 years in prison for possession of cocaine . february 21 – the 32nd annual grammy awards are presented in los angeles , hosted by garry shandling . bonnie raitt 's nick of time wins album of the year , while bette midler 's cover of '' wind beneath my wings '' wins both record of the year and song of the year . milli vanilli win best new artist . february 24 – the byrds ( roger mcguinn , chris hillman and david crosby ) reunite , for the first time in 25 years , to perform at a los angeles tribute to roy orbison . the three are joined unexpectedly on stage by bob dylan , who sings '' mr . tambourine man '' with the band . march 15 – mca inc . purchases geffen records for over 550 million in stock . under the agreement , david geffen will continue to run the record company through an employment contract . march 16 – flea and chad smith of red hot chili peppers are arrested and charged for an incident two days earlier at a performance in daytona beach during mtv 's spring break coverage , in which they allegedly sexually assaulted and verbally abused a female audience member after jumping from the stage . they are released on 2,000 bail . march 20 – gloria estefan 's tour bus is involved in an accident . estefan suffers several broken bones in her back . march 25 – mötley crüe 's tommy lee is arrested for allegedly exposing his buttocks during a performance in augusta , georgia . march 28 – the go-go 's reunite to play a benefit concert for the california environmental protection act . they play several more reunion shows later in the year . april–june . april 4 – gloria estefan returns to miami , florida after undergoing back surgery following the march 20 accident . april 6 – mötley crüe 's tommy lee suffers a mild concussion after falling off of scaffolding above his elevated drum kit during a performance in new haven , connecticut . april 7 – neil young , elton john , kris kristofferson , willie nelson , john mellencamp , guns n ' roses and jackson browne perform at farm aid iv in indiana . john dedicates '' candle in the wind '' to aids patient ryan white during his performance . white dies the following day . april 13 – madonna starts her controversial blond ambition tour in tokyo , japan . april 16 – a massive tribute concert is held at wembley stadium for recently freed anti-apartheid activist nelson mandela , who appears in a pre-taped 45-minute speech at the event . performers include anita baker , tracy chapman , peter gabriel , the neville brothers and neil young . the event is broadcast to 61 countries around the world . april 24 – janet jackson is honored with a star on the hollywood walk of fame april 25 – jimi hendrix 's fender stratocaster , on which he performed his famous version of the '' star spangled banner '' at woodstock , is auctioned off in london for 295,000 . april 27 – axl rose marries model erin everly , daughter of singer don everly , in a las vegas ceremony . divorce papers are filed on may 24 , then withdrawn , then filed again in october . may 5 – the 35th eurovision song contest , held in vatroslav lisinski concert hall in zagreb , is won by italy singer toto cutugno for the song '' insieme : 1992 '' , italy 's first victory in the contest since 1964 . at 46 years old , cutugno becomes the oldest winner of the contest to date , a record he holds until 2001 . may 6 – valery leontiev show '' it seems to me that i have not lived '' in the olympic stadium . may 18 – the rolling stones open their urban jungle european tour in rotterdam , the netherlands . may 27 – the stone roses stage a legendary concert at spike island , cheshire . may 29 in canada , toronto police threaten to arrest madonna if she performs her simulated masturbation scene during her performance of '' like a virgin '' on her blond ambition tour . madonna refuses to change her show , and the police decide not to press charges , later denying that they had ever threatened to do so ( a claim refuted by footage captured during the filming of madonna 's 1991 documentary truth or dare ) . at the eurovision young musicians competition 1990 finals , held at the musikverein in vienna , austria , pianist nick van oosterum of the netherlands takes first place . june 9 – the stone roses perform to 8,000 people at glasgow green , which is widely regarded as their best ever gig . june 10 – members of rap group 2 live crew are arrested and charged with obscenity after a performance in a hollywood , florida nightclub . june 30 – knebworth 1990 , a one-off festival at knebworth park , england in support of nordoff-robbins . participating musicians had all been winners of the silver clef award . the acts included headliners pink floyd , genesis , robert plant , elton john , dire straits , status quo , eric clapton and others . july–september . july 7 – the three tenors give their first concert , at the baths of caracalla in rome . july 14 – jean michel jarre 's concert paris la defense attracts 2.5 million spectators . july 21 – roger waters and numerous guest stars stage a performance of pink floyd 's the wall in berlin , germany to commemorate the fall of the berlin wall eight months earlier . scorpions , cyndi lauper , thomas dolby , sinéad o'connor , the band and bryan adams are among the performers . august 5 – madonna ends her controversial blond ambition tour in nice , france . the last date was aired live and broadcast on hbo in united states , and later released as laser disc only . august 13 – curtis mayfield is paralyzed from the neck down in an accident at an outdoor concert in flatbush , brooklyn , after stage lighting equipment collapses on top of him . august 19 – leonard bernstein conducts his final performance at tanglewood ; he suffers a coughing fit in the middle of one piece which almost brings the concert to a premature end . august 22 – james macmillan 's symphonic piece the confession of isobel gowdie premieres at the proms in london . august 24 a judge rules that heavy metal band judas priest is not responsible for the actions of two nevada youths who shot themselves , one fatally , after listening to the band 's music in december 1985 . irish singer sinéad o'connor sparks controversy when she refuses to play a concert at the pnc bank arts center in new jersey unless the venue refrains from its tradition of playing a recording of the star spangled banner before the performance . o'connor is heavily criticized and her music is dropped from a number of radio stations as a result . august 27 – guitarist stevie ray vaughan is killed in a helicopter crash following a concert at the alpine valley music theatre in east troy , wisconsin . he was 35 . september 4 – walter yetnikoff steps down after fifteen years as president of cbs records . september 11 – after a decade of performing in the francophone world , celine dion makes her formal english-language debut in the united states with the release of her album unison . september 26 – the poorly received cop rock premieres on us television ; it was tv 's only musical police drama . october–december . october 9 – leonard bernstein announces his retirement from the conducting podium ; he dies five days later . october 20 – a florida jury acquits 2 live crew of the obscenity charges stemming from a june 10 performance of their act known for its sexually explicit lyrics . october 22 – pearl jam , then named '' mookie blaylock '' , play their first show as a band at the off ramp club in seattle , washington . october 27 – janet jackson 's '' black cat '' reaches number one . it was also the first song to simultaneously peak atop the billboard hot 100 and mainstream rock chart . november 6 – madonna releases her new single , '' justify my love '' . the accompanying music video is banned by mtv amid international controversy over its sexually explicit content . november 21 – the rolling stones frontman mick jagger finally marries longtime girlfriend jerry hall in a traditional hindu ceremony on the island of bali , although the wedding 's legality is questionable . november 27 – amid growing public skepticism towards the artistic integrity of dance-pop duo milli vanilli as well as creative differences with frontmen fab morvan and rob pilatus , music producer frank farian admits that morvan and pilatus had been lip-synching all of their songs , including hits such as '' girl you know it 's true . '' in actuality , the tracks were composed and recorded by an ensemble of much older artists . milli vanilli 's grammy award for best new artist is voided in the ensuing fallout ; accounts vary as to whether it was revoked or if morvan and pilatus returned it themselves . december 1 – abc airs a television special accompanying the red hot + blue benefit album in which contemporary pop performers reinterpret the songs of cole porter . the special includes video clips portraying the societal effects of aids . december 3 – following the banning of her '' justify my love '' music video by mtv , singer madonna appears on nightline to defend the video . december 15 – rod stewart marries model rachel hunter . december 31 – the nineteenth annual new year 's rockin ' eve special airs on abc , with appearances by the beach boys , bell biv devoe , the kentucky headhunters , nelson , the o'jays and sweet sensation . also in 1990 . fall – for the first time , amy grant and gary chapman hold a night of music at their franklin , tennessee riverstone farm , for local teenagers . performers included rich mullins , rick elias , charlie peacock , wes king and michael w . smith . the event becomes known as '' the loft '' . guitarists : dan nilsson & micke bargstörm , bassist : martin persson & drummer : rille even , all quit opeth who were the original members of the band . david isberg , the only remaining original member hires guitarists : mikael åkerfeldt ( who applied for a bassist position even when the band already had bassist causing friction but ended up as a guitarist ) andreas dimeo , bassist : nick döring & drummer : anders nordin . studio fredman is built . sons of kyuss change their name to kyuss and add new members , except for guitarist josh homme . after a hiatus of 7 years , rock group styx reform to record a new album and tour without long-time guitarist tommy shaw , who was committed to damn yankees at the time . tapes of the original william walton score for the 1969 film battle of britain are rediscovered , having been lost since the score was abandoned in favour of one by ron goodwin . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1990 . bands disbanded . see musical groups disestablished in 1990 . albums released . january–march . ( d . 2017 ) april 10 – maren morris , american country music singer , songwriter , and record producer . april 22 – machine gun kelly ( rapper ) , american rapper april 29 – loick essien , british singer may 26 – nadia oh , english singer , producer rapper , songwriter and model may 30 yoona , south korean singer and actress , member of girls ' generation phillipa soo , american actress and singer . june 4 – zac farro , american musician , drummer , singer-songwriter and multi instrumentalist ( hayley williams , paramore ) june 5 – dj mustard , american producer , dj , june 6 raisa andriana , indonesian singer mike g , american rapper ( odd future ) june 7 – iggy azalea , australian rapper june 14 – starrah , american songwriter , singer and rapper june 16 – john newman ( singer ) , english musician , singer , songwriter and record producer june 18 – raleigh ritchie , english actor , singer-songwriter , rapper , and record producer june 19 jason dy , filipino singer moses sumney , american singer-songwriter , musician june 25 – makj , american dj june 29 – laura macrì , sicilian-italian soprano singer ( mayan ( band ) ) july 4 – fredo santana , american rapper ( d.2018 ) july 6 – meg mac , australian singer-songwriter and musician july 10 – talay riley , british singer-songwriter , producer july 12 – maverick sabre , british singer-songwriter july 15 – olly alexander , english singer-songwriter , musician , producer july 16 james maslow , american actor , singer ( big time rush ) paula rojo , spanish singer and songwriter . july 19 – gfoty , british edm pop singer with pc music july 23 – dagny ( singer ) , norwegian pop singer july 24 ben mckenzie , australian idol contestant , singer , actor jay mcguiness , british singer , songwriter and dancer , former member of the wanted july 28 – soulja boy , american rapper august 8 – rina sawayama , japanese-british singer-songwriter and model . august 13 – shila amzah , malaysian singer august 15 jennifer lawrence , american singer/actress bloodpop – american musician , record producer , and songwriter ( worked with britney spears , ariana grande , madonna , lady gaga ) august 21 – bo burnham , american comedian and musician august 23 – a.g . cook , british singer-songwriter , music producer and head of record label pc music . ( charli xcx ) august 30 – julia jacklin , australian singer-songwriter and musician september 3 – iza , brazilian singer-songwriter september 4 – james bay ( singer ) , english singer-songwriter and guitarist september 11 – alex cameron , australian musician september 18 – sam perry ( looping artist ) , australian singer-songwriter and looping artist september 19 – bjarki , icelandic electronic music composer september 20 – phillip phillips , american singer september 21 – phoebe ryan , american singer-songwriter september 27 – mitski , japanese-american singer-songwriter and musician october 1 – charlie mcdonnell , english singer-songwriter and guitarist ( chameleon circuit ) october 7 – seinabo sey , swedish recording artist and songwriter october 11 – behzod abduraimov , uzbek classical pianist october 23 – stan walker , australian-new zealand singer october 31 – jid , american rapper and songwriter november 2 – kendall schmidt , american actor , singer ( big time rush ) november 7 – matt corby , australian singer november 8 – sza ( singer ) , american singer/songwriter november 18 jackie thomas , new zealand singer myk perez , filipino singer november 26 rita ora , british singer chip , british rapper tofubeats , japanese singer , producer and dj november 27 – blackbear , american rapper , producer , singer december 20 – jojo , american singer , songwriter , activist and actress december 21 – holiday sidewinder , australian singer-songwriter , musician and record producer december 23 – anna maria perez de tagle , american singer and actress ( demi lovato ) december 26 – jon bellion , american singer-songwriter , rapper , record producer . december 28 – david archuleta , season 7 american idol runner-up unknown : danny l harle , british music producer and composer ( pc music ) . deaths . january 3 – arthur gold , american pianist , 72 january 7 – jimmy van heusen , composer and songwriter , 77 january 18 – melanie appleby of british duo mel and kim , 23 ( liver cancer ) january 19 – semprini , pianist and broadcaster , 81 january 28 – puma jones , american singer , 36 ( breast cancer ) january 23 – allen collins , lynyrd skynyrd guitarist , 37 ( complications from pneumonia ) february 1 – peter racine fricker , composer , 69 february 2 – mel lewis , drummer and bandleader , 60 ( cancer ) february 8 – del shannon , singer-songwriter , 55 ( suicide by shotgun ) february 14 – tony holiday , german singer , 38 ( aids-related illness ) february 15 – george suranovich , drummer ( love , eric burdon , chuck berry ) , 45 ( heart attack ) february 16 - keith haring , iconic graffiti artists and aids activist february 24 – johnnie ray , singer , 63 ( liver failure ) february 26 – cornell gunter , r & b singer , 53 ( gunshot wound ) march 6 – mala , singer , 50 march 11 – muriel dickson , operatic soprano , 86 march 16 – andrew wood , singer ( mother love bone ) , 24 ( heroin overdose ) march 17 – ric grech , bassist ( family , blind faith ) , 43 ( brain haemorrhage ) april 3 – sarah vaughan , american jazz singer , 66 ( lung cancer ) april 25 – dexter gordon , jazz saxophonist , 67 may 1 – sergio franchi , italian-american tenor/actor , 64 ( brain cancer ) may 8 – luigi nono , composer , 66 may 16 – sammy davis , jr . , american entertainer , 64 june 3 – stiv bators , punk musician , 40 ( concussion ) june 5 – richard sohl , pianist ( patti smith ) , 37 ( heart failure ) june 6 – joe loss , english bandleader , 80 june 14 – erna berger , operatic soprano , 89 june 15 – jim hodder , steely dan drummer , 42 ( drowning ) june 16 – dame eva turner , operatic soprano , 98 june 21 june christy , american singer , 64 ( renal failure ) elizabeth harwood , operatic soprano , 52 ( cancer ) june 22 – kripp johnson , american singer ( the del-vikings ) , 54 june 25 – peggy glanville-hicks , composer , 77 july 2 – snooky lanson , american singer , 76 july 7 – cazuza , singer and composer , 32 ( aids-related ) july 15 – trouble t roy , hip-hop dancer , 22 ( fall from stage ) july 16 – sidney torch , pianist , theatre organ , conductor , orchestral arranger and composer july 18 – gerry boulet , canadian singer-songwriter ( offenbach ) , 44 ( colon cancer ) july 26 – brent mydland , keyboardist ( grateful dead ) , 37 ( drug overdose ) august 3 – m . ranga rao , indian film composer and music director august 14 – lafayette leake , blues and jazz pianist , organist , vocalist and composer , 71 august 15 – viktor tsoi , russian singer of kino , 28 ( car accident ) august 17 – pearl bailey , singer , 72 august 27 – stevie ray vaughan , american blues guitarist performer , 35 ( helicopter crash ) september 2 – sari biro , pianist , 78 september 6 – tom fogerty ( creedence clearwater revival ) , 48 ( aids-related ) september 13 – phil napoleon , jazz trumpeter , 89 october 3 – eleanor steber , operatic soprano , 76 october 4 – ray stephens , a onetime member of the village people , 35 october 6 asser fagerström , pianist , composer and actor , 78 danny rodriguez , christian rap artist , 22 ( shot ) october 8 – b . j . wilson , drummer of procol harum , 43 ( pneumonia after three years in a coma ) october 14 – leonard bernstein , american composer and conductor , 72 ( pneumonia and a pleural tumor ) october 16 art blakey , jazz drummer , 71 jorge bolet , pianist , 75 october 27 – xavier cugat , violinist , bandleader and arranger , 90 october 31 – m . l . vasanthakumari , carnatic musician and playback singer , 62 november 3 – mary martin , us singer and actress , 76 november 10 – ronnie dyson , soul singer and actor december 2 – aaron copland , american composer december 7 – dee clark , singer , 52 ( heart attack ) december 18 – paul tortelier , cellist , 76 . see also . 1990 in music ( uk ) record labels established in 1990 timeline of musical events . references .