Uttoxeter

history . uttoxeter 's name has had at least 79 spellings since it was mentioned in the domesday book as '' wotocheshede '' : plea rolls of the court of common pleas ; national archives ; cp 40/555 , in 1399 ; ; sixth entry . where the plaintiff john passemor comes from , appearing as uttoksather . it probably came from anglo-saxon wuttuceshǣddre , meaning '' wuttuc 's homestead on the heath '' . some historians have pointed to pre-roman settlement here ; axes from the bronze age discovered in the town are now on display in the potteries museum in stoke-on-trent . it is possible that uttoxeter had some form of roman activity , due to its strategic position on the river dove and its closeness to the large garrison forts at rocester between 69 and 400 ad , and the recently discovered fort at stramshall . however , little corroborating archaeological evidence has been found . uttoxeter saw the last major royalist surrender of the english civil war , on 25 august 1648 , when james hamilton , 1st duke of hamilton surrendered to parliamentarian general john lambert . perhaps the most famous event to have occurred in uttoxeter is the penance of samuel johnson . johnson 's father ran a bookstall on uttoxeter market , and young samuel once refused to help out on the stall . when johnson was older , he stood in the rain ( without a hat ) as a penance for his failure to assist his father . this event is commemorated by the johnson memorial , which stands in the town-centre market place . he is also commemorated in an area of town called johnson road . mary howitt , the quaker writer of the poem '' the spider and the fly '' , lived in uttoxeter for a long period of her life . the town influenced some of her poems and novels and fuelled her love of natural history , which also featured in her books . howitt crescent , a residential road in the town , was named after her . the house where she lived , howitt place , is still standing in balance street . thomas fradgley , uttoxeter 's own architect designed the town hall ( 1854 ) , the johnson memorial ( 1854 ) , st michael 's church , stramshall , st lawrence church , bramshall ( 1835 ) , st mary 's church , uttoxeter , and marchington church . he was involved with pugin and other architects in designs for the 16th earl of shrewsbury at alton towers including the figures of the talbot hounds at the entrance tower ( 1830 ) , the angel corbels in the lady chapel , 1833 , alton towers chapel with joseph potter ( completed in 1833 ) , swiss cottage , and harper 's cottage , farley . he was the architect who improved several local schools , including uttoxeter national school , hanbury free school ( enlarged in 1848 ) , national schools at oakamoor , cauldon , alton , and draycott school , hanbury . he married clara warner from bramshall . their only child thomas died aged six . thomas fradgley died in 1883 aged 83 . bunting 's brewery had occupied a large area of the centre of the town since the victorian era . it ceased production in the 1930s after being bought by parkers brewery of burslem , later part of ind coope . the remains of the brewery were demolished in the 1960s to make way for the maltings shopping precinct and car park . the brewery clock was refurbished and installed on the town hall in the 2000s . in 1945 , joseph cyril bamford founded j c bamford excavators limited in uttoxeter , now known as jcb . the firm , based in the nearby village of rocester , is the world 's third-largest construction equipment manufacturer . the firm 's first vehicle was a tipping trailer made from war-surplus materials , which j . c . bamford built in a rented lock-up garage in uttoxeter . the bamford family had previously started bamfords , later bamford international farm machinery which was a large employer in the town from the end of the 19th century through to the early 1980s , when it gradually declined before closing in 1989 . the land and former building were acquired by jcb for its '' special products '' division . this has now closed and the buildings have been demolished , but the site has yet to be redeveloped . uttoxeter in 2008 marked the 700th anniversary of its market charter of 1308 , which underpins the markets held on saturdays and wednesdays and on other festival days . the 1308 charter followed a more general royal charter granted to the town 's burgesses in 1252 . the originals are held at the national archives in kew and the deferrers museum in leicester . economy . one of the main employers in uttoxeter is the global construction , demolition and agricultural equipment company jcb , headquartered in rocester , with other factories in uttoxeter , cheadle , rugeley , foston and wrexham , and abroad in the united states and india . fox 's biscuits ( previously elkes and adams ) has a factory in uttoxeter . elkes was the creator of the famous malted milk biscuit . glennans crisps , specialising in vegetable crisps , is based in the town . it was bought by tyrrells crisps in 2012 . proximity to the alton towers theme park and resort , st george 's park national football centre and the peak district national park means tourism is important to the local economy . uttoxeter racecourse , home to the midlands grand national , also brings visitors , as do the town centre shops and markets . agriculture remains important , as the town is set in rich dairy farming country . uttoxeter previously housed a large dairy and was historically a major trader in butter and cheese . the farming cooperative dairy farmers of britain had another large dairy in the nearby village of fole , but this closed in 2008 . the next year the firm went into administration . a new cattle market was due to be built in the town after the old one was demolished in 2004 , but no progress was made and it is now unlikely after ten years that the town will regain one . . recent development . uttoxeter town centre underwent a development scheme in 2006–2007 , with the market place , market street , queens street , carter street , and high street receiving new stone paving and street furniture . phased development of dovefields retail park began in 1998 with a tesco supermarket on the edge of the town and expansion in 2002 with seven large retail outlets . in 2005 an entertainment development with a bowling alley , an ice rink , a cinema , a children 's crèche , a fitness centre and business units was built . the old cattle market closed in november 2005 in favour of a retail and housing development , carter square , opening in 2014 . this features a supermarket , a range of smaller retail units and a medical surgery . the replacement cattle market , granted planning permission on the outskirts of the town , failed to appear after several years . a municipal recycling depot has opened on part of the site . the jcb site in the centre of uttoxeter was demolished in 2009 after the firm moved to one of its sites on the edge of town . this is currently undergoing redevelopment : a waitrose store opened there in 2016 . plans have been approved for hundreds of homes , a park and business units . . demography . according to the 2011 census , the population for uttoxeter civil parish was 13,089 . white british make up by far the largest ethnicity at 96 per cent of the population with 493 people from an ethnic minority . . transport and infrastructure . uttoxeter is on the main a50 trunk road . it also has a railway station , opened originally by the north staffordshire railway on 2 october 1881 to replace earlier stations . the bus stop next to the station runs an hourly service to cheadle , stoke-on-trent and alton towers . buses to stafford run every two hours , those to burton upon trent every hour . uttoxeter was once the terminus of a branch of the caldon canal ( the uttoxeter canal ) , but most signs of this , apart from an area of uttoxeter called '' the wharf '' , have disappeared , as much of the canal bed was used in the 19th century for the north staffordshire railway main line from uttoxeter to macclesfield , which has now also disappeared . the nearest airport is east midlands , some 29 miles ( 47 km ) away . public services . policing in uttoxeter is provided from the staffordshire police station in balance street . hm prison dovegate , in the nearby village of marchington , is a category b men 's private prison operated by the serco . hm prison sudbury , just over six miles away beyond the derbyshire boundary , is operated by hm prison service as an category d men 's open prison . fire service in the united kingdom is provided by the staffordshire fire and rescue service . uttoxeter fire station is in cheadle road in the north of the town . uttoxeter has no hospital . it is served by the surrounding queen 's hospital in burton , county hospital in stafford , the university hospital of north staffordshire in stoke-on-trent and royal derby hospital . there is no ambulance station , but a team of rapid response paramedics is based here and supported by volunteer community first responders . the utility firm south staffordshire water manages uttoxeter 's drinking water and severn trent its waste water . places of interest . st mary 's catholic church in balance street was pugin 's first church design . he later worked on alton towers and the houses of parliament . three miles north-west of uttoxeter are the remains of croxden abbey , founded in 1176 by bertram de verdun for monks of the cistercian order . redfern 's cottage museum of uttoxeter life is in carter street and run by volunteers . the restored timber-framed building houses local-history displays , a small gift shop and a cafe . the town 's refurbished market place contains the town 's main war memorial , as well as the millennium monument and the dr johnson memorial . the wednesday , friday and saturday markets are held weekly in the market place . in addition there is a monthly makers ' market . smallwood manor , just over a mile outside the town , was built in 1886 as a country house and now houses smallwood manor preparatory school . the national trust 's museum of childhood is located at nearby sudbury hall . uttoxeter racecourse is a short walk from the town centre . it holds the annual midlands grand national horse race . bramshall road park is the town 's recreation ground , with offers tennis courts , skate park , basketball court , football pitch , bowling green and two children 's play areas , as well as floral arrangements and the picknall brook nature reserve , which can be followed through to the river dove . alton towers resort is some from uttoxeter . the peak district national park is about 20 miles away . the uttoxeter casket or dr nelson 's casket is an anglo-saxon reliquary , probably from croxden abbey . it was rediscovered in a cottage in croxden in the mid-19th century . it probably held a religious relic for display on an altar . it is currently held at the museum of contemporary art cleveland , ohio . media . television . uttoxeter lies within the bbc west midlands and itv central both broadcast from the sutton coldfield transmitting station . it is also possible to receive bbc east midlands from the waltham transmitting station in leicestershire . radio . uttoxeter 's local bbc station is bbc radio derby , based in derby . other local bbc stations that can be received include bbc radio stoke and bbc radio leicester . uttoxeter 's commercial radio station is high peak radio , broadcasting on 101.8 fm locally . other commercial stations that can be received include gem , capital fm east midlands and signal radio . a further online uttoxeter radio service called the knot will be launched on 5 september 2020 . station announcement . . newspapers . uttoxeter 's newspapers are the uttoxeter advertiser ( online only , part of the burton mail group of local papers ) , the uttoxeter echo , times , echo and life publications , since 1896 . and the community magazine the shire standard . family-owned monthly launched in 2017 . . culture . uttoxeter civic society was re-established in 2004 to act as a civic watchdog and to protect and promote the history and heritage of uttoxeter . each year , uttoxeter lions run a beer festival in june , '' lark in the park '' , at bramshall road park on august bank holiday and on bonfire and fireworks night in november , and an annual christmas fair and market known as '' cracker night '' . uttoxeter choral society uttoxeter choral society website . retrieved 15 july 2010 . was founded in 1881 , as one of the earliest in the united kingdom . its continuity is matched by few other societies . uttoxeter is also the home of the acoustic festival of britain . . television appearances . uttoxeter was the setting of a recurring sketch comedy by comedians stephen fry and hugh laurie in their bbc television series a bit of fry and laurie . in one episode , two obnoxious business entrepreneurs who run various companies in uttoxeter throughout the series develop grand plans for a popular sports centre . the sketch derives its humour from the fact that uttoxeter is in fact a quiet and sedate town . the town featured in countryfile , as a '' mystery town '' . its cattle market featured in the programme as the last in the town centre site in 2005 . local people participated in the programme from the local uttoxeter advertiser and uttoxeter racecourse staff . oldfields hall middle school featured in the film a room for romeo brass , written and directed by shane meadows and paul fraser , two uxonians who have risen to fame . uttoxeter racecourse has been used several times , as it is visited by residents of the popular soap coronation street . uttoxeter is the home of rockin ' johnny austin mbe , recognised for his charity work and rock and roll songs such as rockabilly stroll , a minor hit in the 1980s . he also produced in 2010 a world cup single , victory day , which was filmed on location in uttoxeter market place . religion . st . mary the virgin church . the most prominent religious building in uttoxeter is the church of england st mary the virgin church in church street . the present structure dates from 1877 , but parts date from the 15th century . there is another church of england church in the heath area of the town . both lie in the parish of uttoxeter and the diocese of lichfield . st mary 's catholic church . the roman catholic church in the town is st mary 's , dating from 1838 and designed by augustus pugin . it is part of the roman catholic archdiocese of birmingham . other christian churches . uttoxeter has a methodist church dating from 1812 , a united reformed church in carter street , a pentecostal church , a free church , and a kingdom hall for jehovah 's witnesses . non-christian . the nearest mosques and sikh gurdwara are in burton upon trent , and the nearest synagogue is in newcastle-under-lyme . quaker meeting house . the uttoxeter meeting house in carter street quakers website retrieved jan 2017 was built in 1706 and remained in use until the late 1880s . however , it reopened in 1922 and has remained in use since then . education . uttoxeter has a three-tier schooling system : several first schools , three middle schools ( oldfields hall middle school , windsor park middle school and ryecroft middle school , rocester ) and a high school . all three middle schools were rated good by ofsted in 2015/2016 . the high school was named as one of the top 10 per cente of schools nationally for progress at gcse in 2015 . thomas alleyne 's , has over 1,100 pupils , an astroturf football pitch , swimming pool , gymnasium and several grass football pitches . it is the only high school in staffordshire to offer a school farm . it includes a sixth form centre , and is one of three schools founded by the 16th-century priest thomas alleyne . before this educational structure , the town had a selective secondary and grammar school system consisting of windsor park boys ' school , oldfields girls ' school and alleyne 's grammar school . the university of derby and staffordshire university ( stoke-on-trent & stafford ) are the closest higher education institutions . sport . uttoxeter is the home town of olympic gold-medal-winning swimming star adam peaty , world record holder for the 50m and 100m breast stroke . in january 2015 he opened the redeveloped uttoxeter leisure centre , which now houses the adam peaty swimming pool . uttoxeter racecourse is home to the midlands grand national . uttoxeter rugby club was formed in 1982 when jcb rugby club began to play at oldfields sport and social club in uttoxeter , establishing the first rugby side in a town traditionally associated with football . in those days there was no league structure in place nationally , so uttoxeter played '' friendly '' fixtures and developed great rivalries with other local sides including cannock and rugeley which have endured over the last 30 years . uttoxeter has a football club , uttoxeter town f.c . , also based at oldfields sports and social club . it has been successful for many years in the burton and district sunday football league . from 2012 , uttoxeter town entered the staffordshire county senior league , division 1 , and now plays at the . rocester f.c . plays in the nearby village of rocester . uttoxeter golf course is a short walk from the town . the manor golf course is three miles out near the village of kingstone . uttoxeter leisure centre in oldfields road has a swimming pool , gym and sports hall . uttoxeter rifle club is a home office-approved club based in the village of denstone . it regularly shoots on the 30-yard outdoor cadet range at denstone college and at longer-range facilities at catton park and diggle . notable people . in order of birth : thomas alleyne ( c . 1488–1558 ) was a priest who founded schools such as thomas alleyne 's high school uttoxeter . and alleyne 's academy in stone . thomas blagrave ( died 1590 ) was acting master of the revels in 1573–1579 . thomas allen ( 1542–1632 ) , english mathematician and astrologer was born in the town . simon degge , ( 1612–1703 ) antiquary , wrote notes on plot 's natural history of staffordshire . robert bakewell , ( 1682–1752 ) artist and metal worker , was born in the town . admiral lord gardner ( 1742–1809 ) , who commanded a younger nelson , was born at the manor house in the town . samuel march phillipps ( 1780–1862 ) was a civil servant , legal writer and under-secretary of state for the home department from 1827 to 1848 . samuel bentley ( 1785–1868 ) english printer and antiquarian . thomas kynnersley ( 1839–1874 ) , naval officer and later mp in new zealand , was born in town . lewis hall ( 1860–1933 ) became dental surgeon and politician in british columbia , canada . joseph cyril bamford ( 1916–2001 ) , industrialist founder of jcb , was born at what is now the parks . peter vaughan ( 1923–2016 ) television and film actor , lived in the town and attended uttoxeter grammar school . imdb database retrieved december 2017 . dave sampson ( 1941–2014 ) , a rock singer , was born in the town . anthony bamford ( born 1945 ) , a billionaire industrialist and ferrari collector , son of joseph cyril bamford , was born in uttoxeter . ruth gledhill , ( born 1959 ) journalist , lived in gratwich and attended thomas alleyne 's high school . shane meadows ( born 1972 ) , writer and director known for this is england , was born and brought up in uttoxeter . sport . jason beardsley ( born 1989 ) , footballer for notts county f.c . soccerbase database retrieved december 2017 . vincent blore ( 1908–1997 ) , goalkeeper , played for uttoxeter , aston villa , burton town , derby county , west ham , crystal palace and exeter . gary croft ( born 1974 ) , footballer , grew up here and attended alleynes . soccerbase database retrieved december 2017 . he was the first english footballer to play whilst wearing an electronic tag . bartley gorman ( 1944–2002 ) , bare knuckle boxer , lived for many years in the town . adam peaty ( born 1994 ) is a world record holder for the 50m and 100m breast stroke and olympic gold medallist . see also . dovegate prison . references . bibliography . . external links . uttoxeter.biz , local community website