Mohawk language

orthography . the mohawk alphabet consists of these letters : a e h i k n o r s t w y along with ʼ and ꞉ ( see modifier letter apostrophe and modifier letter colon ) . the orthography was standardized in 1993 . the standard allows for some variation of how the language is represented , and the clusters , , and are written as pronounced in each community . the orthography matches the phonological analysis as above except : the glottal stop is written with an apostrophe ʼ , it is often omitted at the end of words , especially in eastern dialect where it is typically not pronounced . is written ts in the eastern dialect ( reflecting pronunciation ) . seven is tsá꞉ta . is written tsi in the central dialect . seven is tsiá꞉ta . is written tsy in the western dialect . seven is tsyá꞉ta . is typically written i in the central and eastern dialects . six is ià꞉iaʼk . is usually written y in the western dialect . six is yà꞉yaʼk . the vowel is written en , as in one énska . the vowel is written on , as in eight shaʼté꞉kon . in cases where the vowel /e/ or /o/ is followed by an /n/ in the same syllable , the /n/ is written with an under-macron diacritic : keṉhó꞉tons ( i am closing a door ) . if the ṉ did not have the diacritic , the sequence would be pronounced . another convention is to write the nasal vowel with an ogonek , e.g . the low-macron accent is not a part of standard orthography and is n't used by the central or eastern dialects . in standard orthography , /h/ is written before /n/ to create the en or on : kehnhó꞉tons ' i am closing it ' . stress , length , and tone . stress , vowel length and tone are linked together in mohawk . there are three kinds of stressed vowels : short-high tone , long-high tone , and long-falling tone . stress is always written and occurs only once per word . short-high tone usually ( but not always ) appears in closed syllables or before /h/ . it is written with an acute accent : fruit káhi , road oháha . long-rising tone generally occurs in open syllables . it is written with a combination acute accent and colon : town kaná꞉ta , man rón꞉kwe . notice that when it is one of the nasal vowels which is long , the colon appears after the n . long-falling tone is the result of the word stress falling on a vowel which comes before a or + a consonant ( there may be , of course , exceptions to this and other rules ) . the underlying or reappears when stress is placed elsewhere . it is written with a grave accent and colon : stomach onekwèn꞉ta ( from . the central ( ahkwesáhsne ) dialect has the following consonant clusters : . education . six nations polytechnic in ohsweken , ontario , offers ogwehoweh language diploma and degree programs in mohawk or cayuga . starting in september 2017 , the university of waterloo in waterloo , ontario will offer a credit course in mohawk ; the classes are to be given at renison university college in collaboration with the waterloo aboriginal education centre , st . paul 's university college . resources are available for self-study of mohawk by a person with no or limited access to native speakers of mohawk . here is a collection of some resources currently available : talk mohawk , an iphone app and android app , includes words , phrases , and the thanksgiving address from monica peters rosetta stone levels 1 and 2 ( cd-rom ) edited by frank and carolee jacobs and produced by the kanienʼkehá꞉ka onkwawén꞉na raotitióhkwa language and cultural center at kahnawà꞉ke ( secondary/high school level ) a collection of 33 vocabulary lessons provided by the mohawk language custodian association . lesson collection at kanehsatakevoices.com david kanatawakhon maracle , kanyenʼkeha tewatati ( let 's speak mohawk ) , ( book and 3 companion tapes are available from audio forum ) ( high school/college level ) nancy bonvillain , a grammar of akwesasne mohawk ( professional level ) nancy bonvillain and beatrice francis , mohawk–english , english–mohawk dictionary , 1971 , university of the state of new york in albany ( word lists , by category ) chris w . harvey , sathahitáhkhe ' kanienʼkéha ( introductory level mohawk language textbook , eastern dialect ) , ( high school/college level ) josephine s . horne , kanienʼkéha iakorihonnién꞉nis ( book and 5 companion cds are available from kahnawà꞉ke cultural center ) ( secondary/high school level ) nora deering & helga harries delisle , mohawk : a teaching grammar ( book and 6 companion tapes are available from kahnawà꞉ke cultural center ) ( high school/college level ) on october 8 , 2013 , '' daryl kramp , member of parliament ( prince edward-hastings ) , on behalf of the honourable shelly glover , minister of canadian heritage and official languages , today announced support for the tsi kionhnheht ne onkwawenna language circle ( tknolc ) to develop mohawk language-learning tools . '' tom porter and dorothy lazore , nobody can do it better than wariso꞉se : language guide and dictionary firstvoices , a free online learning tool , includes videos , text entries , pictures , games , an iphone app and android app to facilitate language learning , teaching and revitalization . speak mohawk , an app that can be downloaded from itunes or google play , facilitates language by teaching words and phrases . keyboards . there are software packages available for both the microsoft windows and mac operating systems to enable typing of the mohawk language electronically . both packages are available through firstvoices , a web-based project to support aboriginal peoples ' teaching and archiving of language and culture . . see also . iroquoian languages oneida language seneca language . references . further reading . hoover , m . l . ( 1992 ) . '' the revival of the mohawk language in kahnawake '' . canadian journal of native studies , 12 ( 2 ) , 269-287 . mcalpine , l . , eriks-brophy , a . , & crago , m . ( 1996 ) . '' teaching beliefs in mohawk classrooms : issues of language and culture '' . anthropology & education quarterly , ( 3 ) . 390 . julian , c . ( 2011 ) . a history of the iroquoian languages ( unpublished doctoral dissertation ) . university of manitoba , winnipeg . maracle , b . j . ( 2002 ) . '' adult mohawk language immersion programming '' . mcgill journal of education , 37 ( 3 ) , 387 . deering , n . , & harries-delisle , h . ( 1976 ) . mohawk . a teaching grammar . preliminary version . michelson , g . ( 1973 ) . a thousand words of mohawk , ( no . 5 ) , national museum of man . external links . mohawk language api for developers of software , websites , mobile apps , video games ( ar , vr and mixed reality ) . mohawk language profile , the endangered languages project kanienkeha.net , '' mohawk dictionary '' endangered language initiative . kanehsatake voices , online lessons , bilingual mohawk course in english and french talkmohawk.com , mohawk language mobile apps mohawk - english dictionary , websters online dictionary mohawk language , alphabet and pronunciation , omniglot marianne mithun , conseil supérieur de la langue française , quebec list of mohawk language resources mohawk language texts , from the boston athenæum : schoolcraft collection of books in native american languages . digital collection .