Francis Asbury

biography . childhood and adolescence . francis asbury was born at hamstead bridge , staffordshire , england on august 20 or 21 , 1745 , to elizabeth and joseph asbury . the family moved to a cottage at great barr , sandwell , the next year . his boyhood home still stands and is open as bishop asbury cottage museum . soon after the family moved to great barr , in may 1748 , asbury 's older sister , sarah , died ; he was less than three years old . asbury wrote later that his mother eliza was '' very much a woman of the world '' ; with his sister 's death , she '' sank into deep distress.from which she was not relieved for many years , '' and was living '' in a very , dark , dark , dark , day and place '' . a few years later she found a renewed christian faith as itinerant preachers , either baptist or methodists , visited barr on a revival circuit . from then on she began to read the bible every day and encouraged her son to do so as well . hallam , david j.a . , eliza asbury : her cottage and her son , studley , 2003 , pp . 8-9 eliza 's deep faith may not have been shared by her husband , who seemed to have problems , possibly drink or gambling . francis asbury described his father as '' industrious . '' the husband supported his wife in her faith and witness : he allowed methodist meetings to be held each sunday in the cottage . hallam ( 2003 ) , eliza asbury , p 13 during asbury 's childhood the west midlands was undergoing massive changes as the industrial revolution swept through the area . waves of workers migrated into the area , attracted by jobs in the growing factories and workshops in birmingham and the black country of the mines . the asburys lived in a cottage tied to a public house , on a main route between the mines and the factories . they would have been aware of the drinking , gambling , poverty and poor behaviour prevalent in the area . hallam ( 2003 ) , eliza asbury , pp 16-20 francis asbury attended a local endowed school in snail 's green , a nearby hamlet . he did not get on well with his fellow pupils who ridiculed him because of his mother 's religious beliefs . during the 1740s there had been widespread anti-methodist rioting in wednesbury and the surrounding area , and into the 1750s a great deal of persecution . nor did he like his teacher and left school at the first opportunity . hallam ( 2003 ) , eliza asbury , pp . 9 and 21 asbury took a keen interest in religion , having '' felt something of god as early as the age of seven '' . hallam ( 2003 ) , p 40 he lived not far from all saint 's church , bromwich , which under the patronage of the methodist earl of dartmouth , provided a living for evangelical minister edward stillinghurst . well connected , stillinghurst invited as visiting preachers some of the foremost preachers and theologians of the day . these included john fletcher , john ryland , henry venn , john cennick and benjamin ingham . his mother encouraged francis to meet with the methodists in wednesbury , eventually joining a '' band '' with four other young men who would meet and pray together . for them a typical sunday would be a preaching meeting at 5.00 am , communion at the parish church mid morning , and attending a preaching meeting again at 5.00 pm . hallam ( 2003 ) , pp 22-25 asbury had his first formal job at age thirteen ; he went '' into service '' for local gentry , whom he later described as '' one of the most ungodly families in the parish '' . but he soon left them and is believed to have eventually worked for thomas foxall , at the old forge farm , old forge farm where he made metal goods . he became great friends with foxall 's son , henry . henry they developed a friendship , which continued after henry foxall 's emigration to colonial america . there he continued working with metal and established the foundry church in georgetown , now part of washington , d.c . asbury began to preach locally , and eventually became an itinerant preacher on behalf of the methodist cause . hallam ( 2003 ) , p42 . asbury 's childhood , and especially his mother 's attitudes , have been the subject of some controversy . in 1927 herbert asbury , a journalist who claimed to be a relative of frances asbury , published a methodist saint : the life of bishop asbury , ( new york : alfred a . knopf , inc . ) . herbert asbury made a number of claims , quoting 'family legend ' about the asbury family , including one that francis 's mother prayed for him to become archbishop of canterbury , that elizabeth claimed to have been visited by angels , and that joseph asbury had previously been married to a susan whipple , a farmer 's daughter from wednesbury . extensive research by local historian david hallam could find no evidence to support herbert asbury 's claims , and dismissed his claiming relation to francis . he noted that asbury was a common surname in the west midlands at the time . see hallam ( 2003 ) , pp . 14-15 . hallam dismisses a similar claim made by a '' genealogical study '' presented by an asbury family to the love lane methodist museum in baltimore . francis asbury was the only surviving child of joseph and elizabeth ; he never married . birth records during this period in england were of poor quality and claims of any relationship are conjecture . asbury 's preaching ministry in england is detailed in the section below : '' asbury 's circuits in england '' . asbury 's work in america . at the age of 22 , asbury 's ordination by john wesley as a traveling preacher became official . typically such positions were held by young , unmarried men , known as exhorters . in 1771 asbury volunteered to travel to thirteen colonies . his first sermon in the colonies took place with the methodist congregation in woodrow , staten island . morris , ira . k . '' early history of staten island '' , proceedings of the new york state historical association , volume 17 , page 198 within the first 17 days of being in the colonies , asbury preached in both philadelphia and new york . during the first year , he served as wesley 's assistant and preached in 25 different settlements . when the american revolutionary war broke out in 1776 , he and james dempster were the only british methodist ministers to remain in america . '' the story of barratt 's chapel , '' accessed 11 september 2015 '' during his early years in north america , asbury devoted his attention mainly to followers living on the eastern shore between the delaware river and the chesapeake bay . bishop asbury was a good friend of the melsons and was their guest many times on his rounds . when the american revolution severed the traditional ties between the american thirteen colonies and great britain , bishop asbury , in the interest of his religious tenets and principles and in an attempt to remain aloof from the political and military fervor that swept the country , announced he would , to keep the embryonic methodist congregations neutral , refrain from endorsing either great britain or the newly formed united states of america government and urged all his followers to do the same . this request placed almost all of his followers , especially those living in maryland , in an untenable position . the state of maryland had enacted a law requiring all citizens to take an oath of allegiance to the newly formed american congress . it addition to this , it stipulated all non-residents within its boundaries also had to take and sign an oath of allegiance . those refusing were summarily incarcerated for treason . asbury , after proclaiming his neutrality , fled to delaware , where taking an oath of allegiance was not a requirement . his adherents in maryland suffered the rancor of the proponents of the oath . '' '' ryan melson '' , melson family in america asbury remained hidden during the war and ventured occasionally back into maryland . sometimes this had the effect of compromising his parishioners . in 1780 , asbury met the freedman harry hosier , a meeting the minister believed '' providentially arranged '' . hosier served as his driver and guide and , though illiterate , memorized long passages of the bible as asbury read them aloud during their travels . hosier eventually became a famous preacher in his own right , the first african american to preach directly to a white congregation in the united states . smith , jessie c . black firsts : 4,000 ground-breaking and pioneering historical events ( 3rd ed . ) , pp . 1820–1821 . '' methodists : 1781 '' . canton , michigan : visible ink press , 2013 . accessed 17 october 2013 . . consecrated a bishop . in 1784 , john wesley named asbury and thomas coke as co-superintendents of the work in the united states . the christmas conference that year marked the beginning of the methodist episcopal church of the united states . it was during this conference that asbury was ordained by coke . christianity today : francis asbury , accessed 8 july 2016 for the next 32 years , asbury led all the methodists in america . however , his leadership did not go unchallenged . his idea for a ruling council was opposed by such notables as william mckendree , jesse lee , and james o'kelly . eventually , based on advice by coke , he established in 1792 a general conference , to which delegates could be sent , as a way of building broader support . his journeys . like wesley , asbury preached in a myriad of places : courthouses , public houses , tobacco houses , fields , public squares , wherever a crowd assembled to hear him . for the remainder of his life , he rode an average of 6,000 miles each year , preaching virtually every day and conducting meetings and conferences . under his direction , the church grew from 1,200 to 214,000 members and 700 ordained preachers . among the men he ordained was richard allen in philadelphia , the first black methodist minister in the united states who later founded the african methodist episcopal church , the first independent black denomination in the country . another african american was daniel coker , who emigrated to sierra leone in 1820 and became the first methodist minister there from the west . bishop asbury also ordained peter cartwright in the fall of 1806 . cartwright , peter . autobiography of peter cartwright : the backwoods preacher pleasant hills : self publication , 1856 . reprint , columbia : pantianos classics , 2019 . 48 . . a camp meeting . in the fall of 1800 , asbury attended one of the events of the revival of 1800 as he travelled from kentucky into tennessee . the combined presbyterian and methodist communion observance made a deep impression on asbury ; it was as an early experience for him of multi-day meetings , which included attendees camping on the grounds or sleeping in their wagons around the meeting house . he recorded the events in his journal : it showed the relation between religious revivalism and camp meetings , later a staple of nineteenth-century frontier methodism . . failing health and death . in 1813 , asbury wrote his will . this was a time when '' the greatest membership gain in the history of the church '' was achieved . duren , william larkin . 1928 . francis asbury , founder of american methodism and unofficial minister of state , new york : the macmillan company . pg . xiii in 1814 his health started to fail and he became ill . in 1816 he started to regain strength and continued his preaching journey . he '' preached his last sermon in richmond , virginia '' on march 24 , '' and died at the home of george arnold near fredericksburg '' on march 31 . . ability as a preacher . in an exciting time in american history , asbury was reported to be an extraordinary preacher . biographer ezra squier tipple wrote : '' if to speak with authority as the accredited messenger of god ; to have credentials which bear the seal of heaven . if when he lifted the trumpet to his lips the almighty blew the blast ; if to be conscious of an ever-present sense of god , god the summoner , god the anointing one , god the judge , and to project it into speech which would make his hearers tremble , melt them with terror , and cause them to fall as dead men ; if to be and do all this would entitle a man to be called a great preacher , then asbury was a great preacher . '' bishop asbury died in spotsylvania county , virginia . he was buried at mount olivet cemetery , in baltimore , near the graves of bishops john emory and beverly waugh . personal habits . '' francis asbury had a great distrust of personal popularity , and equally marked distaste of personal publicity '' . duren , william larkin . 1928 . francis asbury , founder of american methodism and unofficial minister of state , new york : the macmillan company . pg 75 not being a vain person , he did not care to have his image preserved . he had been in america for 23 years , and a bishop for 10 years before he had let a portrait be made of him . his friend james mccannon persuaded him to have it done . asbury had had a portrait painted of him for his mother in 1797 . his last portrait was made in 1813 by an unknown artist in strasburgh , pennsylvania . asbury had times when he tended to have gloomy thoughts and opinions . he believed himself to be '' a true prophet of evil tidings , as it suits my cast of mind '' . duren , william larkin . 1928 . francis asbury , founder of american methodism and unofficial minister of state , new york : the macmillan company . pg 77 although he was pessimistic , those who knew him considered him an extremely sensitive person . in his journal he recorded more failures and misgivings than success in his ministry . he loved simplicity and had '' frequent spells of morbid depression '' . he tended to use cynical sarcasm in his preachings . one of the typical prayers he would say , even on his way to america , was '' lord , we are in thy hands and in thy work . thou knowest what is best of us and for thy work ; whether plenty or poverty . the hearts of all men are in thy hands . if it is best for us and for thy church that we should be cramped and straitened , let the people 's hands and hearts be closed : if it is better for us ; for the church , —and more to thy glory that we should abound in the comforts of life ; do thou dispose the hearts of those we serve to give accordingly : and may we learn to be content whether we abound , or suffer need '' . duren , william larkin . 1928 . francis asbury , founder of american methodism and unofficial minister of state , new york : the macmillan company . pg 119-120 he rose at 5 every morning to read the bible . he was impatient with those who did not do the tasks assigned to them as soon as the task was assigned . he was '' one of the wisest and most farseeing men of his day '' . duren , william larkin . 1928 . francis asbury , founder of american methodism and unofficial minister of state , new york : the macmillan company . pg 167 . his journal . on september 4 , 1771 , at the age of 26 , francis asbury began his journey to philadelphia from pill near bristol . '' it cost him much to leave home and kindred , as is witnessed by his affectionate letters and sacrificial remittances home : but the call of god was not to be denied '' . baker , frank . 1976 . from wesley to asbury : studies in early american methodism . durham , nc : duke university press . pg . 115 before he left , he wrote a letter to his family . '' i wonder sometimes how anyone will sit to hear me , but the lord covers my weakness with his power… . i trust you will be easy and more quiet . as for me , i know what i am called to . it is to give up all , and to have my hands and heart in the work , yea , the nearest and dearest friends… . let others condemn me as being without natural affection , disobedient to parents , or say what they please… . i love my parents and friends , but i love my god better and his service… . and tho ' i have given up all , i do not repent , for i have found all '' . baker , frank . 1976 . from wesley to asbury : studies in early american methodism . durham , nc : duke university press . pg . 113-114 on this voyage he began a journal . '' in his journal he pours out the feelings and impulses of the moment , but often without giving a clue to either the offender or the offense '' . duren , william larkin . 1928 . francis asbury , founder of american methodism and unofficial minister of state , new york : the macmillan company . pg . 122 he became seasick for the first week but had recovered . he was '' poor in material things , but rich in the spiritual atmosphere created and maintained by his mother '' . baker , frank . 1976 . from wesley to asbury : studies in early american methodism . durham , nc : duke university press . pg 107 he also spent a lot of time studying and reading the bible and books written by wesley . on september 22 , september 29 , and october 6 , he preached to the ship 's company . finally , on october 27 , he landed at his destination in philadelphia . his journal also contains some references to opinions of ministers who disagreed with the methodist leadership , such as rev . charles hopkins of powhatan county , virginia who had rejected the methodist ideals several years before . his journal also frequently mentioned thomas s . hinde who was the son of dr . thomas hinde and founder of the city of mount carmel , illinois . the ladies ' repository , volume 12 ( google ebook ) , l . swormstedt and j.h . power , 1852 . asbury 's circuits in england . asbury 's travels in america are amply noted in his three-volume journal , the journal and letters of francis asbury . however , his travels in england are much harder to piece together as very little information exists . '' francis asbury circuits in england '' , the asbury triptych series john wigger provide some details in american saint , his biography on asbury . wigger , john . american saint around 1763 , before this , asbury began leading the class of about two dozen faithful at the west bromwich wesleyan society . in march 1765 , his mentor , wesleyan alexander mather asked asbury to assist him . for the next 11 months , the twenty-year-old asbury taught and preached around the staffordshire circuit . the circuit consisted of small wesleyan societies in west bromwich , wednesbury , walsall , wolverhampton , and billbrook . these areas were the foundation of methodism in the black country . during this initial phase of his circuits around england , two wesleyan preachers offered the majority of the young preachers mentoring . the first was the already mentioned scottish itinerant , mather . the second was an english preacher from bedfordshire , james glasbrook . these two taught asbury , john wesley 's basic requirements for a wesleyan itinerant preacher . in january 1766 , mather offered him the opportunity to quit the forge and join the wesleyan movement as a full-time itinerant on a trial basis . the twenty-one-year-old asbury accepted . part of his training as a full-time traveling preacher required that he read extensively from books suggested by wesley , who made them available in london , bristol and newcastle . the list included several divinity books : the bible , wesley 's tracts , the works of boehm and francke . there were also books on natural philosophy , astronomy , history , poetry and latin prose . there were also books on latin verse , greek prose , including the greek new testament , greek verse - including homer 's iliad , and the hebrew bible . for the next five months , during his circuits in england asbury teamed with william orpe , a young preacher who was the hebrew teacher at wesley 's kingswood school in bristol . they covered the large staffordshire circuit that encompassed not only birmingham , wolverhampton , willenhall , walsall , wednesbury , darlaston and billbrook , but also an extended portion to the south in worcestershire , tewkesbury and gloucestershire . despite his happiness with his new career , asbury struggled with a sense that his efforts were somewhat limited . he was still living with his parents , he was preaching in places that had heard him preach for the last five years . he looked for more travel and more responsibility . asbury pressed mather to assign asbury to the low round of the staffordshire circuit , and found it more grueling than he had anticipated . after twelve months mather sent him home for a short break . asbury then received instructions to head for london . the london conference of 1767 assigned asbury to the bedfordshire circuit . in london , it is likely that asbury met george whitefield when he attended worship at whitefield 's tabernacle . at the time of asbury 's arrival in london , benjamin franklin was staying in london and a guest of his friend whitefield , whom he had met years earlier during one of whitefield 's trips to america . along with franklin at whitefield 's home were connecticut colonial leaders including a mohegan indian named samson occum and his traveling companion , princeton college presbyterian minister , nathaniel whitaker , lord dartmouth , and the merchant dennis de bert . occum and whitaker were in england to raise money for their indian charity school in lebanon , connecticut . spending a couple months in london before the august conference , it is likely that asbury not only heard samson occum speak at the tabernacle , but also had opportunity to meet this unique group . august 18 , 1767 the conference in london began at john and charles wesley 's foundry church . at this conference , wesley assigned asbury to the sprawling bedfordshire circuit . in addition to bedfordshire , asbury was officially admitted on trial and teamed with bedfordshire native , james glasbrook . the main locations were hertford , luton , sundon , millbrook , bedford , clifton and northampton . it was a rural circuit made up of small societies whose total membership was just 208 people . rodell , jonathan . '' francis asbury 's first circuit : bedfordshire , 1767 '' , methodist history ( vol . 42 , issue 2 . ) , umc , january 1 , 2004 in lieu of attending the 1768 conference in bristol , asbury is given instructions to wait in london to await his next assignment . asbury 's short stopover in london occurs at the same time that benjamin rush is staying with george whitefield , having completed his medical studies in edinburgh . after the bristol conference in august 1768 , wesley assigns asbury to the only circuit more difficult than the staffordshire low round , colchester . asbury will preach along the southern coastline of the river stour , from manningtree to harwich . as beautiful as the scenery is , the area sours with rampant smuggling . asbury is to preach against smuggling . perhaps out of worry for the young itinerant and the dangerous territory he travels , after two months on the colchester circuit , asbury receives word to relocate to the wiltshire circuit . the three main cities of the wiltshire circuit are salisbury , winchester and portsmouth . in portsmouth , it is likely that asbury began his study of hebrew through the large jewish settlement that coexisted with the portsmouth methodists . in portsmouth , the majority of the jewish settlers reside in portsea , also known as portsmouth common , the same area as the methodists . for the next ten months , he remains on the wiltshire circuit . august 10 , 1769 , word from the leeds conference arrives for asbury in salisbury . word from wesley is that the next circuit is oxfordshire . there he teams up with his friend from staffordshire , richard whatcoat . in oxford , asbury and whatcoat occasionally preach from st giles church . asbury and whatcoat remain in oxford until christmas . they are both assigned to preach the bedfordshire circuit in the new year . in addition to returning to northampton , asbury will travel to the smaller wesleyan societies in towcester and whittlebury . he also spends time in weedon . for the next eight months , asbury will preach on the western portion of the bedfordshire circuit . in march 1770 , wesley preached at west bromwich . the news of wesley draws asbury to return home after nearly three years away . after his visit home , asbury returns to the western portion of the bedfordshire circuit . after the 1770 conference wesley once again assigns asbury to wiltshire . it is during this assignment asbury is abandoned by his assigned helper , john catermole , who leaves the wiltshire circuit after his dealing with a disorderly lay leader who threatens violence to catermole and asbury . a visit by wesley to the struggling wiltshire circuit results in wesley asking asbury to visit the isle of wight . it is at the august 1771 conference in bristol where asbury volunteers for the circuit simply called , america . veneration . asbury is honored together with george whitefield with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the episcopal church ( usa ) on november 15 . legacy and honors . asbury 's boyhood home , the bishop asbury cottage , newton road , great barr in sandwell , england , is now a museum . the first methodist episcopal school of higher education was named cokesbury college ( 1785 - burned 1796 ) in honor of asbury and thomas coke , drawing some concern from john wesley . the name lives on in cokesbury , part of the united methodist publishing arm . at least six schools have been named after asbury : asbury methodist primary school in lai king , hong kong . two are in wilmore , kentucky : asbury university and asbury theological seminary . in addition , depauw university in greencastle , indiana was originally known as indiana asbury college after him . francis asbury elementary school in hampton , virginia . asbury house child enrichment center in longview , texas asbury high school , marshall county , alabama asbury college , in pangasinan , philippines . james a . bradley , a convert to methodism , named the town he founded on the new jersey shore , asbury park , after asbury . the mascot of the asbury park high school is '' the bishops . '' asbury , new jersey , an unincorporated community in warren county is named after the bishop . hutchinson , viola l . the origin of new jersey place names , new jersey public library commission , may 1945 . accessed august 27 , 2015 . the former asbury methodist church on staten island ( now the son-rise interfaith center ) stands as a monument to his memory . in 1796 bishop asbury helped lay the cornerstone for the church in hall 's mills , nj which shortly changed its name to asbury ( now a village in franklin township , warren county , nj ) . asbury ame church in chester , pennsylvania was founded in 1845 and renamed the church in honor of asbury in 1863 a statue , francis asbury , was erected in washington , d.c . in 1921 . a statue of francis asbury on horseback was erected at drew university in madison , nj . the francis asbury trail at lake junaluska , nc was constructed around 1930 . a hiking trail in the great smoky mountains national park follows part of the path asbury took when crossing the mountains in the early 19th century . there is a monument dedicated to asbury at shiloh memorial cemetery in pigeon forge , tennessee , where asbury delivered a sermon on october 20 , 1808 . stratosphere balloon cave in germany valley , west virginia was for over 150 years called '' asbury cave '' . ( asbury records his 1781 visit to the cave in his journal . ) many towns and villages bear an asbury united methodist church , including the fourth largest united methodist church in the denomination , located in tulsa , ok ( www.asburytulsa.org ) . the first methodist church in northern china , the asbury church in peking , built in 1870 by rev . hiram harrison lowry , was named after asbury . today the church is known as chongwenmen church ( 崇文门教堂 ) . asbury avenue in evanston , illinois , home of northwestern university , founded by methodists asbury , iowa was founded by methodists . asbury road and asbury avenue in ocean grove , nj , next to asbury park , with wesley lake separating them , is a town founded by methodists in the late 1870s as a religious summer camp along the mid atlantic coast.descendants of the original campers still use the many tents in town each season and worship in the great auditorium . asbury street in the second ocean grove , a seaside town established by methodists in mid 1800s , in victoria australia . asbury road , built around 1930 on the friar park housing estate near asbury 's birthplace the world war ii liberty ship was named in his honor . see also . bethel academy list of bishops of the united methodist church perry hall , maryland thomas s . hinde charles t . hinde . references . encyclopædia britannica . sources for further reading . eliza asbury - her cottage and her son by david hallam this is a meticulously researched account of asbury 's life in england and the difficult correspondence with his mother and father during their subsequent life long separation . the official francis asbury website . contains an a-z index of places and people mentioned in his journals . francis asbury triptych website . contains articles on francis asbury and other key players of the methodist movement in england and america . also a book series on francis asbury . trailblazin ' bishop : the francis asbury story . a one-man play on the life of francis asbury . francis asbury podcasts about his ministry of facebook page of bishop francis asbury - quotes from asbury 's journal , portraits and more bishop asbury cottage - story on the bbc website about francis asbury 's former home journal and letters of francis asbury ( 1958 ) by francis asbury american saint : francis asbury and the methodists ( oxford university press , 2009 ) by john h . wigger taking heaven by storm : methodism and the rise of popular christianity in america , 1770-1820 ( oxford university press , 1998 ) by john h . wigger america 's bishop : the life of francis asbury ( 2003 ) by darius salter the story of american methodism : a history of the united methodists and their relations ( 1974 ) by frederick abbott norwood the heritage of american methodism ( 1999 ) by kenneth cain kinghorn from wesley to asbury : studies in early american methodism ( 1976 ) by frank baker . external links . francis asbury collection at the stuart a . rose manuscript , archives , and rare book library