Horrid Henry

books . the first horrid henry book was written and published in 1994 by orion books . as of 2019 , there are 25 titles published . the series has sold more than 21 million copies worldwide . the books are a slice-of-life series featuring the titular henry , a self-centered , naughty boy who will typically be faced with a problem and then will often retaliate in interesting ways that involve trickery , rule-breaking and elaborate practical jokes . henry has a younger brother , perfect peter , who is the exact opposite . almost every character is known by an alliterative nickname ( rude ralph , moody margaret , brainy brian etc . ) with a few exemptions : ( mum and dad ) the horrid henry stories are read on audiobook by the actress miranda richardson and published by orion audio . horrid henry is published in 25 languages around the world . in april 2009 , the us sourcebooks ' jabberwocky imprint released four horrid henry paperbacks nationwide , which included horrid henry , horrid henry 's stinkbomb , horrid henry and the mega-mean time machine '' and horrid henry tricks the tooth fairy . sourcebooks has released additional horrid henry titles including activity pages , event kits and a teacher 's guide . horrid henry ( 1994 ) horrid henry and the secret club ( 1995 ) horrid henry tricks the tooth fairy - previously published as horrid henry and the tooth fairy ( 1996 ) horrid henry ’ s nits ( 1997 ) horrid henry gets rich quick - previously published as horrid henry strikes it rich ( 1998 ) horrid henry : the haunted house - previously published as horrid henry and the haunted house ( 1999 ) horrid henry : the mummy 's curse - previously published as horrid henry and the mummy 's curse ( 2000 ) horrid henry : perfect revenge - previously published as horrid henry 's revenge ( 2001 ) horrid henry : bogey babysitter - previously published as horrid henry and the bogey babysitter ( 2002 ) horrid henry : stinkbombs - previously published as horrid henry 's stinkbomb ( 2002 ) horrid henry : underpants panic - previously published as horrid henry 's underpants ( 2003 ) horrid henry : the queen 's visit - previously published as horrid henry meets the queen ( 2004 ) horrid henry : mega-mean time machine - previously published as horrid henry and the mega-mean time machine ( 2005 ) horrid henry 's bedtime ( 2005 ) - world book day special . also contains horrid henry 's diary , the series ' prequel story for younger readers , do n't be horrid henry ! , and just wondering , a question and answer section focusing on the creative process behind the writing of the stories . only book with more than one story to be currently out of print . horrid henry : football fiend - previously published as horrid henry and the football fiend ( 2006 ) horrid henry : christmas cracker - previously published as horrid henry 's christmas cracker ( 2006 ) horrid henry : abominable snowman previously published as horrid henry and the abominable snowman ( 2007 ) horrid henry : bank robber - previously published as horrid henry robs the bank ( 2008 ) horrid henry : waking the dead - previously published as horrid henry wakes the dead ( 2009 ) horrid henry : rock star - previously published as horrid henry rocks ! ( 2010 ) horrid henry : zombie vampire - previously published as horrid henry and the zombie vampire ( 2011 ) horrid henry : monster movie - previously published as horrid henry 's monster movie ( 2012 ) horrid henry : nightmare - previously published as horrid henry 's nightmare ( 2013 ) horrid henry : krazy ketchup - previously published as horrid henry 's krazy ketchup ( 2014 ) horrid henry : cannibal curse - previously published as horrid henry 's cannibal curse ( 2015 ) - series finale horrid henry : up , up and away ! ( 2019 ) - 25th anniversary special . early readers . do n't be horrid , henry ! ( illustrated by kevin mcaleenan in 2000 , then tony ross in 2006 ) birthday ( previously released from horrid henry : secret club ) holiday ( previously released from horrid henry ) horrid henry 's underpants ( previously released from horrid henry : underpants panic ) horrid henry gets rich quick ( previously released from horrid henry : getting rich quick ) horrid henry and the football fiend ( previously released from horrid henry : football fiend ) horrid henry 's nits ( previously released from horrid henry : nits , nits , nits ) horrid henry and moody margaret ( previously released from horrid henry ) horrid henry 's thank you letter ( previously released from horrid henry : underpants panic ) horrid henry reads a book ( previously released from horrid henry : stinkbombs ) horrid henry 's car journey ( previously released from horrid henry : bogey babysitter ) moody margaret 's school ( previously released from horrid henry : bank robber ) horrid henry tricks and treats ( previously released from horrid henry : bogey babysitter ) horrid henry 's christmas play ( previously released from horrid henry : christmas cracker ) horrid henry 's rainy day ( previously released from horrid henry : abominable snowman ) horrid henry meets the queen ( previously released from horrid henry : the queen 's visit ) horrid henry 's sports day ( previously released from horrid henry : getting rich quick ) horrid henry 's christmas presents ( previously released from horrid henry : christmas cracker ) moody margaret 's makeover ( previously released from horrid henry : abominable snowman horrid henry and the demon dinner lady ( previously released from horrid henry : perfect revenge ) horrid henry tricks the tooth fairy ( previously released from horrid henry : tricking the tooth fairy ) horrid henry 's homework ( previously released from horrid henry : the mummy 's curse ) horrid henry and the bogey babysitter ( previously released from horrid henry : bogey babysitter ) horrid henry 's sleepover ( previously released from angel harrison : stinkbombs ) horrid henry 's wedding ( previously released from horrid henry : tricking the tooth fairy ) horrid henry 's haunted house ( previously released from horrid henry : the haunted house ) horrid henry 's christmas lunch ( previously released from horrid henry : christmas cracker ) horrid henry 's mother 's day ( previously released from horrid henry : nightmare ) horrid henry and the comfy black chair ( previously released from horrid henry : the haunted house ) horrid henry and the mummy 's curse ( previously released from horrid henry : the mummy 's curse ) horrid henry and the abominable snowman ( previously released from horrid henry : abominable snowman ) horrid henry and the mega-mean time machine ( previously released from horrid henry : mega-mean time machine ) horrid henry and the fangmangler ( previously released from horrid henry : nits , nits , nits ) horrid henry 's christmas ambush ( previously released from horrid henry : christmas cracker ) horrid henry 's swimming lesson ( previously released from horrid henry : the mummy 's curse ) horrid henry 's christmas ( previously released from horrid henry : getting rich quick ) horrid henry 's school fair ( previously released from horrid henry : the haunted house ) horrid henry 's stinkbomb ( previously released from horrid henry : stinkbombs ) horrid henry and the zombie vampire ( previously released from horrid henry : zombie vampire ) horrid henry 's hike ( previously released from horrid henry : mega-mean time machine ) horrid henry 's injection ( previously released from horrid henry : secret club ) . broadcast adaptations . television adaptation . in may 2006 , citv announced that an animated television series of 52 episodes the guardian . '' following horrid henry 's lead '' . 24.11.2008 . based on the horrid henry books , had been commissioned from novel entertainment . the show officially launched in october 2006 , for halloween . the series subsequently launched on television in : germany , france , ireland , iceland , portugal , scandinavia , singapore , poland , south africa , turkey and korea . licensing.biz . '' novel scores more horrid henry deals '' . 20.3.2009 horrid henry quickly became citv 's most successful series ever , appearing on said channel every weekday , and on itv at the weekends . a second series of a further 52 all-new episodes of horrid henry was launched in february 2009 , and a third series began on 22 july 2011 , with broadcast starting from 3 september that year . the guardian . '' citv ends commissioning freeze '' . 7.3.2008 . a fourth series began on 11 october 2014 , airing every weekend at 8:15/8:20/8:25am on citv and being re-screened on weekend ( during the day ) or on weekdays . in may 2018 , novel entertainment announced that nickelodeon uk had acquired all four seasons of horrid henry , and that they would air on nicktoons later on during the month . they also announced that a new fifth season that would also air on nicktoons . the fifth season premiered 7 october 2018 . all five seasons of horrid henry are also aired on netflix . . radio adaptation . during august and december 2009 , horrid henry took to the airwaves with his own radio show on fun kids radio , hosting a weekly show of comedy and music . licensing.biz . '' horrid henry makes radio debut '' . theatre adaptation . horrid henry - live and horrid ! opened at sheffield 's lyceum theatre on 28 august 2008 , and ran until september 13 that year . the theatre adaptation toured the uk , which included high wycombe , bromley , newcastle , hull , liverpool and bradford . . film adaptation . on 23 june 2010 , vertigo films announced that a live action 3-d film of horrid henry was in production . the film 's plot focuses on henry and the purple hand gang fighting to prevent the closure of their school by an evil private school headmaster . it is unknown if a sequel will be made . the film was released on 29 july 2011 in the united kingdom and 11 january 2013 in australia . video game adaptations . a video game titled horrid henry : missions of mischief was released for the nintendo ds , wii , and pc on 30 october 2009 . another video game titled horrid henry 's slave was released for the nintendo ds on 5 november 2010 . it was negatively reviewed by nintendo gamer , who gave it a score of 40 % . horrid henry : the good , the bad , and the bugly was released for the nintendo 3ds on 25 november 2011 . in 2015 , horrid henry ’ s big box of pranks released as an app which is available for ios devices . reception . in april 2008 '' horrid henry and the abominable snowman '' won the galaxy children 's book of the year award . horrid henry has twice been nominated for bafta 's best animation ; in 2009 and 2010 . on 23 november 2018 , the show 's official twitter account posted a gif of henry '' flossing ” which went viral . see also . list of horrid henry characters horrid henry ( tv series ) horrible harry , a different character . notes .