1933 in literature

events . february – having joined the japanese communist party , the chinese novelist hu feng is arrested and '' badly beaten '' in tokyo for his protests against imperialism . returning to the republic of china as a popular hero , he is nevertheless prevented from joining the communist party of china by the rejection of him by a rival , zhou yang . february 17 – the magazine newsweek is published for the first time in new york . march 8 – première of federico garcía lorca 's play blood wedding ( bodas de sangre ) is held at the teatro beatriz in madrid . april 23 – millosh gjergj nikolla is appointed schoolteacher among the serbs of vraka , kingdom of albania . the next two years bring his creative period as a short story writer , describing his sense of despair at being isolated in a backward region . may – nazi book burnings take place in germany by the german student union , principally of works by jewish intellectuals , leading to an exilliteratur . although his novels are spared ( unlike those of his brother heinrich mann ) , thomas mann settles in switzerland . lion feuchtwanger , on a lecture tour of the united states in january , has decided not to return to germany ; bertolt brecht has moved to prague in february ; and alfred döblin to switzerland in march . may 16–17 – in the soviet union , joseph stalin orders the nkvd to '' preserve but isolate '' osip mandelstam , after having been informed of the '' stalin epigram '' ; mandelstam is then arrested . a protest by literary figures , including anna akhmatova and boris pasternak , prompts stalin to declare that he might '' review the case '' ( he never will ) . his admiration for pasternak as a poetic genius is strengthened when the latter asks for a private meeting to discuss '' life and death '' — although he never grants it , he instructs the nkvd to '' leave that cloud-dweller pasternak alone '' . june w . h . auden has his '' vision of agape '' . preface to his anthology the protestant mystics ( 1964 ) . robert walser , under treatment for schizophrenia since 1929 , is placed in a sanatorium in herisau , switzerland . this ends his work as a writer , though he will live until 1956 . july – poedjangga baroe , the indonesian avant-garde literary magazine , is first published , by armijn pane , amir hamzah and sutan takdir alisjahbana . october ( approximate ) – the name inklings , previously used by a disbanded undergraduate group , is taken by an informal literary discussion group of university of oxford academics , including c . s . lewis and j . r . r . tolkien . october 8 – the general union of roma in romania is set up by writer gheorghe a . lăzăreanu-lăzurică , with grigoraș dinicu as honorary president ; by 1934 , it publishes the romani language newspaper o ròm , and books of romani mythology , edited by constantin s . nicolăescu-plopșor . december codex sinaiticus sold by the soviet union to the british library through the agency of maggs bros ltd at a price of £100,000 , the highest ever paid for a book at this time . raymond chandler 's first short story , the detective fiction '' blackmailers do n't shoot '' , is published in the magazine black mask in the united states . december 6 – in united states v . one book called ulysses , u.s . district judge john m . woolsey rules that james joyce 's novel ulysses is not as a whole pornography and therefore can not not be obscene . case citation . . new books . fiction . hervey allen – anthony adverse jorge amado – cacau ( cacao ) edwin balmer and philip wylie – when worlds collide marjorie bowen – the last bouquet : some twilight tales pearl s . buck all men are brothers ( translation of water margin ) sons edgar rice burroughs – tarzan and the city of gold dino buzzati – bàrnabo delle montagne erskine caldwell – god 's little acre john dickson carr – the mad hatter mystery leslie charteris – once more the saint ( also the saint and mr . teal ) agatha christie the hound of death lord edgware dies a . j . cronin – grand canary warwick deeping – two black sheep mircea eliade – bengal nights ( mayitreyi ) guy endore – the werewolf of paris susan ertz – the proselyte miles franklin – bring the monkey zona gale – papa la fleur erle stanley gardner – the case of the sulky girl matila ghyka – pluie d'étoiles walter greenwood – love on the dole dashiell hammett the thin man woman in the dark robert hichens – the paradine case james hilton knight without armour lost horizon volter kilpi – alastalon salissa ( in the parlour at alastalo ) pär lagerkvist – bödeln ( the hangman ; novella ) alexander lernet-holenia – i was jack mortimer arthur machen – the green round compton mackenzie – water on the brain claude mckay – banana bottom andré malraux – man 's fate ( la condition humaine ) caroline pafford miller – lamb in his bosom camil petrescu – patul lui procust ( the bed of procrustes ) ellery queen the american gun mystery the siamese twin mystery raymond queneau – le chiendent marjorie kinnan rawlings – south moon under e . arnot robertson – ordinary families dorothy l . sayers hangman 's holiday ( short stories ) murder must advertise bruno schulz – the street of crocodiles ( short stories , published as sklepy cynamonowe , '' cinnamon shops '' , in december , dated 1934 ) nan shepherd – a pass in the grampians gertrude stein – the autobiography of alice b . toklas phoebe atwood taylor – the mystery of the cape cod players angela thirkell – high rising thomas f . tweed – rinehard : a melodrama of the nineteen-thirties s . s . van dine – the kennel murder case helen waddell – peter abelard hugh walpole – vanessa h . g . wells – the shape of things to come franz werfel – the forty days of musa dagh ( die vierzig tage des musa dagh ) nathanael west – miss lonelyhearts dennis wheatley – the forbidden territory antonia white – frost in may virginia woolf – flush : a biography . children and young people . marjorie flack – the story about ping norman hunter – the incredible adventures of professor branestawm ( first in professor branestawm series ) erich kästner – the flying classroom elizabeth foreman lewis – young fu of the upper yangtze arthur ransome – winter holiday felix salten – florian : the emperor ’ s stallion dorothy wall – blinky bill : the quaint little australian ( first in the blinky bill series of three books ) . drama . tawfiq al-hakim – ahl el-kahf ( the people of the cave ) jean anouilh – mandarine clifford bax – the rose without a thorn ferdinand bruckner – die rassen gordon daviot ( josephine tey ) – richard of bordeaux selli engler – heil hitler walter c . hackett – afterwards ian hay – a present from margate hanns johst – schlageter sidney kingsley – men in white federico garcía lorca – blood wedding w . somerset maugham – sheppey r.j . minney – clive of india ivor novello – fresh fields eugene o'neill – ah , wilderness ! j . b . priestley – laburnum grove lennox robinson – drama at inish mordaunt shairp – the green bay tree john van druten – the distaff side maxim ziese – siebenstein . poetry . edwin james brady – wardens of the seas benjamin fondane – ulysse mascha kaléko – das lyrische stenogrammheft : verse vom alltag osip mandelstam – '' stalin epigram '' vita sackville-west – collected poems filip shiroka – zâni i zêmrës j . slauerhoff – soleares w . b . yeats – the winding stair and other poems . non-fiction . vera brittain – testament of youth albert einstein and sigmund freud – warum krieg ? benjamin fondane – rimbaud le voyou carl jung – modern man in search of a soul agnes mure mackenzie – an historical survey of scottish literature to 1714 george orwell – down and out in paris and london wilhelm reich – the mass psychology of fascism ( die massenpsychologie des faschismus ) upton sinclair – upton sinclair presents william fox muiris ó súilleabháin ( maurice o'sullivan ) – fiche bliain ag fás ( twenty years a-growing ) jun'ichirō tanizaki ( 谷崎 潤一郎 ) – in praise of shadows ( 陰翳礼讃 , essay on aesthetics ) . births . january 1 – joe orton , english playwright ( murdered 1967 ) january 2 – seiichi morimura ( 森村誠一 ) , japanese author january 4 – phyllis reynolds naylor , american children 's and adult novelist january 9 – wilbur smith , south african historical novelist january 13 – shahnon ahmad , malaysian writer and politician ( died 2017 ) january 16 – susan sontag ( susan rosenblatt ) , american novelist ( died 2004 ) january 25 – alden nowlan , canadian poet and novelist ( died 1983 ) february 1 – reynolds price , american novelist and literary scholar ( died 2011 ) february 5 – b . s . johnson , english novelist ( died 1973 ) february 12 – costa-gavras ( konstantinos gavras ) , greek-french film director and writer february 20 – zamenga batukezanga , congolese francophone writer and philanthropist ( died 2000 ) february 22 – christopher ondaatje , ceylonese-born english travel writer , biographer and philanthropist february 27 – edward lucie-smith , jamaican-born english writer , critic and broadcaster march 17 – penelope lively ( penelope low ) , egyptian-born english novelist march 18 – sergio pitol , mexican fiction writer , translator and diplomat ( died 2018 ) march 19 – philip roth , american novelist ( died 2018 ) april 2 – györgy konrád , hungarian novelist , essayist , political dissident and president of pen international ( died 2019 ) april 7 – cong weixi , chinese author ( died 2019 ) april 14 – boris strugatsky , russian sci-fi writer ( died 2012 ) april 24 – patricia bosworth , american writer/biographer may 9 – jessica steele , english romance novelist may 10 – barbara taylor bradford ( barbara taylor ) , english-born american novelist may 12 – stephen vizinczey , hungarian-born writer may 29 abdul rahman munif , arab writer ( died 2004 ) edward whittemore , american novelist ( died 1995 ) june 9 – vicente leñero , mexican novelist and playwright ( died 2014 ) june 11 – martti soosaar , estonian journalist and author ( died 2017 ) june 20 – claire tomalin ( claire delavenay ) , english journalist and biographer june 30 – mauricio rosencof , uruguayan playwright , poet and journalist july 2 – john antrobus , english playwright and scriptwriter july 4 – david littman , english historian ( died 2012 ) july 10 – kevin gilbert , australian writer and artist ( died 1993 ) july 13 – david storey , english novelist and playwright ( died 2017 ) july 14 – solange fasquelle , french novelist ( died 2016 ) july 20 – cormac mccarthy , american novelist , playwright , and screenwriter july 21 – john gardner , american writer ( died 1982 ) august – ko un ( ko untae ) , koreans poet august 9 – m . t . vasudevan nair , indian malayalam-language writer august 13 – madhur jaffrey , indian actress and food writer august 16 – tom maschler , austrian-born english literary publisher ( died 2020 ) september 9 – michael novak , american philosopher and author ( died 2017 ) september 19 – gilles archambault , french canadian novelist september 27 – paul goble , english-american author and illustrator ( died 2017 ) october 11 – david daniels , american visual poet ( died 2008 ) october 24 – norman rush , american writer november 1 – huub oosterhuis , dutch poet , theologian and liturgy reformer november 13 – peter härtling , german novelist and poet ( died 2017 ) november 23 - daniel chavarría , uruguayan writer and translator ( died 2018 ) december 2 – kent andersson , swedish dramatist ( died 2005 ) december 22 – jim barnes , native american poet and translator december 31 – edward bunker , american crime novelist ( died 2005 ) . deaths . january 11 – hugo zöller , german explorer and journalist ( born 1852 ) january 21 – george moore , irish poet and novelist ( born 1852 ) january 29 – sara teasdale , american poet ( born 1884 ; suicide ) january 31 – john galsworthy , english novelist and dramatist ( born 1867 ) february 20 – takiji kobayashi ( 小林多喜二 ) , japanese writer ( born 1903 ) april 5 – earl derr biggers , american novelist and playwright ( heart attack , born 1884 ) april 19 – e . w . hobson , english writer on mathematics ( born 1856 ) april 24 – janet milne rae , scottish novelist ( born 1844 ) april 29 – constantine cavafy , greek alexandrine poet ( born 1863 ) april 30 – anna de noailles , french writer ( born 1876 ) may 26 – horatio bottomley , english journalist and fraudster ( born 1860 ) june 7 – dragutin domjanić , croatian poet ( born 1875 ) july 8 – anthony hope ( anthony hope hawkins ) , english adventure novelist ( born 1863 ) august 12 – alexandru philippide , romanian linguist and polemicist ( atherosclerosis , born 1859 ) september 20 – annie besant , english theosophist writer ( born 1847 ) september 23 – györgy almásy , hungarian travel writer ( born 1867 ) september 25 ring lardner , american writer ( born 1885 ) pascal poirier , canadian historian ( born 1852 ) october 30 – herminie templeton kavanagh , anglo-irish-american short story writer ( born 1861 ? ) november 12 – f . holland day , american publisher ( born 1864 ) november 20 – augustine birrell , english politician and author ( born 1850 ) november 28 – minnie earl sears , american librarian ( born 1873 ) november 30 – annie armitt , english novelist and poet ( born 1850 ) december 4 – stefan george , german poet and translator ( born 1868 ) december 27 – georgina castle smith ( pseudonym brenda ) , english children 's writer ( born 1845 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : a . g . macdonell , england , their england james tait black memorial prize for biography : violet clifton , the book of talbot newbery medal for children 's literature : elizabeth foreman lewis , young fu of the upper yangtze nobel prize for literature : ivan alekseyevich bunin pulitzer prize for drama : maxwell anderson , both your houses pulitzer prize for poetry : archibald macleish , conquistador pulitzer prize for the novel : t . s . stribling , the store . references .