Heworth, York

location and demographics . housing in heworth varies from terraced houses along east parade towards layerthorpe , through large victorian villas on heworth green , to older houses in heworth village and the 1830s elmfield villa , home to elmfield college and 1930s semi-detached houses on stockton lane . heworth has seen much modern suburban development , particularly in the outlying area of heworth without . heworth splits into two wards for the purposes of local elections—heworth ( including all land within the old city boundary ) and heworth without ( outside the old city boundary ) . heworth holme is a popular open space near heworth village . the population of the heworth ward at the 2011 census was 13,725 . . transport . a number of bus routes serve heworth , these are operated by first york , york & country and east yorkshire . it is roughly 1.5 miles from york station , which gives access to the uk national rail network . history . very little is known about the prehistoric history of the heworth area , some researchers believe the area was largely boggy land . the village is of roman origin and two roman cremation cemeteries have been found in the area . heworth green , the road from york city centre to the village , is on the site of a roman road . during the early medieval period , contemporary burials took place in a similar area to the roman ones ; this was during the 5th and 6th centuries . however , evidence for settlement in heworth during this period of time still remains minimal . the village appears as heworde in the domesday book , and as hewud in 1219 . . 1453 battle of heworth moor . on 24 august 1453 , a skirmish took place and was the first meeting of the two families involved in the percy-neville feud , the feud which eventually helped provoke the wars of the roses . historians have described an attack on the neville family 's wedding party by lord egremont ; numerous contemporaries regard it as the very first military action of the wars of the roses . the neville family was returning to sheriff hutton castle following a wedding between sir thomas neville and maud stanhope . stanhope was the heiress and niece of baron cromwell . cromwell had previously confiscated percy strongholds such as wressle and bunwell after henry 'hotspur ' percy 's death in 1403 ; the thought of those properties one day being handed over to the neville family angered lord egremont greatly . egremont decided to ambush the neville family 's returning wedding party at heworth moor , along with 1,000 retainers from york . the neville family were said to have given a good account of themselves and defended themselves well in the skirmish . . 1642 meeting on heworth moor . during the summer of 1642 both the parliamentary party and king charles i negotiated with each other while preparing for war . when charles endeavoured to raise a guard for his own person at york , intending it , as the event afterwards proved , to form the nucleus of an army , lord fairfax was required by parliament to present a petition to his sovereign , entreating charles to hearken to the voice of his parliament , and to discontinue the raising of troops . this was at a great meeting of the freeholders and farmers of yorkshire convened by the king on heworth moor on 3 june near york . charles evaded receiving the petition , pressing his horse forward , but thomas fairfax followed him and placed the petition on the pommel of the king 's saddle . . local enclosures . the lands called monk ward stray consist of 131 acres and 38 perches of land , situate near york , and in the township of heworth . before the passing of an enclosure act 1817 , the freemen of york , who were occupiers of houses within a division or ward of the city , called monk ward , were , together with certain other persons , entitled to common of pasture and right of stray or average , and had immemorially used and enjoyed the same , in and over a parcel of ground called heworth moor , of which g . a . thweng , lord of the manor of heworth , was then seised in fee ; another piece of land , called heworth grange , of which the king was then seised in fee ; and certain closes and other parcels of ground , called hall fields , of which e . prest and others were then seised in fee . thomas sergeant ( editor ) , et al . reports of cases argued and determined in the english courts of common law : with tables of the cases and principal matters , great britain . bail court , t . & j.w . johnson , 1865 . p . 233 . settlement . construction of the heworth green villas on heworth road began about 1817 . archaeological investigation of heworth croft area , pp . 1–7 until the mid-19th century , the lord of the manor was the reverend robert william bilton hornby . the ordnance survey map of 1849 , shows that heworth was effectively a square of three parallel streets sandwiched between the then scarborough road and east parade . on the outskirts of the village near monk stray was elmfield college , a primitive methodism foundation which existed from 1864 to 1932 , when it merged with ashville college in harrogate . all that is left of the college now is numbers 1 and 9 straylands grove , next to monk stray , and staff housing along elmfield terrace and willow grove . the church of holy trinity ( architect : george fowler jones ) was added in 1869 ; outlying features included a wesleyan chapel , the manor house , a public house ( the britannia ) , a windmill , several potteries , heworth hall and heworth house . at that time tang hall was just that – a hall situated in parkland ; since then it has developed into its own neighbourhood . christ church was built on stockton lane in 1964 . heworth became a conservation area in 1975 . notable people associated with heworth . mary ward , an english roman catholic nun who founded the sisters of loreto ( also known as the institute of the blessed virgin mary ) , moved to the village in 1642 and stayed there until her death . barbara ward ( economist , writer and environmentalist who was interested in developing countries ) was born here in 1914 . she was awarded the title of dame commander of the order of the british empire later in her life . dame judi dench was born in heworth green . robert william bilton hornby , priest , antiquarian and lord of the manor of heworth . see also people associated with elmfield college alan leach ( the drummer from the band shed seven ) . notable buildings . holy trinity church , built in 1869 . was designed by g . fowler jones , commissioned by the reverend jocelyn willey of camblesforth hall , and his wife , frances carus-wilson ( later lady trevor wheler ) . heworth house in melrosegate was built in 1865 as the old heworth rectory . it was designed by g . fowler jones and is representative of high victorian gothic architecture . the old elmfield college ( b . 1840s ) still has one building standing ( on straylands grove ) the manor house , no . 1 stockton lane , was formerly called the new manor house ( os ) . it was built before 1830 when william hornby esq . ( father of robert hornby ) occupied it and it appears , with its name , on robert cooper 's map of 1832 . the house is partly of two , partly of three , storeys , above a high semi-basement and is of unusual , nearly cubical , shape . a bay window was added later in the 19th century . the cottage , no . 11 stockton lane , dates from c . 1800 and appears to be on robert cooper 's map of 1832 . it was called belle vue cottage in 1834 , when it was occupied by mr . john scott , in 1846 , when it was occupied by henry janson , gent . , and in 1850 ( directories ; os ) . it is a double-fronted cottage with rendered walls and a hipped roof and was extended c . 1840 . it has an enriched door-case of mid 18th-century date , brought from elsewhere . rose villa , no . 32/34 stockton lane , was called heworth villa in 1850 ( os ) . it was built in the early 19th century and may be the house which appears on the site on robert cooper 's map of 1832 . it is a double-fronted house with later extensions . the venerable mary ward died allegedly in heworth manor in 1645 . sport . heworth has some history in the sports of cricket , football , rugby league and others . heworth cricket club is said to have been founded in 1784 ( in 2009 they celebrated their 225th anniversary ) . the football club was one of the earliest to play in the york area , and featured in the york football league from 1898 onwards . they finished as runners-up of the top level during the 1908–09 , 1909–10 and 1911–12 seasons . elmpark way in the village has hosted the york international 9s competition since 2002 . it is an annual rugby league nines competition and in the past has featured clubs from england , france and russia . it has been given a five-star rating by the rugby league european federation . notes . references . ; attribution . external links .