Seaford, East Sussex

geography . the town lies on the coast near seaford head , roughly equidistant between the mouths of the river ouse and the cuckmere . the ouse valley was a wide tidal estuary with its mouth nearly closed by a shingle bar , but the tidal mudflats and salt marshes have been '' inned '' ( protected from the tidal river by dykes ) to form grassy freshwater marshes ( grazing marsh ) . to the north the town faces the chalk downland of the south downs , and along the coast to the east are the seven sisters chalk cliffs , and beachy head . this stretch of coast is notified for its geological and ecological features as seaford to beachy head site of special scientific interest . the river ouse used to run parallel to the shore behind the shingle bar , entering the sea close to seaford . however , a major storm in the 16th century broke through the bar at its western end , creating a new river mouth close to the village then called meeching but renamed newhaven . part of the former channel of the river remains as a brackish lagoon . the town formerly had excellent beaches , which were supplied by longshore drift constantly moving sand along the coast from west to east . however , in the early 20th century a large breakwater was constructed at newhaven harbour and the harbour entrance was regularly dredged . these works cut off the supply of fresh sand to the beach . by the 1980s the beach at seaford had all but vanished , the shoreline becoming steep , narrow and largely composed of small boulders . this made seaford attractive to watersports enthusiasts ( since water visibility was good and there was a rapid drop-off into deep water ) but it discouraged more general seaside visitors . so in 1987 a massive beach nourishment operation was carried out , in which around 1 million tonnes of material was dredged from sandbanks out to sea and deposited on the shore . during a severe storm that october a substantial amount of the deposited material on the upper part of the beach was washed out past low tide level , leading to questions in the house of commons . the beach has been topped up several times since then , giving the town a broad beach of sand and shingle . sand management the town 's publicity website states : for many , the main attraction in seaford is the beach . this has an obvious attraction in the summer , when the sea reaches temperatures up to 20° celsius ( 68 & nbsp ; °f ) . to the east of seaford , below chalk cliffs , is a beach called hope gap . it is a location in the film hope gap . history . in 1620 and 1624 , the sheriff and jurat of seaford was william levett , of an anglo-norman family long seated in sussex . william levett of seaford owned the bunces and stonehouse manors in warbleton , probably inheriting them from his father john levett , who died in 1607 . levett sold the estates in 1628 and died in 1635 , his will being filed in hastings . the levett family intermarried with other sussex families , including the gildredges , the eversfields , the popes , the ashburnhams , the adamses , and the chaloners . a seal with his arms belonging to john de livet , lord of firle , was found at eastbourne in 1851 . . politics and administration . from 1894 to 1974 seaford was an urban district run by seaford urban district council . in the local government reorganisation of 1974 it became an unparished area which was part of the lewes district council area . this loss of independence was unpopular with seaford residents and in 1999 the town became a civil parish within lewes , with a town council . municipal services within seaford are now provided by three tiers of local government – the county council , the district council and the town council . the town council has 20 members , four elected by each of five wards . the seaford community partnership is a body incorporating representatives drawn from all three tiers of local government and from local civic groups . the partnership seeks to advise on long term development strategy for the town . currently the town council is composed of 10 conservative , 7 liberal democrat and 1 labour , 1 ukip and 1 independent councillor . in the lewes district elections on 7th may 2015 the town returned 7 conservative district councillors and 3 liberal democrat district councillors . for district elections , the wards are the same five as for the town council ( central , north , east , west , south ) however they only return two councillors to the district council . the seaford ( uk parliament constituency ) was a notorious rotten borough until its disenfranchisement in the reform act 1832 when it was incorporated into the lewes constituency . seaford returned three members of parliament who went on to become prime minister : henry pelham represented the town from 1717 to 1722 , william pitt the elder from 1747 to 1754 and george canning in 1827 . seaford is currently part of the lewes parliamentary constituency . in the 2015 general election the constituency elected maria caulfield as mp , defeating the former liberal democrat mp norman baker by 1,083 votes . caulfield was formerly an nhs nurse . seaford has been twinned with the town of bönningstedt , germany , since 1984 . seaford has one of the longest-serving town criers in england and wales —peter white— who was appointed to this honorary position in 1977 by lewes ( district ) , and is now an appointee of seaford town council . in 2012 he was also appointed serjeant at mace , and his historic uniform for both crying and mace-bearing is a replica of that worn by 19th . century serjeant william woolgar . ( in post 1865 – 1901 ) seaford has the westernmost of the south coast martello towers , number 74 , now a local history museum . seaford lifeguards patrol the beach and water each weekend and bank holiday from may to september . they are made up of volunteers , mainly young people , who give thousands of unpaid hours every year to train and help keep the public safe . they have been recognised as the best equipped and trained non-rnli beach lifeguard unit in the country . sport and leisure . seaford cricket club have played at the salts recreation ground since 1946 , though the origins of cricket in seaford go back to the 18th century . the latest augmentation of facilities was in 2010 , when the pavilion was extended . seaford rugby football club , affiliated to the sussex county rugby football union , play at the same venue , which has the distinction of being below sea-level . seaford town , the local football club , plays at the crouch playing field . they play in the sussex county league division two . the town has two golf courses , seaford golf club , a downland course at firle road , and seaford head golf course , from which the coastline and the south downs can be seen . seaford has at least two bowling clubs . they include seaford bowling club , which is a private club at blatchington road , dating back to 1912 , and the crouch bowling club in crouch gardens , east street . downs leisure centre operates 'the wave ' in seaford . the wave is a leisure centre offering a range of sports and pastimes , including badminton , indoor bowls , children 's disco dancing , line-dancing and fitness classes . wave leisure : website it should not be confused with waves , which is a seaford-based charity supporting families in difficulties . swimming facilities are provided for the town at seaford head swimming pool , which is also run by wave leisure . seaford head swimming pool : website towards the western end of seaford bay lies newhaven and seaford sailing club . founded in 1952 by a group of sailing enthusiasts , the club now has two sites – racing off seaford beach and sailing at piddinghoe lake near newhaven where the rya accredited sailing school is located . the area around seaford , such as up the cuckmere valley and along the south downs way , offers many walking routes . . transport . two local half-hourly circular bus services , the 119 and 120 , are provided by cuckmere buses ( monday-friday ) and compass bus on saturdays , who also run bus 126 from seaford via alfriston to eastbourne . brighton & hove operate two frequent bus services , the 12 and 12a ( up to every 10 minutes ) , routed along the a259 road through seaford ( the 12a goes via the chyngton estate on the east side of seaford ) which take passengers to brighton or eastbourne which both have extensive onward bus services . seaford station is the terminus of the line from brighton via lewes and newhaven . the local train services are operated by southern . notable people . anthony blunt , the former keeper of the queen 's paintings who was revealed to be a soviet spy , went to school in seaford . actor tony caunter , who played roy evans in the bbc soap opera eastenders , once lived in seaford . clementine churchill , wife of british prime minister winston churchill , lived in seaford . actor nigel davenport , attended st peter 's school , seaford . actor maurice denham lived in seaford . paul garred , drummer of the band the kooks , grew up in seaford . comedian dickie henderson went to school in seaford . musician robyn hitchcock spent time in seaford , writing about it in his song museum of sex . chess player david howell , the uk 's youngest grandmaster and british champion , grew up in seaford . jordan , an actor/model noted for her work with vivienne westwood and the sex boutique in the king 's road area of london in the mid-1970s , was born in seaford , and now works in the town as a veterinary nurse . actor penelope keith went to school in seaford . former motorcycling stunt rider eddie kidd now lives in seaford . actor oscar lloyd , who appears in itv soap emmerdale , was born in seaford . val mccalla , who was voted in 1997 as one of the top 100 black britons of all time and was the founder of the voice , lived in seaford until his death in 2002 . michael olowokandi , from nigeria , former nba basketball player for the minnesota timberwolves and most recently the boston celtics 2006–2007 , went to school for a short time at newlands manor school , seaford . don partridge , singer-songwriter , lived in seaford . twin sisters connie powney and cassie powney , who played mel and sophie burton in channel 4 soap hollyoaks , grew up in seaford . actress margaret rutherford went to school in seaford . the astronaut piers sellers attended tyttenhanger lodge preparatory school , seaford . woodcut artist eric slater lived and died in seaford , and is buried there . bruce stewart , writer of the 1970 , itv series timeslip , lived in seaford . pete thomas , drummer with a 30-year association with elvis costello , was brought up in seaford . tennessee thomas , drummer of the like and fashion model , lived in seaford before moving to california . colin wells , ex-professional cricketer for sussex and derbyshire , lives in seaford . education . between the late 19th century and the 1950s , seaford was renowned as a '' school town '' . the many preparatory schools and other independent schools were the main employers in the town . in the 1960s , sutton avenue had a road sign warning '' 7 schools in next mile '' . sunday mornings in term-time were marked by '' crocodiles '' of schoolchildren from each of the preparatory schools walking to church for the special schools ' service . most of these independent schools , such as ladycross school and st peter 's school were closed and the land used for new housing estates in the last decades of the 20th century . the last girls ' school , micklefield , closed in 1994 . although it has many primary schools ( chyngton , cradle hill , annecy , seaford county primary ) , from the nursery to the '' sixth year '' of education , the town of seaford has only one state-run secondary school , seaford head school , which in 2009 closed its sixth form , but re-opened it in 2014 . seaford was also home to an independent school , newlands preparatory and manor , which included a specialist unit for pupils with specific learning difficulties . however , the school closed for good in july 2014 . its previous site is currently being redeveloped into a housing estate . the town is also home to a special needs boarding school called bowden house which is run by tower hamlets council . . places of worship . parts of the nave , aisles and clerestory of the church of england parish church of st leonard are norman work from the 11th century . the north and south arcades and most of the clerestory windows are early english gothic . the tower is 14th century and its upper part is perpendicular gothic . the transepts and polygonal apse are gothic revival additions designed by john billing and built in 1861–82 . there is some modern stained glass by the cox & barnard firm of hove . the church is a grade i listed building . st luke 's church , opened in 1959 and built of flint and brick , serves the chyngton and sutton suburbs of the town . it has been attributed to architect john leopold denman . the roman catholic church of st thomas more was built in 1935 to replace a chapel in the grounds of bishop of southwark francis bourne 's home nearby . james o'hanlon hughes and geoffrey welch designed the flint and stucco building , which was extended in 1969 using artificial stone . w.f . poulton designed a gothic revival chapel for congregationalists in 1877 . the flint building has a distinctive corner turret . it is now a united reformed church with the name cross way clinton centre , and has links with the town 's methodism church , now called cross way church . this was built in the gothic revival style of red brick in 1894 . a town-centre baptist chapel was demolished in 1973 and replaced by a new brown-brick circular church on the road to east blatchington . elsewhere in the town , there is a jehovah 's witnesses kingdom hall , a spiritualism church and an evangelical church ( the seaford community church in vale road ) . military . the romans are known to have had a camp in seaford . from 1794 coastal defence barracks were established at east blatchington . in 1806–1808 a martello tower was built at the eastern end of seaford bay . it is the most westerly of the towers , numbered tower 74 . during the first and second world wars there were large military camps in the town . in the first world war , the camps were built to house the 22nd division from kitchener 's third new army . the south camp nearly encircled seaford ladies college . in december 1914 there was a strike by a mainly welsh regiment over the remoteness of the accommodation and mud . in 1919 two thousand canadians rioted after one of them was beaten by a camp picket for walking with his hands in his pockets . seaford has seven victoria cross holders associated with the town : william george walker lived and died in seaford cuthbert bromley lived in seaford william frederick mcfadzean trained at the north camp , seaford geoffrey charles tasker keyes attended king 's mead school , seaford david auldjo jamieson attended ladycross school , seaford claud raymond lived in seaford h . jones attended st peter 's school , seaford . freedom of the town . the following people and military units have received the freedom of the city of seaford . individuals . field marshal his grace the duke of richmond : 1789 . rt hon william pitt : 1789 . laurie holland : 30 september 2012 . donald mabey : 30 september 2012 . keith blackburn : february 2019 . military units . 1st sussex engineers , re ( ta ) : 1959 .