1995 in music

specific locations . 1995 in british music 1995 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1995 in classical music 1995 in country music 1995 in heavy metal music 1995 in hip hop music 1995 in latin music 1995 in jazz . events . january–february . january 1 – mo ostin steps down as chairman and ceo of warner music group . january 8 – pearl jam frontman eddie vedder hosts '' self-pollution radio '' , a four-and-a-half hour radio broadcast with live performances by pearl jam , soundgarden , mudhoney , and others . any station with a satellite receiver could pick up and carry the program . january 10 – michel sardou begins a record-breaking run of 113 shows at the paris olympia . january 14 – perry farrell is arrested for cocaine possession , being under the influence and possession of a syringe at a los angeles hotel . january 18 – jerry garcia crashes his rented bmw into a guard rail near mill valley , california , usa , but is not injured in the accident . january 20–february 5 – the big day out festival takes place in australia and new zealand , headlined by ministry , primal scream , hole , the cult and the offspring . originally , oasis were also named in the lineup , but had to cancel their performance due to co-frontman liam gallagher losing his voice . january 27 – live from the house of blues premieres on tbs . february 1 – welsh rock band manic street preachers band member richey james edwards goes missing after leaving the london embassy hotel , uk at 7 & nbsp ; am . february 7 – rapper tupac shakur is sentenced to one-and-a-half to four-and-a-half years in prison on a sexual abuse charge . he was later released on appeal . february 12 – iron butterfly bassist philip taylor kramer disappeared from highway 101 , usa as he tried to get back home from the los angeles international airport . he tried calling his family and 911 for help , but received none . february 14 – richey edwards ' vauxhall cavalier is found abandoned in a service station on the bristol side of the severn bridge in the uk , with evidence that he had been living in it . although he was near a notorious suicide spot , there is still no evidence to suggest he committed suicide . february 19 roxette play to a crowd of 12,000 in beijing , china , becoming the first western band to be allowed to perform in the workers ' indoor arena for ten years . mötley crüe drummer tommy lee marries baywatch actress pamela anderson on a beach in cancún , mexico . february 25 – lyle lovett suffers a broken clavicle in an accident while riding his motorcycle in mexico . the accident prevented lovett from attending the grammy awards ( he ended up winning two awards ) . . march–april . march 1 r.e.m . drummer bill berry leaves the stage during a concert in switzerland after suffering a brain aneurysm . he undergoes successful brain surgery two days later in switzerland . the 37th annual grammy awards are presented in los angeles , hosted by paul reiser . bruce springsteen won four awards , including song of the year for '' streets of philadelphia '' , while tony bennett 's mtv unplugged live album wins album of the year and sheryl crow 's '' all i wan na do '' wins record of the year . crow also wins best new artist . march 8 – former helloween drummer , ingo schwichtenberg , commits suicide by jumping under a subway train . march 13 – radiohead album the bends is released . march 14 – with the release of me against the world , tupac shakur became the first male solo artist to have a number one album on the american billboard 200 chart while in prison . the album remained at the top of the charts for four weeks . march 26 – rapper eazy-e , better known as eazy-e , dies of complications from aids . march 28 – lyle lovett and actress julia roberts announce their separation after 21 months of marriage . march 30 – celine dion releases d'eux , which goes on to be the most successful french-language album of all time . march 31 tejano singer selena is shot and killed by yolanda saldivar , her former personal assistant and former fan club president , who had recently been fired for embezzling money from the fan club . the event was called '' black friday '' by hispanics worldwide . during a performance in auburn hills , michigan , usa , jimmy page narrowly escapes being stabbed by a man who rushes the stage with a knife . the man was tackled by security guards who were injured in the brawl . april 17 – ed rosenblatt replaces david geffen as chairman and ceo of geffen records . april 29 – tupac shakur marries keisha morris inside the clinton correctional facility , new york , usa . shakur was serving a four-and-a-half year jail term on sexual assault charges . they would later divorce . may–june . may 5 – former guns n ' roses drummer steven adler is arraigned on a felony count of possession of heroin , in addition to two misdemeanor drug charges . may 13 – the eurovision song contest 1995 , held at point theatre in dublin , ireland , is won by irish-norwegian band secret garden , representing norway with the song '' nocturne '' . this is the last competition with only one host until 2013 . may 15 – stone temple pilots singer scott weiland is arrested outside a motel in pasadena , california , for possession of heroin and cocaine . may 19 – sam phillips makes her motion picture debut in the bruce willis action film , die hard with a vengeance . phillips played one of the main terrorists in the film . june 1 – alan wilder leaves depeche mode . june 13 – icelandic singer björk releases post , her critically acclaimed second album as a solo artist . the musically diverse album contained some of her most popular work to date , including '' army of me '' , '' hyperballad '' , '' i miss you '' and a betty hutton cover of '' it 's oh so quiet '' . june 16 – michael jackson released his first double-album history , which became the best-selling multiple-album of all-time , with 35 million copies ( 70 million copies ) sold worldwide . july–august . july 3 – the members of tlc file for chapter 11 bankruptcy , declaring debts of over 3.5 million . july 9 – the grateful dead performs its final show with jerry garcia at soldier field in chicago he dies one month later of a heart attack at the age of 53 . july 14 – george michael and sony music complete their acrimonious split . in 1994 michael lost a lawsuit seeking to be released from his sony contract , but he vowed to never sing for the company again . michael will now record for the new label dreamworks records . july 17 – robbie williams announces he is quitting take that . july 18 – selena becomes the first hispanic singer to have an album debut and peak at number-one on the us billboard 200 chart . she also becomes the first and only female singer to place five albums simultaneously on the billboard 200 chart . august 9 jerry garcia of the grateful dead passes away of a heart attack at age 53 . in cities all over the united states , deadheads spontaneously gather to mourn his death and celebrate his life . kiss performs on mtv unplugged . the band 's current lineup is joined by original members peter criss and ace frehley , setting the stage for the band 's reunion tour the following year . august 12 – the offspring 's dexter holland marries hairstylist kristine luna , who co-wrote the band 's song '' session '' from ignition . august 22 – rancid release their third studio album . and out come the wolves . along with green day 's dookie and the offspring 's smash ( both released 1994 in music ) , this album helped revive mainstream popular interest in punk rock in the mid-1990s , and becomes one of the best-selling independent records of all time . and out come the wolves eventually goes platinum . august 28 oingo boingo announce that they will break up following a series of halloween shows in los angeles , california , usa . lead singer danny elfman has established a career scoring motion pictures . the official end of sarah records is marked with a farewell party featuring live sets by many of the label 's acts . it was the last live appearance by the orchids before they split up . august 29 – al jourgensen and mike scaccia of ministry are arrested for heroin possession in two separate incidents in texas . . september–october . september 1 – the rock and roll hall of fame opens in cleveland , ohio , usa . september 5 – the luminiş villa , george enescu memorial house , becomes an official memorial to the composer . september 8 – for squirrels vocalist jack vigliatura , bassist bill white and manager tim bender are all killed in a van accident near savannah , georgia . september 15 – alternative-country magazine no depression publishes its first issue , with son volt on the cover . september 27 – time warner agrees to sell back its 50 percent share of interscope records . the media giant had come under intense fire for the explicit lyrics of rap artists on the label . october 2 the first international guitar festival is held in buenos aires , argentina . oasis release their second album , ( what 's the story ) morning glory ? . the album spawns several number one singles around the world and eventually becomes the third best-selling album in the uk ever . october 10 mariah carey performed at madison square garden to promote her album daydream . green day release their fourth album insomniac . while it did n't sell as well as their previous album dookie , it still sold 4 million copies . october 11 – tupac shakur is released from clinton correctional facility , new york , usa , on us 1.4 million bail which was posted by suge knight . in return tupac signed a three-album deal with knight 's death row records . october 21 – blind melon singer shannon hoon is found dead of a cocaine overdose at the age of 28 . october 23 – def leppard enters the guinness book of world records by performing three shows in three continents in the same day , playing tangier , morocco , london , england and vancouver , canada . the guinness book of records , 1997 p.272 october 24 – the smashing pumpkins released their album mellon collie and the infinite sadness october 30 – oasis released their single wonderwall . november–december . november 6 cher releases her first album in four years , it 's a man 's world , her first original recording for warner music group . the album would get its u.s . debut in june 1996 . queen releases their made in heaven that includes contributions from all original members following freddie mercury 's death 1991 . it goes on to be a huge success , selling 20 million copies worldwide . november 21 dc talk release their 4th studio album jesus freak . it was a departure from their previous hip hop albums taking on a rap rock sound . it achieved the biggest 1st week sales for a christian album selling more than 80,000 copies in its first week and entering the billboard top 200 at 16 . it is known as one of the most important christian albums of all time . the offspring re-release their debut album ( which originally appeared in 1989 ) , on cd for the first time . this proves to be the band 's final release on epitaph records ; they leave epitaph and sign with columbia records the next year . enrique iglesias releases his debut album , in spanish . it tops the latin album charts and would go on to win a grammy and produce five no . 1 singles on billboards hot latin tracks chart . december 4 – the beatles release '' free as a bird '' as their first new single in over 20 years . december 21 – madonna is subpoenaed to testify on january 3 , 1996 , against her stalker , robert hoskins , at the criminal courts building in los angeles , california , usa . hoskins was shot by a security guard outside her estate in los angeles in may 1995 for trespassing on her property and threatening to marry or kill her . december 31 – the twenty-fourth annual new year 's rockin ' eve special airs on abc , with appearances by brandy , goo goo dolls , kool & the gang , martin page , and the rembrandts . also in 1995 . in flames hires björn gelotte & anders fridén . three members of r.e.m . , bill berry , mike mills and michael stipe , fall ill while on the band 's '' monster tour '' . berry suffers an aneurysm which required immediate surgery , stipe suffers a hiatal hernia and mills undergoes an appendectomy . paul d'amour leaves tool . john denver – the wildlife concert ( us single : '' for you '' ) kid ' n play disbands . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1995 . bands disbanded . see : category : musical groups disestablished in 1995 . bands reformed . the misfits ( hiatus since 1983 ) journey ( since 1987 ) e street band ( 1995 reunion tour ; officially reformed in 1999 ) . albums released . january–march . february 25 – francesca michielin , italian singer-songwriter march 3 – maine mendoza , filipina entertainer april 5 – daniel caesar , canadian singer-songwriter rnb/soul musician april 11 – dodie clark , british singer-songwriter , musician , author and youtuber april 19 – arizona zervas , american singer april 21 – madison love , japanese american singer-songwriter , producer and musician april 24 – kehlani , american singer songwriter april 24 – ludmilla , brazilian singer and songwriter april 26 lorenzo fragola , italian singer daniel padilla , filipino actor and singer april 27 – sarah close , british singer-songwriter , youtuber april 28 – melanie martinez ( singer ) , american singer , songwriter , photographer , and director may 4 – shameik moore , american actor , singer , and dancer may 10 – yoan garneau , canadian singer-songwriter may 24 – kiiara , american singer/songwriter june 5 – troye sivan , south african-australian singer/songwriter/actor/youtuber june 15 – tash sultana , australian singer-songwriter and multi-instrumentalist june 20 – serayah ( actress ) , n american actress , model and singer june 23 – lauren aquilina , english songwriter-singer , musician , music producer june 26 reema major , sudanese-canadian rapper mitch james – new zealand independent musician july 1 – hoài lâm , vietnamese pop singer and actor july 2 ruth b , canadian singer/songwriter shirley setia , indian singer july 4 – post malone , american rapper , singer-songwriter and guitarist july 11 – tyler medeiros , canadian singer-songwriter and dancer july 13 – the japanese house , aka amber bain , an english singer-songwriter , musician , multi-instrumentalist july 15 – elyar , azerbaijani-english musician , pop star , music producer , and singer-songwriter ( collaborator with leadley ) july 22 – marília mendonça , brazilian singer and songwriter august 1 – derrick monasterio , filipino actor , dancer and singer august 8 – malin reitan , norwegian singer august 22 – dua lipa , british singer/songwriter august 24 – wenwen han , chinese child actress and violinist august 29 – gud ( music producer ) , swedish dj and producer best known as a member of rapper yung lean 's stockholm-based group sad boys september 18 – megan lee , korean-american singer-songwriter and actress september 19 – chase rice , american singer-songwriter september 25 ryan beatty , american singer sofía reyes , mexican singer-songwriter and actress september 29 – julien baker , american singer and guitarist october 4 – caitlyn shadbolt , australian singer-songwriter october 13 – jimin , south korean singer-songwriter , dancer , and member of bts october 22 – doja cat , american singer , rapper and songwriter november 6 – anja nissen , danish-australian singer , songwriter , dancer and actress november 29 – laura marano , american actress and singer december 15 -leadley , british musician , singer-songwriter , activist and youtuber ( collaborator with elyar ) december 27 – caroline pennell , american singer-songwriter december 30 – v , south korean singer-songwriter , actor , and member of bts dominic fike , american singer and rapper . deaths . january 1 – ted hawkins , soul blues singer-songwriter , 58 january 24 – david cole , producer ( c+c music factory ) , 32 january 31 – george abbott us librettist and director , 107 february 6 – art taylor , jazz drummer , 65 february 12 – tony secunda , marc bolan 's former manager , 54 ( heart attack ) february 18 bob stinson , guitarist ( the replacements ) , 35 ( complications caused by drug and alcohol abuse ) denny cordell , english record producer , 51 february 23 – melvin franklin , the temptations , 52 ( brain seizure ) march 5 – vivian stanshall , eccentric british musician , 51 ( house fire ) march 9 – ingo schwichtenberg , helloween , 29 ( suicide ) march 16 – heinrich sutermeister , swiss composer , 84 march 17 – sunnyland slim , blues pianist , 88 march 26 – eazy-e , rapper and record producer , 31 ( aids ) march 29 jimmy mcshane , singer ( baltimora ) ( aids ) roland wolf , keyboardist ( nick cave and the bad seeds , einstürzende neubauten ) , 29 or 30 ( car accident ) march 30 – paul a . rothchild , american record producer , 59 march 31 – selena , singer , 23 ( murdered ) april 4 – priscilla lane , us singer and actress , 79 ( lung cancer ) april 6 – delroy wilson , reggae artist , 46 ( cirrhosis of the liver ) april 14 – burl ives , singer and actor , 85 april 25 – ginger rogers , us actress , dancer and singer , 83 may 6 – barbarito diez , cuban singer and bandleader , 85 may 8 – teresa teng , singer , 42 may 16 – lola flores , spanish singer and dancer , 72 may 25 – dick curless , country singer . 63 june 4 – ernest bornemann , jazz musician and critic , 80 june 12 – arturo benedetti michelangeli pianist , 75 june 14 – rory gallagher , irish blues/rock guitarist , 47 ( complications from liver transplant ) june 30 phyllis hyman , r & b , soul and jazz singer , 45 ( suicide by overdose of barbiturates ) nazariy yaremchuk , ukrainian singer , 43 july 1 – wolfman jack , disk jockey , 57 july 2 – zdeněk košler , conductor , 67 july 8 – günter bialas , composer , 87 july 23 – miklós rózsa , film score composer , 88 july 25 – charlie rich , country singer and musician , 62 july 28 – eddie hinton , songwriter and session musician , 51 august 9 – jerry garcia , grateful dead , 53 ( diabetes-related ) august 11 allan mccarthy , canadian singer of men without hats , 38 herbert sumsion , english church musician , 96 august 16 – bobby debarge , lead singer of switch , 39 ( aids ) august 18 – alan dell bbc radio 2 disc jockey , 71 august 19 john gilmore , jazz saxophonist , 63 pierre schaeffer , composer and pioneer of musique concrète , 85 august 23 – dwayne goettel , industrial keyboard player ( skinny puppy ) , 31 ( drug overdose ) august 26 – ronnie white , the miracles , co-writer of the temptations hit '' my girl '' ( with smokey robinson ) , 57 leukemia . august 30 – sterling morrison , the velvet underground guitarist , 53 ( non-hodgkin lymphoma ) september 5 – salil chowdhury , indian film composer and poet , 71 september 27 – alison steele , american disc jockey , 58 october 19 – don cherry , jazz trumpeter , 58 october 21 maxene andrews , singer , member of the andrews sisters , 79 shannon hoon , lead singer of group blind melon , 28 ( drug overdose ) hans helfritz , german composer , 93 october 26 – gorni kramer , italian bandleader and songwriter , 82 october 31 alan bush , composer , pianist and conductor , 94 erika morini , violinist , 91 november 2 – florence greenberg , music executive and producer , 82 november 3 – isang yun ( yun i-sang ) , composer , 78 november 7 – jerry daniels , the ink spots , 79 november 8 – ion baciu , conductor , 64 november 17 – alan hull , singer-songwriter and founder of lindisfarne , 50 ( heart thrombosis ) november 21 peter grant , manager of the yardbirds , led zeppelin , bad company , 60 ( myocardial infarction ) matthew ashman , guitarist of adam and the ants , bow wow wow , 35 november 23 – junior walker , r & b and soul musician , 64 november 26 – david briggs , record producer , 51 december 10 – darren robinson , rapper ( the fat boys ) , 28 december 25 dean martin , singer and actor , 78 ( cancer ) nicolas slonimsky , russian-born conductor and composer , 101 december 27 – shura cherkassky , american classical pianist , 86 december 29 – hans henkemans dutch composer , 82 date unknown – mogens ellegaard , accordionist , 59 or 60 . awards . the following artists are inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame : the allman brothers band , al green , janis joplin , led zeppelin , martha and the vandellas , neil young and frank zappa inductees of the gma gospel music hall of fame include charles wesley ( writer of '' hark the herald angels sing '' ) udit narayan wins the filmfare best male playback award . tetsuya komuro ( producer ) & trf win the japan record award for '' overnight sensation '' t the 37th japan record awards . . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1995 . country music association awards . . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1995 . mercury music prize . dummy – portishead wins . mtv video music awards . 1995 mtv video music awards . charts . triple j hottest 100 main article : triple j hottest 100 , 1995