Interpersonal relationship

types . intimate relationships . . romantic relationships generally . romantic relationships have been defined in countless ways , by writers , philosophers , religions , scientists , and in the modern day , relationship counselors . two popular definitions of love are sternberg 's triangular theory of love and fisher 's theory of love . sternberg defines love in terms of intimacy , passion , and commitment , which he claims exist in varying levels in different romantic relationships . fisher defines love as composed of three stages : attraction , romantic love , and attachment . romantic relationships may exist between two people of any gender , or among a group of people ( see polyamory ) . romance . the single defining quality of a romantic relationship is the presence of love . love is therefore equally difficult to define . hazan and shaver define love , using ainsworth 's attachment theory , as comprising proximity , emotional support , self-exploration , and separation distress when parted from the loved one . other components commonly agreed to be necessary for love are physical attraction , similarity , reciprocity , and self-disclosure . . platonic love . as the merriam webster dictionary explains platonic love as , '' love conceived by plato as ascending from passion for the individual to contemplation of the universal and ideal . '' it is a love that is affectionate but not sexual ; in modern terms it can be easily be mistaken for a sexual relationship . life stages . early adolescent relationships are characterized by companionship , reciprocity , and sexual experiences . as emerging adults mature , they begin to develop attachment and caring qualities in their relationships , including love , bonding , security , and support for partners . earlier relationships also tend to be shorter and exhibit greater involvement with social networks . later relationships are often marked by shrinking social networks , as the couple dedicates more time to each other than to associates . later relationships also tend to exhibit higher levels of commitment . most psychologists and relationship counselors predict a decline of intimacy and passion over time , replaced by a greater emphasis on companionate love ( differing from adolescent companionate love in the caring , committed , and partner-focused qualities ) . however , couple studies have found no decline in intimacy nor in the importance of sex , intimacy , and passionate love to those in longer or later-life relationships . older people tend to be more satisfied in their relationships , but face greater barriers to entering new relationships than do younger or middle-aged people . older women in particular face social , demographic , and personal barriers ; men aged 65 and older are nearly twice as likely as women to be married , and widowers are nearly three times as likely to be dating 18 months following their partner 's loss compared to widows . significant other . the term significant other gained popularity during the 1990s , reflecting the growing acceptance of 'non-heteronormative ' relationships . it can be used to avoid making an assumption about the gender or relational status ( e.g . married , cohabitating , civil union ) of a person 's intimate partner . cohabiting relationships continue to rise , with many partners considering cohabitation to be nearly as serious as , or a substitute for , marriage . lgbt people in particular may face unique challenges in establishing and maintaining intimate relationships . the strain of 'internalized homo-negativity ' and of presenting themselves in line with socially acceptable gender norms can reduce the satisfaction and emotional and health benefits they experience in their relationships . lgbt youth also lack the social support and peer connections enjoyed by hetero-normative young people . nonetheless , comparative studies of homosexual and heterosexual couples have found few differences in relationship intensity , quality , satisfaction , or commitment . . marital relationship . although nontraditional relationships continue to rise , marriage still makes up the majority of relationships except among emerging adults . it is also still considered by many to occupy a place of greater importance among family and social structures . familial relationships . . parent-child . in ancient times , parent-child relationships were often marked by fear , either of rebellion or abandonment , resulting in the strict filial roles in , for example , ancient rome and china . freud conceived of the oedipal complex , the supposed obsession that young boys have towards their mother and the accompanying fear and rivalry with their father , and the electra complex , in which the young girl feels that her mother has castrated her and therefore becomes obsessed with her father . freud 's ideas influenced thought on parent-child relationships for decades . another early conception of parent-child relationships was that love only existed as a biological drive for survival and comfort on the child 's part . in 1958 , however , harry harlow ’ s study comparing rhesus ’ reactions to wire '' mothers '' and cloth '' mothers '' demonstrated the depth of emotion felt by infants . the study laid the groundwork for mary ainsworth ’ s attachment theory , showing how the infants used their cloth '' mothers '' as a secure base from which to explore . in a series of studies using the strange situation , a scenario in which an infant is separated from then reunited with the parent , ainsworth defined three styles of parent-child relationship . securely attached infants miss the parent , greet them happily upon return , and show normal exploration and lack of fear when the parent is present insecure avoidant infants show little distress upon separation and ignore the caregiver when they return ; they explore little when the parent is present insecure ambivalent infants are highly distressed by separation , but continue to be distressed upon the parent 's return ; these infants also explore little and display fear even when the parent is present some psychologists have suggested a fourth attachment style , disorganized , so called because the infants ’ behavior appeared disorganized or disoriented . secure attachments are linked to better social and academic outcomes , greater moral internalization , and less delinquency for children , and have been found to predict later relationship success . for most of the late nineteenth through the twentieth century , the perception of adolescent-parent relationships was that of a time of upheaval . g . stanley hall popularized the “ sturm und drang ” , or storm and stress , model of adolescence . psychological research has painted a much tamer picture . although adolescents are more risk-seeking , and emerging adults have higher suicide rates , they are largely less volatile and have much better relationships with their parents than this model would suggest early adolescence often marks a decline in parent-child relationship quality , which then re-stabilizes through adolescence , and relationships are sometimes better in late adolescence than prior to its onset . with the increasing average age at marriage and more youths attending college and living with parents past their teens , the concept of a new period called emerging adulthood gained popularity . this is considered a period of uncertainty and experimentation between adolescence and adulthood . during this stage , interpersonal relationships are considered to be more self-focused , and relationships with parents may still be influential . . siblings . sibling relationships have a profound effect on social , psychological , emotional , and academic outcomes . although proximity and contact usually decreases over time , sibling bonds continue to affect people throughout their lives . sibling relationships are affected by parent-child relationships , such that sibling relationships in childhood often reflect the positive or negative aspects of children 's relationships with their parents . . other examples of interpersonal relationship . egalitarian and platonic friendship enemy frenemy — a person with whom an individual maintains a friendly interaction despite underlying conflict , possibly encompassing rivalry , mistrust , jealousy or competition . neighbor business relationships partnership employer and employee contractor customer landlord and tenant coworker official . stages . interpersonal relationships are dynamic systems that change continuously during their existence . like living organisms , relationships have a beginning , a lifespan , and an end . they tend to grow and improve gradually , as people get to know each other and become closer emotionally , or they gradually deteriorate as people drift apart , move on with their lives and form new relationships with others . one of the most influential models of relationship development was proposed by a psychologist george levinger . this model was formulated to describe heterosexual , adult romantic relationships , but it has been applied to other kinds of interpersonal relations as well . according to the model , the natural development of a relationship follows five stages : acquaintance and acquaintanceship – becoming acquainted depends on previous relationships , physical proximity , first impressions , and a variety of other factors . if two people begin to like each other , continued interactions may lead to the next stage , but acquaintance can continue indefinitely . another example is the association . buildup – during this stage , people begin to trust and care about each other . the need for intimacy , compatibility and such filtering agents as common background and goals will influence whether or not interaction continues . continuation – this stage follows a mutual commitment to quite a strong and close long-term friendship , romantic relationship , or even marriage . it is generally a long , relatively stable period . nevertheless , continued growth and development will occur during this time . mutual trust is important for sustaining the relationship . deterioration – not all relationships deteriorate , but those that do tend to show signs of trouble . boredom , resentment , and dissatisfaction may occur , and individuals may communicate less and avoid self-disclosure . loss of trust and betrayals may take place as the downward spiral continues , eventually ending the relationship . ( alternately , the participants may find some way to resolve the problems and reestablish trust and belief in others . ) ending – the final stage marks the end of the relationship , either by breakups , death or by spatial separation for quite some time and severing all existing ties of either friendship or romantic love . terminating a relationship . according to the latest systematic review of the economic literature on the factors associated with life satisfaction ( dating from 2007 ) , stable and secure relationships are beneficial , and correspondingly , relationship dissolution is harmful . the american psychological association has summarised the evidence on breakups . breaking up can actually be a positive experience when the relationship did not expand the self and when the breakup leads to personal growth . they also recommend some ways to cope with the experience : purposefully focussing on the positive aspects of the breakup ( '' factors leading up to the break-up , the actual break-up , and the time right after the break-up '' ) minimising the negative emotions journaling the positive aspects of the breakup ( e.g . '' comfort , confidence , empowerment , energy , happiness , optimism , relief , satisfaction , thankfulness , and wisdom '' ) . this exercise works best , although not exclusively , when the breakup is mutual . less time between a breakup and a subsequent relationship predicts higher self-esteem , attachment security , emotional stability , respect for your new partner , and greater well-being . furthermore , rebound relationships do n't last any shorter than regular relationships . 60 % of people are friends with one or more ex . 60 % of people have had an off-and-on relationship . 37 % of cohabiting couples , and 23 % of the married , have broken up and gotten back together with their existing partner . terminating a marital relationship implies a divorce . one reason cited for divorce is infidelity . the determinants of unfaithfulness are debated by dating service providers , feminists , academics and science communicators . according to psychology today , women 's , rather than men 's , level of commitment more strongly determines if a relationship will continue . . pathological relationships . abusive . abusive relationships involve either maltreatment or violence from one individual to another and include physical abuse , physical neglect , sexual abuse , and emotional maltreatment . abusive relationships within the family are very prevalent in the united states and usually involve women or children as victims . common individual factors for abusers include low self-esteem , poor impulse control , external locus of control , drug use , alcohol abuse , and negative affectivity . there are also external factors such as stress , poverty , and loss which contribute to likelihood of abuse . . codependent . codependency initially focused on a codependent partner enabling substance abuse , but has become more broadly defined to describe a dysfunctional relationship with extreme dependence on or preoccupation with another person . there are some who even refer to codependency as an addiction to the relationship . the focus of a codependent individual tends to be on the emotional state , behavioral choices , thoughts , and beliefs of another person . often those who are codependent neglect themselves in favor of taking care of others and have difficulty fully developing their identity on their own . . narcissists . narcissists focus on themselves and often distance themselves from intimate relationships ; the focus of narcissistic interpersonal relationships is to promote one 's self-concept . generally , narcissists show less empathy in relationships and view love pragmatically or as a game involving others ' emotions . narcissist are usually a part of the personality disorder , narcissistic personality disorder ( npd ) . in relationships , they tend to affect the other person as they attempt to use them to enhance their self-esteem . maj , mario . , akiskal , hagop s . , hagop s . , mezzich , juan e . , wiley john & sons . personality disorders . medical march 11 , 2015 . specific types of npd make a person incapable of having an interpersonal relationship due to them being cunning , envious , and contemptuous . . importance . human beings are innately social and are shaped by their experiences with others . there are multiple perspectives to understand this inherent motivation to interact with others . need to belong . according to maslow 's hierarchy of needs , humans need to feel love ( sexual/nonsexual ) and acceptance from social groups ( family , peer groups ) . in fact , the need to belong is so innately ingrained that it may be strong enough to overcome physiological and safety needs , such as children 's attachment to abusive parents or staying in abusive romantic relationships . such examples illustrate the extent to which the psychobiological drive to belong is entrenched . social exchange . another way to appreciate the importance of relationships is in terms of a reward framework . this perspective suggests that individuals engage in relations that are rewarding in both tangible and intangible ways . the concept fits into a larger theory of social exchange . this theory is based on the idea that relationships develop as a result of cost-benefit analysis . individuals seek out rewards in interactions with others and are willing to pay a cost for said rewards . in the best-case scenario , rewards will exceed costs , producing a net gain . this can lead to '' shopping around '' or constantly comparing alternatives to maximize the benefits or rewards while minimizing costs . relational self . relationships are also important for their ability to help individuals develop a sense of self . the relational self is the part of an individual 's self-concept that consists of the feelings and beliefs that one has regarding oneself that develops based on interactions with others . in other words , one 's emotions and behaviors are shaped by prior relationships . relational self theory posits that prior and existing relationships influence one 's emotions and behaviors in interactions with new individuals , particularly those individuals that remind him or her of others in his or her life . studies have shown that exposure to someone who resembles a significant other activates specific self-beliefs , changing how one thinks about oneself in the moment more so than exposure to someone who does not resemble one 's significant other . . power and dominance . power is the ability to influence the behavior of other people . when two parties have or assert unequal levels of power , one is termed '' dominant '' and the other '' submissive '' . expressions of dominance can communicate intention to assert or maintain dominance in a relationship . being submissive can be beneficial because it saves time , emotional stress , and may avoid hostile actions such as withholding of resources , cessation of cooperation , termination of the relationship , maintaining a grudge , or even physical violence . submission occurs in different degrees ; for example , some employees may follow orders without question , whereas others might express disagreement but concede when pressed . groups of people can form a dominance hierarchy . for example , a hierarchical organization uses a command hierarchy for top-down management . this can reduce time wasted in conflict over unimportant decisions , prevents inconsistent decisions from harming the operations of the organization , maintain alignment of a large population of workers with the goals of the owners ( which the workers might not personally share ) and if promotion is based on merit , help ensure that the people with the best expertise make important decisions . this contrasts with group decision-making and systems which encourage decision-making and self-organization by front-line employees , who in some cases may have better information about customer needs or how to work efficiently . dominance is only one aspect of organizational structure . a power structure describes power and dominance relationships in a larger society . for example , a feudal society under a monarchy exhibits a strong dominance hierarchy in both economics and physical power , whereas dominance relationships in a society with democracy and capitalism are more complicated . in business relationships , dominance is often associated with economic power . for example , a business may adopt a submissive attitude to customer preferences ( stocking what customers want to buy ) and complaints ( '' the customer is always right '' ) in order to earn more money . a firm with monopoly power may be less responsive to customer complaints because it can afford to adopt a dominant position . in a business partnership a '' silent partner '' is one who adopts a submissive position in all aspects , but retains financial ownership and a share of the profits . two parties can be dominant in different areas . for example , in a friendship or romantic relationship , one person may have strong opinions about where to eat dinner , whereas the other has strong opinions about how to decorate a shared space . it could be beneficial for the party with weak preferences to be submissive in that area , because it will not make them unhappy and avoids conflict with the party that would be unhappy . the breadwinner model is associated with gender role assignments where the male in a heterosexual marriage would be dominant in all areas . relationship satisfaction . social exchange theory and rusbult 's investment model shows that relationship satisfaction is based on three factors : rewards , costs , and comparison levels ( miller , 2012 ) . rewards refer to any aspects of the partner or relationship that are positive . conversely , costs are the negative or unpleasant aspects of the partner or their relationship . comparison level includes what each partner expects of the relationship . the comparison level is influenced by past relationships , and general relationship expectations they are taught by family and friends . individuals in long-distance relationships , ldrs , rated their relationships as more satisfying than individuals in proximal relationship , prs . alternatively , holt and stone ( 1988 ) found that long-distance couples who were able to meet with their partner at least once a month had similar satisfaction levels to unmarried couples who cohabitated . also , the relationship satisfaction was lower for members of ldrs who saw their partner less frequently than once a month . ldr couples reported the same level of relationship satisfaction as couples in prs , despite only seeing each other on average once every 23 days . social exchange theory and the investment model both theorize that relationships that are high in costs would be less satisfying than relationships that are low in costs . ldrs have a higher level of costs than prs , therefore , one would assume that ldrs are less satisfying than prs . individuals in ldrs are more satisfied with their relationships compared to individuals in prs . this can be explained by unique aspects of the ldrs , how the individuals use relationship maintenance behaviors , and the attachment styles of the individuals in the relationships . therefore , the costs and benefits of the relationship are subjective to the individual , and people in ldrs tend to report lower costs and higher rewards in their relationship compared to prs . . theories and empirical research . . confucianism . confucianism is a study and theory of relationships especially within hierarchies . social harmony—the central goal of confucianism—results in part from every individual knowing his or her place in the social order , and playing his or her part well . particular duties arise from each person 's particular situation in relation to others . the individual stands simultaneously in several different relationships with different people : as a junior in relation to parents and elders , and as a senior in relation to younger siblings , students , and others . juniors are considered in confucianism to owe their seniors reverence and seniors have duties of benevolence and concern toward juniors . a focus on mutuality is prevalent in east asian cultures to this day . minding relationships . the mindfulness theory of relationships shows how closeness in relationships may be enhanced . minding is the '' reciprocal knowing process involving the nonstop , interrelated thoughts , feelings , and behaviors of persons in a relationship . '' five components of '' minding '' include : knowing and being known : seeking to understand the partner making relationship-enhancing attributions for behaviors : giving the benefit of the doubt accepting and respecting : empathy and social skills maintaining reciprocity : active participation in relationship enhancement continuity in minding : persisting in mindfulness . in popular culture . popular perceptions . popular perceptions of intimate relationships are strongly influenced by movies and television . common messages are that love is predestined , love at first sight is possible , and that love with the right person always succeeds . those who consume the most romance-related media tend to believe in predestined romance and that those who are destined to be together implicitly understand each other . these beliefs , however , can lead to less communication and problem-solving as well as giving up on relationships more easily when conflict is encountered . . social media . social media has changed the face of interpersonal relationships . romantic interpersonal relationships are no less impacted . for example , in the united states , facebook has become an integral part of the dating process for emerging adults . social media can have both positive and negative impacts on romantic relationships . for example , supportive social networks have been linked to more stable relationships . however , social media usage can also facilitate conflict , jealousy , and passive aggressive behaviors such as spying on a partner . aside from direct effects on the development , maintenance , and perception of romantic relationships , excessive social network usage is linked to jealousy and dissatisfaction in relationships . a growing segment of the population is engaging in purely online dating , sometimes but not always moving towards traditional face-to-face interactions . these online relationships differ from face-to-face relationships ; for example , self-disclosure may be of primary importance in developing an online relationship . conflict management differs , since avoidance is easier and conflict resolution skills may not develop in the same way . additionally , the definition of infidelity is both broadened and narrowed , since physical infidelity becomes easier to conceal but emotional infidelity ( e.g . chatting with more than one online partner ) becomes a more serious offense .