University of Western Ontario

athletics . athletics at western is managed by sports & recreation services , a division of the faculty of health sciences . the university 's varsity teams compete in the ontario university athletics conference of u sports . the varsity teams are known as the western mustangs . as is mandatory for all members of u sports , western does not provide full-ride athletic scholarships . western 's varsity teams have been highly successful . in particular , the football team has won 32 provincial championships , appeared in 16 national championship finals and won 7 vanier cup championships as well as 3 earlier churchill bowl championships as national champions . basketball has won 24 provincial championships and rowing has won 23 provincial championships . the squash team has won two ncaa championship titles . the university has a number of athletic facilities open to their varsity teams and their students . the western student recreation centre , opened in january 2009 , is home to western 's group fitness , drop in recreation , registered massage therapy , sport psychology , drop in recreation , intramural sports and clubs . better known as the wsrc or the rec centre , this facility has an 8-lane , 50-metre pool facility . overlooking the pool is a 3-tiered concrete viewing area . a 1-metre diving board is also available . there is over 19,000 square feet of weight , cardio , and stretching space within the wsrc . there are three gyms on the first floor , and two more on the upper level . outside the lower gyms is the 1st floor games and activity lounge for table tennis , while outside of the upper gym spaces is cardio space as well as the destination for spin bike programming . also on the 4th floor are two large studio spaces where the drop in fitness , clubs and dance courses take place . td stadium has been the university 's main stadium since it opened in 2000 , with a seating capacity of over 8,000 spectators . the stadium is home to the university 's varsity football team , and has hosted a number of events including the world lacrosse championships and the canada games . the thompson recreation & athletic centre which houses a number of athletic venues , including an ice rink , tennis facilities and a track , is home to the varsity ice hockey teams and the varsity track and field teams . another athletic facility at the university is alumni hall , which is a multipurpose venue for sports such as basketball , volleyball and other indoor events . many western students take part in intramural sport leagues and tournaments . opportunities are offered at multiple skill levels and across a variety of sports . sports offered include traditional sports like volleyball , basketball and soccer , as well as less traditional events like dodgeball and inner tube water polo . western also hosts secondary school football games at td stadium . western has several fight songs and school songs that may be heard at varsity games , including the official school song , '' western '' . written in 1930 , it is most notably played at football games and other athletic events by the western mustang band . . performances . the don wright faculty of music offers almost 400 performances , masterclasses and recitals each year , most of which are open to the public . the western university symphony orchestra and the western university chamber orchestra perform regularly under conductor alain trudel . uwopera , under the direction of theodore baerg , performs a wide variety of repertoire ranging from operetta to full operatic works in the paul davenport theatre ( refurbished and renamed in 2009 from talbot theatre ) . theatre western produces a season that includes an annual musical revue of modern and classic broadway , purple shorts ( western 's one act play festival , ) and a major musical production each spring . the huron underground dramatic society ( huds ) is a student run drama group that puts on several shows per year . media . the university 's student population operates a number of media outlets throughout the campus environment . the university students ' council owns and operates the campus radio station chrw-fm ( 94.9 fm ) . the first campus radio to operate at western was in 1971 , although the present day station chrw-fm , was not established until 1979 , one year after the closure of the western 's first campus radio station . the university students ' council previously operated a closed-circuit television station known as tvwestern.ca . the station began broadcasting in 1994 , and was discontinued by the student union in 2010 after being cut from the university students ' council 's operating budget . . newspaper . the gazette , sometimes called the western gazette , is a student newspaper which has been in publication since 1906 . the gazette publishes online daily and in print on tuesdays during the academic year . the gazette has its roots as a hand-written literature newspaper called in cap and gown , which began in 1902 . the in cap and gown was first produced in newsprint in november 1906 , but changed its name to the gazette in 1908 . the gazette ceased publishing in the spring of 1916 due to world war i but was revived in its old form in 1919 . in 1930 , 7 years after western university changed its name to the university of western ontario , the paper changed its name to the university of western ontario gazette . it is now known simply as the gazette , its affiliation with western variously recognized in its print edition as '' western university 's official student newspaper . '' the gazette started as monthly but in its early years appeared weekly and twice weekly . it started publishing four times a week in 1991 and returned to the twice-weekly format in 2015 . the change in print publication schedule was accompanied by a major digital transformation . the newspaper has moved towards a digital-first philosophy and focuses on multimedia and online-only content on a daily basis . in 2017 , the gazette began printing only once a week . the western gazette absorbed the assets of western tv in 2016 . western tv was formally the big purple couch and tv western . the gazette has spawned several other publications in its history . one was occidentalia , which had its roots in special convocation issues of the gazette which included pictures of the graduating class . '' oxy '' as it was known became the university 's year book and it provided '' an interesting record of the year 's activities in all faculties and schools . '' the paper is owned and published by the university students ' council ( usc ) . the paper has editorial autonomy from the usc . the publications committee consists of mainly professional journalists who advise the full-time staff on editorial decisions and financial management of the paper , as well as offer an intermediary between the sometimes contentious relationship between the student politicians who are reported on by the gazette . the paper is one of the founding members of the national university wire . . student life programs . . leadership education . the leadership education program is designed to teach students how to become effective leaders , both individually and in teams . the program is split into three tiers : individual leadership , group leadership , and community leadership . to successfully complete a tier an individual must complete at least five of its seven modules . upon completion , students receive a letter of accomplishment signed by the dean of the university . student exchange . the university of western ontario offers a student exchange program to study abroad with several other partner institutions . almost four hundred students come to western each year as exchange students from all over the world , with even more students coming to western as international undergraduate or exchange students . the western international exchange program offers its students the opportunity to study at more than 85 different institutions in 25 countries . . notable people . file : john robarts , premier of ontario.jpg john robarts , 17th premier of ontario file : fredrick banting.jpg sir frederick banting , awarded the nobel prize for the first use of insulin on humans file : margaret chan - world economic forum annual meeting 2011 crop.jpg margaret chan , 7th director general of the world health organization file : carson mark.gif j . carson mark , mathematician and member of the manhattan project file : kevin o'leary 2012.jpg kevin o'leary , president of the learning company and television personality file : willard gordon galen weston at the cfc gala 2013.jpg galen weston , chairman of george weston limited file : prem watsa.jpg prem watsa , founder and chairman of fairfax financial file : roberta bondar nasa.jpg roberta bondar , csa astronaut and the first canadian female in space , the university of western ontario has over 220,000 alumni residing in over 100 countries . throughout western 's history , faculty , alumni , and former students have played prominent roles in many different fields and have won the nobel prize , pulitzer prize and other awards such as the rhodes scholarship . former faculty member frederick banting received the nobel prize in physiology or medicine for his discovery of insulin . alice munro , who won the nobel prize in literature in 2013 , studied in the university 's english department for two years under a scholarship and returned to western in 1974–75 , when she held the post of writer-in-residence . she was later awarded an honorary degree . two graduates from western have also travelled in space , namely bjarni tryggvason and roberta bondar . many former students have gained local and national prominence for serving in government , such as james bartleman , who served as lieutenant governor of ontario from 2002 to 2007 , and sheila copps who served as deputy prime minister of canada . western 's alumni also include a number of provincial premiers , including former premier of ontario john robarts and david peterson , and the former premier of alberta , don getty . a number of graduates have also served prominent positions on the international level . examples include glenn stevens , the governor of the reserve bank of australia and margaret chan , the director-general of the world health organization . a significant number of prominent leaders in business and economics have also studied at western . examples include : stephen poloz , governor , bank of canada , thomas h . bailey , founder and former chairman of janus capital group , geoff beattie , president of the woodbridge company and chairman of bell media , george cope , president and ceo of bell canada , joseph muncaster , president of canadian tire , edward rogers iii , deputy chairman of rogers communications , and former president of rogers cable , arkadi kuhlmann , chairman of ing direct , rob mcewen , founder , chairman and former ceo of goldcorp inc . , john thompson , former chairman of toronto-dominion bank and chancellor of western , prem watsa , chairman , ceo of fairfax financial , lee seng wee , former chairman of oversea-chinese banking corporation , galen weston , chairman and president of george weston limited , howard lindzon , author and founder of stocktwits , businesswoman margaret heng , ceo of shatec , a singapore-based hospitality training institution , and kevin o'leary , television personality , venture capitalist , and former president of the learning company . . see also . 15025 uwontario old four st . peter 's seminary ( diocese of london , ontario ) western mustang band . notes . references . further reading . . external links . official athletics website