Compression artifact

images . when performing block-based discrete cosine transform ( dct ) coding for quantization , as in jpeg-compressed images , several types of artifacts can appear . ringing contouring posterizing staircase noise ( aliasing ) along curving edges blockiness in '' busy '' regions ( block boundary artifacts , sometimes called macroblocking , quilting , or checkerboarding ) other lossy algorithms , which use pattern matching to deduplicate similar symbols , are prone to introducing hard to detect errors in printed text . for example , the numbers '' 6 '' and '' 8 '' may get replaced . this has been observed to happen with jbig2 in certain photocopier machines . . block boundary artifacts . at low bit rates , any lossy block-based coding scheme introduces visible artifacts in pixel blocks and at block boundaries . these boundaries can transform block boundaries , prediction block boundaries , or both , and may coincide with macroblock boundaries . the term macroblocking is commonly used regardless of the artifact 's cause . other names include tiling , mosaicing , pixelating , quilting , and checkerboarding . block-artifacts are a result of the very principle of block transform coding . the transform ( for example the discrete cosine transform ) is applied to a block of pixels , and to achieve lossy compression , the transform coefficients of each block are quantized . the lower the bit rate , the more coarsely the coefficients are represented and the more coefficients are quantized to zero . statistically , images have more low-frequency than high-frequency content , so it is the low-frequency content that remains after quantization , which results in blurry , low-resolution blocks . in the most extreme case only the dc-coefficient , that is the coefficient which represents the average color of a block , is retained , and the transform block is only a single color after reconstruction . because this quantization process is applied individually in each block , neighboring blocks quantize coefficients differently . this leads to discontinuities at the block boundaries . these are most visible in flat areas , where there is little detail to mask the effect . image artifact reduction . various approaches have been proposed to reduce image compression effects , but to use standardized compression/decompression techniques and retain the benefits of compression ( for instance , lower transmission and storage costs ) , many of these methods focus on '' post-processing '' —that is , processing images when received or viewed . no post-processing technique has been shown to improve image quality in all cases ; consequently , none has garnered widespread acceptance , though some have been implemented and are in use in proprietary systems . many photo editing programs , for instance , have proprietary jpeg artifact reduction algorithms built-in . consumer equipment often calls this post-processing '' mpeg noise reduction '' . boundary artifact in jpeg can be turned into more pleasing '' grains '' not unlike those in high iso photographic films . instead of just multiplying the quantized coefficients with the quantisation step pertaining to the 2d-frequency , intelligent noise in the form of a random number in the interval can be added to the dequantized coefficient . this method can be added as an integral part to jpeg decompressors working on the trillions of existing and future jpeg images . as such it is not a '' post-processing '' technique . the ringing issue can be reduced at encode time by overshooting the dct values , clamping the rings away . posterization generally only happens at low quality , when the dc values are given too little importance . tuning the quantization table helps . . video . when motion prediction is used , as in mpeg-1 , mpeg-2 or mpeg-4 , compression artifacts tend to remain on several generations of decompressed frames , and move with the optic flow of the image , leading to a peculiar effect , part way between a painting effect and '' grime '' that moves with objects in the scene . data errors in the compressed bit-stream , possibly due to transmission errors , can lead to errors similar to large quantization errors , or can disrupt the parsing of the data stream entirely for a short time , leading to '' break-up '' of the picture . where gross errors have occurred in the bit-stream , decoders continue to apply updates to the damaged picture for a short interval , creating a '' ghost image '' effect , until receiving the next independently compressed frame . in mpeg picture coding , these are known as '' i-frames '' , with the ' i ' standing for '' intra '' . until the next i-frame arrives , the decoder can perform error concealment . motion compensation block boundary artifacts . block boundary discontinuities can occur at edges of motion compensation prediction blocks . in motion compensated video compression , the current picture is predicted by shifting blocks ( macroblocks , partitions , or prediction units ) of pixels from previously decoded frames . if two neighboring blocks use different motion vectors , there will be a discontinuity at the edge between the blocks . mosquito noise . video compression artifacts include cumulative results of compression of the comprising still images , for instance ringing or other edge busyness in successive still images appear in sequence as a shimmering blur of dots around edges , called mosquito noise , as they resemble mosquitoes swarming around the object . '' 3.9 mosquito noise : form of edge busyness distortion sometimes associated with movement , characterized by moving artifacts and/or blotchy noise patterns superimposed over the objects ( resembling a mosquito flying around a person 's head and shoulders ) . '' itu-t rec . p.930 ( 08/96 ) principles of a reference impairment system for video the so-called '' mosquito noise '' is caused by the block-based discrete cosine transform ( dct ) compression algorithm used in most video coding standards , such as the mpeg formats . . video artifact reduction . the artifacts at block boundaries can be reduced by applying a deblocking filter . as in still image coding , it is possible to apply a deblocking filter to the decoder output as post-processing . in motion-predicted video coding with a closed prediction loop , the encoder uses the decoder output as the prediction reference from which future frames are predicted . to that end , the encoder conceptually integrates a decoder . if this '' decoder '' performs a deblocking , the deblocked picture is then used as a reference picture for motion compensation , which improves coding efficiency by preventing a propagation of block artifacts across frames . this is referred to as an in-loop deblocking filter . standards which specify an in-loop deblocking filter include vc-1 , h.263 annex j , h.264/avc , and h.265/hevc . audio . lossy audio compression typically works with a psychoacoustic model—a model of human hearing perception . lossy audio formats typically involve the use of a time/frequency domain transform , such as a modified discrete cosine transform . with the psychoacoustic model , masking effects such as frequency masking and temporal masking are exploited , so that sounds that should be imperceptible are not recorded . for example , in general , human beings are unable to perceive a quiet tone played simultaneously with a similar but louder tone . a lossy compression technique might identify this quiet tone and attempt to remove it . also , quantization noise can be '' hidden '' where they would be masked by more prominent sounds . with low compression , a conservative psy-model is used with small block sizes . when the psychoacoustic model is inaccurate , when the transform block size is restrained , or when aggressive compression is used , this may result in compression artifacts . compression artifacts in compressed audio typically show up as ringing , pre-echo , '' birdie artifacts '' , drop-outs , rattling , warbling , metallic ringing , an underwater feeling , hissing , or '' graininess '' . an example of compression artifacts in audio is applause in a relatively highly compressed audio file ( e.g . 96 kbit/sec mp3 ) . in general , musical tones have repeating waveforms and more predictable variations in volume , whereas applause is essentially random , therefore hard to compress . a highly compressed track of applause may have '' metallic ringing '' and other compression artifacts . artistic use . compression artifacts may intentionally be used as a visual style , sometimes known as glitch art . rosa menkman 's glitch art makes use of compression artifacts , particularly the discrete cosine transform blocks ( dct blocks ) found in most digital media data compression formats such as jpeg digital images and mp3 digital audio . in still images , an example is jpegs by german photographer thomas ruff , which uses intentional jpeg artifacts as the basis of the picture 's style . jpegs , thomas ruff , aperture , may 31 , 2009 , 132 pp . , review : jpegs by thomas ruff , by jörg colberg , april 17 , 2009 in video art , one technique used is datamoshing , where two videos are interleaved so intermediate frames are interpolated from two separate sources . another technique involves simply transcoding from one lossy video format to another , which exploits the difference in how the separate video codecs process motion and color information . the technique was pioneered by artists bertrand planes in collaboration with christian jacquemin in 2006 with divxprime , sven könig , takeshi murata , jacques perconte and paul b . davis in collaboration with paperrad , and more recently used by david oreilly and within music videos for chairlift and by nabil elderkin in the '' welcome to heartbreak '' music video for kanye west . pixel bleed , by john michael boling . rhizome . february 25 , 2009 .