Orange River

course . the orange rises in the drakensberg mountains along the border between south africa and lesotho , about west of the indian ocean and at an altitude of over 3,000 m . the extremity of the orange river inside lesotho is known as the senqu . parts of the senqu river freeze in winter because of the high altitude there . this creates droughts downstream , which mainly affect goat and cattle production . the orange river then runs westward through south africa , forming the south-western boundary of the free state province . in this section , the river flows first into the gariep dam ( the largest in the country ) , and later into the vanderkloof dam . from the border of lesotho to below the vanderkloof dam , the river bed is deeply incised . further downstream , the land is flatter , and the river is used extensively for irrigation . at the western point of the free state , southwest of kimberley , the orange meets with its main tributary , the vaal river , which itself forms much of the northern border of the province . from here , the river flows further westward through the arid wilderness of the southern kalahari region and namaqualand in the northern cape province to meet with namibia at 20°e longitude . from here , it flows westward for 550 & nbsp ; km , forming the international border between the province and namibia 's ǁkaras region . on the border , the river passes the town of vioolsdrif , the main border post between south africa and namibia . left in the last of its course , the orange receives many intermittent streams , and several large wadis lead into it . in this section , the namib desert terminates on the north bank of the river , so under normal circumstances , the volume of water added by these tributaries is negligible . here , the bed of the river is once again deeply incised . the augrabies falls are located on this section of the orange , where the river descends 122 & nbsp ; m ( 400 & nbsp ; ft ) in a course of . the orange empties into the atlantic ocean between the small towns of oranjemund ( meaning '' orange mouth '' ) in namibia and alexander bay in south africa , about equidistant between walvis bay and cape town . some from its mouth , it is completely obstructed by rapids and sand bars and is generally not navigable for long stretches . the river has a total length of . catchment and rainfall . image : augrabie 01.jpg thumb the augrabies falls in full flow in the dry winter , the volume of the water in the river is considerably reduced because of the rapid run-off and evaporation . at the source of the orange , the rainfall is about 2,000 & nbsp ; mm per annum , but precipitation decreases as the river flows westward ; at its mouth , the rainfall is less than 50 & nbsp ; mm per year . the factors that support evaporation , though , tend to increase in a westerly direction . in the wet season ( summer ) , the orange river becomes an impetuous , brown torrent . the huge mass of sediment carried constitutes a long-term threat to all engineering projects on the river . the northern ephemeral rivers of the orange-senqu river basin the total catchment of the orange river ( including the vaal ) extends over 973,000 & nbsp ; km 2 , i.e . equivalent to about 77 % of the land area of south africa ( 1,268,5358 & nbsp ; km 2 ) . around 366,000 & nbsp ; km 2 ( 38 % ) , however , are situated outside the country in lesotho , botswana , and namibia . history . name of the river . some of the earliest precolonial inhabitants called the river ǂnūǃarib , referring to its black colour , or sometimes just kai ! arib ( '' great river '' ) , from which is derived the afrikaans version gariep , the surrounding area was once known as '' transgariep '' ( '' the land aross the gariep '' ) but the name has long been obsolete . see karel schoeman , early white travellers in the transgariep , 1819-1840 , protea boekhuis , 2012 and translation '' groote rivier '' . earle , anton et al . ( 2005 ) , a preliminary basin profile of the orange/senqu river ( pdf ) , african centre for water research , retrieved 30 june 2007 the early dutch name for the river was just that translation , groote rivier , meaning '' great river '' . the river was named the orange river by robert jacob gordon , commander of the dutch east india company garrison at cape town , on a trip to the interior in 1779 . gordon named the river in honor of william v of orange . a popular but incorrect belief is that the river was named after the supposedly orange color of its water , as opposed to the color its tributary , the vaal river , itself derived from the name ǀhaiǃarib '' pale river '' ( vaal being afrikaans for pale or grey ) . since the end of apartheid , the name '' gariep '' has had greater favour in official correspondence in south africa , although the name '' orange '' has greater international recognition . in lesotho , where the river rises , it is known as the senqu river , derived from the original khoemana name . image : orange river panorama.jpg thumb centre 600px panorama taken from a fluorspar-rich hill overlooking a bend in the river , which was in flood due to above-normal rains . renaming the river . the eastern cape geographical names committee has advertised its intention to consider a name change from the colonial name , for that portion of the river that forms the border between the eastern cape and the free state , with suggestions being igqili or senqu . statement by afriforum on proposed name change of orange river the advertisement placed in the aliwal weekblad newspaper states that the '' present name is perceived to have a strong association with the history of colonial subjugation and has therefore no place under the current democratic dispensation . '' . economy . image : orange river at aliwal north.jpg thumb the general hertzog bridge over the orange river at aliwal north on the southwestern border with the free state : note the remains of the frere bridge on the left . as the collection point for the majority of south africa 's water , the orange river plays a major role in supporting agriculture , industry , and mining . to assist in this , two large water schemes have been created , the orange river project and the lesotho highlands water project . historically , the river played an important role in the south african diamond rush , with the first diamonds in the country being discovered in alluvium deposits on the orange . today , several commercial diamond mines operate along the final stretch of the orange river and around its mouth . finally , because of the lack of dangerous animals and high water levels during summer , the river is used for recreational canoeing and rafting . orange river rafting has become very popular with many companies using their camps along the river from which to operate . the most popular trips are four-day and six-day river trips that take place either along the gorge below the augrabies falls or along the richtersveld area . orange river project . the orange river project ( orp ) was one of the largest and most imaginative projects of its kind in south africa . it was constructed by hendrik verwoerd 's government at the height of the apartheid era . the orp was built to use the unused water of the orange river – which , without the vaal river , represents some 14.1 % of the total runoff in south africa – and in the process , to satisfy an increasing demand for water . the main objectives of the project were : to stabilise river flow , the generation and transmission of hydroelectric power , to provide a reliable water supply for users in the orange river basin , and to give a new lease on life to water-deficient areas in the eastern cape , such as the great fish and sundays river valleys . the gariep dam near colesberg , previously named the hendrik verwoerd dam when built , is the main storage structure within the orange river . from here , the water is supplied in two directions , westward along the orange river ( via hydroelectric power generators ) to the vanderkloof dam which was previously named the pk le roux dam , and southward through the orange-fish tunnel to the eastern cape . image : gariepdam.jpg left thumb the gariep dam on the orange river is the largest dam in south africa , and was a key part of the orange river project . hydroelectricity . eskom operates hydroelectric power stations at both the gariep dam and the vanderkloof dam . the hydroelectric power station at the vanderkloof dam was the first power-generation station in south africa situated entirely underground . the towns oviston and oranjekrag were established to facilitate the construction and operation of the new infrastructure . irrigation . image : orange river wine farm.jpg thumb a vineyard on the orange river left irrigation in the vast area downstream of the vanderkloof dam , which has turned thousands of hectares of arid veld into highly productive agricultural land , was made possible by the construction of the gariepand vanderkloof dams . old , established irrigation schemes such as those at buchuberg , upington , kakamas , and vioolsdrif have also benefitted because regulation of the flow is now possible . on the namibian side of the river , aussenkehr produces grapes with the help of water from the orange . in recent years , the northern cape wine along the orange river have grown in importance . irrigation in the eastern cape has also received a tremendous boost , not only from the additional water being made available , but also owing to improvement in water quality . without this improvement , the citrus farmers along the lower sundays river would almost certainly have continued to suffer losses of productivity . lesotho highlands water project . the lesotho highlands water project was conceived to supplement the water supply in the vaal river system . water is delivered to south africa by means of the delivery tunnel which passes under the lesotho south africa border at the caledon river , and then under the little caledon river south of clarens in the free state , and discharges into the ash river about 30 & nbsp ; km further to the north . the scheme became viable when water demands in gauteng reached levels that could no longer be supported economically by alternative schemes such as the tugela river-vaal river pumped storage scheme , which used the sterkfontein dam , located near harrismith in the free state . alluvial diamonds . in 1867 , the first diamond discovered in south africa , the eureka diamond , was found near hopetown on the orange river . two years later , a much larger diamond known as the star of south africa was found in the same area , causing a diamond rush . this was soon eclipsed by the diamond rush to mine diamonds directly from kimberlite at kimberley in 1871 , although alluvial diamonds continued to be found in the orange . today , several commercial diamond mines operate on the last stretch of the river , as well as the beaches around its mouth . diamond mines also operate on the middle stretch of the river . thumb . rafting and canoeing . during the temperate months of march and april , given good rains and the sluices of the dams being open , a canoeist ( or rafter ) can easily travel 30 & nbsp ; km per day . the lower reaches of the river are most popular , because of the spectacular topography . commercial tours are available , and these expeditions depart from the border town of vioolsdrif . wildlife . fish species . the orange river has a relative paucity of species diversity . a 2011 survey of 13,762 fish found only 16 species of fish present . three of these , the common carp , the mozambique tilapia , and the mosquitofish are not indigenous . another exotic species , rainbow trout , is found in the river headwaters in lesotho . image : labeobarbus aeneus , orange river , richtersveld.jpg thumb upright 1.15 the smallmouth yellowfish ( labeobarbus aeneus ) is a popular sport fish endemic to the orange-vaal river system . seven species are endemic to the vaal-orange river system : rock-catfish ( austroglanis sclateri ) maluti redfin or maloti minnow ( pseudobarbus quathlambae ) namaquab barb ( barbus hospes ) river sardine ( mesobola brevianalis ) smallmouth yellowfish ( labeobarbus aeneus ) largemouth yellowfish ( labeobarbus kimberlyensis ) orange river mudfish ( labeo capensis ) . larger animals . the orange river has no large animals . it lies outside the range of the nile crocodile , and although hippopotami were once abundant , they were hunted to extermination in the 1800s .