Barchester Towers

plot summary . barchester towers concerns the leading clergy of the cathedral city of barchester . the much loved bishop having died , all expectations are that his son , archdeacon grantly , will succeed him . owing to the passage of the power of patronage to a new prime minister , a newcomer , the far more evangelical bishop proudie , gains the see . his wife , mrs proudie , exercises an undue influence over the new bishop , making herself as well as the bishop unpopular with most of the clergy of the diocese . her interference to veto the reappointment of the universally popular mr septimus harding ( protagonist of trollope 's earlier novel , the warden ) as warden of hiram 's hospital is not well received , even though she gives the position to a needy clergyman , mr quiverful , with 14 children to support . even less popular than mrs proudie is the bishop 's new chaplain , the hypocritical and sycophantic mr obadiah slope , who decides it would be expedient to marry harding 's wealthy widowed daughter , eleanor bold . slope hopes to win her favour by interfering in the controversy over the wardenship . the bishop or rather mr slope under the orders of mrs proudie , also orders the return of the prebendary dr vesey stanhope from italy . stanhope has been in italy recovering from a sore throat for 12 years and has spent his time catching butterflies . with him to the cathedral close come his wife and their three adult children . the younger of dr stanhope 's two daughters causes consternation in the palace and threatens the plans of mr slope . signora madeline vesey neroni is a disabled serial flirt with a young daughter and a mysterious italian husband , whom she has left . mrs proudie is appalled and considers her an unsafe influence on her daughters , servants and mr slope . mr slope is drawn like a moth to a flame and can not keep away . dr stanhope 's son bertie is skilled at spending money but not at making it ; his sisters think marriage to rich eleanor bold will help . summoned by archdeacon grantly to assist in the war against the proudies and mr slope is the brilliant reverend francis arabin . mr arabin is a considerable scholar , fellow of lazarus college at oxford , who nearly followed his mentor john henry newman into the roman catholic church . a misunderstanding occurs between eleanor and her father , brother-in-law , sister and mr arabin , who think that she intends to marry mr slope , much to their disgust . mr arabin is attracted to eleanor but the efforts of grantly and his wife to stop her marrying slope , interfere with any relationship that might develop . at the ullathorne garden party held by the thornes , matters come to a head . mr slope proposes to mrs bold and is slapped for his presumption ; bertie goes through the motions of a proposal to eleanor and is refused with good grace and the signora has a chat with mr arabin . mr slope 's double-dealings are now revealed and he is dismissed by mrs proudie and the signora . the signora drops a delicate word in several ears and with the removal of their misunderstanding mr arabin and eleanor become engaged . the old dean of the cathedral having died , mr slope campaigns to become dean but mr harding is offered the preferment , with a beautiful house in the close and fifteen acres of garden . mr harding considers himself unsuitable and with the help of the archdeacon , arranges that mr arabin be made dean . with the stanhopes ' return to italy , life in the cathedral close returns to normal and mr harding continues his life of gentleness and music . structure . the literary scholar john sutherland observes that trollope suspended work on the novel ( having reached the end of chapter viii ) between february 1855 and may 1856 , turning instead to his posthumously published the new zealander . during this time he changed his idea of writing a short novel ( similar in length to the warden ) to a longer one , and that from this hiatus there arise a number of inconsistencies in the text . in the first chapter trollope says that bishop grantley is dying in '' the latter days of july '' and that proudie became bishop '' just a month after his grantly 's demise '' . at the beginning of chapter ix , sutherland observes that trollope has proudie three months onto his term as bishop - effectively late november . however at the beginning of chapter xii slope is writing a letter dated 20 august , and in chapters xxxiii and xxxv it is made clear that miss thorne 's fête champêtre takes place on the last day of september . in chapter xlviii arabin proposes to eleanor on '' a beautiful afternoon in the beginning of october '' . sutherland points out that in the early chapters trollope describes the proudies as intending to spend as much time as possible in london , leaving the field clear for slope to act on his own in barchester with the action easily contained in a single-volume novel : in chapter iv , slope thinks to himself that in the proudies anticipated absences in london '' he , therefore , he , mr slope , would in effect be bishop of barchester '' . but when trollope resumed the composition of barchester towers in may 1856 , planning the eventual three-volume novel as a result of the unexpectedly increasing sales of the warden in late 1855 , he expanded the text by keeping the proudies in barchester and introducing a number of new characters who had not appeared in the earlier chapters - the stanhopes , mr arabin , and the thornes inter alia . and although sutherland notes that trollope was '' often indifferent to minor inconsistencies in his narratives '' , he regards these lapses as showing the point at which trollope conceived the idea of the novel series which would eventually became the hugely successful chronicles of barsetshire . . characters . high church faction . mr septimus harding is the meek , elderly precentor of barchester and rector of the church of st . cuthbert 's near the cathedral close . he was formerly warden of hiram 's hospital but resigned in the warden . archdeacon grantly , dr theophilus grantly , is the son of the former bishop of barchester , dr grantly senior , who dies at the start of the novel . married to susan grantly , originally susan harding , he has three sons ( charles james , henry , and samuel ) and two daughters ( florinda and griselda ) and lives at plumstead episcopi . his sister-in-law is mrs eleanor bold , née harding . mrs susan grantly , mr harding 's elder daughter and the archdeacon 's wife . mr francis arabin , vicar of st ewold , fellow of lazarus college and former professor of poetry at oxford university . he is a former follower of john henry newman and adheres to the high church faction of the anglican church . arabin is sought out by dr grantly as an ally against the evangelical faction of bishop proudie , his wife and chaplain obadiah slope . dr gwynne , master of lazarus college , another ally . low church faction . bishop proudie , apparently henpecked , weak-willed and under the influence of his wife mrs proudie and chaplain obadiah slope concerning the matters of the see . mrs proudie , a proud , vulgar , domineering wife , who promotes evangelical causes such as sunday schools and is adamant in eliminating high-church rituals . mr obadiah slope , a wheedling , oleaginous chaplain who has much influence over bishop proudie . midway in the novel slope decides that he will marry mrs eleanor bold ( née harding ) . formerly mrs proudie 's ally , he comes into conflict with her over the wardenship of hiram 's hospital and she regards him as a traitor . the narrator speculates that he is a lineal descendant of doctor slop from the novel tristram shandy . he has been described as a major sycophant : '' epitomizing the lick up/kick down sycophant — fawning with the powerful , tyrannical with subordinates '' . . others . mrs eleanor bold , widow of john bold with an infant son and younger daughter of mr septimus harding . she has three potential suitors , mr obadiah slope , mr bertie stanhope and mr francis arabin . dr vesey stanhope is the rector of crabtree canonicorum and of stogpingum , in the diocese of barchester and a prebendary of barchester cathedral . he and his family lived for twelve years in italy before being recalled by bishop proudie on obadiah slope 's advice . he has two daughters , charlotte and madeline and a son , bertie ( ethelbert ) . signora madeline vesey neroni née madeline stanhope is the beautiful younger daughter of dr vesey stanhope , given to inflation of her own status- '' her father had been christened vesey as another man is christened thomas , and she had no more right to assume it than would have the daughter of a mr josiah jones to call herself mrs josiah smith , on marrying a man of the latter name '' ; her card bears '' a bright gilt coronet '' , despite the fact that her husband , paulo neroni , '' had had not the faintest title to call himself a scion of even italian nobility '' . lamed by her abusive italian husband , she is disabled and needs to be carried around the house on a sofa , although it does not stop her constantly flirting with all men . she has a young daughter , julia , whom she calls “ the last of the neros . ” ethelbert '' bertie '' stanhope is the only son of dr vesey stanhope . an idling , carefree man who never settles down , he is a gifted artist , who borrows and spends a great deal and earns nothing . his sister charlotte advises him to woo the rich and beautiful widow eleanor bold . charlotte stanhope is the polymath elder daughter of dr vesey stanhope ; she challenges eleanor bold to comment on the theological arguments concerning intelligent life on other worlds as presented by william whewell and david brewster . she is the manager of the family and a good friend of eleanor bold until eleanor realises charlotte is the primary instigator of her brother wooing her . mr quiverful , a poor clergyman with 14 children who becomes the new warden of hiram 's hospital . mrs letty quiverful , his wife . wilfred thorne , the squire of st ewold 's . a bachelor of about fifty who comes under the charms of signora neroni . miss monica thorne , his spinster sister of about sixty , who is an extreme traditionalist . she throws a party at their residence for the notables of barsetshire . adaptations . the warden and barchester towers were filmed by the bbc as the barchester chronicles in 1982 . notes . references . external links . information about barchester towers on anthony trollope.com