Fantômas

overview . fantômas is a criminal genius , ruthless and particularly elusive . as described by schütt ( 2003 ) in her analysis of french crime fiction literature , fantômas is the cause of almost any unsolved crime , a merciless criminal who can get away with his evil deeds by impersonating pretty much anyone . he is obsessively chased by inspector juve , who is generally the only one able to see fantômas 's tracks . fantômas was introduced a few years after arsène lupin , another well-known thief . but whereas lupin draws the line at murder , fantômas has no such qualms and is shown as a sociopath who enjoys killing in a sadistic fashion . he is totally ruthless , shows no mercy , and is loyal to none , not even his own children . he is a master of disguise , always appearing under an assumed identity , often that of a person whom he has murdered . fantômas makes use of bizarre and improbable techniques in his crimes , such as plague-infested rats , giant snakes , and rooms that fill with sand . fantômas 's background remains vague . he might be of british and/or french ancestry . he appears to have been born in 1867 . in the books , it is established that c . 1892 , the man who later became fantômas called himself archduke juan north and operated in the german principality of hesse-weimar . there he fathered a child , vladimir , with an unidentified noblewoman . in circumstances unrevealed , he was arrested and sent to prison . c . 1895 , fantômas was in india . there , an unidentified european woman gave birth to a baby girl , hélène , whose father might be fantômas or an indian prince who was fantômas ' acolyte . the girl was raised in south africa . in 1897 , fantômas was in the united states of america and mexico . there , he ruined his then business partner , etienne rambert . in 1899 , he fought in the second boer war in south africa under the name of gurn . he fought in the transvaal as an artillery sergeant under the command of lord roberts . he became aide-de-camp to lord edward beltham of scottwell hill and fell in love with his younger wife , lady maud beltham . upon their return to europe , soon before the first novel begins ( c . 1900 ) , gurn and lady beltham were surprised in their paris love nest , rue levert , by her husband . lord beltham was about to shoot maud when gurn hit him with a hammer then strangled him . fantômas then impersonated etienne rambert and framed his son , charles , for a murder he had committed . as etienne , he persuaded charles to go into hiding , but the young man was soon found out by french police detective juve , who was truly obsessed with the capture of fantômas . juve knew that charles was innocent and gave him a new identity : journalist jerôme fandor who is employed at the newspaper la capitale . juve later arrested gurn and , at his trial , brought forward a convincing argument that gurn and fantômas were one and the same , though the evidence was too circumstantial to make a real case . on the eve of his execution , gurn/fantômas escaped from custody by being replaced by an actor who had modelled the appearance of his latest character after him and was guillotined in his place . lady beltham remained constantly torn between her passion for the villain and her horror at his criminal schemes . she eventually committed suicide in 1910 . fandor fell in love with hélène and , despite fantômas 's repeated attempts to break them up , married her . fantômas 's evil son , vladimir , reappeared in 1911 . vladimir 's girlfriend was murdered by fantômas and vladimir himself was eventually shot by juve . characters . fantômas : a criminal genius , known by many nicknames , such as '' the '' master of everything and everyone , '' the '' torturer '' or the '' elusive '' , and whose face and true identity remain unknown . a ruthless criminal , he wo n't hesitate to torture and kill to achieve his goals . juve : an inspector in the sûreté of paris , he is the sworn archenemy of fantômas , whom he pursues obsessively . the intelligent and stubborn juve is completely devoted to capturing or killing fantômas . jérôme fandor : a former victim of fantômas , he was originally named charles rambert . fantômas killed his parents and then framed him as the killer . juve , the only one to understand his wrong accusation , provides him with the identity of journalist fandor so as to save him from going to jail and to use his help in capturing the murderer . he falls in love with hélène . hélène : she is the beautiful stepdaughter of fantômas , who might even be her biological father . the criminal protects her jealously . she falls in love with j . fandor , and is engaged to marry him , eventually helping her fiancé to fight the criminal . lady maud beltham : the wife of lord beltham , she becomes the lover of fantômas , towards whom she feels both passionate love and repulsion for his many crimes . bouzille : a streetwise tramp who often helps juve and fandor , and even fantômas on occasion , and provides comic relief in the series . the beadle : a thug and companion of fantômas who earns his nickname after his custom of taking the money of passers-by by smashing their heads against the pavement , he is the most notorious of fantômas ' gang of apaches . mother toulouche : an old woman who is a sort of leader among fantômas ' apaches . she is portrayed as an equally ruthless killer and thug . books . by allain and souvestre . 1 . fantômas ( 1911 ; transl . 1915 ; retransl . 1986 ) 2 . juve contre fantômas ( 1911 ; transl . 1916 as the exploits of juve ; retransl . 1987 as the silent executioner ) 3 . le mort qui tue ( 1911 ; transl . 1917 as messengers of evil ; retransl . 2008 as the corpse who kills ) 4 . l'agent secret ( 1911 ; transl . 1917 as a nest of spies ) 5 . un roi prisonnier de fantômas ( 1911 ; transl . 1918 as a royal prisoner ) 6 . le policier apache ( 1911 ; transl . 1924 by alfred allinson as the long arm of fantômas uk title : the limb of satan ) 7 . le pendu de londres ( 1911 ; transl . 1920 as slippery as sin ) 8 . la fille de fantômas ( 1911 ; transl . 2006 by mark p . steele as the daughter of fantomas ) 9 . le fiacre de nuit ( 1911 ) 10 . la main coupée 11 . l'arrestation de fantômas ( 1912 ) 12 . le magistrat cambrioleur ( 1912 ) 13 . la livrée du crime ( 1912 ) 14 . la mort de juve ( 1912 ) 15 . l'evadée de saint-lazare ( 1912 ) 16 . la disparition de fandor ( 1912 ) 17 . le mariage de fantômas ( 1912 ) 18 . l'assassin de lady beltham ( 1912 ) 19 . la guêpe rouge ( 1912 ) 20 . les souliers du mort ( 1912 ) 21 . le train perdu ( 1912 ) 22 . les amours d'un prince ( 1912 ) 23 . le bouquet tragique ( 1912 ) 24 . le jockey masqué ( 1913 ) 25 . le cercueil vide ( 1913 ) 26 . le faiseur de reines ( 1913 ) 27 . le cadavre géant ( 1913 ) 28 . le voleur d'or ( 1913 ) 29 . la série rouge ( 1913 ) 30 . l'hôtel du crime ( 1913 ) 31 . la cravate de chanvre ( 1913 , transl . 2017 by sheryl curtis as the death of fantomas ) 32 . la fin de fantômas ( 1913 , transl . 2017 by sheryl curtis as the death of fantomas ) . by allain . 33 . fantômas est-il ressuscité ? ( 1925 ; transl . 1925 by alfred allinson as the lord of terror ) 34 . fantômas , roi des recéleurs ( 1926 ; transl . 1926 by alfred allinson as juve in the dock ) 35 . fantômas en danger ( 1926 ; transl . 1926 by alfred allinson as fantômas captured ) 36 . fantômas prend sa revanche ( 1926 ; transl . 1927 by [ alfred allinson as the revenge of fantômas ) 37 . fantômas attaque fandor ( 1926 ; transl . 1928 by alfred allinson as bulldog and rats ) 38 . si c'était fantômas ? ( 1933 ) 39 . oui , c'est fantômas ! ( 1934 ) 40 . fantômas joue et gagne ( 1935 ) 41 . fantômas rencontre l'amour ( 1946 ) 42 . fantômas vole des blondes ( 1948 ) 43 . fantômas mène le bal ( 1963 ) . notes . the original covers by gino starace are often considered works of lurid genius in themselves and may be seen at the '' fantômas lives '' site . the first fantômas book cover , showing a contemplative masked man dressed in evening dress and holding a dagger , boldly stepping over paris , is so well known that it has become a visual cliché . the novel the yellow document , or fantômas of berlin by marcel allain ( 1919 ) , despite its title , is not a fantômas novel . the last novel written by allain was published as a newspaper serial , but never appeared in book form . during the 1980s , the first two novels of the series were published in revised english translations : fantômas appeared in 1986 with an introduction by american poet john ashbery ; and juve contre fantômas appeared in 1987 under the title the silent executioner , with an introduction by american artist edward gorey . films . silent serials . 1 . fantômas ( 1913 ) 2 . juve contre fantômas ( 1913 ) 3 . le mort qui tue ( 1913 ) 4 . fantômas contre fantômas ( 1914 ) 5 . le faux magistrat ( 1914 ) the silent film pioneer louis feuillade directed five fantômas serials starring rené navarre as fantômas , bréon as juve , georges melchior as fandor , and renée carl as lady beltham . they are regarded as masterpieces of silent film . his later serial les vampires , which concerns the eponymous crime syndicate ( and not actual vampires ) is also reminiscent of the fantômas series . there was a 1920 20-episode american fantômas serial directed by edward sedgwick starring edward roseman as fantômas , which bore little resemblance to the french series . in it , fantômas 's nemesis is detective fred dixon , played by john willard . it was partially released in france ( 12 episodes only ) under the title les exploits de diabolos ( the exploits of diabolos ) . a novelization of this serial was written by david lee white for black coat press under the title fantômas in america in 2007 . . other films . 6 . fantômas ( 1932 ) , directed by paul fejos , with jean galland as fantômas . 7 . monsieur fantômas ( 1937 ) , directed by ernst moerman is a surrealist silent comedy short subject . 8 . fantômas ( 1946 ) , directed by jean sacha , with marcel herrand as fantomas . 9 . fantomas against fantomas ( 1949 ) , directed by robert vernay , with maurice teynac as fantomas . 10 . fantômas ( 1964 ) , the first of three films directed by andré hunebelle ; with jean marais as both fantômas and fandor , louis de funès as juve , and mylène demongeot as fandor 's bride , the photographer hélène . their tone was generally much more light-hearted than the novels ' and the characters were updated in a james bond-like style including bond-type gadgets like the flying citroën ds of fantômas with retractable wings that converts to an airplane . 11 . fantômas se déchaîne ( 1965 ) 12 . fantômas contre scotland yard ( 1966 ) 13 . macario against zagomar was a 1944 italian film that used '' zagomar '' when they were unable to obtain the rights of fantomas . chiti , roberto & poppi , roberto the films : all italian films from 1930 to 1944 gremese editore , 2005 . television . a series of four 90-minute episodes was produced in 1980 starring helmut berger as fantômas , jacques dufilho as juve , and gayle hunnicutt as lady beltham . episodes 1 and 4 were directed by claude chabrol ; episodes 2 and 3 by luis buñuel 's son , juan luis buñuel . the fantômas ( 1964 film ) of fantômas appears in the czechoslovakian 1979-1981 children fantasy series arabela as well as its sequel series arabela se vrací , performed respectively by actors františek peterka and pavel nový . in this version , he does not perform a villain 's role , but becomes an ally and friend of the protagonists . fantômas also has a cameo appearance in the czech children 's series lucie , postrach ulice as a tv character , where he resembles his original 1911 book serial covers ' depiction . comic books . french . '' fantômas contre les nains '' . a weekly color page written by marcel allain and drawn by santini was published in gavroche 24-30 ( 1941 ) . this series was interrupted because of censorship ; a sequel , fantômas et l'enfer sous-marin was written but not published . a daily '' fantômas '' strip drawn by pierre tabary was syndicated by opera mundi from november 1957 to march 1958 ( 192 strips in total ) , adapting the first two novels . seventeen fantômas fumetti magazines adapting books 1 , 2 , 3 , and 5 were published by del duca in 1962 and 1963 . a new weekly '' fantômas '' color page , written by agnès guilloteau and drawn by jacques taillefer , was again syndicated by opera mundi in 1969 and published in jours de france . finally , a series of fantômas graphic novels written by l . dellisse and drawn by claude laverdure were published by belgian publisher claude lefrancq : l'affaire beltham ( 1990 ) , juve contre fantômas ( 1991 ) , and le mort qui tue ( 1995 ) . mexican . during the 1960s the mexican comics publisher editorial novaro produced a fantomas , la amenaza elegante ( fantomas , the elegant menace ) comic book series that became popular throughout latin america . this was apparently meant to be the same character , although rewritten as a hero . perhaps as a way to make the original french character more attuned to latin american audiences who crave justice avengers in fiction and national politics . it is not known if this was done with or without legal permission . this fantômas was a thief who committed spectacular robberies just for the thrill of it , and wore a white skintight mask all the time or a variety of disguises so his true face was never shown to his nemeses . the character was also pursued by the authorities , in his case mainly by a french police inspector named gerard . his mask in the latin american version – which was clearly inspired by the black mask worn by the italian comic book criminal diabolik — and his use of it , seems to have been influenced by the popular images generated by lucha libre . apparently the series was also influenced by the james bond movies , as fantômas , equipped with advanced technology created by a scientist called professor semo , had all kind of adventures around the world , and even fought other , more cruel criminals . the latin american fantômas , created in mexico , encompassed the aesthetic of both the british james bond and american hugh hefner , who created playboy magazine , with a necessary dose of traditional latin american machismo . a mixture that immediately gained traction with vast latino audiences , mostly prepubescent and adolescents males . latino fantômas also was a millionaire , owning several corporations under assumed identities , had secret headquarters outside paris , and was assisted by several secret agents , including the 12 '' zodiac girls '' , beautiful women who assisted him personally and dressed provocatively , known only by their codenames – the signs of the zodiac . the attractive female element was another concession to latin american audiences familiar with beautiful women as part of male-dominated environments playing key roles without hiding their femininity and preceding charlie 's angels by decades . although cancelled years ago ( novaro folded in 1985 , and a character revival by rival grupo editorial vid in mexico in the 1990s did not last long ) , it is from this mexican comic that the character is best known in both central america and south america . fantômas continues to be one of latin america 's favorite comic characters . for more information on this version of the character check the link to the fantomas lives website below . american . a fantômas short story by paul kupperberg and roy mann appeared in captain action comics no . 1 , published in 2009 by moonstone books . new fiction . '' yes virginia , there is a fantomas '' by william patrick maynard was published in tales of the shadowmen volume 6 , published in 2009 by black coat press . fantomas has appeared in several stories in the series . the first third of the novella , '' reign of terror '' by r . allen leider was published in awesome tales no . 3 , published in 2016 by bold venture press . the second third of the novella was published in awesome tales no . 9 , with the final third coming . cultural influence . the fantômas novels and the subsequent films were highly regarded by the french avant-garde of the day , particularly by the surrealism . blaise cendrars called the series '' the modern aeneid '' ; guillaume apollinaire said that '' from the imaginative standpoint fantômas is one of the richest works that exist . '' the painter rené magritte , the surrealist poet and novelist robert desnos and the cubist painter juan gris produced works alluding to fantômas . the films were also popular in the soviet union . after their success fantômas had a short appearance in two popular soviet comedies : seven old men and one girl ( 1968 ) and grandads-robbers ( 1972 ) . in 2007 , russian author andrey shary published the book sign f : fantomas in books and on the screen , dealing in particular with this phenomenon . pastiches , homages , and related characters . fantômas may well have been influenced by its less well remembered predecessor , zigomar , the creation of , which first appeared as a serial in le matin in 1909 , then as a pulp magazine ( 28 issues ) in 1913 , and again in zigomar contre zigomar for eight more issues in 1924 . in france alone , fantômas spawned numerous imitators . among those are arnould galopin 's tenebras , gaston rené 's masque rouge , arthur bernède 's belphégor , r . collard 's demonax and marcel allain 's own tigris , fatala , miss teria and ferocias . the 1915 adventure film filibus was probably inspired largely by the popularity of fantômas , although the film 's title character , a female air pirate , strongly resembles arsène lupin . after the success of the first fantômas film serial directed by louis feuillade , gaumont produced another serial directed by feuillade in the same style , les vampires , about a gang of criminals . as feuillade had been criticized for glorifying outlaws , his next serial for gaumont , judex , starred this time a positive hero , a mysterious avenger conceived as an honest version of fantômas . judex was himself featured in various adaptations , sequels and remakes . the original judex serial was released in the united states and appears to have been an inspiration for the american pulp character the shadow , who was himself an inspiration for batman . xavier fournier , super-héros : une histoire française , huginn muninn , 2014 , p . 69-73 fantômas has appeared in an unauthorized fashion in two french stage plays : nick carter vs . fantômas ( 1910 ) by alexandre bisson and guillaume livet ( translated , and sherlock holmes vs . fantômas ( la mort d ' herlock sholmes , ou bandits en habits noirs , 1914 ) by pierre de wattyne and yorril walter ( translated , . a number of italian dark villains of the 1960s were clearly influenced by fantômas . among the most famous are diabolik , kriminal , killing , and satanik . the british film critic and writer kim newman has argued that fantômas inspired the pink panther film series starring peter sellers . in the initial 1963 pink panther film , fantômas was transformed into sir charles lytton ( the phantom ) , and inspector juve became inspector clouseau . fantômas also has many plot points in common with the 1969 hong kong movie temptress of a thousand faces . paperinik , ( duck avenger ) alter-ego of donald duck created by guido martina and giovan battista carpi in 1969 , is partly based on fantômas . his predecessor , fantomius , ( fantomallard ) was obviously also named after fantômas . in france , the character is known as fantomiald ; in germany as phantomias ; in greek as phantom duck and in spain as patomas . fantômas inspired julio cortázar 's 1975 novella fantomas contra los vampiros multinacionales . fantômas ' grandson , fantoma mark iii , serves as an antagonist for arsène lupin iii ( grandson of arsène lupin ) in two episodes of the shin lupin iii of the lupin iii franchise , wherein his appearance and portrayal are comparable to jean marais version of the character . a character in the doctor who novel the man in the velvet mask ( 1996 ) is named fantômas . fantomas was the inspiration for the character mr . ixnay , who appears in the chuckling whatsit , a 1997 graphic novel by writer/artist richard sala , creator of invisible hands , an animated homage to old-fashioned mystery thrillers which aired on mtv . in 1999 , former faith no more singer mike patton named his metal group fantômas after the fictional character . there is a marvel comics character named fantomex , first appearing in august 2002 . he was created by grant morrison and igor kordey for the title new x-men . in one of the back-story sections of the graphic novel the league of extraordinary gentlemen , volume ii , fantômas is described as being a member of '' les hommes mystérieux '' , the french counterpart of the league , alongside arsène lupin , the sky-pirate robur , and the nyctalope . in the follow-up , the league of extraordinary gentlemen : black dossier , the league 's encounter with les hommes is halted once fantômas detonates a bomb which destroys the opera garnier , after saying in unaccented english , '' i win '' . the character of spectrobert in gahan wilson 's book everybody 's favorite duck is a direct parody of fantômas . fantômas is a partial inspiration for the character of phantom limb on the adult swim cartoon the venture bros . his last name , in fact , is fantômas . a picture similar in appearance to the masked villain can be seen hanging on the wall of his office at state university in '' the invisible hand of fate '' . it is revealed that phantom limb is actually the grandson of the famous criminal . fantômas himself briefly appears in the series during a flashback in the season 3 episode '' orb '' as one of the original members of the guild of calamitous intent . fantômas has a german cousin in the person of the ( supposedly british ) lord lister . in the story '' fantômville '' by nick campbell , in the book wildthyme in purple , fantomas meets the time traveller iris wildthyme . in the film adaptation of alan moore and kevin o'neill 's the league of extraordinary gentlemen , the fantom ( a character resembling the title character from the phantom of the opera ) owes more than a little to fantômas , although he is ultimately revealed to be m , who in turn is revealed to be professor moriarty . in the egyptian movie , “ romantic chase ” , produced in 1968 , fantômas is played by egyptian actor hasan mustafa . the role of fantômas is a butler that wants to steal all the money of his employer . the film itself is an adaptation of what 's new pussycat ? which was produced in 1965 . in the czech fantasy tv series arabela and the sequel arabela returns ( arabela se vrací ) , the french movie version of fantomas is one of the residents in the world of fairy tales . references . further reading . . external links . fantômas works at project gutenberg french wold newton universe – fantômas picture of the fantômas citroën ds with retractable wings that converts to an airplane via the internet archive centenary of the birth of the character of fantômas : february 10 , 2011