ITunes

history . soundjam mp , released by casady & greene in 1998 , was renamed '' itunes '' when apple purchased it in 2000 . the primary developers of the software moved to apple as part of the acquisition , and simplified soundjam 's user interface , added the ability to burn cds , and removed its recording feature and skin support . the first version of itunes , promotionally dubbed '' world ’ s best and easiest to use jukebox software , '' was announced on january 9 , 2001 . subsequent releases of itunes often coincided with new hardware devices , and gradually included support for new features , including '' smart playlists , '' the itunes store , and new audio formats . . platform availability . apple released itunes for windows in 2003 . on april 26 , 2018 , itunes was released on microsoft store for windows 10 , primarily to allow it to be installed on windows 10 devices configured to only allow installation of software from microsoft store . unlike windows versions for other platforms , it is more self-contained due to technical requirements for distribution on the store ( not installing background helper services such as bonjour ) , and is updated automatically though the store rather than using apple software update . . music library . itunes features a music library . each track has attributes , called metadata , that can be edited by the user , including changing the name of the artist , album , and genre , year of release , artwork , among other additional settings . the software supports importing digital audio tracks that can then be transferred to ios devices , as well as supporting ripping content from cds . itunes supports wav , aiff , apple lossless , aac , and mp3 audio formats . it uses the gracenote music database to provide track name listings for audio cds . when users rip content from a cd , itunes attempts to match songs to the gracenote service . for self-published cds , or those from obscure record labels , itunes will normally only list tracks as numbered entries ( '' track 1 '' and '' track 2 '' ) on an unnamed album by an unknown artist , requiring manual input of data . file metadata is displayed in users ' libraries in columns , including album , artist , genre , composer , and more . users can enable or disable different columns , as well as change view settings . . special playlists . introduced in 2004 , '' party shuffle '' selected tracks to play randomly from the library , though users could press a button to skip the current song and go to the next in the list . the feature was later renamed '' itunes dj '' , before being discontinued altogether , replaced by a simpler '' up next '' feature that notably lost some of '' itunes dj '' 's functionality . introduced in itunes 8 in 2008 , '' '' can automatically generate a playlist of songs from the user 's library that '' go great together '' . '' genius '' transmits information about the user 's library to apple anonymously , and evolves over time to enhance its recommendation system . it can also suggest purchases to fill out '' holes '' in the library . the feature was updated with itunes 9 in 2009 to offer '' genius mixes , '' which generated playlists based on specific music genres . '' smart playlists '' are a set of playlists that can be set to automatically filter the library based on a customized list of selection criteria , much like a database query . multiple criteria can be entered to manage the smart playlist . selection criteria examples include a genre like christmas music , songs that have n't been played recently , or songs the user has listened to the most in a time period . . library sharing . through a '' home sharing '' feature , users can share their itunes library wirelessly . computer firewalls must allow network traffic , and users must specifically enable sharing in the itunes preferences menu . ios applications also exist that can transfer content without internet . additionally , users can set up a network-attached storage system , and connect to that storage system through an app . . artwork printing . to compensate for the '' boring '' design of standard cds , itunes can print custom-made jewel case inserts . after burning a cd from a playlist , one can select that playlist and bring up a dialog box with several print options , including different '' themes '' of album artworks . . sound processing . itunes includes sound processing features , such as equalization , '' sound enhancement '' and crossfade . there is also a feature called , which automatically adjusts the playback volume of all songs in the library to the same level . . video . in may 2005 , video support was introduced to itunes with the release of itunes 4.8 , though it was limited to bonus features part of album purchases . the following october , apple introduced itunes 6 , enabling support for purchasing and viewing video content purchased from the itunes store . at launch , the store offered popular shows from the abc network , including desperate housewives and lost , along with disney channel series that 's so raven and the suite life of zack and cody . ceo steve jobs told the press that '' we ’ re doing for video what we ’ ve done for music — we ’ re making it easy and affordable to purchase and download , play on your computer , and take with you on your ipod . '' in 2008 , apple and select film studios introduced '' itunes digital copy , '' a feature on select dvds and blu-ray discs allowing a digital copy in itunes and associated media players . . podcasts . in june 2005 , apple updated itunes with support for podcasts . users can subscribe to podcasts , change update frequency , define how many episodes to download and how many to delete . similar to songs , '' smart playlists '' can be used to control podcasts in a playlist , setting criteria such as date and number of times listened to . apple is credited for being the major catalyst behind the early growth of podcasting . . books . in january 2010 , apple announced the ipad tablet , and along with it , a new app for it called ibooks ( now known as apple books ) . the app allowed users to purchase e-books from the itunes store , manage them through itunes , and transfer the content to their ipad . . apps . on july 10 , 2008 , apple introduced native mobile apps for its ios operating system . on ios , a dedicated app store application served as the storefront for browsing , purchasing and managing applications , whereas itunes on computers had a dedicated section for apps rather than a separate app . in september 2017 , apple updated itunes to version 12.7 , removing the app store section in the process . however , the following month , itunes 12.6.3 was also released , retaining the app store , with 9to5mac noting that the secondary release was positioned by apple as '' necessary for some businesses performing internal app deployments '' . . itunes store . introduced on april 28 , 2003 , the itunes store allows users to buy and download songs , with 200,000 tracks available at launch . in its first week , customers bought more than one million songs . music purchased was protected by fairplay , an encryption layer referred to as digital rights management ( drm ) . the use of drm , which limited devices capable of playing purchased files , sparked efforts to remove the protection mechanism . eventually , after an open letter to the music industry by ceo steve jobs in february 2007 , apple introduced a selection of drm-free music in the itunes store in april 2007 , followed by its entire music catalog without drm in january 2009 . in october 2005 , apple announced that movies and television shows would become available through its itunes store , employing the drm protection . . itunes u . in may 2007 , apple announced the launch of '' itunes u '' via the itunes store , which delivers university lectures from top u.s . colleges . with itunes version 12.7 in august 2017 , itunes u collections became a part of the podcasts app . on 10 june 2020 , apple formally announced that itunes u will be discontinued from the end of 2021 . . itunes in the cloud and itunes match . in june 2011 , apple announced '' itunes in the cloud , '' in which music purchases were stored on apple 's servers and made available for automatic downloading on new devices . for music the user owns , such as content ripped from cds , the company introduced '' itunes match , '' a feature that can upload content to apple 's servers , match it to its catalog , change the quality to 256kbit/s aac format , and make it available to other devices . . internet radio and music streaming . when itunes was first released , it came with support for the kerbango internet radio tuner service . in june 2013 , the company announced itunes radio , a free music streaming service . in june 2015 , apple announced apple music , its paid music streaming service , and subsequently rebranded itunes radio into beats 1 , a radio station accompanying apple music . . iphone connectivity . itunes was used to activate early iphone models . beginning with the iphone 3g in june 2008 , activation did not require itunes , making use of activation at point of sale . later iphone models were able to be activated and set-up on their own , without requiring the use of itunes . ping . with the release of itunes 10 in september 2010 , apple announced itunes ping , which ceo steve jobs described as '' social music discovery . '' it had features reminiscent of facebook , including profiles and the ability to follow other users . ping was discontinued in september 2012 . . criticism . security . the telegraph reported in november 2011 that apple had been aware of a security vulnerability since 2008 that would let unauthorized third parties install '' updates '' to users ' itunes software . apple fixed the issue prior to the telegraphs report , and told the media that '' the security and privacy of our users is extremely important '' , though this was questioned by security researcher brian krebs , who told the publication that '' a prominent security researcher warned apple about this dangerous vulnerability in mid-2008 , yet the company waited more than 1,200 days to fix the flaw . '' . software bloat . itunes has been repeatedly accused of being bloated as part of apple 's efforts to turn it from a music player to an all-encompassing multimedia platform . former pc world editor ed bott accused the company of hypocrisy in its advertising attacks on windows for similar practices . the role of itunes is replaced with independent apps for apple music , apple tv , as well as for ios device management . see also . itunes festival itunes store itunes version history airplay list of audio conversion software comparison of ipod managers digital distribution fairplay feed aggregators : feed aggregators , comparison feed aggregators , list media players , comparison music visualization