Chuck Wepner

early life . charles wepner was born on february 26 , 1939 in new york city . '' chuck wepner '' , boxrec.com ; retrieved september 27 , 2016 . he is of german , ukrainian , and poles descent . gambardello , joseph a . ( november 20 , 2003 ) . '' 'rocky ' meets reality the fighter who inspired the movies has gone to court to win a share of the profits . he said he has gotten nothing '' , philly.com ; accessed november 21 , 2017 . wepner learned to fight on the streets of bayonne , new jersey , saying , '' this was a tough town with a lot of people from the docks and the naval base and you had to fight to survive '' . wepner was about a year old when he moved in with his grandmother on 28th street near hudson boulevard ( now kennedy boulevard ) . he was raised by his mother and grandparents , living in a room that was a converted coal shed until he was 13 . he was an avid player of sports in his youth , playing basketball for the police athletic league . at bayonne high school , his height helped him get a spot on the basketball team . sullivan , joseph f . '' bayonne cheers a hometown product ; 'good luck , chuck ' '' , the new york times , march 22 , 1975 . accessed april 18 , 2020 . '' mr . wepner said that he was a gangling six‐footer when he was 13 years old and that the added height helped him win a berth on the bayonne high school basketball team . '' wepner opted to join the military , joining the u.s . marines , where he became a member of the boxing team , developing a reputation for being able to withstand other boxers ' punches , and becoming a military champion at one of the airbases . a 1975 sports illustrated article said that wepner had saved the lives of three marine pilots , pulling them from blazing airplanes . sullivan , al ( january 27 , 2007 ) . '' 'the bayonne bleeder ' chuck wepner , the real life rocky '' . career . wepner turned professional in 1964 and became a popular fighter on the northeast 's club boxing circuit , fighting throughout the county , including arenas close to his boyhood home such as north bergen and secaucus . nicknamed '' the bayonne bleeder '' , he began posting many wins and some losses . he had formerly boxed while a member of the united states marine corps , and had worked as a bouncer before turning pro . he was the new jersey state heavyweight boxing champion , but after losing fights to george foreman ( by cut eye stoppage in three ) and sonny liston ( by knockout in ten ) many boxing fans thought that his days as a contender were numbered . after the fight with liston , wepner needed 72 stitches in his face . wepner said after his career was over that liston was the hardest puncher he ever fought . however , after losing to joe bugner by a cut eye stoppage in three in england , wepner won nine of his next eleven fights , including victories over charlie polite and former wba heavyweight champion ernie terrell . muhammad ali fight . in 1975 , it was announced wepner would challenge muhammad ali for the world heavyweight title . according to the cleveland plain dealer ( february 9 , 1975 , page 4-c ) , carl lombardo put up 1.3 million for the wepner-ali heavyweight title bout . according to a time article , '' in stitches '' , ali was guaranteed 1.5 million and wepner signed for 100,000 . this was considerably more than wepner had ever earned ; thus , he did not need any coaxing . wepner spent eight weeks near the catskill mountains under the guidance of al braverman ( trainer and noted cutman ) and bill prezant ( manager ) . prezant prophesied that the fight would be a big surprise . this bout was the first time wepner had been able to train full-time . the fight was held on march 24 at the richfield coliseum in richfield , ohio , south of cleveland . before the fight , a reporter asked wepner if he thought he could survive in the ring with the champion , to which wepner allegedly answered , '' i 've been a survivor my whole life . if i survived the marines , i can survive ali . '' in the ninth round wepner scored a knockdown , which ali said occurred because wepner was stepping on his foot . wepner went to his corner and said to his manager al braverman , '' al , start the car . we 're going to the bank . we are millionaires . '' to this , wepner 's manager replied : '' you better turn around . he 's getting up and he looks pissed off . '' in the remaining rounds , ali decisively outboxed wepner and opened up cuts above both wepner 's eyes and broke his nose . wepner was far behind on the scorecards when ali knocked him down with 19 seconds left in the 15th round . the referee counted to seven before calling a technical knockout . after wepner 's fight , sylvester stallone wrote the script for rocky , which was released in theatres in 1976 . like wepner , ( rocky ) balboa lasts 15 rounds , but unlike wepner , he actually '' goes the distance '' . for years after rocky was released , stallone denied that wepner provided inspiration for the movie . . late career . in 1976 , wepner fought professional wrestler andré the giant and lost by countout after andre threw him out of the ring . wepner 's last fight was on may 2 , 1978 , for the new jersey state heavyweight championship against a new rising prospect , scott frank , noted for a useful heavy left hook . wepner lost the fight in a 12-round decision , but again proved durable , ring magazine noted . he announced his retirement after the fight . . later life . after his retirement from boxing , wepner began abusing drugs . in 1979 , sylvester stallone wanted to cast wepner as a sparring partner in rocky ii , but he failed the audition due to his drug problems . in november 1985 , wepner was arrested on drug charges when he was found with four ounces of cocaine in an undercover police investigation . under a plea-bargain agreement , he was sentenced in 1988 to ten years in prison . he served 17 months in northern state prison , newark , new jersey , then spent another 20 months in new jersey 's intensive supervision program . in 2003 , wepner sued sylvester stallone , seeking payment for his use as the inspiration for rocky and the film series . the lawsuit was settled with stallone in 2006 for an undisclosed amount . as of 2010 , wepner had been working for 10 years with his third wife linda in the liquor sales field for majestic wines and spirits in carlstadt , new jersey , and was an expert in consumer liquors , wines and spirits . a film about wepner 's career was released in 2012 , and espn aired a documentary titled the real rocky on october 25 , 2011 . the espn film features a clip of wepner 's ninth round knockdown of muhammad ali in their 1975 world heavyweight title bout . wepner sues over 'copycat ' film . wepner , the boxer who inspired the character of rocky balboa , is preparing for a legal fight over his life story . . ring appearances . wepner occasionally makes ringside appearances at boxing cards in his home state of new jersey , signing autographs and posing for photos with boxing fans . on october 12 , 2012 , wepner appeared ringside with former world light heavyweight champion mike rossman in atlantic city , new jersey , at a tropicana casino & resort atlantic city fight card featuring a wba naba lightweight title bout in the main event . wepner held the wba naba heavyweight title during his boxing career . portrayals and inspirations . sylvester stallone 's character rocky balboa and portions of the rocky film series were inspired by the life of chuck wepner . for instance , it was speculated that a scene from the 1982 film rocky iii had been influenced by wepner 's fight against andre the giant , as the movie features a match versus wrestler hulk hogan as '' thunderlips '' , who throws rocky out of the ring . liev schreiber played the role of wepner in a sports film , chuck . zach mcgowan played the role of wepner in another sports film , the brawler . . professional boxing record . - style '' text-align : center ; '' colspan '' 8 '' 35 wins ( 17 knockouts ) , 14 losses , 2 draws - style '' text-align : center ; background : e3e3e3 ; '' style '' border-style : none none solid solid ; '' result style '' border-style : none none solid solid ; '' record style '' border-style : none none solid solid ; '' opponent style '' border-style : none none solid solid ; '' type style '' border-style : none none solid solid ; '' round style '' border-style : none none solid solid ; '' date style '' border-style : none none solid solid ; '' location style '' border-style : none none solid solid ; '' notes - align center loss align left scott frank pts 12 align left align left - align center win align left tom healy ko 5 align left align left - align center win align left johnny blaine ko 3 align left align left - align center loss align left horst geisler tko 10 align left - align center loss align left mike schutte pts 10 align left align left - align center loss align left duane bobick tko 6 align left - align center win align left tommy sheehan tko 2 align left align left - align center win align left johnny dolan ko 3 align left align left - align center win align left johnny evans tko 4 align left align left - align center loss align left muhammad ali tko 15 align left align left - align center win 30-9-2 align left terry hinke tko 11 align left - align center win 29-9-2 align left charley polite ko 4 align left align left - align center win 28-9-2 align left randy neumann tko 6 align left align left - align center win 27-9-2 align left billy williams pts 10 align left align left - align center win 26-9-2 align left ernie terrell pts 12 align left align left - align center win 25-9-2 align left billy marquart pts 12 align left align left - align center win 24-9-2 align left john clohessy pts 10 align left align left - align center win 23-9-2 align left randy neumann pts 12 align left align left - align center loss 22-9-2 align left randy neumann pts 12 align left align left - align center win 22-8-2 align left mike boswell tko 10 align left align left - align center win 21-8-2 align left jesse crown ko 4 align left align left - align center loss 20-8-2 align left jerry judge tko 5 align left align left - align center loss 20-7-2 align left joe bugner tko 3 align left - align center loss 20-6-2 align left sonny liston rtd 9 align left - align center win 20-5-2 align left manuel ramos ud 10 align left align left - align center win 19-5-2 align left pedro agosto pts 10 align left align left - align center loss 18-5-2 align left george foreman tko 3 align left - align center loss 18-4-2 align left josé roman pts 10 align left align left - align center win 18-3-2 align left mike bruce pts 8 align left align left - align center win 17-3-2 align left roberto davila md 10 align left - align center win 16-3-2 align left jerry tomasetti tko 1 align left align left - align center win 15-3-2 align left mert brownfield pts 10 align left align left - align center win 14-3-2 align left forest ward tko 7 align left - align center win 13-3-2 align left mike bruce pts 8 align left align left - align center win 12-3-2 align left eddie vick sd 10 align left align left - align center win 11-3-2 align left clay thomas tko 3 align left align left - align center win 10-3-2 align left charlie harris tko 6 align left align left - align center loss 9-3-2 align left jerry tomasetti tko 5 align left align left - align center win 9-2-2 align left don mcateer tko 5 align left align left - align center win 8-2-2 align left dave centi pts 6 align left align left - align center win 7-2-2 align left johnny deutsch ko 6 align left align left - align center win 6-2-2 align left cleo daniels pts 6 align left align left - align center win 5-2-2 align left jerry tomasetti pts 6 align left align left - align center loss 4-2-2 align left buster mathis tko 3 align left - align center loss 4-1-2 align left bob stallings pts 6 align left align left - align center style '' background : abcdef ; '' draw 4-0-2 align left everett copeland pts 6 align left align left - align center win 4-0-1 align left ray patterson sd 6 align left - align center win 3–0–1 align left jerry tomasetti pts 4 align left align left - align center style '' background : abcdef ; '' draw 2–0–1 align left everett copeland pts 6 align left align left - align center win 2–0 align left rudy pavesi pts 4 align left align left - align center win 1–0 align left george cooper ko 3 align left align left - align center . see also . references . external links . interview with chuck wepner