Lothal

archaeology . when partition of india in 1947 , most indus sites , including mohenjo-daro and harappa , became part of pakistan . the archaeological survey of india undertook a new program of exploration , and excavation . many sites were discovered across northwestern india . between 1954 and 1958 , more than 50 sites were excavated in the kutch ( notably dholavira ) , and saurashtra peninsulas , extending the limits of harappan civilisation by to the river kim , where the bhagatrav site accesses the valley of the rivers narmada and tapti . lothal stands from mohenjo-daro , which is in sindh . the meaning of lothal ( a combination of loth and ( s ) thal ) in gujarati to be '' the mound of the dead '' is not unusual , as the name of the city of mohenjo-daro in sindhi means the same . people in villages neighbouring to lothal had known of the presence of an ancient town and human remains . as recently as 1850 , boats could sail up to the mound . in 1942 , timber was shipped from broach to saragwala via the mound . a silted creek connecting modern bholad with lothal and saragwala represents the ancient flow channel of a river or creek . speculation suggests that owing to the comparatively small dimensions of the main city , lothal was not a large settlement at all , and its '' dock '' was perhaps an irrigation tank . however , the asi and other contemporary archaeologists assert that the city was a part of a major river system on the trade route of the ancient peoples from sindh to saurashtra in gujarat . lothal provides with the largest collection of antiquities in the archaeology of modern india . it is essentially a single culture site—the harappan culture in all its variances is evidenced . an indigenous micaceous red ware culture also existed , which is believed to be autochthonous and pre-harappan . two sub-periods of harappan culture are distinguished : the same period ( between 2400 and 1900 & nbsp ; bce ) is identical to the exuberant culture of harappa and mohenjo-daro . after the core of the indus civilisation had decayed in mohenjo-daro and harappa , lothal seems not only to have survived but to have thrived for many years . its constant threats - tropical storms and floods - caused immense destruction , which destabilised the culture and ultimately caused its end . topography also shows signs that at about the time of its demise , the region suffered from aridity or weakened monsoon rainfall . thus the cause for the abandonment of the city may have been changes in the climate as well as natural disasters , as suggested by environmental magnetic records . lothal is based upon a mound that was a salt marsh inundated by tide . remote sensing and topographical studies published by indian scientists in the journal of the indian geophysicists union in 2004 revealed an ancient , meandering river adjacent to lothal , in length according to satellite imagery— an ancient extension of the northern river channel bed of a tributary of the bhogavo river . small channel widths when compared to the lower reaches suggest the presence of a strong tidal influence upon the city—tidal waters ingressed up to and beyond the city . upstream elements of this river provided a suitable source of freshwater for the inhabitants . . town planning . a flood destroyed village foundations and settlements ( c . 2350 & nbsp ; bce ) . harappans based around lothal and from sindh took this opportunity to expand their settlement and create a planned township on the lines of greater cities in the indus valley . lothal planners engaged themselves to protect the area from consistent floods . the town was divided into blocks of 1–2-metre-high ( 3–6 & nbsp ; ft ) platforms of sun-dried bricks , each serving 20–30 houses of thick mud and brick walls . the city was divided into a citadel , or acropolis and a lower town . the rulers of the town lived in the acropolis , which featured paved baths , underground and surface drains ( built of kiln-fired bricks ) and potable water well . the lower town was subdivided into two sectors . a north-south arterial street was the main commercial area . it was flanked by shops of rich and ordinary merchants and craftsmen . the residential area was located to either side of the marketplace . the lower town was also periodically enlarged during lothal 's years of prosperity . lothal engineers accorded high priority to the creation of a dockyard and a warehouse to serve the purposes of naval trade . while the consensus view amongst archaeologists identifies this structure as a '' dockyard , '' it has also been suggested that owing to small dimensions , this basin may have been an irrigation tank and canal . the dock was built on the eastern flank of the town , and is regarded by archaeologists as an engineering feat of the highest order . it was located away from the main current of the river to avoid silting , but provided access to ships in high tide as well . the warehouse was built close to the acropolis on a 3.5-metre-high ( 10.5 & nbsp ; ft ) podium of mud bricks . the rulers could thus supervise the activity on the dock and warehouse simultaneously . facilitating the movement of cargo was a mudbrick wharf , long , built on the western arm of the dock , with a ramp leading to the warehouse . there was an important public building opposite to the warehouse whose superstructure has completely disappeared . throughout their time , the city had to brace itself through multiple floods and storms . dock and city peripheral walls were maintained efficiently . the town 's zealous rebuilding ensured the growth and prosperity of the trade . however , with rising prosperity , lothal 's people failed to upkeep their walls and dock facilities , possibly as a result of over-confidence in their systems . a flood of moderate intensity in 2050 & nbsp ; bce exposed some serious weaknesses in the structure , but the problems were not addressed properly . all the construction were made of fire dried bricks , lime and sand mortar and not by sun-dried bricks as bricks are still intact after 4000 years and still bonded together with each other with the mortar bond . . economy and urban culture . the uniform organisation of the town and its institutions give evidence that the harappans were very disciplined people . commerce and administrative duties were performed according to standards laid out . municipal administration was strict – the width of most streets remained the same over a long time , and no encroached structures were built . householders possessed a sump , or collection chamber to deposit solid waste in order to prevent the clogging of city drains . drains , manholes and cesspools kept the city clean and deposited the waste in the river , which was washed out during high tide . a new provincial style of harappan art and painting was pioneered . the new approaches included realistic portrayals of animals in their natural surroundings . metalware , gold and jewellery and tastefully decorated ornaments attest to the culture and prosperity of the people of lothal . most of their equipment : metal tools , weights , measures , seals , earthenware and ornaments were of the uniform standard and quality found across the indus civilization . lothal was a major trade centre , importing en masse raw materials like copper , chert and semi-precious stones from mohenjo-daro and harappa , and mass distributing to inner villages and towns . it also produced large quantities of bronze celts , fish-hooks , chisels , spears and ornaments . lothal exported its beads , gemstones , ivory and shells . the stone blade industry catered to domestic needs—fine chert was imported from the larkana valley or from bijapur in modern karnataka . bhagatrav supplied semi-precious stones while chank shell came from dholavira and bet dwarka . an intensive trade network gave the inhabitants great prosperity . the network stretched across the frontiers to egypt , bahrain and sumer . one of the evidence of trade in lothal is the discovery of typical persian gulf seals , a circular button seal bridget , f . raymond allchin , the rise of civilization in india and pakistan , p . & nbsp ; 187 . architectural development . while the wider debate over the end of indus civilisation continues , archaeological evidence gathered by the asi appears to point to natural catastrophes , specifically floods and storms as the source of lothal 's downfall . a powerful flood submerged the town and destroyed most of the houses , with the walls and platforms heavily damaged . the acropolis was levelled ( 2000–1900 & nbsp ; bce ) , and inhabited by common tradesmen and newly built makeshift houses . the worst consequence was the shift in the course of the river , cutting off access to the ships and dock . the people built a new but shallow inlet to connect the flow channel to the dock for sluicing small ships into the basin . large ships were moored away . houses were rebuilt , yet without removal of flood debris , which made them poor-quality and susceptible to further damage . public drains were replaced by soakage jars . the citizens did not undertake encroachments , and rebuilt public baths . however , with a poorly organised government , and no outside agency or central government , the public works could not be properly repaired or maintained . the heavily damaged warehouse was never repaired properly , and stocks were stored in wooden canopies , exposed to floods and fire . the economy of the city was transformed . trade volumes reduced greatly , though not catastrophically , and resources were available in lesser quantities . independent businesses caved , allowing a merchant-centric system of factories to develop where hundreds of craftsmen worked for the same supplier and financier . the bead factory had ten living rooms and a large workplace courtyard . the coppersmith 's workshop had five furnaces and paved sinks to enable multiple artisans to work . the declining prosperity of the town , paucity of resources and poor administration increased the woes of a people pressured by consistent floods and storms . increased salinity of soil made the land inhospitable to life , including crops . this is evidenced in adjacent cities of rangpur , rojdi , rupar and harappa in punjab , mohenjo-daro and chanhudaro in sindh . a massive flood ( c . 1900 & nbsp ; bce ) completely destroyed the flagging township in a single stroke . archaeological analysis shows that the basin and dock were sealed with silt and debris , and the buildings razed to the ground . the flood affected the entire region of saurashtra , sindh and south gujarat , and affected the upper reaches of the indus and sutlej , where scores of villages and townships were washed away . the population fled to inner regions . . later harappan culture . archaeological evidence shows that the site continued to be inhabited , albeit by a much smaller population devoid of urban influences . the few people who returned to lothal could not reconstruct and repair their city , but surprisingly continued to stay and preserved religious traditions , living in poorly built houses and reed huts . that they were the harappan peoples is evidenced by the analyses of their remains in the cemetery . while the trade and resources of the city were almost entirely gone , the people retained several harappan ways in writing , pottery , and utensils . about this time asi archaeologists record a mass movement of refugees from punjab and sindh into saurashtra and to the valley of sarasvati ( 1900–1700 & nbsp ; bce ) . hundreds of ill-equipped settlements have been attributed to this people as late harappans a completely de-urbanised culture characterised by rising illiteracy , less complex economy , unsophisticated administration and poverty . though indus seals went out of use , the system of weights with an 8.573 & nbsp ; gram ( 0.3024 & nbsp ; avoirdupois . civilization . the people of lothal made significant and often unique contributions to human civilisation in the indus era , in the fields of city planning , art , architecture , science , engineering , pottery , and religion . their work in metallurgy , seals , beads and jewellery was the basis of their prosperity . science and engineering . a thick ring-like shell object found with four slits each in two margins served as a compass to measure angles on plane surfaces such as housing alignments , roads or land surveys . s.r . rao also suggested that it could have functioned as an instrument for measuring angles and perhaps the position of stars and thus for navigation like a sextant . lothal contributes one of three measurement scales that are integrated and linear ( others found in harappa and mohenjodaro ) . an ivory scale from lothal has the smallest-known decimal divisions in indus civilisation . the scale is 6 & nbsp ; millimetres ( 0.2 & nbsp ; inches ) thick , broad and the available length is , but only 27 graduations are visible over , the distance between graduation lines being ( the small size indicates use for fine purposes ) . the sum total of ten graduations from lothal is approximate to the angula in the arthashastra . the lothal craftsmen took care to ensure durability and accuracy of stone weights by blunting edges before polishing . for their renowned draining system , lothal engineers provided corbelled roofs , and an apron of kiln-fired bricks over the brick face of the platform where the sewerage entered the cesspool . wooden screens inserted in grooves in the side drain walls held back solid waste . the well is built of radial bricks , in diameter and deep . it had an immaculate network of underground drains , silting chambers and cesspools , and inspection chambers for solid waste . the extent of drains provided archaeologists with many clues regarding the layout of streets , organisation of housing and baths . on average , the main sewer is in depth , with outer dimensions of 86 & nbsp ; × & nbsp ; 68 & nbsp ; × & nbsp ; 33 & nbsp ; cm ( 34 & nbsp ; × & nbsp ; 27 & nbsp ; × & nbsp ; 13 & nbsp ; in ) . lothal brick-makers used a logical approach in manufacture of bricks , designed with care in regards to thickness of structures . they were used as headers and stretchers in same and alternate layers . archaeologists estimate that in most cases , the bricks were in ratio 1:0.5:0.25 on three sides , in dimensions which were integral multiples of large graduations of lothal scale of . . religion and disposal of the dead . the people of lothal worshipped a fire god , speculated to be the horned deity depicted on seals , which is also evidenced by the presence of private and public fire-altars where religious ceremonies were apparently conducted . archaeologists have discovered gold pendants , charred ashes of terra-cotta cakes and pottery , bovine remains , beads and other signs that may indicate the practice of the gavamayana sacrifice , associated with the ancient vedic religion . animal worship is also evidenced , but not the worship of the mother goddess that is evidenced in other harappan cities—experts consider this a sign of the existence of diversity in religious traditions . however , it is believed that a sea goddess , perhaps cognate with the general indus-era mother goddess , was worshipped . today , the local villagers likewise worship a sea goddess , vanuvati sikotarimata , suggesting a connection with the ancient port 's traditions and historical past as an access to the sea . but the archaeologists also discovered that the practice had been given up by 2000 & nbsp ; bce ( determined by the difference in burial times of the carbon-dated remains ) . it is suggested that the practice occurred only on occasion . it is also considered that given the small number of graves discovered—only 17 in an estimated population of 15,000—the citizens of lothal also practised cremation of the dead . post-cremation burials have been noted in other indus sites like harappa , mehi and damb-bhuti . . metallurgy and jewellery . lothal copper is unusually pure , lacking the arsenic typically used by coppersmiths across the rest of the indus valley . the city imported ingots from probable sources in the arabian peninsula . workers mixed tin with copper for the manufacture of celts , arrowheads , fishhooks , chisels , bangles , rings , drills , and spearheads , although weapon manufacturing was minor . they also employed advanced metallurgy in following the cire perdue technique of casting , and used more than one-piece moulds for casting birds and animals . they also invented new tools such as curved saws and twisted drills unknown to other civilisations at the time . lothal was one of the most important centres of production for shell-working , owing to the abundance of chank shell of high quality found in the gulf of kutch and near the kathiawar coast . gamesmen , beads , unguent vessels , chank shells , ladles and inlays were made for export and local consumption . components of stringed musical instruments like the plectrum and the bridge were made of shell . an ivory workshop was operated under strict official supervision , and the domestication of elephants has been suggested . an ivory seal , and sawn pieces for boxes , combs , rods , inlays and ear-studs were found during excavations . lothal produced a large quantity of gold ornaments—the most attractive item being microbeads of gold in five strands in necklaces , unique for being less than 0.25 & nbsp ; millimetres ( 0.010 & nbsp ; inches ) in diameter . cylindrical , globular and jasper beads of gold with edges at right angles resemble modern pendants used by women in gujarat in plaits of hair . a large disc with holes recovered from a sacrificial altar is compared to the rukma worn by vedic priests . studs , cogwheel and heart-shaped ornaments of faience and steatite were popular in lothal . a ring of thin copper wire turned into double spirals resembles the gold-wire rings used by modern hindus for weddings . . art . the discovery of etched carnelian beads and non-etched barrel beads in kish and ur ( modern iraq ) , jalalabad ( afghanistan ) and susa ( iran ) attest to the popularity of the indus bead industry across west asia . the lapidary select stones of variegated colours , producing beads of different shapes and sizes . the methods of lothal bead-makers were so advanced that no improvements have been noted over 4,000 & nbsp ; years—modern makers in the khambhat area follow the same technique . double-eye beads of agate and collared or gold-capped beads of jasper and carnelian beads are among those attributed as uniquely from lothal . it was very famous for micro-cylindrical beads of steatite ( chlorite ) . the lothal excavation yielded 213 seals , third in volume amongst all indus sites . seal-cutters preferred short-horned bulls , mountain goats , tigers and composite animals like the elephant-bull for engravings . there is a short inscription of intaglio in almost every seal . stamp seals with copper rings inserted in a perforated button were used to sealing cargo , with impressions of packing materials like mats , twisted cloth and cords , a fact verified only at lothal . quantitative descriptions , seals of rulers and owners were stamped on goods . a unique seal found here is from bahrain—circular , with motif of a dragon flanked by jumping gazelles . lothal offers two new types of potter work , a convex bowl with or without stud handle , and a small jar with flaring rim , both in the micaceous red ware period , not found in contemporary indus cultures . lothal artists introduced a new form of realistic painting . paintings depict animals in their natural surroundings . on one large vessel , the artist depicts birds with fish in their beaks , resting in a tree , while a fox-like animal stands below . this scene bears resemblance to the story of the fox and the crow in the panchatantra . artistic imagination is also suggested via careful portrayals—for example , several birds with legs aloft in the sky suggest flight , while half-opened wings suggest imminent flight . on a miniature jar , the story of the thirsty crow and deer is depicted – of how the deer could not drink from the narrow-mouth of the jar , while the crow succeeded by dropping stones in the jar . the features of the animals are clear and graceful . movements and emotions are suggested by the positioning of limbs and facial features—in a jar without overcrowding . a complete set of terra-cotta gamesmen , has been found in lothal—animal figures , pyramids with ivory handles and castle-like objects ( similar to the chess set of queen hatshepsut in egypt ) . the realistic portrayal of human beings and animals suggests a careful study of anatomical and natural features . the bust of a male with slit eyes , sharp nose , and square-cut beard is reminiscent of sumerian figures , especially stone sculptures from mari . in images of men and women , muscular and physical features are sharp , prominently marked . terra-cotta models also identify the differences between species of dogs and bulls , including those of horses . animal figures with wheels and a movable head may have been utilised as toys . excavated lothal . on plan , lothal stands north-to-south and east-to-west . at the height of its habitation , it covered a wider area since remains have been found south of the mound . due to the fragile nature of unbaked bricks and frequent floods , the superstructures of all buildings have receded . dwarfed walls , platforms , wells , drains , baths and paved floors are visible . but thanks to the loam deposited by persistent floods , the dock walls were preserved beyond the great deluge ( c . & nbsp ; 1900 & nbsp ; bce ) . the absence of standing high walls is attributed to erosion and brick robbery . the ancient nullah , the inlet channel , and riverbed have been similarly covered up . the flood-damaged peripheral wall of mud-bricks is visible near the warehouse area . the remnants of the north-south sewer are burnt bricks in the cesspool . cubical blocks of the warehouse on a high platform are also visible . the asi has covered the peripheral walls , the wharf and many houses of the early phase with earth to protect from natural phenomena , but the entire archaeological site is nevertheless facing grave concerns about necessary preservation . salinity ingress and prolonged exposure to the rain and sun are gradually eating away the remains of the site . heavy rain in the region has damaged the remains of the sun-dried mud brick constructions . stagnant rain water has lathered the brick and mud work with layers of moss . due to siltation , the dockyard 's draft has been reduced by and saline deposits are decaying the bricks . officials blame the salinity on capillary action and point out that cracks are emerging and foundations weakening even as restoration work slowly progresses . . dockyard . the dockyard was located away from the main current to avoid deposition of silt . it is speculated that lothal engineers studied tidal movements , and their effects on brick-built structures , since the walls are of kiln-burnt bricks . this knowledge also enabled them to select lothal 's location in the first place , as the gulf of khambhat has the highest tidal amplitude and ships can be sluiced through flow tides in the river estuary . the engineers built a trapezoidal structure , with north-south length of average , and east-west width of . another assessment is that the basin could have served as an irrigation tank , for the estimated original dimensions of the '' dock '' are not large enough , by modern standards , to house ships and conduct much traffic . criticism of the dock theory has grown since first doubted by leshnik in 1968 and later yule in 1982 . title lothal publisher c.h . beck author paul yule pages 31 year 1982 the controversy was finally settled when scientists from the national institute of oceanography , goa discovered foraminifera ( marine microfossils ) and salt , gypsum crystals ( due to evapouration of seawater ) in the rectangular structure clearly indicating that sea water once filled the structure . additional evidence includes findings of 7 stone anchors of which 5 were found in the dock , 5 terracotta models of boats and a circular persian gulf seal from bahrain . the original height of the embankments was . ( now it is . ) the main inlet is wide , and another is provided on the opposite side . to counter the thrust of water , offsets were provided on the outer wall faces . when the river changed its course in 2000 & nbsp ; bce , a smaller inlet , wide was made in the longer arm , connected to the river by a channel . at high tide flow of of water would have allowed ships to enter . provision was made for the escape of excess water through the outlet channel , wide and high in the southern arm . the dock also possessed a lock-gate system—a wooden door could be lowered at the mouth of the outlet to retain a minimum column of water in the basin so as to ensure flotation at low tides . central to the city 's economy , the warehouse was originally built on sixty-four cubical blocks , square , with passages , and based on a 3.5-metre-high ( 11.5 & nbsp ; ft ) mud-brick podium . the pedestal was very high to provide maximum protection from floods . brick-paved passages between blocks served as vents , and a direct ramp led to the dock to facilitate loading . the warehouse was located close to the acropolis , to allow tight supervision by ruling authorities . despite elaborate precautions , the major floods that brought the city 's decline destroyed all but twelve blocks , which became the makeshift storehouse . . acropolis and lower town . lothal 's acropolis was the town centre , its political and commercial heart , measuring east-to-west by north-to-south . there were three streets and two lanes running east-west , and two streets running north-south . the four sides of the rectangular platform on which houses were built are formed by mud-brick structures of thickness and high . the baths were primarily located in the acropolis—mostly two-roomed houses with open courtyards . the bricks used for paving baths were polished to prevent seepage . the pavements were lime-plastered and edges were wainscoted ( wooden panels ) by thin walls . the ruler 's residence is in area with a 1.8-square-meter-bath ( 19 & nbsp ; sq & nbsp ; ft ) equipped with an outlet and inlet . the remains of this house give evidence to a sophisticated drainage system . the lower town marketplace was on the main north-south street wide . built in straight rows on either side of the street are residences and workshops , although brick-built drains and early period housing has disappeared . the street maintained a uniform width and did not undergo encroachment during the reconstructive periods after deluges . there are multiple two-roomed shops and workplaces of coppersmiths and blacksmiths . the bead factory , which performs a very important economic function , possesses a central courtyard and eleven rooms , a store , and a guardhouse . there is a cinder dump , as well as a double-chambered circular kiln , with stoke-holes for fuel supply . four flues are connected with each other , the upper chamber and the stokehold . the mud plaster of the floors and walls are vitrified owing to intense heat during work . the remnants of raw materials such as reed , cow dung , sawdust , and agate are found , giving archaeologists hints of how the kiln was operated . a large mud-brick building faces the factory , and its significance is noted by its plan . four large rooms and a hall , with an overall measurement of . the hall has a large doorway and a raised floor in the southern corner of the building . coastal trade route . a coastal route may have existed linking sites such as lothal and dholavira to sutkagan dor on the makran coast . . see also . list of indus valley civilization sites bhagatrav , a small port rangpur , gujarat , a sea port . notes . harappa town planning '' ( published in '' uttar pradesh '' in november 1961 ) . s . r . rao , lothal ( published by the director general , archaeological survey of india , 1985 ) a.s . khadikar , n . basaviah , t . k . gundurao and c . rajshekhar paleoenvironments around the harappan port of lothal , gujarat , western india , in journal of the indian geophysicists union ( 2004 ) lawrence s . leshnik , the harappan '' port '' at lothal : another view american anthropologist , new series , vol . & nbsp ; 70 , no . & nbsp ; 5 ( oct . , 1968 ) , pp . 911–922 robert bradnock , rajasthan and gujarat handbook : the travel guide s . r . rao , lothal and the indus civilisation s . r . rao , lothal : a harappan port town ( 1955–1962 ) ( memoirs of the archaeological survey of india ) asin : b0006e4eac paul yule , lothal . stadt der harappa-kultur in nordwest-indien . materialien zur allgemeinen und vergleichenden archäologie 9 , munich , 1982 ava-materialien , sir john marshall , mohenjo-daro and indus civilisation i–iii ( 1932 ) dennys frenez & maurizio tosi the lothal sealings : records from an indus civilization town at the eastern end of the maritime trade circuits across the arabian sea , in m . perna ( ed . ) , studi in onore di enrica fiandra . contributi di archeologia egea e vicinorientale , naples 2005 , pp . & nbsp ; 65–103 . s . p . gupta ( ed . ) , the lost sarasvati and the indus civilization ( 1995 ) , kusumanjali prakashan , jodhpur jonathan mark kenoyer , ancient cities of the indus valley civilization ( 1998 ) oxford university press , . external links . pictures of lothal remains lothal a walk through lothal ancient civilizations timeline the harappan civilization indus artefacts cache of seal impressions discovered in western india offers surprising new evidence for cultural complexity in little-known ahar-banas culture , circa 3000-1500 b.c collection of images