Heitor Villa-Lobos

biography . youth and exploration . villa-lobos was born in rio de janeiro . his father , raúl , was a civil servant , an educated man of spanish extraction , a librarian , and an amateur astronomer and musician . in villa-lobos 's early childhood , brazil underwent a period of social revolution and modernisation , abolishing slavery in 1888 and overthrowing the empire of brazil in 1889 . the changes in brazil were reflected in its musical life : previously european music had been the dominant influence , and the courses at the conservatório de música were grounded in traditional counterpoint and harmony . villa-lobos underwent very little of this formal training . after a few abortive harmony lessons , he learnt music by illicit observation from the top of the stairs of the regular musical evenings at his house arranged by his father . he learned to play cello , clarinet , and classical guitar . when his father died suddenly in 1899 he earned a living for his family by playing in cinema and theatre orchestras in rio . ; around 1905 villa-lobos started explorations of brazil 's '' dark interior '' , absorbing the native brazilian musical culture . serious doubt has been cast on some of villa-lobos 's tales of the decade or so he spent on these expeditions , and about his capture and near escape from cannibals , with some believing them to be fabrications or wildly embellished romanticism . after this period , he gave up any idea of conventional training and instead absorbed the musical influences of brazil 's indigenous cultures , themselves based on portugal and african , as well as american indian elements . his earliest compositions were the result of improvisations on the classical guitar from this period . villa-lobos played with many local brazilian street-music bands ; he was also influenced by the cinema and ernesto nazareth improvised tangos and polkas . for a time villa-lobos became a cellist in a rio opera company , and his early compositions include attempts at grand opera . encouraged by arthur napoleão , a pianist and music publisher , he decided to compose seriously . thumb . brazilian influences . on november 12 , 1913 , villa-lobos married the pianist lucília guimarães , ; ended his travels , and began his career as a serious musician . up until his marriage , he had not learned to play the piano , so his wife taught him the rudiments of the instrument . his music began to be published in 1913 . he introduced some of his compositions in a series of occasional chamber concerts ( later also orchestral concerts ) from 19151921 , mainly in rio de janeiro 's salão nobre do jornal do comércio . the music presented at these concerts shows his coming to terms with the conflicting elements in his experience , and overcoming a crisis of identity , as to whether european or brazilian music would dominate his style . this was decided by 1916 , the year in which he composed the symphonic poems amazonas and tédio de alvorada , the first version of what would become uirapurú ( although amazonas was not performed until 1929 , and uirapurú was only completed in 1934 and first performed in 1935 ) . these works drew from native brazilian legends and the use of '' primitive '' folk material . european influences did still inspire villa-lobos . in 1917 sergei diaghilev made an impact on tour in brazil with his ballets russes . that year villa-lobos also met the french composer darius milhaud , who was in rio as secretary to paul claudel at the french legation . milhaud brought the music of claude debussy , erik satie , and possibly igor stravinsky ; in return villa-lobos introduced milhaud to brazilian street music . in 1918 , he also met the pianist arthur rubinstein , who became a lifelong friend and champion ; this meeting prompted villa-lobos to write more piano music . in about 1918 villa-lobos abandoned the use of opus numbers for his compositions as a constraint to his pioneering spirit . with the piano suite carnaval das crianças ( children 's carnival ) of 191920 , villa-lobos liberated his style altogether from european romanticism : the suite , in eight movements with the finale written for piano duet , depicts eight characters or scenes from rio 's lenten carnival . in february 1922 , a festival of modern art took place in são paulo and villa-lobos contributed performances of his own works . the press were unsympathetic and the audience were not appreciative ; their mockery was encouraged by villa-lobos 's being forced by a foot infection to wear one carpet slipper . the festival ended with villa-lobos 's quarteto simbólico , composed as an impression of brazilian urban life . in july 1922 , rubinstein gave the first performance of the piano suite a prole do bebê ( the baby 's family ) , composed in 1918 . there had recently been an attempted military coup on copacabana beach , and places of entertainment had been closed for days ; the public possibly wanted something less intellectually demanding , and the piece was booed . villa-lobos was philosophical about it , and rubinstein later reminisced that the composer said , '' i am still too good for them . '' the piece has been called '' the first enduring work of brazilian modernism '' . rubinstein suggested that villa-lobos tour abroad , and in 1923 he set out for paris . his avowed aim was to exhibit his exotic sound world rather than to study . just before he left he completed his nonet ( for ten players and chorus ) which was first performed after his arrival in the french capital . he stayed in paris in 192324 and 192730 , and there he met influential residents including edgard varèse , pablo picasso , leopold stokowski and aaron copland . parisian concerts of his music made a strong impression . see , for example , the influence of the brilliance of his orchestral palette on the young olivier messiaen , discussed in . external links . villalobos.iu.edu villa-lobos site at indiana university : maintained by the latin american music center villalobosproject.com villa-lobos : maintained by minc peermusic classical : heitor villa-lobos composer 's publisher and bio classical composers database . villa-lobos : biography . '' o acorde de tristão em villa-lobos '' by paulo de tarso salles . violão intercâmbio 12 , no . 8 ( archive from march 7 , 2008 , accessed november 19 , 2015 ) . heitor villa-lobos e o ambiente artístico parisiense : convertendo-se em um músico brasileiro by paulo renato guérios heitor villa-lobos and the parisian art scene : how to become a brazilian musician by paulo renato guérios international jose guillermo carrillo foundation '' villa-lobos ' guitar music : alternative sources and implications for performance '' , by stanley yates , reprinted from soundboard , journal of the guitar foundation of america 24 , no . 1 ( summer 1997 ) : 7–20 ( accessed november 19 , 2015 ) . the villa-lobos magazine : news about heitor villa-lobos on the web and in the real world .