Appendectomy

procedure . in general terms , the procedure for an open appendectomy is : antibiotics are given immediately if signs of actual sepsis are seen ( in appendicitis , sepsis and bacteremia usually only occurs at some point after rupture , once peritonitis has begun ) , or if there is reasonable suspicion that the appendix has ruptured ( e.g . , on imaging ) or if the onset of peritonitis- which will lead to full sepsis if not quickly treated- is suspected ; otherwise , a single dose of prophylactic intravenous antibiotics is given immediately before surgery . general anaesthesia is induced , with endotracheal tube and full muscle relaxant , and the patient is positioned supine . the abdomen is prepared and draped and is examined under anesthesia . if a mass is present , the incision is made over the mass . otherwise , the incision is made over mcburney 's point ( one-third of the way from the anterior superior iliac spine to the navel ) , which represents the most common position of the base of the appendix . the various layers of the abdominal wall are opened . in order to preserve the integrity of abdominal wall , the external oblique aponeurosis is split along the line of its fibers , as is the internal oblique muscle . as the two run at right angles to each other , this reduces the risk of later incisional hernia . on entering the peritoneum , the appendix is identified , mobilized , and then ligated and divided at its base . some surgeons choose to bury the stump of the appendix by inverting it so it points into the caecum . each layer of the abdominal wall is then closed in turn . the skin may be closed with staples or stitches . the wound is dressed . the patient is brought to the recovery room . incisions . the standardization of an incision is not best practice when performing an appendectomy given that the appendix is a mobile organ . a physical exam should be performed prior to the operation and the incision should be chosen based on the point of maximal tenderness to palpation . these incisions are placed for appendectomy : mcburney 's incision , also known as grid iron incision lanz incision rutherford morison incision paramedian incision over the past decade , the outcomes of laparoscopic appendectomies have compared favorably to those for open appendectomies because of decreased pain , fewer postoperative complications , shorter hospitalization , earlier mobilization , earlier return to work , and better cosmesis ; however , despite these advantages , efforts are still being made to decrease abdominal incision and visible scars after laparoscopy . recent research has led to the development of natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery ( notes ) ; however , numerous difficulties need to be overcome before a wider clinical application of notes is adopted , including complications such as the opening of hollow viscera , failed sutures , a lack of fully developed instrumentation , and the necessity of reliable cost-benefit analyses . many surgeons have attempted to reduce incisional morbidity and improve cosmetic outcomes in laparoscopic appendectomy by using fewer and smaller ports . kollmar et al . described moving laparoscopic incisions to hide them in the natural camouflages like the suprapubic hairline to improve cosmesis . additionally , reports in the literature indicate that minilaparoscopic appendectomy using 2– or 3-mm or even smaller instruments along with one 12-mm port minimizes pain and improves cosmesis . more recently , studies by ates et al . and roberts et al . have described variants of an sling-based single-port laparoscopic appendectomy with good clinical results . also , a trend is increasing towards single-incision laparoscopic surgery ( sils ) , using a special multiport umbilical trocar . with sils , a more conventional view of the field of surgery is seen compared to notes . the equipment used for sils is familiar to surgeons already doing laparoscopic surgery . most importantly , it is easy to convert sils to conventional laparoscopy by adding a few trocars ; this conversion to conventional laparoscopy is called 'port rescue ' . sils has been shown to be feasible , reasonably safe , and cosmetically advantageous , compared to standard laparoscopy ; however , this newer technique involves specialized instruments and is more difficult to learn because of a loss of triangulation , clashing of instruments , crossing of instruments ( cross triangulation ) , and a lack of maneuverability . the additional problem of decreased exposure and the added financial burden of procuring special articulating or curved coaxial instruments exist . sils is still evolving , being used successfully in many centres , but with some way to go before it becomes mainstream . this limits its widespread use , especially in rural or peripheral centres with limited resources . . pregnancy . appendicitis is the most common emergent general surgery related problem to arise during pregnancy . there is a natural elevation in white blood cell count in addition to anatomical changes of the appendix that occur during pregnancy . these findings , in addition to non-specific abdominal symptoms make appendicitis difficult to diagnose . appendicitis develops most commonly in the second trimester . if appendicitis develops in a pregnant woman , an appendectomy is usually performed and should not harm the fetus . the risk of premature delivery is about 10 % . schwartz book of general surgery the risk of fetal death in the perioperative period after an appendectomy for early acute appendicitis is 3 to 5 % . the risk of fetal death is 20 % in perforated appendicitis . sabiston textbook of surgery 2007 . there has been debate regarding which surgical approach is preferred during pregnancy . overall , there is no increased risk of fetal loss or preterm delivery with the laparoscopic approach ( la ) as compared to the open approach ( oa ) . however , the la was associated with shorter length of stay in the hospital as well as reduced risk of wound infection . patient positioning is of utmost importance to ensure safety of the fetus during the procedure . this is especially important during the third trimester due to the potential of compression of the inferior vena cava leading by the enlarged uterus . placing the patient in a 30-degree left lateral decubitus position alleviates this pressure and prevents fetal distress . one area of concern related to the la during pregnancy is pneumoperitoneum . this causes an increase in the intra-abdominal pressure , leading to decreased venous return and therefore , decreased cardiac output . the decreased cardiac output may lead to fetal acidosis and cause distress . however , an animal pregnancy model demonstrated that a 10-12mmhg insufflation pressure demonstrated no adverse effects on the fetus . sages ( society of american gastrointestinal and endoscopic surgeons ) currently recommends an insufflation pressure of 10-15mmhg during pregnancy . . recovery . thumb thumb a study from 2010 found that the average hospital stay for people with appendicitis in the united states was 1.8 days . for people with a perforated ( ruptured ) appendix , the average length of stay was 5.2 days . barrett m . l . , hines a . l . , andrews r . m . trends in rates of perforated appendix , 2001–2010 . hcup statistical brief 159 . agency for healthcare research and quality , rockville , md . july 2013 . recovery time from the operation varies from person to person . some take up to three weeks before being completely active ; for others , it can be a matter of days . in the case of a laparoscopic operation , the patient has three stapled scars of about an inch ( 2.5 & nbsp ; cm ) in length , between the navel and pubic hair line . when an open appendectomy has been performed , the patient has a 2– to 3-inch ( 5–7.5 & nbsp ; cm ) scar , which will initially be heavily bruised . surgery 2 . complications . one of the most common post-operative complications associated with an appendectomy is the development of a surgical site infection ( ssi ) . signs and symptoms indicative of a superficial ssi are redness , swelling , and tenderness surrounding the incision and are most likely to arise on post-operative day 4 or 5 . these symptoms oftentimes precede fluid drainage from the incision . tenderness extending beyond the redness that surrounds the incision , in addition to the development of cutaneous vesicles or bullae may be indicative of a deep ssi . patients with complicated appendicitis ( perforated appendicitis ) are more likely to develop a ssi , abdominal abscess , or pelvic abscess during the post-operative period . placement of an abdominal drain was originally thought to reduce the risk of these post-operative complications . however , abdominal drains have not been found to play a significant role in reducing ssis and have lead to increased length of stay in the hospital in addition to increased cost of the operation . . frequency . about 327,000 appendectomies were performed during u.s . hospital stays in 2011 , a rate of 10.5 procedures per 10,000 population . appendectomies accounted for 2.1 % of all operating-room procedures in 2011 . . history . the first recorded successful appendectomy was on december 6 , 1735 , at st . george 's hospital in london , when french surgeon claudius amyand described the presence of a perforated appendix within the inguinal hernial sac of an 11-year-old boy . the organ had apparently been perforated by a pin the boy had swallowed . the patient , hanvil andersen , made a recovery and was discharged a month later . harry hancock performed the first abdominal surgery for appendicitis in 1848 , but he did not remove the appendix . in 1889 in new york city , charles mcburney described the presentation and pathogenesis of appendicitis accurately and developed the teaching that an early appendectomy was the best treatment to avoid perforation and peritonitis . some cases of autoappendectomies have occurred . one was attempted by evan o'neill kane in 1921 , but the operation was completed by his assistants . another was leonid rogozov , who had to perform the operation on himself as he was the only doctor on a remote antarctic base . on september 13 , 1980 , kurt semm performed the first laparoscopic appendectomy opening up the path for a much wider application of minimally invasive surgery . . cost . united states . while appendectomy is a standard surgical procedure , its cost has been found to vary considerably in the united states . a 2012 study a study by the agency for healthcare research and quality found that in 2010 , the average cost for a stay in the united states involving appendicitis was 7,800 . for stays where the appendix had ruptured , the average cost was 12,800 . the majority of patients seen in the hospital were covered by private insurance .