Russian Ark

plot . on a winter 's day , a small party of men and women arrive by horse-drawn carriage to a minor , side entrance of the winter palace , dressed in the style of the early 19th century to attend a ball hosted by the emperor alexander i . the narrator ( whose point of view is always in first-person ) meets another spectral but visible outsider , '' the european '' , and follows him through numerous rooms of the palace . '' the european '' , a 19th-century french diplomat who appears to be the marquis de custine , has nothing but contempt for russians ; he tells the narrator that they are unable to create or appreciate beauty as europeans do , as demonstrated by the european treasures around him . each room manifests a different period of russian history , although the periods are not in chronological order . featured are peter the great harassing and striking one of his generals ; a spectacular presentation of operas and plays in the era of catherine the great ; an imperial audience in which tsar nicholas i is offered a formal apology by the shah of iran for the death of ambassador alexander griboyedov in 1829 ; the idyllic family life of tsar nicholas ii 's children ; the ceremonial changing of the various regiments of the imperial guard ; people touring the palace in the present ; the museum 's director whispering the need to make repairs during the rule of joseph stalin ; and a desperate leningrader making his own coffin during the 900-day siege of the city during world war ii . a grand ball follows , featuring music by mikhail glinka , with many of the participants in spectacular period costume , and a full orchestra conducted by valery gergiev , then a long final exit with a crowd down the grand staircase . the european tells the narrator that he belongs here , in the world of 1913 where everything is still beautiful and elegant , and does not want to go any further . the narrator then walks backwards out the hallway and sees many people from different time periods exiting the building together . as he watches them , the narrator quietly departs the procession , leaves the building through a side door and looks out upon an endless ocean . cast . alexander sokurov as narrator sergei dontsov ( sergey dreyden ) as the european ( marquis de custine ) mariya kuznetsova as catherine the great marksim sergeyev as peter the great anna aleksakhina as alexandra feodorovna vladimir baranov as nicholas ii . production . the film displays 33 rooms of the museum , which are filled with a cast of over 2,000 actors and three orchestras . russian ark was recorded in uncompressed high-definition video using a sony hdw-f900 camera . the information was not recorded compressed to tape as usual , but uncompressed onto a hard disk which could hold 100 minutes which was carried behind the cameraman as he traveled from room to room , scene to scene . according to in one breath , the documentary on the making of the film , four attempts were made . the first failed at the five-minute mark . after two more failed attempts , they were left with only enough battery power for one final take . the four hours of daylight available were also nearly gone . fortunately , the final take was a success and the film was completed at 90 minutes . tilman büttner , the director of photography and steadicam operator , executed the shot on 23 december 2001 . in a 2002 interview , büttner said that film sound was recorded separately . '' every time i did the take , or someone else made a mistake , i would curse , and that would have gotten in , so we did the sound later . '' lighting directors of photography on the film were bernd fischer and anatoli radionov . the director later rejected büttner 's nomination for a european film academy award , believing that only the whole film should gain an award . . post-production . in post-production the uncompressed hd 87-minute one-shot could be reworked in detail : besides many object removals ( mainly cables and other film equipment ) , compositings ( e.g . additional snow or fog ) , stabilisations , selective colour-corrections and digitally added focus changes , the whole film was continuously and dynamically reframed ( resized ) and for certain moments even time-warped ( slowed down and sped up ) . this work took several weeks and was mainly executed by editor patrick wilfert under supervision of lead editor sergei ivanov on discreet logic 's inferno system . avoiding any playouts and using framestore to framestore transfers only , the picture was left uncompressed , before being reprinted onto filmstock for theatrical distribution . background . the narrator 's guide , '' the european '' , is based on the book by the french aristocrat marquis de custine , who visited russia in 1839 and wrote la russie en 1839 , in which he depicted russia in extremely unflattering terms . a few biographical elements from custine 's life are shown in the film . like the european , the marquis ' mother was friends with the italian sculptor canova and he himself was very religious . custine 's book mocks russian civilization as a thin veneer of europe on an asiatic soul . for custine , europe was '' civilization '' while asia was '' barbarism '' , and his placing of russia as a part of asia rather than europe was meant to deny that russians had any sort of civilization worthy of the name . echoing this sentiment , the film 's european comments that russia is a theater and that the people he meets are actors . the marquis 's family fortune came from a porcelain works , hence the european 's interest in the sèvres porcelain waiting for the diplomatic reception . at the end of the film , which depicts the last imperial ball in 1913 , the european appears to accept russia as a european nation . in one breath , a documentary about the making of russian ark , written and directed by knut elstermann , gives more insight into the single long shot tracking techniques and formidable organization behind the making of the film . reception . box office . the film was not a huge commercial success , though as an art film it performed strongly in many territories . these include the uk , japan , korea , argentina , and especially the us , where the film remains one of the most successful of both german and russian movies of the last decades . russian ark is a german-russian co-production . the film grossed 3,011,013 in the united states and canada , with 3,674,735 internationally , for a worldwide total of 6,685,748 . . critical response . russian ark received high critical acclaim . roger ebert wrote , '' apart from anything else , this is one of the best-sustained ideas i have ever seen on the screen . the effect of the unbroken flow of images ( experimented with in the past by directors like hitchcock and max ophüls ) is uncanny . if cinema is sometimes dreamlike , then every edit is an awakening . russian ark spins a daydream made of centuries . '' rotten tomatoes reported that 90 % of critics gave the film a positive review based on 105 reviews , with an average rating of 7.88/10 . the consensus review summary reads , '' as successful as it is ambitious , russian ark condenses three centuries of russian history into a single , uninterrupted , 87-minute take . '' on metacritic , which uses an average of critics ' reviews , the film has an 86/100 rating based on 32 reviews , indicating '' universal acclaim '' . slant magazine ranked the film 84th in its list of the best films of the 2000s . in a critics ' and readers ' poll by empire magazine , it was voted the 358th greatest film of all time . . awards . russian ark received the visions award at the 2002 toronto international film festival , a special citation at the 2003 san francisco film critics circle awards and the 2004 silver condor award for best foreign film from the argentine film critics association ; it was also nominated for the palme d'or at the 2002 cannes film festival , the golden hugo at the 2002 chicago international film festival and the 2004 nika award for best film . in addition , alexander sokurov was named best director at fancine in 2003 and was nominated for the 2002 european film award for best director . cinematographer tilman büttner was also nominated for various awards for his work on the film , including a european film award and a german camera award .