Philip Sidney

early life . born at penshurst place , kent , of an aristocratic family , he was educated at shrewsbury and christ church , oxford . he was the eldest son of henry sidney and lady mary dudley . his mother was the eldest daughter of john dudley , 1st duke of northumberland , and the sister of robert dudley , 1st earl of leicester . his younger brother , robert sidney was a statesman and patron of the arts , and was created earl of leicester in 1618 . his younger sister , mary , married henry herbert , 2nd earl of pembroke and was a writer , translator and literary patron . sidney dedicated his longest work , the arcadia , to her . after her brother 's death , mary reworked the arcadia , which became known as the countess of pembroke 's arcadia . politics and marriage . in 1572 , at the age of 18 , he was elected to parliament as a member of parliament for shrewsbury and in the same year travelled to france as part of the embassy to negotiate a marriage between elizabeth i and the duc d'alençon . he spent the next several years in mainland europe , moving through germany , italy , poland , the kingdom of hungary and austria . on these travels , he met a number of prominent european intellectuals and politicians . returning to england in 1575 , sidney met penelope devereux ( who would later marry robert rich , 1st earl of warwick ) . although much younger , she would inspire his famous sonnet sequence of the 1580s , astrophel and stella . her father , walter devereux , 1st earl of essex , was said to have planned to marry his daughter to sidney , but he died in 1576 and this did not occur . in england , sidney occupied himself with politics and art . he defended his father 's administration of ireland in a lengthy document . more seriously , he quarrelled with edward de vere , 17th earl of oxford , probably because of sidney 's opposition to the french marriage of elizabeth to the much younger alençon , which de vere championed . in the aftermath of this episode , sidney challenged de vere to a duel , which elizabeth forbade . he then wrote a lengthy letter to the queen detailing the foolishness of the french marriage . characteristically , elizabeth bristled at his presumption , and sidney prudently retired from court . during a 1577 diplomatic visit to prague , sidney secretly visited the exiled jesuit priest edmund campion . duncan-jones ( 1991 ) , pp . 125 & ndash ; 127 . sidney had returned to court by the middle of 1581 and in 1584 was mp for kent . that same year penelope devereux was married , apparently against her will , to lord rich . sidney was knighted in 1583 . an early arrangement to marry anne cecil , daughter of sir william cecil and eventual wife of de vere , had fallen through in 1571 . in 1583 , he married frances , the 16-year-old daughter of sir francis walsingham . in the same year , he made a visit to oxford university with giordano bruno , the polymath known for his cosmological theories , such as affirming copernicus at a time when many others did not , and speculating that the stars were other suns with planets , among other ideas , and who subsequently dedicated two books to sidney . in 1585 the couple had one daughter , elizabeth , who later married roger manners , 5th earl of rutland , in march 1599 and died without issue in 1612 . n . e . mcclure , ed . the letters of chamberlain , john philadelphia , 1939 , vol ii , p . 377 ilya gililov , the shakespeare game : the mystery of the great phoenix . translated by gennady bashkov et al . , agathon press , 2003 , . hutchinson , robert ( 2007 ) elizabeth 's spy master : francis walsingham and the secret war that saved england . london : weidenfeld & nicolson . , pp . 266–267 . . literary writings . like the best of the elizabethans , sidney was successful in more than one branch of literature , but none of his work appeared until after his death . his finest achievement was a sequence of 108 love sonnets . these owe much to petrarch and ronsard in tone and style , and place sidney as the greatest elizabethan sonneteer after shakespeare . written to his mistress , lady penelope rich , though dedicated to his wife , they reveal true lyric emotion couched in a language delicately archaic . in form sidney usually adopts the petrarchan octave ( abbaabba ) , with variations in the sestet that include the english final couplet . his artistic contacts were more peaceful and significant for his lasting fame . during his absence from court , he wrote astrophel and stella ( 1591 ) and the first draft of the arcadia and the defence of poesy . his pastoral romance the arcadia ( 1598 ) is an intricate love story , embodying the ideals of the medieval chivalry , so congenial to sidney 's own spirit . the story is diffused and involved , and the many secondary love stories interwoven with the main one distract attention . the characters are vague and idealized . the style , in its strength and its weaknesses , is that of a poet writing prose ; melodious , picturesque , rather artificial and ornamental . the story contains a number of fine lyrics . somewhat earlier , he had met edmund spenser , who dedicated the shepheardes calender to him . other literary contacts included membership , along with his friends and fellow poets fulke greville , edward dyer , edmund spenser and gabriel harvey , of the ( possibly fictitious ) '' areopagus '' , a humanist endeavour to classicise english verse . military activity . sidney played a brilliant part in the military/literary/courtly life common to the young nobles of the time . at the age of 31 was mortally wounded at zutphen , when assisting the dutch against the spaniards . both his family heritage and his personal experience ( he was in walsingham 's house in paris during the st . bartholomew 's day massacre ) , confirmed him as a keenly militant protestant . in the 1570s , he persuaded john casimir to consider proposals for a united protestant effort against the roman catholic church and spain . in the early 1580s , he argued fruitlessly for an assault on spain itself . promoted general of horse in 1583 , his enthusiasm for the protestant struggle was given free rein when he was appointed governor of flushing in the netherlands in 1585 . in the netherlands , he consistently urged boldness on his superior , his uncle the earl of leicester . he carried out a successful raid on spanish forces near axel in july 1586 . injury and death . later that year , he joined john norreys in the battle of zutphen , fighting for the protestant cause against the spanish . the norton anthology of english literature : sixteenth/early seventeenth century , volume b , 2012 , pg . 1037 during the battle , he was shot in the thigh and died of gangrene 26 days later , at the age of 31 . one account says this death was avoidable and heroic . sidney noticed that one of his men was not fully armored . dorsten , jan adrianus van , dominic baker-smith , and arthur f . kinney . 1986 . sir philip sidney : 1586 and the creation of a legend . brill archive , pp . 68–69 he put off his thigh armor on the grounds that it would be wrong to be better armored than his men . as he lay dying , sidney composed a song to be sung by his deathbed . the norton anthology of english literature : sixteenth/early seventeenth century , volume b , 2012 , pg 1037 according to the story , while lying wounded he gave his water to another wounded soldier , saying , '' thy necessity is yet greater than mine '' . charles carlton ( 1992 ) . going to the wars : the experience of the british civil wars , 1638–1651 , routledge , . p . 216 this became possibly the most famous story about sir philip , intended to illustrate his noble and gallant character . it also inspired evolutionary biologist john maynard smith to formulate a problem in signalling theory which is known as the sir philip sidney game . sidney 's body was returned to london and interred in the old st paul 's cathedral on 16 february 1587 . the grave and monument were destroyed in the great fire of london in 1666 . a modern monument in the crypt lists his among the important graves lost . already during his own lifetime , but even more after his death , he had become for many english people the very epitome of a castiglione courtier : learned and politic , but at the same time generous , brave , and impulsive . the funeral procession was one of the most elaborate ever staged , so much so that his father-in-law , francis walsingham , almost went bankrupt . as sidney was a brother of the worshipful company of grocers , the procession included 120 of his company brethren . never more than a marginal figure in the politics of his time , he was memorialised as the flower of english manhood in edmund spenser 's astrophel , one of the greatest english renaissance elegies . an early biography of sidney was written by his friend and schoolfellow , fulke greville . while sidney was traditionally depicted as a staunch and unwavering protestant , recent biographers such as katherine duncan-jones have suggested that his religious loyalties were more ambiguous . he was known to be friendly and sympathetic towards individual catholics . works . the lady of may – this is one of sidney 's lesser-known works , a masque written and performed for queen elizabeth in 1578 or 1579 . astrophel and stella – the first of the famous english sonnet sequences , astrophel and stella was probably composed in the early 1580s . the sonnets were well-circulated in manuscript before the first ( apparently pirated ) edition was printed in 1591 ; only in 1598 did an authorised edition reach the press . the sequence was a watershed in english renaissance poetry . in it , sidney partially nativised the key features of his italian model , petrarch : variation of emotion from poem to poem , with the attendant sense of an ongoing , but partly obscure , narrative ; the philosophical trappings ; the musings on the act of poetic creation itself . his experiments with rhyme scheme were no less notable ; they served to free the english sonnet from the strict rhyming requirements of the italian form . the countess of pembroke 's arcadia – the arcadia , by far sidney 's most ambitious work , was as significant in its own way as his sonnets . the work is a romance that combines pastoral elements with a mood derived from the hellenistic model of heliodorus . in the work , that is , a highly idealised version of the shepherd 's life adjoins ( not always naturally ) with stories of jousts , political treachery , kidnappings , battles , and rapes . as published in the sixteenth century , the narrative follows the greek model : stories are nested within each other , and different storylines are intertwined . the work enjoyed great popularity for more than a century after its publication . william shakespeare borrowed from it for the gloucester subplot of king lear ; parts of it were also dramatised by john day and james shirley . according to a widely told story , king charles i quoted lines from the book as he mounted the scaffold to be executed ; samuel richardson named the heroine of his first novel after sidney 's pamela . arcadia exists in two significantly different versions . sidney wrote an early version ( the old arcadia ) during a stay at mary sidney 's house ; this version is narrated in a straightforward , sequential manner . later , sidney began to revise the work on a more ambitious plan , with much more backstory about the princes , and a much more complicated story line , with many more characters . he completed most of the first three books , but the project was unfinished at the time of his death—the third book breaks off in the middle of a sword fight . there were several early editions of the book . fulke greville published the revised version alone , in 1590 . the countess of pembroke , sidney 's sister , published a version in 1593 , which pasted the last two books of the first version onto the first three books of the revision . in the 1621 version , sir william alexander provided a bridge to bring the two stories back into agreement . it was known in this cobbled-together fashion until the discovery , in the early twentieth century , of the earlier version . an apology for poetry ( also known as a defence of poesie and the defence of poetry ) – sidney wrote defence of poetry before 1583 . it has taken its place among the great critical essays in english . it is generally believed that he was at least partly motivated by stephen gosson , a former playwright who dedicated his attack on the english stage , the school of abuse , to sidney in 1579 , but sidney primarily addresses more general objections to poetry , such as those of plato . in his essay , sidney integrates a number of classical and italian precepts on fiction . the essence of his defence is that poetry , by combining the liveliness of history with the ethical focus of philosophy , is more effective than either history or philosophy in rousing its readers to virtue . the work also offers important comments on edmund spenser and the elizabethan stage . the sidney psalms – these english translations of the psalms were completed in 1599 by philip sidney 's sister mary . in popular culture . a memorial , erected in 1986 at the location in zutphen where he was mortally wounded by the spanish , can be found at the entrance of a footpath ( '' 't gallee '' ) located in front of the petrol station at the warnsveldseweg 170 . in arnhem , in front of the house in the bakkerstraat 68 , an inscription on the ground reads : '' in this house died on the 17 october 1586 sir philip sidney english poet , diplomat and soldier , from his wounds suffered at the battle of zutphen . he gave his life for our freedom '' . the inscription was unveiled on 17 october 2011 , exactly 425 years after his death , in the presence of philip sidney , viscount de l'isle , a descendant of the brother of philip sidney . the city of sidney , ohio , in the united states and a street in zutphen , netherlands , have been named after sir philip . a statue of him can be found in the park at the coehoornsingel where , in the harsh winter of 1795 , english and hanoverian soldiers were buried who had died while retreating from advancing french troops . bert fermin en michel groothedde : 'de lunetten van van coehoorn ' , zutphense archeologische publicaties 34 , 2007 , p . 7 another statue of sidney , by arthur george walker , forms the centrepiece of the old salopians memorial at shrewsbury school to alumni who died serving in world war i ( unveiled 1924 ) . in the monty python 's flying circus sketches '' tudor jobs agency '' , '' pornographic bookshop '' and '' elizabethan pornography smugglers '' ( season 3 , episode 10 ) , superintendent gaskell of the vice squad is referred to as sir phillip sidney by those around him . an epitaph of sir philip sidney : '' england has his body , for she it fed ; netherlands his blood , in her defence shed ; the heavens have his soul , the arts have his fame , the soldier his grief , the world his good name . '' the wayfarer 's book ( 1952 ) . by e.mansell ( 2011 reprint '' the rambler 's countryside companion '' ) p . 172 he is a regular character in the novels about giordano bruno , written by sj parris : heresy , prophecy , sacrilege , treachery etc . sir philip sidney was the archetypal heroic courtier of the elizabethan era acclaimed as much for his sonnets as his bravery , handsome looks and sense of ideal romance . he was the inspiration for romanticised lyrics with an elizabethan theme in popular music , possibly even the international pop band queen . he died tragically young whilst still in his 30s , 32 to be precise , an eternal wooer laid to rest in st paul 's cathedral , london . the popsong love letters in the sand is thought to allude to sir philip sidney . references . further reading . works the poems of sir philip sidney , ed . william a . ringler . oxford university press , 1962 . the countess of pembroke 's arcadia , ed . maurice evans . penguin books , 1997 . the sidney psalms , completed by mary sidney herbert , countess of pembroke , ed . r.e . pritchard . fyfield books . books alexander , gavin . writing after sidney : the literary response to sir philip sidney 1586–1640 . oxford : oxford university press , 2006 . allen , m . j . b . et al . sir philip sidney 's achievements . new york : ams press , 1990 . craig , d . h . '' a hybrid growth : sidney 's theory of poetry in an apology for poetry . '' essential articles for the study of sir philip sidney . ed . arthur f . kinney . hamden : archon books , 1986 . davies , norman . europe : a history . london : pimlico , 1997 . duncan-jones , katherine . sir philip sidney : courtier poet . new haven and london : yale university press , 1991 . northrop frye . words with power : being a second study of the bible and literature . toronto : penguin books , 1992 . garrett , martin . ed . sidney : the critical heritage . london : routledge , 1996 . greville , fulke.life of the renowned sir philip sidney . london , 1652 . hale , john . the civilization of europe in the renaissance . new york : atheeum , 1994 . jasinski , james . sourcebook on rhetoric : key concepts in contemporary rhetorical studies . thousand oaks : sage publications , 2001 . kimbrough , robert . sir philip sidney . new york : twayne publishers , inc . , 1971 . kuin , roger ( ed . ) , '' the correspondence of sir philip sidney '' . 2 vols . oxford : oxford university press , 2012 . leitch , vincent b . , ed . the norton anthology of theory and criticism . new york : w . w . norton & company , inc . , 2001 . lewis , c . s . english literature in the sixteenth century , excluding drama . oxford : oxford university press , 1954 . robertson , jean . '' philip sidney . '' in the spenser encyclopedia . eds . a . c . hamilton et al . toronto : university of toronto press , 1990 . shelley , percy bysshe . '' a defence of poetry . '' in shelley ’ s poetry and prose : a norton critical edition . 2nd ed . eds . donald h . reiman and neil fraistat . new york : w . w . norton & company , 2002 . sidney , philip . a defence of poesie and poems . london : cassell and company , 1891 . van dorsten , jan , et al . sir philip sidney : 1586 and the creation of a legend . leiden : brill , 1986 . woudhuysen , h . r . , sir philip sidney and the circulation of manuscripts , 1558-1640 , oxford : clarendon press , 1996 the cambridge history of english and american literature . volume 3 . cambridge : cambridge university press , 1910 . articles acheson , kathy . '' ' outrage your face ' : anti-theatricality and gender in early modern closet drama by women . '' early modern literary studies 6.3 ( january , 2001 ) : 7.1–16 . 21 october 2005 . bear , r . s . '' defence of poesie : introduction . in renascence editions . 21 october 2005 . griffiths , matthew . english court poets and petrarchism : wyatt , sidney and spenser . 25 november 2005 . harvey , elizabeth d . sidney , sir philip . in the johns hopkins guide to literary theory & criticism . 25 november 2005 . knauss , daniel , philip . love ’ s refinement : metaphysical expressions of desire in philip sidney and john donne . , master 's thesis submitted to the faculty of the north carolina state university . 25 november 2005 . maley , willy . cultural materialism and new historicism . 8 november 2005 mitsi , efterpi . the '' popular philosopher '' : plato , poetry , and food in tudor aesthetics . in early modern literary studies . 9 november 2004 . pask , kevin . '' the '' mannes state '' of philip sidney : pre-scripting the life of the poet in england . '' 25 november 2005 . staff . sir philip sidney 1554–1586 , poets ' graves . accessed 26 may 2008 other stump , donald ( ed ) . '' sir philip sidney : world bibliography , saint louis university . accessed 26 may 2008 . '' this site is the largest collection of bibliographic references on sidney in existence . it includes all the items originally published in sir philip sidney : an annotated bibliography of texts and criticism , 1554–1984 ( new york : g.k . hall , macmillan 1994 ) as well updates from 1985 to the present . '' . external links . a restoration in contemporary english of the complete 1593 edition of the countess of pembroke 's arcadia by charles stanley ross and joel b . davis the correspondence of philip sidney in emlo audio : robert pinsky reads '' my true love hath my heart and i have his '' by philip sidney ( via poemsoutloud.net )