Audio feedback

history and theory . the conditions for feedback follow the barkhausen stability criterion , namely that , with sufficiently high gain , a stable oscillation can ( and usually will ) occur in a feedback loop whose frequency is such that the phase delay is an integer multiple of 360 degrees and the gain at that frequency is equal to 1 . if the small signal gain is greater than 1 for some frequency then the system will start to oscillate at that frequency because noise at that frequency will be amplified . sound will be produced without anyone actually playing . the sound level will increase until the output starts clipping , reducing the loop gain to exactly unity . this is the principle upon which electronic oscillators are based ; although in that case the feedback loop is purely electronic , the principle is the same . if the gain is large , but slightly less than 1 , then high-pitched slowly decaying feedback tones will be created , but only when at least some input sound is already being sent through the system , such as through a microphone . early academic work on acoustical feedback was done by dr . c . paul boner . boner reasoned that when feedback happened , it did so at one precise frequency . he also reasoned that it could be stopped by inserting a very narrow notch filter at that frequency in the loudspeaker 's signal chain . behavior of sound system response immediately below feedback , cp boner , j . audio eng . soc , 1966 he worked with gifford white , founder of white instruments to hand craft notch filters for specific feedback frequencies in specific rooms . boner was responsible for establishing basic theories of acoustic feedback , room-ring modes , and room-sound system equalizing techniques . . distance . to maximize gain before feedback , the amount of sound energy that is fed back to the microphones must be reduced as much as is practical . as sound pressure falls off with 1/r with respect to the distance r in free space , or up to a distance known as reverberation distance in closed spaces ( and the energy density with 1/r² ) , it is important to keep the microphones at a large enough distance from the speaker systems . as well , microphones should not be positioned in front of speakers and individuals using mics should be asked to avoid pointing the microphone at speaker enclosures . directivity . additionally , the loudspeakers and microphones should have non-uniform directivity and should stay out of the maximum sensitivity of each other , ideally at a direction of cancellation . public address speakers often achieve directivity in the mid and treble region ( and good efficiency ) via horn systems . sometimes the woofers have a cardioid characteristic . professional setups circumvent feedback by placing the main speakers a far distance from the band or artist , and then having several smaller speakers known as monitors pointing back at each band member , but in the opposite direction to that in which the microphones are pointing . this allows independent control of the sound pressure levels for the audience and the performers . if monitors are oriented at 180 degrees to the microphones that are their sources , the microphones should have a cardioid pickup pattern . super- or hypercardioid patterns are suitable if the monitor speakers are located at a different angle on the back side of the microphones , they also better cancel reverberations coming from elsewhere . almost all microphones for sound reinforcement are directional . frequency response . almost always , the natural frequency responses of sound reinforcement systems is not ideally flat . this leads to acoustical feedback at the frequency with the highest loop gain , which may be much higher than the average gain over all frequencies ( resonance ) . it is therefore helpful to apply some form of equalization to reduce the gain of this frequency . feedback can be reduced manually by '' ringing out '' a sound system prior to a performance . the sound engineer can increase the level of a microphone or guitar pickup until feedback occurs . the engineer can then attenuate the relevant frequency on an equalizer preventing feedback at that frequency but allowing sufficient volume at other frequencies . many professional sound engineers can identify feedback frequencies by ear but others use a real time analyzer to identify the ringing frequency . to avoid feedback , automatic anti-feedback devices can be used . ( in the marketplace these go by the name '' feedback destroyer '' or '' feedback eliminator '' . ) some of these work by shifting the frequency slightly , with this upshift resulting in a '' chirp '' -sound instead of a howling sound of unaddressed feedback . other devices use sharp notch-filters to filter out offending frequencies . adaptive algorithms are often used to automatically tune these notch filters . deliberate uses . to intentionally create feedback , an electric guitar player needs a guitar amplifier and a loudspeaker cabinet , with very high gain ( amplification ) and/or the guitar brought near the speaker . the guitarist then allows the open strings to vibrate freely and brings the guitar close to the speaker enclosure of the guitar amp . the use of distortion effects units also facilitates the creation of intentional feedback . early examples in popular music . a deliberate use of acoustic feedback was pioneered by blues and rock and roll guitarists such as willie johnson , johnny watson and link wray . according to allmusic 's richie unterberger , the very first use of feedback on a commercial rock record is the introduction of the song '' i feel fine '' by the beatles , recorded in 1964 . richie unterberger . '' ' i feel fine ' song review '' , allmusic.com . jay hodgson agrees that it was the first chart-topper to showcase feedback distortion , created by john lennon leaning a semi-acoustic guitar against an amplifier . hodgson ( 2010 ) , p.120-121 . the who 's 1965 hits '' anyway , anyhow , anywhere '' and '' my generation '' featured feedback manipulation by pete townshend , with an extended solo in the former and the shaking of his guitar in front of the amplifier to create a throbbing noise in the latter . canned heat 's '' fried hockey boogie '' ( off of their 1968 album boogie with canned heat ) also featured guitar feedback produced by henry vestine during his solo to create a highly amplified distorted boogie style of feedback . in 1963 , the teenage brian may and his father custom-built his signature guitar red special , which was purposely designed to feed back . hey , what 's that sound : homemade guitars the guardian . retrieved august 17 , 2011 brian may interview the music biz ( 1992 ) . retrieved august 17 , 2011 feedback was used extensively after 1965 by the monks , shaw , thomas edward and anita klemke . black monk time : a book about the monks . reno : carson street publishing , 1995 . jefferson airplane , the velvet underground and the grateful dead , who included in many of their live shows a segment named feedback , a several-minutes long feedback-driven improvisation . feedback has since become a striking characteristic of rock music , as electric guitar players such as jeff beck , pete townshend , dave davies , steve marriott and jimi hendrix deliberately induced feedback by holding their guitars close to the guitar amplifier . jazz guitarist gábor szabó was one of the earliest jazz musicians to use controlled feedback in his music , which is prominent on his live album the sorcerer ( 1967 ) . szabó 's method included the use of a flat top acoustic guitar with a magnetic pickup . lou reed created his album metal machine music ( 1975 ) entirely from loops of feedback played at various speeds . an example of feedback can be heard on hendrix 's performance of '' can you see me ? '' at the monterey pop festival . the entire guitar solo was created using amplifier feedback . . introductions , transitions , and fade-outs . in addition to '' i feel fine '' , feedback was used on the introduction to songs including jimi hendrix 's '' foxy lady '' , the beatles ' '' it 's all too much '' , hendrix 's '' crosstown traffic '' , david bowie 's '' little wonder '' , the strokes 's '' new york city cops '' , ben folds five 's '' fair '' , midnight juggernauts 's '' road to recovery '' , nirvana 's '' radio friendly unit shifter '' , the jesus and mary chain 's '' tumbledown '' and '' catchfire '' , the stone roses 's '' waterfall '' , porno for pyros 's '' tahitian moon '' , tool 's '' stinkfist '' , and the cure 's '' prayer for rain '' . hodgson ( 2010 ) , p.121-122 . examples of feedback combined with a quick volume swell used as a transition include weezer 's '' my name is jonas '' and '' say it ai n't so '' ; the strokes ' '' reptilia '' , '' new york city cops '' , and '' juicebox '' ; dream theater 's '' as i am '' ; as well as numerous tracks by meshuggah and tool . hodgson ( 2010 ) , p.122-123 . cacophonous feedback fade-outs ending a song are most often used to generate rather than relieve tension , often cross-faded too after a thematic and musical release . examples include modwheelmood 's remix of nine inch nail 's '' the great destroyer '' ; and the jesus and mary chain 's '' teenage lust '' , '' tumbledown '' , '' catchfire '' , '' sundown '' , and '' frequency '' . hodgson ( 2010 ) , p.123 . . examples in modern classical music . though closed circuit feedback was a prominent feature in many early experimental electronic music compositions , it was contemporary american composer robert ashley who first used acoustic feedback as sound material in his work the wolfman ( 1964 ) . steve reich makes extensive use of audio feedback in his work pendulum music ( 1968 ) by swinging a series of microphones back and forth in front of their corresponding amplifiers . , 88 hugh davies van eck ( 2017 ) , p . 84 and alvin lucier van eck ( 2017 ) , p . 91 both use feedback in their works . more recent examples can be found in the work of for example lara stanic , van eck ( 2017 ) , p . 163 paul craenen , van eck ( 2017 ) , p . 159 anne wellmer , van eck ( 2017 ) , p . 93 adam basanta , lesley flanigan , ronald boersen and erfan abdi . . pitched feedback . pitched melodies may be created entirely from feedback through changing the angle between a guitar and amplifier after establishing a feedback loop . examples include tool 's '' jambi '' , robert fripp 's guitar on david bowie 's '' heroes '' ( album version ) , and jimi hendrix 's '' third stone from the sun '' and his live performance of '' wild thing '' at the monterey pop festival . hodgson ( 2010 ) , p.119 . regarding fripp 's work on '' heroes '' : . contemporary uses . audio feedback became a signature feature of many underground rock bands during the 1980s . american noise-rockers sonic youth melded the rock-feedback tradition with a compositional/classical approach ( notably covering reich 's '' pendulum music '' ) , and guitarist/producer steve albini 's group big black also worked controlled feedback into the makeup of their songs . with the alternative rock movement of the 1990s , feedback again saw a surge in popular usage by suddenly mainstream acts like nirvana , the red hot chili peppers , rage against the machine and the smashing pumpkins . devices . the principle of feedback is used in many guitar sustain devices . examples include handheld devices like the ebow , built-in guitar pickups that increase the instrument 's sonic sustain , string drivers mounted on a stand such as the guitar resonator , and sonic transducers mounted on the head of a guitar . intended closed-circuit feedback can also be created by an effects unit , such as a delay pedal or effect fed back into a mixing console . the feedback can be controlled by using the fader to determine a volume level . the boss df-2 super feedbacker and distortion pedal is an electronic effect unit that helps electric guitarists to create feedback effects . see also . circuit bending comb filter distortion ( music ) echo cancellation feedback suppressor optical feedback . references . external links . sound improving means and method , u.s . patent no . 3,624,298 c . paul boner , phd . , early pioneer in studying feedback . charles paul boner he : היזון חוזר ( מוזיקה )