Leon Czolgosz

assassination of president william mckinley . on august 31 , 1901 , czolgosz traveled to buffalo , new york , the site of the pan-american exposition , where president mckinley would be speaking . czolgosz rented a room in nowak 's hotel at 1078 broadway . on september 6 , czolgosz went to the exposition armed with a concealed . 32 caliber iver johnson safety automatic revolver he had purchased four days earlier . leon czolgosz and the trial & nbsp ; — '' lights out in the city of light '' & nbsp ; — anarchy and assassination at the pan-american exposition he approached mckinley , who had been standing in a receiving line inside the temple of music , greeting the public for ten minutes . at 4:07 & nbsp ; p.m . , czolgosz reached the front of the line . mckinley extended his hand . czolgosz slapped it aside and shot the president twice in the abdomen at point blank range : the first bullet ricocheted off a coat button and lodged in mckinley 's jacket ; the other seriously wounded him in the stomach . mckinley 's stomach wound was not lethal , but he died eight days later on september 14 , 1901 of an infection that had spread from the wound . james parker , a man standing directly behind czolgosz , struck the assassin in the neck and knocked the gun out of his hand ; as mckinley slumped backward , members of the crowd began beating czolgosz . '' go easy on him , boys '' , the president told the attackers . the police struggled to keep the angry crowd off czolgosz . czolgosz was taken to buffalo 's 13th precinct house at 346 austin street and held in a cell until he was moved to police headquarters . file : president mckinley greeting well-wishers at a reception in the temple of music . september 6 , 1901 ( minutes before he was shot ) . jpg president mckinley greeting well-wishers at a reception in the temple of music minutes before he was shot september 6 , 1901 file : mckinleyassassination.jpg a sketch of czolgosz shooting mckinley . file : temple of music mckinley murder site.jpg site of mckinley murder-marked by '' x '' in lower right . file : czolgoszcunning.png illustration of how czolgosz 's gun was concealed . chicago eagle , september 14 , 1901 file : pistola de czolgosz.jpg handkerchief , pistol and bullets used by czolgosz . trial and execution . after mckinley 's death , newly inaugurated president theodore roosevelt declared , '' when compared with the suppression of anarchy , every other question sinks into insignificance . '' on september 13 , the day before mckinley succumbed to his wounds , czolgosz was taken from the police headquarters , which were undergoing repairs , and transferred to the erie county women 's penitentiary . on september 16 , he was brought to the erie county jail to be arraigned before county judge emery . after the arraignment , czolgosz was transferred to auburn prison . a grand jury indicted czolgosz on september 16 with one count of first-degree murder . throughout his incarceration , czolgosz spoke freely with his guards , but he refused every interaction with robert c . titus and loran l . lewis , the prominent judges-turned-attorneys assigned to defend him , and with the expert psychiatrist sent to test his sanity . the case was prosecuted by the erie county district attorney , thomas penney , and assistant d.a . frederick haller , whose performance was described as '' flawless '' . although czolgosz answered that he was pleading '' guilty '' , presiding judge truman c . white overruled him and entered a '' not guilty '' plea on his behalf . hamilton , dr . allan mclane . autobiography . pre-1921 czolgosz 's trial began in the state courthouse in buffalo on september 23 , 1901 , nine days after mckinley died . prosecution testimony took two days and consisted principally of the doctors who treated mckinley and various eyewitnesses to the shooting . lewis and his co-counsel called no witnesses , which lewis in his closing argument attributed to czolgosz 's refusal to cooperate with them . in his 27-minute address to the jury , lewis took pains to praise mckinley . scott miller , author of the president and the assassin , notes that the closing argument was more calculated to defend the attorney 's '' place in the community , rather than an effort to spare his client the electric chair '' . even had the jury believed the defense that czolgosz was insane , by claiming that no sane man would have shot and killed the president in such a public and blatant manner , knowing he would be caught , there was still the insanity defense to be overcome . under new york law , czolgosz was legally insane only if he was unable to understand what he was doing . the jury was unconvinced of czolgosz 's insanity due to the directions given to them by judge white ; they voted to convict him after less than a half-hour of deliberations ( a jury member later said it would have been sooner but they wanted to review the evidence before conviction ) . czolgosz had two visits the night before his execution , one with two clergymen and another later in the night with his brother and brother-in-law . even though czolgosz refused father fudzinski and father hickey twice , superintendent collins permitted their visit and escorted them to his cell . the priests pleaded for 45-minutes for him to repent , but he refused and they left . his brother and brother-in-law visited after the priests had left . his brother asked him '' who got you into this scrape ? '' to which czolgosz responded '' no one . nobody had anything to do with it but me . '' his brother said it was unlike him and was not how he was raised . when asked by his brother if he wanted the priests to come back , czolgosz said , '' no , -- -- them ; do n't send them here again i do n't want them , '' and '' do n't you have any praying over me when i 'm dead , i do n't want it . i do n't want none of their -- -- religion . '' his father wrote a letter to his son the night before his execution , wishing him luck and informing him that he could no longer help him , and leon had to '' pay the price for his actions . '' czolgosz 's last words were : '' i killed the president because he was the enemy of the good peoplethe good working people . i am not sorry for my crime . i am sorry i could not see my father . '' czolgosz was electrocuted by three jolts , each of 1,800 volts , in auburn prison on october 29 , 1901 , 45 days after his victim 's death . he was pronounced dead at 7:14 & nbsp ; a.m . czolgosz 's brother , waldek , and his brother-in-law , frank bandowski , attended the execution . when waldek asked the warden for his brother 's body , to be taken for proper burial , he was informed that he '' would never be able to take it away '' , and that crowds of people would mob him . although post-trial czolgosz and his attorneys were informed of his right to appeal the sentence , they chose not to after czolgosz declined to appeal . also , the attorneys knew that there were no grounds for appeal ; the trial had been '' quick , swift , and fair . '' czolgosz was autopsy by john e . gerin ; his brain was autopsied by edward anthony spitzka . the autopsy showed his teeth were normal but in poor condition ; likewise the external genitals were normal , although scars were present , the result of chancroids . the autopsy showed the deceased was in good health ; a death mask was made of his face . the body was buried on prison grounds following the autopsy . prison authorities had planned to inter the body with quicklime to hasten its decomposition , but decided otherwise after testing quicklime on a sample of meat . after determining that they were not legally limited to the use of quicklime for the process , they poured sulfuric acid into czolgosz 's coffin so that his body would be completely disfigured . the warden estimated that the acid caused the body to disintegrate within 12 hours . his clothes and possessions were burned in the prison incinerator to discourage exhibitions of his life . . legacy . emma goldman was arrested on suspicion of being involved in the assassination , but was released due to insufficient evidence . she later incurred a great deal of negative publicity when she published '' the tragedy at buffalo '' . in the article , she compared czolgosz to marcus junius brutus , the assassin of julius caesar , and called mckinley the '' president of the money kings and trust magnates . '' other anarchists and radicals were unwilling to support goldman 's effort to aid czolgosz , believing that he had harmed the movement . the scene of the crime , the temple of music , was demolished in november 1901 , along with the rest of the exposition temporary structures . a stone marker in the median of fordham drive , now a residential street in buffalo , marks the approximate spot ) where the shooting occurred . czolgosz 's revolver is on display in the pan-american exposition exhibit at the buffalo history museum in buffalo . lloyd vernon briggs , who later became the director of the massachusetts department for mental hygiene , reviewed the czolgosz case in 1901 on behalf of dr . walter channing shortly after czolgosz 's death . czolgosz is buried at soule cemetery in cayuga county , new york . portrayals in media . czolgosz 's execution was portrayed in the silent film execution of czolgosz with panorama of auburn prison . he is featured as a central character of stephen sondheim 's musical assassins . his assassination of mckinley takes place during a musical number called '' the ballad of czolgosz '' . he was portrayed in the reaper episode '' leon '' by patton oswalt , as an escaped/captured/released/re-captured soul from hell who could turn his arms into large guns , but had issues with his father . the 1990 film slacker refers to czolgosz by his photograph on the wall . in season seven , episode fifteen , of the cbc television drama series murdoch mysteries , '' the spy who came up to the cold '' ( 2014 ) , leon czolgosz is portrayed by goran stjepanovic .