Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory

von neumann–bernays–gödel set theory . the axiom schemata of replacement and separation each contain infinitely many instances . included a result first proved in his 1957 ph.d . thesis : if zfc is consistent , it is impossible to axiomatize zfc using only finitely many axioms . on the other hand , von neumann–bernays–gödel set theory ( nbg ) can be finitely axiomatized . the ontology of nbg includes proper classes as well as sets ; a set is any class that can be a member of another class . nbg and zfc are equivalent set theories in the sense that any theorem not mentioning classes and provable in one theory can be proved in the other . consistency . gödel 's second incompleteness theorem says that a recursively axiomatizable system that can interpret robinson arithmetic can prove its own consistency only if it is inconsistent . moreover , robinson arithmetic can be interpreted in general set theory , a small fragment of zfc . hence the consistency of zfc can not be proved within zfc itself ( unless it is actually inconsistent ) . thus , to the extent that zfc is identified with ordinary mathematics , the consistency of zfc can not be demonstrated in ordinary mathematics . the consistency of zfc does follow from the existence of a weakly inaccessible cardinal , which is unprovable in zfc if zfc is consistent . nevertheless , it is deemed unlikely that zfc harbors an unsuspected contradiction ; it is widely believed that if zfc were inconsistent , that fact would have been uncovered by now . this much is certain — zfc is immune to the classic paradoxes of naive set theory : russell 's paradox , the burali-forti paradox , and cantor 's paradox . studied a subtheory of zfc consisting of the axioms of extensionality , union , powerset , replacement , and choice . using models , they proved this subtheory consistent , and proved that each of the axioms of extensionality , replacement , and power set is independent of the four remaining axioms of this subtheory . if this subtheory is augmented with the axiom of infinity , each of the axioms of union , choice , and infinity is independent of the five remaining axioms . because there are non-well-founded models that satisfy each axiom of zfc except the axiom of regularity , that axiom is independent of the other zfc axioms . if consistent , zfc can not prove the existence of the inaccessible cardinals that category theory requires . huge sets of this nature are possible if zf is augmented with tarski 's axiom . assuming that axiom turns the axioms of infinity , power set , and choice ( 7 & thinsp ; – & thinsp ; 9 above ) into theorems . independence . many important statements are independent of zfc ( see list of statements independent of zfc ) . the independence is usually proved by forcing , whereby it is shown that every countable transitive model of zfc ( sometimes augmented with large cardinal axioms ) can be expanded to satisfy the statement in question . a different expansion is then shown to satisfy the negation of the statement . an independence proof by forcing automatically proves independence from arithmetical statements , other concrete statements , and large cardinal axioms . some statements independent of zfc can be proven to hold in particular inner models , such as in the constructible universe . however , some statements that are true about constructible sets are not consistent with hypothesized large cardinal axioms . forcing proves that the following statements are independent of zfc : continuum hypothesis diamondsuit suslin 's problem martin 's axiom ( which is not a zfc axiom ) axiom of constructibility ( which is also not a zfc axiom ) . remarks : the consistency of v l is provable by inner models but not forcing : every model of zf can be trimmed to become a model of zfc + v l . the diamond principle implies the continuum hypothesis and the negation of the suslin hypothesis . martin 's axiom plus the negation of the continuum hypothesis implies the suslin hypothesis . the constructible universe satisfies the generalized continuum hypothesis , the diamond principle , martin 's axiom and the kurepa hypothesis . the failure of the kurepa tree is equiconsistent with the existence of a strongly inaccessible cardinal . a variation on the method of forcing can also be used to demonstrate the consistency and unprovability of the axiom of choice , i.e . , that the axiom of choice is independent of zf . the consistency of choice can be ( relatively ) easily verified by proving that the inner model l satisfies choice . ( thus every model of zf contains a submodel of zfc , so that con ( zf ) implies con ( zfc ) . ) since forcing preserves choice , we can not directly produce a model contradicting choice from a model satisfying choice . however , we can use forcing to create a model which contains a suitable submodel , namely one satisfying zf but not c . another method of proving independence results , one owing nothing to forcing , is based on gödel 's incompleteness theorem . this approach employs the statement whose independence is being examined , to prove the existence of a set model of zfc , in which case con ( zfc ) is true . since zfc satisfies the conditions of gödel 's second theorem , the consistency of zfc is unprovable in zfc ( provided that zfc is , in fact , consistent ) . hence no statement allowing such a proof can be proved in zfc . this method can prove that the existence of large cardinals is not provable in zfc , but can not prove that assuming such cardinals , given zfc , is free of contradiction . proposed additions . the project to unify set theorists behind additional axioms to resolve the continuum hypothesis or other meta-mathematical ambiguities is sometimes known as '' gödel 's program '' . mathematicians currently debate which axioms are the most plausible or '' self-evident '' , which axioms are the most useful in various domains , and about to what degree usefulness should be traded off with plausibility ; some '' multiverse '' set theorists argue that usefulness should be the sole ultimate criterion in which axioms to customarily adopt . one school of thought leans on expanding the '' iterative '' concept of a set to produce a set-theoretic universe with an interesting and complex but reasonably tractable structure by adopting forcing axioms ; another school advocates for a tidier , less cluttered universe , perhaps focused on a '' core '' inner model . criticisms . : for criticism of set theory in general , see objections to set theory zfc has been criticized both for being excessively strong and for being excessively weak , as well as for its failure to capture objects such as proper classes and the universal set . many mathematical theorems can be proven in much weaker systems than zfc , such as peano arithmetic and second-order arithmetic ( as explored by the program of reverse mathematics ) . saunders mac lane and solomon feferman have both made this point . some of '' mainstream mathematics '' ( mathematics not directly connected with axiomatic set theory ) is beyond peano arithmetic and second-order arithmetic , but still , all such mathematics can be carried out in zc ( zermelo set theory with choice ) , another theory weaker than zfc . much of the power of zfc , including the axiom of regularity and the axiom schema of replacement , is included primarily to facilitate the study of the set theory itself . on the other hand , among axiomatic set theories , zfc is comparatively weak . unlike new foundations , zfc does not admit the existence of a universal set . hence the universe of sets under zfc is not closed under the elementary operations of the algebra of sets . unlike von neumann–bernays–gödel set theory ( nbg ) and morse–kelley set theory ( mk ) , zfc does not admit the existence of proper classes . a further comparative weakness of zfc is that the axiom of choice included in zfc is weaker than the axiom of global choice included in nbg and mk . there are numerous list of statements undecidable in zfc . these include the continuum hypothesis , the whitehead problem , and the moore space ( topology ) . some of these conjectures are provable with the addition of axioms such as martin 's axiom or large cardinal axioms to zfc . some others are decided in zf+ad where ad is the axiom of determinacy , a strong supposition incompatible with choice . one attraction of large cardinal axioms is that they enable many results from zf+ad to be established in zfc adjoined by some large cardinal axiom ( see projective determinacy ) . the mizar system and metamath have adopted tarski–grothendieck set theory , an extension of zfc , so that proofs involving grothendieck universes ( encountered in category theory and algebraic geometry ) can be formalized .