Shadow mask

development . color television . color television had been studied even before commercial broadcasting became common , but it was not until the late 1940s that the problem was seriously considered . at the time , a number of systems were being proposed that used separate red , green and blue signals ( rgb ) , broadcast in succession . most experimental systems broadcast entire frames in sequence , with a colored filter ( or '' gel '' ) that rotated in front of an otherwise conventional black and white television tube . each frame encoded one color of the picture , and the wheel spun in sync with the signal so the correct gel was in front of the screen when that colored frame was being displayed . because they broadcast separate signals for the different colors , all of these systems were incompatible with existing black and white sets . another problem was that the mechanical filter made them flicker unless very high refresh rates were used . ed reitan , '' cbs field sequential color system '' , 24 august 1997 . ( this is conceptually similar to a dlp based projection display where a single dlp device is used for all three color channels . ) rca worked along different lines entirely , using the luminance-chrominance system first introduced by georges valensi in 1938 . this system did not directly encode or transmit the rgb signals ; instead it combined these colors into one overall brightness figure , called the '' luminance '' . this closely matched the black and white signal of existing broadcasts , allowing the picture to be displayed on black and white televisions . the remaining color information was separately encoded into the signal as a high-frequency modulation to produce a composite video signal . on a black and white television this extra information would be seen as a slight randomization of the image intensity , but the limited resolution of existing sets made this invisible in practice . on color sets the extra information would be detected , filtered out and added to the luminance to re-create the original rgb for display . ed reitan , '' rca dot sequential color system '' , 28 august 1997 . although rca 's system had enormous benefits , it had not been successfully developed because it was difficult to produce the display tubes . black and white tvs used a continuous signal and the tube could be coated with an even painting of phosphor . with rca 's system , the color was changing continually along the line , which was far too fast for any sort of mechanical filter to follow . instead , the phosphor had to be broken down into a discrete pattern of colored spots . focusing the right signal on each of these tiny spots was beyond the capability of electron guns of the era . . numerous attempts . through the 1940s and early 1950s a wide variety of efforts were made to address the color problem . a number of major companies continued to work with separate color '' channels '' with various ways to re-combine the image . rca was included in this group ; on 5 february 1940 they demonstrated a system using three conventional tubes combined to form a single image on a plate of glass , but the image was too dim to be useful . john logie baird , who made the first public color television broadcast using a semi-mechanical system on 4 february 1938 , was already making progress on an all-electronic version . his design , the telechrome , used two electron guns aimed at either side of a phosphor covered plate in the center of the tube . development had not progressed far when baird died in 1946 . '' the world 's first high definition colour television system '' , baird television . a similar project was the geer tube , which used a similar arrangement of guns aimed at the back of a single plate covered with small three-sided phosphor covered pyramids . '' teacher 's tube '' , time , 20 march 1950 . however , all of these projects had problems with colors bleeding from one phosphor to another . in spite of their best efforts , the wide electron beams simply could not focus tightly enough to hit the individual dots , at least over the entirety of the screen . moreover , most of these devices were unwieldy ; the arrangement of the electron guns around the outside of the screen resulted in a very large display with considerable '' dead space '' . rear-gun efforts . a more practical system would use a single gun at the back of the tube , firing at a single multi-color screen on the front . through the early 1950s , several major electronics companies started development of such systems . another contender was general electric 's penetron , which used three stacked layers of phosphor and attempted to change the power of the electron beam to write to the correct one . david morton , '' electronics : the life story of a technology '' , johns hopkins university press , 2007 , p . 87 . more common were attempts to use a secondary focussing arrangement just behind the screen to produce the required accuracy . paramount pictures worked long and hard on the chromatron , which used a set of wires behind the screen as a secondary '' gun '' , further focussing the beam and steering it towards the correct color . u.s . patent 2,692,532 , '' cathode ray focusing apparatus '' , ernst o . lawrence , university of california/chromatic television laboratories ( original chromatron patent ) . philco 's '' apple '' tube used additional stripes of phosphor that released a burst of electrons when the electron beam swept across them , by timing the bursts it could adjust the passage of the beam and hit the correct colors . richard clapp et all , '' a new beam-indexing coor television display system '' , proceedings of the ire , september 1956 , p . 1108–1114 . it would be years before any of these systems made their way into production . the penetron never worked for color tv , but found niche roles in aerospace . sony tried the chromatron in the 1960s , but gave up and developed the trinitron instead . the apple tube re-emerged in the 1970s and had some success . but it was rca 's success with the shadow mask that dampened most of these efforts . until 1968 , every color television sold used the rca shadow mask concept , in the spring of that year sony introduced their first trinitron sets . john nathan , '' sony : the private life '' , houghton mifflin harcourt , 2001 , p . 48 . . shadow mask . in 1938 german inventor werner flechsig first patented ( received 1941 , france ) the seemingly simple concept of placing a sheet of metal just behind the front of the tube , and punching small holes in it . the holes would be used to focus the beam just before it hit the screen . independently , al schroeder at rca worked on a similar arrangement , but using three electron guns as well . when the lab leader explained the possibilities of the design to his superiors , he was promised unlimited manpower and funds to get it working . abramson & sterling , p . 40 . over a period of only a few months , several prototype color televisions using the system were produced . abramson & sterling , p . 41 . the guns , arranged in a delta pattern at the back of the tube , were aimed to focus on the metal plate and scanned it as normal . for much of the time during the scan , the beams would hit the back of the plate and be stopped . however , when the beams passed a hole they would continue to the phosphor in front of the plate . in this way , the plate ensured that the beams were perfectly aligned with the colored phosphor dots . this still left the problem of focusing on the correct colored dot . normally the beams from the three guns would each be large enough to light up all three colored dots on the screen . the mask helped by mechanically attenuating the beam to a small size just before it hit the screen . gilmore , p . 81 . but the real genius of the idea is that the beams approached the metal plate from different angles . after being cut off by the mask , the beams would continue forward at slightly different angles , hitting the screens at slightly different locations . the spread was a function of the distance between the guns at the back of the tube , and the distance between the mask plate and the screen . by painting the colored dots at the correct locations on the screen , and leaving some room between them to avoid interactions , the guns would be guaranteed to hit the right colored spot . although the system was simple , it had a number of serious practical problems . as the beam swept the mask , the vast majority of its energy was deposited on the mask , not the screen in front of it . a typical mask of the era might have only 15 % of its surface open . to produce an image as bright as the one on a traditional b & w television , the electron guns in this hypothetical shadow mask system would have to be five times more powerful . additionally , the dots on the screen were deliberately separated in order to avoid being hit by the wrong gun , so much of the screen was black . gilmore , p . 178 . this required even more power in order to light up the resulting image . and as the power was divided up among three of these much more powerful guns , the cost of implementation was much higher than for a similar b & w set . gilmore , p . 83 . the amount of power deposited on the color screen was so great that thermal loading was a serious problem . the energy the shadow mask absorbs from the electron gun in normal operation causes it to heat up and expand , which leads to blurred or discolored images ( see doming ) . signals that alternated between light and dark caused cycling that further increased the difficulty of keeping the mask from warping . furthermore , the geometry required complex systems to keep the three beams properly positioned across the screen . if you consider the beam when it is sweeping across the middle area of the screen , the beams from the individual guns are each traveling the same distance and meet the holes in the mask at equal angles . in the corners of the screen some beams have to travel farther and all of them meet the hole at a different angle than at the middle of the screen . these issues required additional electronics and adjustments to maintain correct beam positioning . market introduction . during development , rca was not sure that they could make the shadow mask system work . although simple in concept , it was difficult to build in practice , especially at a reasonable price point . the company optioned several other technologies , including the geer tube , in case the system did n't work out . when the first tubes were produced in 1950 , these other lines were dropped . wartime advances in electronics had opened up large swaths of high frequency transmission to practical use , and in 1948 the u.s . federal communications commission ( fcc ) started a series of meetings on the use of what would become the uhf channels . at the time there were very few television sets in use in the united states , so the stakeholder groups quickly settled on the idea of using uhf for a new , incompatible , color format . these meetings eventually selected a competing semi-mechanical field-sequential color system being promoted by cbs . however , in the midst of the meetings , rca announced their efforts on compatible color , but too late to influence the proceedings . cbs color was introduced in 1950 . gilmore , p . 82 . however , the promise of the rca system was so great that the national television system committee ( ntsc ) took up its cause . between 1950 and 1953 they carried out a huge study on human color perception , and used that information to improve rca 's basic concept . '' colorimetry standards '' , broadcast engineering . rca had , by this time , produced experimental shadow mask sets that were an enormous leap in quality over any competitors . the system was dim , complex , large , power hungry and expensive for all these reasons , but provided a usable color image , and most importantly , was compatible with existing b & w signals . this had not been an issue in 1948 when the first fcc meetings were held , but by 1953 the number of b & w sets had exploded ; there was no longer any way they could simply be abandoned . when the ntsc proposed that their new standard be ratified by the fcc , cbs dropped its interest in its own system . everyone in the industry wanting to produce a set then licensed rca 's patents , and by the mid-1950s there were a number of sets commercially available . however , color sets were much more expensive than b & w sets of the same size , and required constant adjustment by field staff . by the early 1960s they still represented a small percentage of the television market in north america . the numbers exploded in the early 1960s , with 5,000 sets being produced a week in 1963 . gilmore , p . 80 . . manufacture . shadow masks are made using a photochemical machining process . it starts out with a sheet of steel or invar alloy that is coated with photoresist , which is baked to solidify it , exposed to uv light through photomasks , developed to remove unexposed resist , the metal is etched using liquid acid , and then the photoresist is removed . one photomask has larger dark spots than the other , this creates tapered apertures . the shadow mask is installed to the screen using metal pieces or a rail or frame that is fused to the funnel or the screen glass respectively , holding the shadow mask in tension to minimize warping ( if the mask is flat , used in flat screen crt computer monitors ) and allowing for higher image brightness and contrast . bimetal springs may be used in crts used in tvs to compensate for warping that occurs as the electron beam heats the shadow mask , causing thermal expansion . . improvements , market acceptance . by the 1960s the first rca patents were ending , while at the same time a number of technical improvements were being introduced . a number of these were worked into the ge porta-color set of 1966 , which was an enormous success . by 1968 almost every company had a competing design , and color television moved from an expensive option to mainstream devices . doming problems due to thermal expansion of the shadow mask were solved in several ways . some companies used a thermostat to measure the temperature and adjust the scanning to match the expansion . bi-metallic shadow masks , where differential expansion rates offset the issue , became common in the late 1960s . invar and similar low-expansion alloys were introduced in the 1980s '' taking the heat out of flat-screen television . '' , new scientist , 3 october 1985 , p . 35 . these materials suffered from easy magnetization that can affect the colors , but this could be generally solved by including an automatic demagnetizing feature . the last solution to be introduced was the '' stretched mask '' , where the mask was welded to a frame , typically glass , at high temperatures . the frame was then welded to the inside of the tube . when the assembly cooled , the mask was under great tension , which no amount of heating from the guns would be able to remove . james foley , '' computer graphics : principles and practice '' , addison-wesley , 1996 , p . 160 . improving brightness was another major line of work in the 1960s . the use of rare-earth phosphors produced brighter colors and allowed the strength of the electron beams to be reduced slightly . better focusing systems , especially automatic systems that meant the set spent more time closer to perfect focus , allowed the dots to grow larger on the screen . the porta-color used both of these advances and re-arranged the guns to lie beside each other instead of in a triangle , allowing the dots to be extended vertically into slots that covered much more of the screen surface . this design , sometimes known as a '' slot mask '' , became common in the 1970s . len buckwalter , '' 1970 television : the picture is brighter than ever '' , '' popular science '' , october 1969 , p . 142–145 , 224 . jerry whitaker , '' dtv handbook '' , mcgraw-hill , 2001 , p . 461–462 . another change that was widely introduced in the early 1970s was the use of a black material in the spaces around the inside of the phosphor pattern . this paint absorbed ambient light coming from the room , lowering the amount that was reflected back to the viewer . in order to make this work effectively , the phosphor dots were reduced in size , lowering their brightness . however , the improved contrast compared to ambient conditions allowed the faceplate to be made much more clear , allowing more light from the phosphor to reach the viewer and the actual brightness to increase . grey-tinted faceplates dimmed the image , but provided better contrast , because ambient light was attenuated before it reached the phosphors , and a second time as it returned to the viewer . light from the phosphors was attenuated only once . this method changed over time , with tv tubes growing progressively more black over time . in manufacturing color crts , the shadow masks or aperture grilles were also used to expose photoresist on the faceplate to ultraviolet light sources , accurately positioned to simulate arriving electrons for one color at a time . this photoresist , when developed , permitted phosphor for only one color to be applied where required . the process was used a total of three times , once for each color . ( the shadow mask or aperture grille had to be removable and accurately re-positionable for this process to succeed . ) . see also . dot pitch aperture grille cromaclear porta-color . references . notes . . bibliography . albert abramson and christopher sterling , '' the history of television , 1942 to 2000 '' . c . p . gilmore , '' color tv : is it finally worth the money ? '' , popular science , august 1963 , pp . & nbsp ; 80–83 , 178 . external links . what is a shadow mask ?