Hazarajat

etymology and usage . the hazara people and surrounding peoples use the names hazarajat or hazaristan to identify the historic hazara lands . hazarajat is a compound of hazara and the dari suffix jat , which is used to make words associated with land in south , central and west asia . the arab geographer maqdesi 945/946 – 991 ) named hazarajat as gharjistan or gharchistan ( gharj meaning '' mountain '' ) area ruled by chiefs . ḥamd-allah mostawfi , nozhat al-qolub , tr . guy le strange , london 1919 . pp 415–16 s . a . mousavi , the hazaras of afghanistan , london , 1998 , p . 39 . the name hazarajat first appears in the 16th-century in baburnama , written by mughal empire babur . geography . topography . the hazarajat lies in the central highlands of afghanistan , among the koh-i-baba and the western extremities of the hindu kush . its boundaries have historically been inexact and shifting . its physical boundaries , however , are roughly marked by the bā-miān basin ( see bāmiān ii . ) to the north , the headwaters of the helmand river ( q.v . ) to the south , firuzkuh to the west , and the unai pass to the east . the regional terrain is very mountainous and extends to the safid kuh and the siāh kuh mountains , where the highest peaks are between 15,000 and 17,000 feet . both sides of the kuh-e bābā range contain a succession of valleys . the north face of the range descends steeply , merging into low foothills and short semi-arid plains , while the south face stretches towards the helmand valley and the mountainous district of behsud . wilfred thesiger '' the hazaras of central afghanistan , '' the geographical journal 71/3 , 1955 , pp . 313 the northeastern part of the hazarajat , is the site of ancient bamyan , a center of buddhism and a key caravanserai on the silk road . the town is situated at a height of 7,500 feet and surrounded by the hindu kush to the north and koh-i baba to the south . . climate . hazarajat is mountainous , anonymous , ḥodud al-ʿālam , tr . minorsky , london , 1937 ; reprinted , 1982 , p . 105 and a series of mountain passes extend along its eastern edge . one of them , salang pass , is blocked by snow six months out of the year . another , shibar pass , at a lower elevation , is blocked by snow only two months out of the year . johannes humlum , la geographie de l ’ afghanistan , copenhagen , 1959 , p . 64 bamyan is the colder part of the region ; winters there are severe . ebn ḥawqal , ke-tāb ṣurat al-arż , trs . j . h . kramers and g . wiet as configuration de la terre , ii , paris , 1964 , p . 227 hazarajat is the source of the rivers that run through kabul , arghandab , helmand , hari , murghab , balkh , and kunduz , and during the spring and summer months , it has some of the greenest pastures in afghanistan . ḥamd-allah mostawfi , nozhat al-qolub , tr . guy le strange , london 1919 , p . 212 band-e amir , green valleys and caves are found in bamyan . s . a . mousavi , the hazaras of afghanistan , london , 1998 , p . 71 . history . the area was ruled successively by the achaemenids , seleucids , mauryas , kushans , and hephthalites before the saffarids islamized it and made it part of their empire . it was taken over by the samanids , followed by the ghaznavids and ghurids before falling to the delhi sultanate . in the 13th century , it was invaded by genghis khan and his mongols . in the following decades the qarlughids emerged to create a local dynasty that offered a few decades of self-rule . later , the area became part of the timurid dynasty , the mughal empire and the durrani empire . the subjugation of the hazarajat , particularly the mountain fortresses of bamyan , proved difficult for the invaders at their conquest of the region . '' adopted the language of the vanquished '' . w . barthold , an historical geography of iran , princeton , 1984 , p . 82 j . p . ferrier , caravan journeys and wanderings in persia , afghanistan , turkestan , and beloochistan , london , 1856 , p . 221 johannes humlum , la geographie de l ’ afghanistan , copenhagen , 1959 , p . 87 . 19th century . in the 18th and 19th centuries developed among the hazara tribes and the pashtun tribes , began to coalesce . robert l . canfield , hazara integration into the afghan nation , new york , 1973 , p . 3 it has been suggested that in the 19th century there was an emerging awareness of ethnic and religious differences among the population of kabul . this brought about divisions along '' confessional lines '' that became reflected in new '' spatial boundaries '' . christine noelle , state and tribe in nineteenth-century afghanistan , richmond , 1997 , p . 22 during the reign of dost mohammad khan , mir yazdanbakhsh , a diligent chief of the behsud hazaras , consolidated many of the districts they controlled . mir yazdanbakhsh collected revenues and safeguarded caravans traveling on the hajigak route through bamyan to kabul through shekh ali and behsud areas . the consolidation of the hazarajat thus increasingly made the region and its inhabitants a threat to the durrani state . c . masson , narrative of various journeys in baloochistan , afghanistan , and the punjab . london , 1842 , ii , p . 296 until the late 19th century , the hazarajat remained as a small part of afghanistan and local chieftains obeyed from central government . w . barthold , an historical geography of iran , princeton , 1984 , pp . 82–83 joseph pierre ferrier , a french author who supposedly traveled through the region in the mid-19th century , described the inhabitants settled in the mountains near the rivers balkh and kholm '' the hazara population is very less but ungovernable , and has no occupation but pillage ; they will pillage and pillage only , and plunder from camp to camp '' . j . p . ferrier , caravan journeys and wanderings in persia , afghanistan , turkestan , and beloochistan , london , 1856 , pp . 219–20 only pashtun rulers would control the area as they controlled it for centuries . klaus ferdinand , preliminary notes on hazāra culture , copenhagen , 1959 , p . 18 later in the early 1890s , the tribes of the hazara were more noticed . their population was about hundred thousand and were living in the central afghanistan areas . s . a . mousavi , the hazaras of afghanistan , london , 1998 , p . 95 during the second anglo-afghan war , thomas holdich of the indian survey department referred to the hazarajat as '' great unknown highlands '' . t . h . holdich , the indian borderland , 1880–1900 , london , 1901 , p . 41 and for the next few years , neither the survey nor the indian intelligence department succeeded in obtaining any trustworthy information on the routes between herat and kabul through the hazarajat . a . c . yate , travels with the afghan boundary commission , edinburgh , 1887 pp . 147–48 various members of the afghan boundary commission were able to gather information that brought the geography of remote regions such as the hazarajat further under state surveillance . in november 1884 , the commission crossed over the koh-i baba mountains by the chashma sabz pass . general peter lumsden and major c . e . yate , who surveyed the tracts between herat and the oxus , visited the qala-e naw pashtuns in the paropamisus mountain range , to the east of the jamshidis of kushk . noting surviving evidence of terraced cultivation in times past , both described the northern pashtuns as semi-nomadic with large flocks of sheep and black cattle . they possessed an '' inexhaustible supply of grass , the hills around being covered knee-deep with a luxuriant crop of pure rye '' . c . e . yate , northern afghanistan , edinburgh , 1888 , p . 9 yate noted clusters of kebetkas , or the summer dwellings of the qala-e naw pashtuns on the hillsides , and described '' flocks and herds grazing in all directions '' . c . e . yate , northern afghanistan , edinburgh , 1888 , pp . 7–8 peter lumsden , '' countries and tribes bordering on the koh-e baba range , '' proceedings of the royal geographical society 7 , 1885 , pp . 562–63 the geographical reach of the authority of the afghan state was extended into the hazarajat during the reign of abdul rahman khan . caught between the strategic interests of foreign powers and disappointed by the demarcation of the durand line in southern afghanistan , which cut into pashtun territory , he set out to bring the northern peripheries of the country more firmly under his control . this policy had disastrous consequences for the hazarajat , whose inhabitants were singled out by abdur rahman khan 's regime . mir munshi , ed . , the life of abdur rahman , amir of afghanistan , ii , london , 1900 , p . 276 . 20th and 21st century . in the 1920s the ancient shibar pass road which leads through bamyan and east to the panjshir valley was paved for lorries , and it remained the busiest road across the hindu kush until the building of the salang tunnel in 1964 and the opening of a winter route . hazaras migrated to cities and to surrounding countries , where they became laborers and undertook the hardest and lowest-paid work . in 1979 , there were reportedly less than half million hazaras in the hazarajat and kabul , although a reliable census has never been taken in afghanistan . barnett rubin , the fragmentation of afghanistan , new haven , 2002 , p . 246 the group ruling hazarajat was the revolutionary council of islamic unity of afghanistan or shura-i ettefaq , led by sayyid ali beheshti . the region 's geographic nature and un-strategic location meant that the government and soviets ignored it as they fought rebels elsewhere . this effectively allowed the shura-i ettefaq administration to rule over the region and give autonomy to the hazaras . their politically opposing groups were the pro-iran nasr and the khans , who were mostly educated , secular and left-wing . nation , ethnicity and the conflict in afghanistan : political islam and the rise of ethno-politics 1992–1996 by raghav sharma , 2016 . the shura wanted a return to the 19th century status quo whereas the nasr wanted an iranian-style government of clerics . between 1982 and 1984 , an internal civil war caused the shura to be overthrown by the sazman-i nasr and sepah-i pasdaran groups . however inter-factional rivalry continued thereafter . most of the hazara groups united in 1987 and in 1989 formed the hizb-i-wahdat . during the rule of taliban , once again violence struck hazarajat . in 1997 , a revolt broke out among hazara people in mazar-i-sharif when they refused to be disarmed by taliban ; 600 taliban were killed in subsequent fighting . ahmed rashid , taliban : militant islam , oil , and fundamentalism in central asia , london and new haven , 2000 , p . 58 in retaliation , the genocidal policies of amir abdur rahman khan 's era was adopted by taliban . in 1998 , six hundred hazaras were killed in the north ; the intention was ethnic cleansing of hazara . ahmed rashid , taliban : militant islam , oil , and fundamentalism in central asia , london and new haven , 2000 , pp . 67–74 at that stage , hazarajat does not exist as an official region ; the area comprises the administrative provinces of bamyan , ghor , wardak , ghazni , oruzgan , juzjan , and samangan . . demographics . ethnic groups . the hazaras constitute the majority of the hazarajat population , with small tajiks and pashtuns minorities . language . dari language is the official language in hazarajat . health . leprosy has been reported in the hazarajat region of afghanistan . the vast majority ( 60 % ) of the leprosy victims are hazara . dr . mohammad salim rasooli . leprosy situation in afghanistan in 2001–2006 . ministry of public health ( moph ) national leprosy control program . 7–9 july 2008 . in 1999 , leprosy control stated that they were the only ngo providing anti-leprosy aid in the hazarajat , and had been doing so since 1984 . a 1989 report noted that common diseases in the hazarajat included gastrointestinal infections , typhoid , whooping cough , measles , leprosy , tuberculosis , rheumatoid arthritis and malaria .