Poly(methyl methacrylate)

modification of properties . pure poly ( methyl methacrylate ) homopolymer is rarely sold as an end product , since it is not optimized for most applications . rather , modified formulations with varying amounts of other comonomers , additives , and fillers are created for uses where specific properties are required . for example , a small amount of acrylate comonomers are routinely used in pmma grades destined for heat processing , since this stabilizes the polymer to depolymerization ( '' unzipping '' ) during processing . comonomers such as butyl acrylate are often added to improve impact strength . comonomers such as methacrylic acid can be added to increase the glass transition temperature of the polymer for higher temperature use such as in lighting applications . plasticizers may be added to improve processing properties , lower the glass transition temperature , improve impact properties , and improve mechanical properties such as elastic modulus dyes may be added to give color for decorative applications , or to protect against ( or filter ) uv light . fillers may be added to improve cost-effectiveness . poly ( methyl acrylate ) . the polymer of methyl acrylate , pma or poly ( methyl acrylate ) , is similar to poly ( methyl methacrylate ) , except for the lack of methyl groups on the backbone carbon chain . polymethyl acrylate and polyethyl acrylate , encyclopædia britannica . encyclopædia britannica . retrieved 2012-05-09 . pma is a soft white rubbery material that is softer than pmma because its long polymer chains are thinner and smoother and can more easily slide past each other . uses . being transparent and durable , pmma is a versatile material and has been used in a wide range of fields and applications such as rear-lights and instrument clusters for vehicles , appliances , and lenses for glasses . pmma in the form of sheets affords to shatter resistant panels for building windows , skylights , bulletproof security barriers , signs & displays , sanitary ware ( bathtubs ) , lcd screens , furniture and many other applications . it is also used for coating polymers based on mma provides outstanding stability against environmental conditions with reduced emission of voc . methacrylate polymers are used extensively in medical and dental applications where purity and stability are critical to performance . transparent glass substitute . image : bathyscaphe trieste sphere.jpg thumb right close-up of pressure sphere of bathyscaphe trieste , with a single conical window of pmma set into sphere hull . the very small black circle ( smaller than the man 's head ) is the inner side of the plastic '' window '' , only a few inches in diameter . the larger circular clear black area represents the larger outer side of the thick one-piece plastic cone '' window '' . pmma is commonly used for constructing residential and commercial aquariums . designers started building large aquariums when poly ( methyl methacrylate ) could be used . it is less often used in other building types due to incidents such as the summerland disaster . pmma is used for viewing ports and even complete pressure hulls of submersibles , such as the alicia submarine 's viewing sphere and the window of the bathyscaphe trieste . pmma is used in the lenses of exterior lights of automobiles . spectator protection in ice hockey rinks is made from pmma . historically , pmma was an important improvement in the design of aircraft windows , making possible such designs as the bombardier 's transparent nose compartment in the boeing b-17 flying fortress . modern aircraft transparencies often use stretched acrylic plies . police vehicles for riot control often have the regular glass replaced with pmma to protect the occupants from thrown objects . pmma is an important material in the making of certain lighthouse lenses . terry pepper , seeing the light , illumination . terrypepper.com . retrieved 2012-05-09 . pmma was used for the roofing of the compound in the olympic park for the 1972 summer olympics in munich . it enabled a light and translucent construction of the structure . pmma ( under the brand name '' lucite '' ) was used for the ceiling of the reliant astrodome . daylight redirection . laser cut acrylic panels have been used to redirect sunlight into a light pipe or tubular skylight and , from there , to spread it into a room . yeang , ken . light pipes : an innovative design device for bringing natural daylight and illumination into buildings with deep floor plan , nomination for the far east economic review asian innovation awards 2003 their developers veronica garcia hansen , ken yeang , and ian edmonds were awarded the far east economic review innovation award in bronze for this technology in 2003 . lighting up your workplace – queensland student pipes light to your office cubicle , may 9 , 2005 kenneth yeang , world cities summit 2008 , june 23–25 , 2008 , singapore attenuation being quite strong for distances over one meter ( more than 90 % intensity loss for a 3000 & nbsp ; k source ) , acrylic broadband light guides are then dedicated mostly to decorative uses . pairs of acrylic sheets with a layer of microreplicated prisms between the sheets can have reflective and refractive properties that let them redirect part of incoming sunlight in dependence on its angle of incidence . such panels act as miniature light shelves . such panels have been commercialized for purposes of daylighting , to be used as a window or a canopy such that sunlight descending from the sky is directed to the ceiling or into the room rather than to the floor . this can lead to a higher illumination of the back part of a room , in particular when combined with a white ceiling , while having a slight impact on the view to the outside compared to normal glazing . how serraglaze works . bendinglight.co.uk . retrieved 2012-05-09 . glaze of light , building design online , june 8 , 2007 . medical technologies and implants . pmma has a good degree of compatibility with human tissue , and it is used in the manufacture of rigid intraocular lenses which are implanted in the eye when the original lens has been removed in the treatment of cataracts . this compatibility was discovered by the english ophthalmologist sir harold ridley in wwii raf pilots , whose eyes had been riddled with pmma splinters coming from the side windows of their supermarine spitfire fighters – the plastic scarcely caused any rejection , compared to glass splinters coming from aircraft such as the hawker hurricane . robert a . meyers , '' molecular biology and biotechnology : a comprehensive desk reference '' , wiley-vch , 1995 , p . 722 ridley had a lens manufactured by the rayner company ( brighton & hove , east sussex ) made from perspex polymerised by ici . on 29 november 1949 at st thomas ' hospital , london , ridley implanted the first intraocular lens at st thomas 's hospital in london . in particular , acrylic-type contact lenses are useful for cataract surgery in patients that have recurrent ocular inflammation ( uveitis ) , as acrylic material induces less inflammation . glasses lenses are commonly made from pmma . historically , hard contact lenses were frequently made of this material . soft contact lenses are often made of a related polymer , where acrylate monomers containing one or more hydroxyls make them hydrophile . in orthopedic surgery , pmma bone cement is used to affix implants and to remodel lost bone . it is supplied as a powder with liquid methyl methacrylate ( mma ) . although pmma is biologically compatible , mma is considered to be an irritant and a possible carcinogen . pmma has also been linked to cardiopulmonary events in the operating room due to hypotension . bone cement acts like a grout and not so much like a glue in arthroplasty . although sticky , it does not bond to either the bone or the implant ; rather , it primarily fills the spaces between the prosthesis and the bone preventing motion . a disadvantage of this bone cement is that it heats up to while setting that may cause thermal necrosis of neighboring tissue . a careful balance of initiators and monomers is needed to reduce the rate of polymerization , and thus the heat generated . in plastic surgery , tiny pmma microspheres suspended in some biological fluid are injected as a soft tissue filler under the skin to reduce wrinkles or scars permanently . pmma as a soft tissue filler was widely used in the beginning of the century to restore volume in patients with hiv-related facial wasting . pmma is used illegally to shape muscles by some bodybuilding . plombage is an outdated treatment of tuberculosis where the pleural space around an infected lung was filled with pmma balls , in order to compress and collapse the affected lung . emerging biotechnology and medical research uses pmma to create microfluidic lab-on-a-chip devices , which require 100 micrometre-wide geometries for routing liquids . these small geometries are amenable to using pmma in a biochip fabrication process and offers moderate biocompatibility . bioprocess chromatography columns use cast acrylic tubes as an alternative to glass and stainless steel . these are pressure rated and satisfy stringent requirements of materials for biocompatibility , toxicity and extractables . uses in dentistry . due to its aforementioned biocompatibility , poly ( methyl methacrylate ) is a commonly used material in modern dentistry , particularly in the fabrication of dental prosthetics , artificial teeth , and orthodontic appliances . ; acrylic prosthetic construction : pre-polymerized , powdered pmma spheres are mixed with a methyl methacrylate liquid monomer , benzoyl peroxide ( initiator ) , and nn-dimethyl-p-toluidine ( accelerator ) , and placed under heat and pressure to produce a hardened polymerized pmma structure . through the use of injection molding techniques , wax based designs with artificial teeth set in predetermined positions built on gypsum stone models of patients ' mouths can be converted into functional prosthetics used to replace missing dentition . pmma polymer and methyl methacrylate monomer mix is then injected into a flask containing a gypsum mold of the previously designed prosthesis , and placed under heat to initiate polymerization process . pressure is used during the curing process to minimize polymerization shrinkage , ensuring an accurate fit of the prosthesis . though other methods of polymerizing pmma for prosthetic fabrication exist , such as chemical and microwave resin activation , the previously described heat-activated resin polymerization technique is the most commonly used due to its cost effectiveness and minimal polymerization shrinkage . ; artificial teeth : while denture teeth can be made of several different materials , pmma is a material of choice for the manufacturing of artificial teeth used in dental prosthetics . mechanical properties of the material allow for heightened control of aesthetics , easy surface adjustments , decreased risk of fracture when in function in the oral cavity , and minimal wear against opposing teeth . additionally , since the bases of dental prosthetics are often constructed using pmma , adherence of pmma denture teeth to pmma denture bases is unparalleled , leading to the construction of a strong and durable prosthetic . . artistic and aesthetic uses . acrylic paint essentially consists of pmma suspended in water ; however since pmma is hydrophobe , a substance with both hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups needs to be added to facilitate the suspension . modern furniture makers , especially in the 1960s and 1970s , seeking to give their products a space age aesthetic , incorporated lucite and other pmma products into their designs , especially office chairs . many other products ( for example , guitars ) are sometimes made with acrylic glass to make the commonly opaque objects translucent . perspex has been used as a surface to paint on , for example by salvador dalí . diasec is a process which uses acrylic glass as a substitute for normal glass in picture frames . this is done for its relatively low cost , light weight , shatter-resistance , aesthetics and because it can be ordered in larger sizes than standard picture framing glass . as early as 1939 , los angeles-based dutch sculptor jan de swart experimented with samples of lucite sent to him by dupont ; de swart created tools to work the lucite for sculpture and mixed chemicals to bring about certain effects of color and refraction de swart , ursula . my life with jan . collection of jock de swart , durango , co from approximately the 1960s onward , sculptors and glass artists such as jan kubíček , leroy lamis , and frederick hart began using acrylics , especially taking advantage of the material 's flexibility , light weight , cost and its capacity to refract and filter light . in the 1950s and 1960s , lucite was an extremely popular material for jewelry , with several companies specialized in creating high-quality pieces from this material . lucite beads and ornaments are still sold by jewelry suppliers . acrylic sheets are produced in dozens of standard colors , plexiglas ® color numbers . professionalplastics.com most commonly sold using color numbers developed by rohm & haas in the 1950s . other uses . pmma , in the commercial form technovit 7200 is used vastly in the medical field . it is used for plastic histology , electron microscopy , as well as many more uses . pmma has been used to create ultra-white opaque membranes that are flexible and switch appearance to transparent when wet . acrylic is used in tanning beds as the transparent surface that separates the occupant from the tanning bulbs while tanning . the type of acrylic used in tanning beds is most often formulated from a special type of polymethyl methacrylate , a compound that allows the passage of ultraviolet rays sheets of pmma are commonly used in the sign industry to make flat cut out letters in thicknesses typically varying from . these letters may be used alone to represent a company 's name and/or logo , or they may be a component of illuminated channel letters . acrylic is also used extensively throughout the sign industry as a component of wall signs where it may be a backplate , painted on the surface or the backside , a faceplate with additional raised lettering or even photographic images printed directly to it , or a spacer to separate sign components . pmma was used in laserdisc optical media . ( cds and dvds use both acrylic and polycarbonate for impact resistance . ) it is used as a light guide for the backlights in tft lcd . plastic optical fiber used for short distance communication is made from pmma , and perfluorinated pmma , clad with fluorinated pmma , in situations where its flexibility and cheaper installation costs outweigh its poor heat tolerance and higher attenuation over glass fiber . pmma , in a purified form , is used as the matrix in laser dye-doped organic solid-state gain media for tunable solid state dye lasers . f . j . duarte ( ed . ) , tunable laser applications ( crc , new york , 2009 ) chapters 3 and 4 . in semiconductor research and industry , pmma aids as a resist in the electron beam lithography process . a solution consisting of the polymer in a solvent is used to spin coat silicon and other semiconducting and semi-insulating wafers with a thin film . patterns on this can be made by an electron beam ( using an electron microscope ) , deep uv light ( shorter wavelength than the standard photolithography process ) , or x-rays . exposure to these creates chain scission or ( de-cross-linking ) within the pmma , allowing for the selective removal of exposed areas by a chemical developer , making it a positive photoresist . pmma 's advantage is that it allows for extremely high resolution patterns to be made . smooth pmma surface can be easily nanostructured by treatment in oxygen radio-frequency plasma and nanostructured pmma surface can be easily smoothed by vacuum ultraviolet ( vuv ) irradiation . pmma is used as a shield to stop beta radiation emitted from radioisotopes . small strips of pmma are used as dosimeter devices during the gamma irradiation process . the optical properties of pmma change as the gamma dose increases , and can be measured with a spectrophotometry . a blacklight-reactive tattoo ink using pmma microcapsules has been developed . – blacklight tattoo ink – blacklight tattoo ink faq . crazychameleonbodyartsupply.com . retrieved 2012-05-09 . pmma can be used as a dispersant for ceramic powders to stabilize colloidal suspensions in non-aqueous media . due to its high viscosity upon dissolution , it can also be used as binder material for solution deposition processes , e.g . printing of solar cells . in the 1960s , luthier dan armstrong developed a line of electric guitars and basses whose bodies were made completely of acrylic . these instruments were marketed under the ampeg brand . ibanez js2k-plt . ibanezregister.com . retrieved 2012-05-09 . and b.c . rich have also made acrylic guitars . ludwig-musser makes a line of acrylic drums called vistalites , well known as being used by led zeppelin drummer john bonham . artificial nails in the '' acrylic '' type often include pmma powder . some modern briar , and occasionally meerschaum , tobacco pipes sport stems made of lucite . pmma technology is utilized in roofing and waterproofing applications . by incorporating a polyester fleece sandwiched between two layers of catalyst-activated pmma resin , a fully reinforced liquid membrane is created in situ . pmma is a widely used material to create deal toys and financial tombstones . file : acrylic heels.jpg high heel shoes made of lucite file : basscat bass.jpg an electric bass guitar made from poly ( methyl methacrylate ) . biodegradation . the futuro house was made of fibreglass-reinforced polyester plastic , polyester-polyurethane , and poly ( methylmethacrylate ) ; one of them was found to be degrading by cyanobacteria and archaea . . see also . polycarbonate organic laser organic photonics . references . external links . perspex technical properties perspex material safety data sheet ( msds )