1928 in film

top-grossing films . the top ten 1928 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . events . january 6 – the long-awaited charlie chaplin comedy the circus premieres at the strand theatre in new york city . january 15 – five months after its premiere at the criterion theater in new york city , paramount 's wings opens in los angeles . the film goes on to win the first academy award for best picture . april 21 – the passion of joan of arc is released . july 6 – lights of new york ( starring helene costello ) is released by warner bros . it is the first '' 100 % talkie '' feature film , in that dialog is spoken throughout the film . previous releases don juan and the jazz singer had used a synchronized soundtrack with sound effects and music , with the jazz singer having a few incidental lines spoken by al jolson . september 19 – the singing fool , warner bros ' follow-up to the jazz singer , is released . while still only a partial-talkie ( sequences still featured intertitles ) , 66 minutes of the film 's 105 minute running time feature dialogue or songs , making it the longest talking motion picture yet . ( lights of new york runs a total of 57 minutes . ) it is the highest-grossing film of the year , becomes warner bros ' highest-grossing film for the next 13 years , and is the most financially successful film of al jolson 's career . october 23 – rko created november 10 – at the beginning of white shadows in the south seas , metro-goldwyn-mayer 's mascot leo the lion roars for the very first time , giving voice to one of the most popular american film logos . november 18 – disney 's steamboat willie premieres , marking the official introduction of mickey mouse . this animated short is the first film to include a soundtrack , completely created in post production , including sound effects , music , and dialogue . december 25 – in old arizona , released by fox films , is the first sound-on-film feature-length talkie , utilizing the movietone process . previously , feature-length talkies used the less-reliable vitaphone sound-on-disc process . it is also the first western talkie , and the first sound film primarily shot outdoors . academy awards . best picture : wings – paramount pictures best unique and artistic picture : sunrise : a song of two humans – fox film academy award for best director : frank borzage – 7th heaven best director , comedy picture : lewis milestone – two arabian knights best actor : emil jannings – the last command and the way of all flesh best actress : janet gaynor – 7th heaven , street angel , and sunrise : a song of two humans note : prior to 1933 , awards were not based on calendar years , which is why there is no 'best picture ' for a 1928 film . notable films released in 1928 . united states unless stated . a . accident ( polizeibericht überfall ) – ( germany ) across to singapore , starring ramón novarro and joan crawford the actress directed by sidney franklin ; starring norma shearer adam 's apple , starring monty banks – ( gb ) alraune , starring brigitte helm and paul wegener – ( germany ) ang lumang simbahan , directed by jose nepomuceno starring juanita angeles , gregorio fernandez and mary walter – ( philippines ) l'argent ( money ) , starring pierre alcover and brigitte helm – ( france ) the awakening , directed by victor fleming , starring vilma bánky and louis wolheim . b . balaclava , starring cyril mclaglen , benita hume – ( gb ) beau sabreur , directed by john waters , starring gary cooper and evelyn brent beggars of life , directed by william wellman , starring wallace beery and louise brooks the big city , starring lon chaney , sr . the burning of the red lotus temple ( huo shao hong lian si ) – ( china ) – released in 18 parts as the film runs for a total of 27 hours . c . the cameraman , a buster keaton film the cardboard lover , directed by robert z . leonard ; starring marion davies , nils asther , and jetta goudal champagne , directed by alfred hitchcock – ( gb ) the circus , starring , directed and written by charles chaplin the constant nymph , starring ivor novello – ( gb ) the cossacks starring john gilbert , renée adorée and ernest torrence the crowd , directed by king vidor . d . dawn , directed by herbert wilcox , starring sybil thorndike – ( britain ) the devious path ( abwege ) , directed by g.w . pabst – ( germany ) the divine woman , starring greta garbo the docks of new york , directed by josef von sternberg , starring george bancroft , betty compson and olga baclanova . e . easy virtue , directed by alfred hitchcock – ( gb ) . f . the fall of the house of usher , directed by james sibley watson the fall of the house of usher ( la chute de la maison usher ) – ( france ) the farmer 's wife , directed by alfred hitchcock – ( gb ) feel my pulse , starring bebe daniels , richard arlen and william powell the first born , starring miles mander , madeleine carroll – ( gb ) four sons , directed by john ford . g . the gallant hussar , directed by géza von bolváry , starring ivor novello , evelyn holt ( britain/germany ) gentlemen prefer blondes , starring ruth taylor and alice white , subtitles written by anita loos a girl in every port , directed by howard hawks , starring victor mclaglen , robert armstrong , louise brooks the godless girl , directed by cecil b . demille the guns of loos , directed by sinclair hill , starring madeleine carroll ( britain ) . h . hangman 's house , directed by john ford , starring victor mclaglen and june collyer his house in order , starring tallulah bankhead ( britain ) homecoming ( heimkehr ) – ( germany ) the house on trubnaya ( дом на трубной ) , directed by boris barnet – ( u.s.s.r . ) hungarian rhapsody , directed by hanns schwarz , starring lil dagover , willy fritsch , dita parlo ( germany ) . i . interference , paramount 's first ever all talking movie the italian straw hat ( un chapeau de paille d'italie ) , directed by rené clair – ( france ) . j . jujiro – ( japan ) . k . kurama tengu – ( japan ) . l . ladies of the mob , starring clara bow , richard arlen and helen lynch the last command , directed by joseph von sternberg , starring emil jannings , evelyn brent and william powell laugh , clown , laugh , starring lon chaney and loretta young lights of new york a little bit of fluff , starring sydney chaplin and betty balfour – ( gb ) lonesome , directed by paul fejos – ( a silent and a sound version ) . m . the man who laughs , directed by paul leni , starring conrad veidt and mary philbin maria marten , starring trilby clark and warwick ward ( britain ) the matinee idol , directed by frank capra , starring bessie love and johnnie walker . the midnight taxi mother machree , directed by john ford moulin rouge directed by ewald andré dupont – ( gb ) the mysterious lady , starring greta garbo and conrad nagel . n . noah 's ark , starring george o'brien the noose , starring richard barthelmess number 17 , directed by géza von bolváry , starring guy newall and lien deyers – ( gb/germany ) . o . october : ten days that shook the world ( oktyabr ' : desyat ' dney kotorye potryasli mir ) , directed by sergei eisenstein – ( u.s.s.r . ) on trial , sound film , starring pauline frederick and bert lytell our dancing daughters , starring joan crawford and johnny mack brown . p . the passion of joan of arc ( la passion de jeanne d'arc ) , directed by carl theodor dreyer , starring maria falconetti – ( france ) the patsy , directed by king vidor , starring marion davies and marie dressler piccadilly , starring anna may wong , gilda gray and cyril ritchard ( britain ) the power of the press , directed by frank capra , starring douglas fairbanks , jr . r . the racket , directed by lewis milestone , starring thomas meighan , marie prevost , and louis wolheim . ramona , starring dolores del río and warner baxter the red dance , directed by raoul walsh , starring dolores del río and charles farrell red hair , starring clara bow the ringer directed by arthur maude – ( britain ) the road to ruin rose-marie , starring james murray and joan crawford . s . sadie thompson , starring gloria swanson and lionel barrymore the seashell and the clergyman ( la coquille et le clergyman ) – ( france ) sex in chains ( geschlecht in fesseln ) , starring and directed by william dieterle – ( germany ) show people , directed by king vidor , starring marion davies and william haines the singing fool , starring al jolson and betty bronson sins of the fathers starring emil jannings and ruth chatterton skyscraper , directed by cecil b . demille , starring william boyd , alan hale , sue carol and alberta vaughn the smart set , starring william haines , jack holt , and alice day a south sea bubble , starring ivor novello , benita hume ( britain ) speedy , starring harold lloyd spione ( spies ) , directed by fritz lang – ( germany ) steamboat bill , jr . , a buster keaton film steamboat willie , a walt disney mickey mouse short storm over asia ( potomok chingis-khana ) , starring valéry inkijinoff – ( u.s.s.r . ) street angel , starring janet gaynor and charles farrell sweeney todd , starring moore marriott – ( gb ) . t . take me home , a lost film directed by marshall neilan , starring bebe daniels tempest , starring john barrymore , camilla horn and george fawcett the terror , starring may mcavoy , edward everett horton , and louise fazenda tesha , directed by victor saville , starring maría corda , jameson thomas – ( gb ) thérèse raquin , directed by jacques feyder – ( france ) three sinners starring pola negri , warner baxter and olga baclanova tillie 's punctured romance , starring w . c . fields , louise fazenda and chester conklin tommy atkins , starring lillian hall-davis ( britain ) toni starring jack buchanan – ( gb ) the trail of '98 , starring dolores del río the triumph of the scarlet pimpernel , starring matheson lang ( britain ) two tars , starring laurel and hardy . u . underground , directed by anthony asquith – ( gb ) . v . the viking – the first feature-length technicolor film vormittagsspuk ( ghosts before breakfast ) , a dadaist animated short – ( germany ) the vortex , starring ivor novello – ( gb ) . w . we faw down , starring laurel and hardy the wedding march , directed by and starring erich von stroheim with fay wray and zasu pitts west of zanzibar , starring lon chaney and lionel barrymore west point , starring william haines and joan crawford what a night ! , directed by a . edward sutherland ; starring bebe daniels while the city sleeps , directed by jack conway ; starring lon chaney white shadows in the south seas , starring monte blue and raquel torres the wind , directed by victor sjostrom , starring lillian gish and lars hanson a woman of affairs , starring greta garbo and john gilbert . z . zvenigora , directed by alexander dovzhenko – ( u.s.s.r . ) . short film series . buster keaton ( 1917–1941 ) our gang ( 1922–1944 ) laurel and hardy ( 1921–1943 ) . animated short film series . felix the cat ( 1919–1936 ) aesop 's film fables ( 1921–1933 ) krazy kat ( 1925–1940 ) inkwell imps ( 1927–1929 ) oswald the lucky rabbit harem scarem neck ' n ' neck the ol ' swimmin ' hole africa before dark rival romeos bright lights oh , what a knight sagebrush sadie ride'em plow boy sky scrappers ozzie of the mounted hungry hoboes poor papa the fox chase tall timber sleigh bells hot dog newslaffs ( 1927–1928 ) mickey mouse plane crazy gallopin ' gaucho steamboat willie the barn dance . births . january 2 – ellen kaarma , estonian actress ( died 1973 ) january 7 – william peter blatty , american screenwriter ( died 2017 ) january 23 – jeanne moreau , french actress , singer , screenwriter and director ( died 2017 ) january 26 – roger vadim , french director , screenwriter , actor ( died 2000 ) february 1 – stuart whitman , american film and television actor february 8 – jack larson , american actor ( died 2015 ) february 11 – conrad janis , american actor february 22 - paul dooley , american actor , writer and comedian . february 29 – tempest storm , american burlesque performer and actress march 1 – jacques rivette , french director ( died 2016 ) march 19 – patrick mcgoohan , irish actor ( died 2009 ) march 24 – vanessa brown american actress ( died 1999 ) april 2 – piet römer , dutch actor ( died 2012 ) april 4 – estelle harris , american actress and comedienne april 7 – james garner , american actor ( died 2014 ) april 23 – shirley temple , american actress ( died 2014 ) may 7 – georgi rusev , bulgarian actor ( died 2011 ) may 30 – agnès varda , belgian-born french director , producer and screenwriter ( died 2019 ) june 12 – vic damone , american singer , entertainer and actor ( died 2018 ) june 13 – nikola todev , bulgarian actor ( died 1991 ) june 19 – nancy marchand , american actress ( died 2000 ) june 20 – martin landau , american actor ( died 2017 ) june 22 – ralph waite , american actor ( died 2014 ) july 6 – néstor de villa , filipino actor ( died 2004 ) july 14 – nancy olson , american actress july 26 – stanley kubrick , american director ( died 1999 ) august 6 – andy warhol , american artist and director ( died 1987 ) august 14 joëlle bernard , french actress ( died 1977 ) jacques rouffio , french director and screenwriter ( died 2016 ) august 15 nicolas roeg , english director ( died 2018 ) simone silva , egyptian-born french actress ( died 1957 ) august 16 – ann blyth , american actress august 31 – james coburn , american actor ( died 2002 ) september 3 – pilar pallete , peruvian actress september 4 – dick york , american actor ( died 1992 ) september 11 – earl holliman , american actor september 17 – roddy mcdowall , anglo-american actor ( died 1998 ) september 19 – adam west , american actor ( died 2017 ) october 1 – george peppard , american actor ( died 1994 ) october 2 – george mcfarland , american actor ( died 1993 ) november 1 – emmaline henry , american actress ( died 1979 ) november 3 – wanda hendrix , american actress ( died 1981 ) november 10 – ennio morricone , italian composer ( died 2020 ) november 13 helena carroll , scottish-american actress ( died 2013 ) ralph foody , american actor ( died 1999 ) december 9 – dick van patten , american actor ( died 2015 ) december 25 – dick miller , american actor ( died 2019 ) . deaths . january 2 – emily stevens , american stage & film actress ( born 1882 ) january 3 – claude france , german film actress ( born 1893 ) january 25 – charles gorman , american stage and screen actor ( born 1865 ) february 22 – rudolph j . bergquist american cinematographer march 5 – lidia quaranta , italian actress ( born 1891 ) march 13 – poppy wyndham , british actress and heiress ; lost at sea ( born 1893 ) april 22 – frank currier , american director , stage & silent film actor ( born 1857 ) june 22 – george siegmann , american silent film actor ( born 1882 ) june 24 – holbrook blinn , american stage & silent film actor ( born 1872 ) july 20 – scott sidney , american film director ( born 1872 ) july 21 ellen terry , british stage actress of the victorian and edwardian times and later a silent film actress ( born 1847 ) ward crane , american film actor ( born 1890 ) august 10 – rex cherryman , american actor ( born 1896 ) august 17 – frank urson , american film director ( born 1887 ) august 26 – colin campbell , british-born film director ( born 1859 ) october 8 – larry semon , american film comedian ( born 1889 ) november 10 – anita berber , german film actress ( born 1899 ) november 19 – jeanne bérangère , french stage and film actress ( born 1864 ) december 14 – theodore roberts , american film actor ( born 1861 ) december 25 – fred thomson , american film actor ( born 1890 ) . film debuts . jack benny – bright moments humphrey bogart – the dancing town madeleine carroll – the guns of loos andy devine – that 's my daddy jean gabin – ohé ! les valises jean harlow – moran of the marines miriam hopkins – the home girl charles laughton – the tonic anna magnani – scampolo ray milland – moulin rouge randolph scott – sharp shooters mickey mouse – steamboat willie . references .