Trent's Last Case

plot summary . sigsbee manderson , a wealthy american plutocrat , is found shot dead in the grounds of his english country house '' white gables '' , in the village of marlstone , on the south-west coast of england . philip trent , an artist , freelance journalist , and amateur detective , is commissioned by sir james molloy , a fleet street press magnate , to investigate and report on the case . trent receives the cooperation of the police ( the investigating officer proves to be inspector murch of scotland yard , an old acquaintance ) , and is able to view the body , examine the house and grounds , and interview those involved . other members of the household include manderson 's wife , mabel ; his two secretaries ( calvin bunner , an american , and john marlowe , an englishman ) ; martin , a manservant ; and célestine , a lady 's maid . nathaniel cupples , mabel manderson 's uncle-by-marriage and another old friend of trent , is staying at a hotel in the village . trent pursues his enquiries , and learns , among other things , that the mandersons ' marriage was in difficulties , and that the couple had grown distant from one another . in the process , he falls in love with mabel manderson . the coroner 's inquest finds that manderson was killed by a person or persons unknown : there is a strong suggestion that he was the victim of a feud . trent , however , concludes that manderson was shot by marlowe , who then returned to the house wearing some of manderson 's outer clothing in order to give the impression that manderson was at that point still alive , before driving to southampton to provide himself with an alibi . trent believes that marlowe 's motive was his own love for mabel , but is unclear as to how far she may have colluded in the affair . he writes down his ideas in the form of a dispatch for molloy , but before sending it presents it to mabel and asks whether there had been anything between her and marlowe . her reaction persuades him that there had been , and he leaves the dispatch unsent . six months later ( having spent the intervening period in latvia as a roving correspondent for molloy ) trent re-establishes contact with mabel in london , and finally extracts her version of events . she tells him that there had never been any sort of intimacy between her and marlowe , but that her husband 's suspicions had been the cause of their marital rift , and that in his jealousy he may have plotted an act of revenge . trent now sends marlowe his original dispatch , and arranges a meeting , at which cupples is also present , to allow marlowe to give his side of the story . marlowe explains that manderson had fabricated a web of incriminating evidence to implicate marlowe in his apparent '' murder '' , and send him to the gallows ; and had then shot himself . having realised what was happening , and having discovered manderson 's body , marlowe had attempted to cover his tracks and give himself an alibi – this much of trent 's analysis had been correct . following this meeting , trent and cupples have dinner together , at which cupples reveals – in the final pages of the book – that , while the majority of marlowe 's story had been accurate , it was in fact he who had fired the fatal shot . he had chanced upon manderson pointing a pistol at himself , probably meaning only to cause a self-inflicted wound . however , suspecting a suicide attempt , cupples had intervened , and in the ensuing struggle had shot manderson in the face . on the last page , trent vows that he will never again attempt to dabble in crime detection . reception . g . k . chesterton , author of the father brown mysteries , felt that this novel was '' the finest detective story of modern times '' . ( bentley and chesterton were close personal friends , and bentley dedicated the book to chesterton . ) agatha christie called trent 's last case '' one of the three best detective stories ever written '' . dorothy sayers wrote that '' it is the one detective story of the present century which i am certain will go down to posterity as a classic . it is a masterpiece . '' literary critic jacques barzun included it in his top ten mystery novels . in his critique of the mystery genre , the simple art of murder , raymond chandler ridiculed some plot points that he considered preposterous : '' i have known relatively few international financiers , but i rather think the author of this novel has ( if possible ) known fewer . '' according to aaron marc stein in his introduction to the 1977 edition , published by university extension of ucsd : '' at the risk of bringing down on his memory the wrath of the baker street irregulars it must be recorded that bentley had reservations about even the conan doyle originals . he deplored the great detective 's lack of humor and he was irritated by the sherlockian eccentricities . bentley had the idea of doing a detective who would be a human being and who would know how to laugh . '' . adaptations . film . the novel was adapted into a silent film directed by richard garrick in 1920 . a second adaptation ( released in both a silent version and a sound version ) was made by howard hawks in 1929 . a third film adaptation was directed by herbert wilcox in 1952 . it starred michael wilding as trent , orson welles as sigsbee manderson , and margaret lockwood as margaret manderson . an excerpt of the book is recited in the film places in the heart ( 1984 ) . the only part the audience hears is the opening line : '' chapter 1 . bad news . between what matters and what seems to matter , how shall the world we know judge wisely ? '' . television . the novel was adapted as an episode of the bbc anthology tv series detective in april 1964 , introduced by rupert davies as maigret . it starred michael gwynn as trent , carleton hobbs as cupples , bill nagy as bunner , penelope horner as mabel manderson , kenneth fortescue as marlowe , and peter williams as sigsbee manderson . . stage . the novel was adapted into a stage production by john arden mcclure , which premiered in january 2013 at the broadway onstage live theatre in eastpointe , michigan . it starred mcclure as trent , daniel woitulewicz as cupples , elizabeth rager as bunner , stella rothe as mabel manderson , patrick john sharpe as marlowe , and jack abella as sigsbee manderson . trent 's last case , broadway onstage . retrieved 28 april 2015 . . radio . the novel was adapted for the bbc national programme in january 1934 . it was later serialised in 1950 ; and a further dramatisation was broadcast for the home service in 1963 , starring richard hurndall . another radio adaptation was broadcast on bbc radio 4 in december 1986 with martin jarvis in the title role . . publication details . 1913 , uk , nelson ( isbn na ) , pub date 1913 , hardback ( 1st edition ) 1917 , uk , nelson ( isbn na ) , pub date 1917 , hardcover ( 4th edition ) 2005 , us , kessinger publishing , , pub date 31 october 2005 , paperback 2005 , us , echo library , , october 2005 , paperback . references . further reading . t . j . binyon . murder will out : the detective in fiction . oxford & new york : oxford university press , 1989 . pp . & nbsp ; 56–58 , 63–66 , 122 . external links . trent 's last case at fantastic fiction