Carl Stamitz

biography . early life in mannheim . carl stamitz was born at mannheim and baptized on 8 may 1745 , the eldest son of johann stamitz , a violinist and composer of the early classical era . johann stamitz was the leader of the court orchestra at mannheim palace , and trained it to be disciplined and technically polished . the players created a sensation with their ability to play with subtlety and precision , as well as with a great dynamic range . carl received his first lessons in violin and musical composition from his father . after johann stamitz 's death in 1757 , the 12-year-old stamitz was taught by the composer christian cannabich , his father 's successor as concert-master and leader of the mannheim orchestra . ignaz holzbauer , the court-director of music , and the court-composer franz xaver richter also had a hand in the boy 's education . early career . by the time he was seventeen , stamitz was employed as a violinist in the court orchestra . in 1770 , he resigned from his post and began travelling . as a travelling virtuoso on the violin , the viola and viola d'amore , stamitz often accepted short-term engagements , but never managed to gain a permanent position with one of the european princes or in one of the orchestras of his time . in 1770 he went to paris , where he went into service with louis de noailles , who made him his court composer . he also appeared in the concert spirituel , sometimes together with his brother anton , who had probably come to paris with him . with paris as his base , he made frequent concert tours to a number of german cities : on 12 april 1773 he appeared in frankfurt ; a year later he was in augsburg ; and in 1775 he ventured as far as the russian capital , saint petersburg . in 1777 he dwelt for a time in strasbourg where franz xaver richter was music director . during the years 1777 and 1778 he was successful in london , one of many austro-german musicians , such as carl friedrich abel , j . c . bach and in his last years haydn , to be drawn there . his stay in london was possibly facilitated through his contact with thomas erskine , earl of kellie ( 1753–1781 ) , who had received lessons from carl 's father johann during a tour of the continent . between 1782 and 1783 , stamitz gave concerts in the hague and in amsterdam . in 1785 he returned to germany to appear in concerts in hamburg , lübeck , braunschweig , magdeburg and leipzig . in april 1786 he made his way to berlin , where on 19 may 1786 he participated in the performance of handel 's messiah , under the baton of johann adam hiller . he later travelled to dresden , prague , halle and then nuremberg , where on 3 november 1787 he staged a great allegorical musical festivity in two acts in celebration of the balloon ascent of the french aviation pioneer jean-pierre blanchard . during the winter of 1789 & ndash ; 90 he directed the amateur concerts in kassel , but failed to gain an employment with the schwerin court . by now married and the father of four young children , he was forced to resume a life of travelling . on 12 november 1792 he gave a concert in the weimar court theatre , which was then under the direction of goethe . in 1793 he undertook a last journey along the rhine to his native mannheim , before he finally gave up travelling . sometime in the winter of 1794 & ndash ; 95 he moved his family to the university town of jena in central germany . final years . during the years stamitz spent at jena , there was neither a town band nor an orchestra to speak of . according to some sources , he was in some way connected to the university , but this seems a matter of dispute . stamitz gradually descended into poverty . after his death in november 1801 , a substantial number of tracts on alchemy were found in his library . because of this it is thought that he dabbled in attempts at making gold . music . carl stamitz wrote more than 50 symphony , at least 38 sinfonia concertante and more than 60 concertos for violin , viola , viola d'amore , cello , clarinet , basset horn , flute , bassoon and other instruments . he also wrote a large volume of chamber music . some of the clarinet and viola concertos that stamitz composed are considered to be among the finest available from the period . during the period when he lived in paris , stamitz began to cooperate with the bohemian born clarinet virtuoso joseph beer ( 1744–1811 ) , which proved fruitful for both stamitz and beer . at least one of stamitz 's clarinet concertos ( the concerto no . 6 in e-flat major ) seems to have been composed jointly by the two men , as both of their names appear on the title page of the viennese manuscript . stamitz was the first composer to specify a left-hand pizzicato ( an important virtuoso device ) in a musical composition . this occurs in his viola concerto in d & nbsp ; major , where the passage in question is designated by an '' 0 '' above the notes . stamitz 's cello concertos were written for frederick william ii of prussia , who was a gifted amateur musician : both mozart and beethoven wrote music for the king . style . stylistically , stamitz 's music is not too far removed from the galante music of the young mozart , or those of haydn 's middle period . stamitz 's works are characterized by regular periods and appealing melody , with the voices quite often led in thirds , sixths and tenths . the writing for the solo instruments is idiomatic and virtuoso , but not excessively so . the opening movements of stamitz 's concertos and orchestral works are regularly constructed in sonata form , with an extensive double exposition . their structure is additive in nature and does not exhibit the thematic development that is considered typical of the viennese classical style . the middle movements are expressive and lyrical , sometimes called 'romance ' and usually constructed according to the liedform ( aba , aba ' or aa ' b ) . the final movement is often ( and in the concertos almost always ) a french-style rondo . just as his teacher franz xaver richter had done , stamitz preferred minor keys , as he generally used a variety of ( sometimes remote ) keys . works ( selection ) . symphonies 50 symphonies ( usually in three movements omitting the minuet ) concertos 11 clarinet concertos ( at least one jointly composed with johann joseph beer ( 1744–1811 ) 3 cello concertos 40 concertos for flute , bassoon , basset horn , violin , viola , viola d'amore and different combinations of some of these instruments 38 symphonies concertantes chamber music duos , trios , quartets for various instruments , with a prevalence of strings ; the unaccompanied duos for violin and viola are particularly notable . 6 orchestral quartets , op.1 6 orchestral quartets , op.14 operas both are considered lost . der verliebte vormund ( 1787 ) dardanus ( 1780 ) . discography ( selection ) . symfonies concertante , vienna symphony , henry swoboda , conductor , westminster , wl 50-17 ( wl-17 a-wl-17 b ) , 1950 . four quartets for winds and strings , nonesuch records , h-71125 , c . 1966 . chamber music . selections , musical heritage society , mhs 1403 , 1972 . cello concertos christian benda with the prague chamber orchestra , naxos 8.550865 , 1994 carl stamitz : four symphonies , london mozart players , matthias bamert , conductor , chandos records , chan 9358 , 1995 . references . sources . . further reading . friedrich blume , hrsg . die musik in geschichte und gegenwart . allgemeine enzyklopädie der musik . unabbreviated electronic edition of the first edition . kassel : walther killy , rudolf vierhaus . ( ed . ) deutsche biographische enzyklopäde ( german biographic encyclopaedia ) . vol . 5 . k–g . munich : kg saur , 1999 . . external links .