Stage management

history . the title of stage manager was not used until the 18th century , though the concept and need for someone to fill the area of stage management can be seen with the ancient greeks . the playwrights were usually responsible for production elements . sophocles is the first known stage technician , supported by his employment as a scenic artist , playwright , musician , and producer . in the middle ages , there is evidence of a conducteur de secrets , who oversaw collecting money at the door and serving as a prompter on stage . the prompter held the script and was prepared to feed performers their lines ; this was a common practice of the time . between the renaissance and 17th century , the actors and playwright handled stage management aspects and stage crew . in the elizabethan and jacobean theatre there were two roles that covered the stage management : stage keeper and book keeper . the stage keeper was responsible for the maintenance of the theater , taking props on and off stage , and security of performance space . the book keeper was responsible for the stage script , obtaining necessary licenses , copying/providing lines for the performers , marking entrances and exits , tracking props , marking when sound effects come in , and cueing props and sound effects . between the renaissance and the 16th century , actors and playwrights took upon themselves the handling of finances , general directorial duties , and stage management . stage management first emerged as a distinct role in the 17th century during shakespeare 's and molière 's time . during shakespeare ’ s time the roles of stage management were left to apprentices , young boys learning the trade . there is still evidence of a prompter at this time . it was not until the 18th century in england that the term stage manager was used . this was the first time a person other than actors and playwright was hired to direct or manage the stage . over time , with the rise in complexity of theatre due to advances such as mechanized scenery , quick costume changes , and controlled lighting , the stage manager 's job was split into two positions—director and stage manager . many playwrights , directors , and actors have previously worked as an assistant stage manager . writer and director preston sturges , for example , was employed as an asm on isadora duncan 's production of oedipus rex at the age of 16 and a half : when one is responsible for giving an offstage cue , even the simplest ones , like the ring of a telephone or a birdcall , demand considerable sangfroid , and the job is nervewracking . one is very much aware that everything depends on the delivery of the cue at exactly the right microsecond . one stands there , knees slightly bent , breathing heavily . , p . 123-24 sturges did n't last long in this job , due to his calling for thunder and then lightning instead of lightning and then thunder , but 16 years later brock pemberton hired him as an asm on antoinette perry 's production of goin ' home , which led to the first mounting of one of sturges ' plays on broadway , the guinea pig , in 1929 . pp . 239-245 . tools . stage management kit . the stage management kit can be as expansive as a huge tackle box , or a smaller bag containing only the absolute essentials . some common items in a kit include : first aid kit/hygiene supplies band-aids epipen or sugar pen pain medication such as ibuprofen or tylenol tweezers ace bandages antibiotic ointment nail clippers/file mints eye drops lozenges lip balm ice packs hand sanitizer tampons/pads gauze hair elastics and/or clips bobby pins tissues flashlight ( s ) batteries variety of tape gaff spike glow masking color-blocking reflective tools wrench screwdriver power drill ( and charger ) staple remover pocketknife emergency sewing kit mini-scissors safety pins needle and thread extra notions like : zippers buttons snaps hooks and eyes hemming tape tide or stain-removal pen . rehearsal room kit . other items may be needed specifically during the rehearsal period , such as : laptop for note-taking and rehearsal reports pens , pencils , and highlighters sticky notes for line notes or other notes in the script . means of communication . it is important to keep lines of communication open between the stage manager and all other departments of the production . technology phones actors ' equity requires a dedicated line in a production office , but most people in a cast and crew will have personal cell phones available . texting/calling the stage manager may need to text or call actors or crew members to give them reminders or check up on them if they are late for a call time . email email can be useful for communication between production departments , sending reminders to cast and crew , or distribution of rehearsal reports and other materials . the sm might utilize a feedback loop - ask the recipients to reply to show they have received and understand the information . '' communication without feedback is n't communication , it 's broadcasting . '' - ed baker headset/walkie talkies during tech , dress rehearsals , and the run of the show , the stage manager may need to be on headset to call cues and communicate with lights , sound , and any assistant stage managers call board the call board might be an actual bulletin board backstage , or an electronic message board . usually the sign-in sheet for actors and crew will be located on the call board . prompt book . the prompt book contains the script from which the sm calls the show , labeled with light and sound cues . it may also contain : shift plot for props a pre-show schedule a pre-show checklist light and sound cue breakdowns rehearsal schedules rehearsal and performance reports confidential emergency health history cast and crew contact sheet directors notes blocking notes scene changes . regional differences . united states . in the united states , stage manager is a generic title that may be applied to anyone who performs stage management functions . on small shows , one person typically performs all the tasks of stage management , and is simply referred to as the stage manager . larger shows often need two or more stage managers . in such cases the head stage manager is titled production stage manager ( commonly abbreviated psm ) , and working under the psm is one or more assistant stage managers ( commonly abbreviated asm ) . shows that employ three stage managers have a psm and two asms , though the program credits may list them as production stage manager ( first or head stage manager ) , stage manager ( second stage manager ) , and assistant stage manager ( third stage manager ) . some professional stage managers on plays and musicals may choose to be represented by a union known as the actors ' equity association , which also represents performers . in addition to performing their typical stage management duties ( e.g . , maintaining the prompt book and calling performances ) , equity stage managers are also required to uphold the union 's rules and rights for equity artists . union stage managers for opera , ballet , and modern dance are represented by the american guild of musical artists and perform most of the same duties as their counterparts in plays and musicals . the american guild of variety artists also represents variety performers , dancers and stage managers . united kingdom . in the uk , the structure of a stage management team depends on the type and size of the production . it can consist of stage manager ( overseeing the running of the show ) , deputy stage manager ( commonly called dsm ) , and assistant stage manager ( commonly called asm ) . a fringe theatre show may employ one stage manager to carry out the tasks of an entire team , whereas a west end theatre show in london might employ multiple asms . professional stage managers are represented by the british actors ' equity association , which also represents performers . deputy stage manager . the dsm prompts actors and will usually cue technical crew members and sometimes cast , while following the orders of the director and stage manager . the dsm calls actors to hold while technical problems are sorted out during rehearsal , and determines where in the script to restart halted scenes . pallin , p . 81 the deputy stage manager ( dsm ) is a separate position in some theatres , while in others the responsibilities of the dsm may be assumed by the stage manager or assistant stage manager . bond , p . 15 . assistant stage manager . the assistant stage manager ( asm ) has varied responsibilities , which are assigned by the stage manager . the asm assists in finding and maintaining props during rehearsals and the run of the show . the asm may take attendance or estimate audience size , may manage the backstage technicians , may act as a liaison between crew , cast and management , and may call some cues . mundane tasks such as mopping the stage and brewing coffee or tea may fall to the asm . if the stage manager is unable to perform his or her duties , the asm must be able to fill in . bond , pp . 15–16 the assistant may also be in charge of one wing of the stage , while the stage manager is on the other wing . show control based venues . many live shows around the world are produced with the foreknowledge that they will have a very long run , often measured in years . these are usually known quantities that are very expensive productions and have a guaranteed audience because of their location . they may be on cruise ships , in theme parks , las vegas or at destination resorts . these shows warrant very long-range development and planning and use stage managers to run almost all technical elements in the show , without many of the other traditional crew members , such as sound , lighting and rigging operators . in these cases , show control systems are installed and connected to all other technical systems in the theatre , which are specifically designed to be controlled by show control and to operate safely with minimal supervision . stage managers working these shows usually have the additional responsibility for programming the show control system , and often the other control systems as well . different areas of stage management . the role of stage manager evolved from an amalgamation of various positions in theater over several centuries and is still generally known for its integral relationship with theater . many other types of productions and events have incorporated the position of stage management , however . some of the most common are opera , music and dance concerts , film and television . for music concerts , stage management includes a large variety of responsibilities depending on both the venue and the size and expertise of the musical group coming into the venue . some of the responsibilities of a concert stage manager include overseeing the schedule for load in and out of equipment , seeing to the comfort of the group which can include arranging refreshments and or transportation , sometimes arranging how and where merchandise is to be sold at the venue , and above all , as with all areas of stage management , watching out for the safety of all participants in the experience including performers , audience , and any crews required . stage managers and unions . a stage manager needs to know what unions they will be working with , how often they take breaks , and who is represented by which union . actors equity association . commonly referred to as actors equity ( aea ) . actors equity represents the stage actors and stage managers in the live theatre industry . the aea works to negotiate and provide performers and stage managers quality living conditions , livable wages , and benefits . iatse . international alliance of theatrical stage employees ( iatse ) represents stagehands in the theatre . united scenic artists . united scenic artists is also known as united scenic artists of america . it organizes designers , artists and craftspeople in the entertainment and decorative arts industries . united scenic artists has been affiliated with the international alliance of theatrical stage employees since 1999 . see also . film crew prompt corner show control stagecraft television crew theatre technique theatre