Xanth

books . as of july 2020 , there are 43 novels . world of xanth . inhabitants and talents . each human character in xanth is born with a unique magical ability , called a talent . with the exception of the curse fiends , the winged centaurs , and the child surprise golem ( daughter of rapunzel and grundy golem ) , these abilities never repeat exactly in individuals throughout the entire history of xanth ( although nearly identical talents show up on occasion ) . though many talents are limited in scope ( called the '' spot-on-a-wall '' variety ) , the series focuses mainly on individuals with '' magician '' caliber abilities ( one of the criteria for serving as king of xanth ) . in addition to the human characters , xanth is populated by elf , centaurs , demons , dragons , fauns , gargoyles , goblins , golems , harpy , merfolk , naga , nymphs , ogres , zombies , curse fiends , and other fictional beasts . though initially introduced as obstacles to the human characters , some individuals from those groups become main characters in later books of the series . as the series progresses , some of the half-human species are discovered to have the potential to possess magical talents . the centaurs of the primary centaur community , centaur isle , exile any centaurs who demonstrate a magical talent ( although some centaur communities are more lenient about possession of talent ) ; however , they tolerate talents in '' lesser '' races such as humans . goblins and harpies are shown to have the potential to possess half-talents , the complementary half existing in a member of the other species , ( i.e . , a goblin must team with a harpy for them to utilize their talent ) ; the hostility between goblins and harpies proved a major obstacle to any serious effort by them to work together to develop these potential talents . other non-human species are also known to possess talents , for example : sesame serpent and claire voyant . visitors from other dimensions with talents retain their talents after arriving in xanth . geography . geographically , modern xanth resembles the state of florida in the united states in shape , but has landmarks that mimic well known geographical features from around the world . one major example of this is the gap chasm , an enormous canyon a mile wide which completely bisects the country , paralleling the korean demilitarized zone . the position of the chasm could also correspond with the cross florida barge canal , which , similar to the chasm , is generally forgotten except for those who stumble upon it . the gap is guarded by a resident dragon , known as stanley steamer , and is crossed by means of treacherous bridges . many of xanth 's other geographical features are puns on those of florida ( for example , lake okeechobee and the kiss-mee river ) . the florida keys also exist , though they are , in xanth , actual keys . other punning feature names include the isle of view ( '' i love you '' ) , mount ever-rest ( mount everest ) and the centaur aisle ( center aisle ) created by a magician from the centaur isle . the moon is close enough that flying creatures may land there ; the back side is sweet and honeyish , the visible side has turned sour and become curdled cheese , due to observing what has happened on earth and xanth . plants may bear fruit of all descriptions ( pie trees and shoe trees are common ) or they may be carnivorous ( such as the tangle trees ) , making travel in xanth risky . xanth has a connection with the normal world , which is referred to as '' mundania '' ; its people are called '' mundanes '' . although any citizen of xanth can enter mundania at any time through an isthmus in the northwest , mundanes enter the isthmus in xanth from random geographic locations and time periods throughout history . in other words , xanth does not have a fixed location or time in the mundane world ; and the timeline between xanth and mundania seems to jump backwards and forwards . for example , within the lifetime of a normal citizen of xanth , an american mundane from and an egyptian mundane from 3000 bc could both walk across the isthmus . however , mundanes seem to have trouble finding xanth on a consistent basis , making any travel to xanth a somewhat rare occurrence . despite these seeming difficulties , xanth was colonized in several waves by groups of invaders and nomads from mundania over the course of several centuries . the series ties these colonization events to actual historical events on earth , most notably the punic wars . adult conspiracy . first mentioned in crewel lye , the adult conspiracy is one of the prominent features of the xanth world . in an interview with moira allen , piers anthony referred to the '' adult conspiracy to keep interesting things from children '' as a literary device '' parodying current societal conventions '' . nearly all subsequent books contain references to the conspiracy and its effects , particularly those novels in which the main characters are children . at its core , the adult conspiracy seeks to protect children from knowledge that could bring them to great harm . the precise age for entering into the world of adults is age 18 , corresponding to the age of majority in most places . the primary principle that inducts children into the conspiracy is the understanding of the secret of '' sexual reproduction '' . in xanthian terms , '' summoning the stork '' literally means to put out a call to summon a stork which will deliver to the couple a child . in isle of view , it is revealed that summoning the stork will release an '' ellipsis '' ( . ) into the air to fly off to the stork . this is a play on the joke that all the '' adult '' things happen after a paragraph ends in an ellipsis . most inductees actually discover the specifics of the act '' by accident '' after marriage , or under the influence of a love spring ( a magical spring which causes two drinkers , not necessarily human , or even of the same species , to fall madly , and lustfully , in love with one another at first sight ) . other faculties of the adult conspiracy include : censorship of profanity & ndash ; all foul words contain the ability to cause various effects ( the wilting of plants ( negative ) , removal of curse burrs ( positive ) , etc . ) . these are automatically bleeped when said in the presence of someone who has yet to be inducted . visual access to underwear & ndash ; because underwear is so closely tied to sexuality ( even more so than nudity in xanth ) , men become automatically '' freaked out '' when they view panties . this is made a common joke , most prominently in the novel the color of her panties , and is often used by women to gain advantage over men . panties only carry their effects when worn , but because of their nature , they are forbidden to be shown to children . inability to have childish fun & ndash ; children believe that once they join the adult conspiracy , they will no longer have pillow fights , eat sweets and drink '' tsoda popka '' ( soda pop ) , or want to have fun . while this belief is exaggerated , the entry to the conspiracy does cause the couple to lose their bed monster , inadvertently creating the appearance of losing all childhood spirit under the responsibility of adulthood . it is important to note that there have been occasions when children gained access to the adult conspiracy prematurely . jenny elf , che centaur , and gwenny goblin had to be given access to the adult conspiracy when gwenny received a pair of contact lenses that corrected her poor eyesight while giving her the ability to see others ' dreams ( some of which could contain conspiracy material ) . in one rare instance , a little girl was born with the magic talent of immunity to the magical censorship of adult conspiracy , causing her family much distress . this was remedied with magician sherlock 's talent of reversal and a vial of lethe water which erased her memory . mundania . whenever xanth characters visit the nonmagical land outside of xanth , called mundania , its natives ( mundanes ) speak what sounds like gibberish to the xanth characters . the gibberish can be translated by a simple replacement cipher , depending on the mundane language being spoken . often the language is a simple shift in the alphabet , a letter or two forwards or backwards ( see caesar cipher ) . curse fiends . curse fiends , who call themselves '' curse friends , '' are known for their talent to throw curses at their enemies . they are believed to be the primary cause of several different settings in xanth : 1 ) the land of air , 2 ) the land of earth , 3 ) the land of fire , 4 ) the land of water ( also called the water wing ) , and 5 ) the void . the story about how these regions were created is described in demons do n't dream . the curse fiends in the present day xanth stay close to their own community where they put on plays . because of this , they are widely known for their acting skills . related works . encyclopedia of xanth ( 1987 , by jody lynn nye ) a crossroads adventure role-playing game book ghost of a chance ( 1988 , by jody lynn nye ) a crossroads adventure role-playing game book piers anthony 's visual guide to xanth ( 1989 , with jody lynn nye ) '' xanth '' board game ( 1991 , created by mayfair games , a board game for 1-6 players set in the xanth universe ) companions of xanth ( a 1993 video game described in and following the plot of demons do n't dream ) letters to jenny ( 1993 , nonfiction )