Bristol Zoo

animal exhibits . seal and penguin coasts is a major attraction at the zoo ; opened in 1999 , it allows south american fur seals and african penguins to be watched both above and below the water . the most notable of these african penguins being cgp grey the penguin named after internet personality cgp grey , cgp grey the penguin died in 2017 ( no exact date was given but was first reported on may 13 , 2017 ) . the two pools contain of salt water , with waves , waterfalls , rocks and pebble beaches to simulate the natural habitat . the exhibit has a large net over the top to allow inca terns and common eiders to be kept in the same enclosure . forest of birds opened in may 2009 and features exotic plants and free-flying birds from south-east asia . gorilla island is home to a family of western lowland gorillas , which are the largest animals kept at bristol zoo . one silverback , jock as well as kera , kukena , romina , salome and touni . in february 2016 , kera 's first baby afia was born after an emergency caesarean section . in april 2017 , touni gave birth to baby ayana . as well as an indoor house , they have a large island . despite the gorilla 's herbivorous diet , keepers do not enter the same space as the apes . this is because not only is there a great risk of injury with these powerful primates , but they also want to let the gorillas socialize on their own without human interference . the top terrace is one of the oldest parts of the zoo . it is home to a pair of asiatic lions , keas , red pandas , livingstone 's fruit bats and flamingos . twilight world was the first such exhibit to offer the daytime visitor the chance to view the twilight behaviour of nocturnal animals . by exchanging night and day , the animals ( which are awake during their 'night ' ) can be observed during daylight hours . the lights allow a natural transition from night to day and vice versa . twilight world is split into four zones : the desert ( sand cats , mongooses , the rainforest ( slow loris , mouse deer , quolls , aye-ayes , cuscuses and mouse lemurs ) , the cave ( scorpions , blind cave fish and naked mole rats ) and the house ( rats and mice ) . the reptile house houses a collection of reptiles and amphibians . the house itself is heated and gives a sense of the heat of the rainforest . there are three sections to the house : desert ( gila monsters , geckos and tortoises ) , rainforest ( dwarf crocodiles , terrapins and snakes ) and the rearing room where visitors can view the raising of reptiles and amphibian and also learn about the zoo 's conservation work . outside , but still considered part of the reptile house , is a giant tortoise and rhinoceros iguana enclosure where the animals have access to a heated indoor house and an outdoor enclosure . the aquarium has around 70 species of fish . the aquarium has three sections : the amazon river ( catfish , pacu and piranha ) , africa ( cichlids ) and the coral reef ( seahorses , corals and various species of fish ) . on the outside of the building there is a water sculpture . there are several exhibits of conservation significance on view . notably , there is a display of endangered cichlids from lake barombi mbo in cameroon and a display of goodeids from mexico and paddlefish and alligator gar from north america . image : bristol.zoo.aquarium.arp.jpg thumb right the south east asia tank in the zoo aquarium . bug world , the zoo 's collection of invertebrates , includes species such as partula snails , phasmidas and corals . other displays include tarantulas , giant millipedes , honey bees , leaf-cutting ants and dryococelus australiss . bug world also houses the critically endangered hogna ingens . previous displays included peacock mantis shrimp and latrodectuss . zona brazil has a variety of primate species ; an enclosure for golden lion tamarins and goeldi 's marmoset . there is a nearby enclosure and island for golden-headed lion tamarins as well as an enclosure for the titi . as part of the walk-through there are also a variety of bird species and three linked paddocks for tapirs and capybaras . monkey jungle opened in 2006 featuring four new exhibits replacing the old monkey house . an enclosure is home to crowned lemurs and ring-tailed lemurs where visitors can walk in with the lemurs without any boundaries . the other enclosures are home to brown spider monkeys and lion-tailed macaques . there is also a nearby enclosure for two-toed sloths and six-banded armadillos . the islands opposite gorilla island house a family of squirrel monkeys , a pair of agile gibbons and also golden-headed lion tamarins . the butterfly house is made up of an undercover walk-through in a sustainably-heated , climate-controlled polytunnel . species on show include the morpho peleides , glasswings , leopard lacewings and atlas moths . the exhibit is linked to sustainable butterfly producers in costa rica . the zoo also supports work to protect the rare idaea dilutaria in avon gorge . thumb image : bristol.zoo.western.lowland.gorilla.arp.jpg thumb western lowland gorilla . history . opened in 1836 by the bristol , clifton and west of england zoological society , bristol zoo is the world 's oldest provincial zoo . it is a victorian walled zoo located between clifton down and clifton college , near brunel 's clifton suspension bridge ; it covers a small area by modern standards , but with a considerable number of species . in the 1960s the zoo came to national prominence by appearing in the uk television series , animal magic , hosted by the comic animal 'communicator ' , johnny morris . morris would play keeper and voice all the animals there . the zoo 's official name is bristol zoological gardens ( 'bristol zoo gardens ' for commercial purposes ) . this is not in recognition of the flower displays but recognises the first use of that title at the london zoo . bristol , like its earlier london counterpart , includes several original buildings which have been praised for their architectural quirks , despite being unsuitable for the care of animals ; the ( former ) giraffe house joins the main entrance lodge and the south gates on guthrie road as a grade ii listed building . the old monkey temple , resembling a southern-asian temple , is now home to an exhibit called '' smarty plants '' , an interactive exhibit which shows how plants use and manipulate animals to survive . the zoo also has breeding firsts , including the first black rhino born in britain in 1958 , the first squirrel monkey born in captivity in 1953 and the first chimpanzee born in europe in 1934 . in december 2014 , the zoo lost three endangered animals after two fatal accidents , including one involving a male warty pig which killed its own offspring and afterwards attacking its mate , who had to be put down due to the injuries . the keepers were not aware that they had mated , nor that the female was due to give birth . in a separate incident a few days later , a golden lion tamarin fell from a branch in its enclosure into some water , where it became stuck and eaten by the zoo 's group of north american otters . both incidents were described as unprecedented , unheard of and freak accidents by the zoo staff . . conservation . bristol zoo supports wildlife conservation , education and breeding programmes worldwide . for example , bristol works with other zoos around the world to breed lemurs in captivity . native to madagascar , the lemurs are critically endangered because their forest habitat is being destroyed . bristol zoo supports the uk/us charity ape action africa , which rescues and rehabilitates primates in cameroon , west africa . bristol zoo website – bristol zoo presents gorilla sculpture to cameroon school children – 14/04/11 . bristolzoo.org.uk . closer to home , the zoo has helped to reintroduce the water vole and the white-clawed crayfish to parts of southern england . wild place project . a number of mammals are kept on a site to the north of bristol and there are plans to relocate many more species to the hollywood tower estate near cribbs causeway , as part of a second zoo . the new site is called the wild place project , and is designed to house larger animals than the existing bristol zoo . the zoo is split into biomes , representing species found only in specific habitats . current areas include : secret congo , british ancient woodland , discover madagascar and the latest addition - benoue national park . the species list currently includes : okapi , red river hog , sudan cheetah , zebra , common eland , gelada baboon , kirk 's dik-dik , giraffe , wolverine , eurasian lynx , grey wolf , and a new brown bear . some of the biomes to be included are : central american swamp , sumatra tropical forest , nepal riverine forest , coral reef and british wetlands . the species list for each ecosystem has not yet been finalised , but is likely to include manatees , crocodiles , bonobos , bongo , bengal tiger , orangutan , warthog , lion , kudu , african hunting dog and rhinoceros . the site officially opened on 22 july 2013 as wild place project . new bristol attraction opens 22 july the wild place project . wildplace.org.uk . . event hosting . the womad music festival came to the zoo in 2011 , bristol zoo teams up with womad for summer spectacular – bristol24-7 . bristol247.com ( 17 march 2011 ) . an evening of music from around the world will be staged at bristol zoo this summer as it teams up with the womad festival for a unique concert . this is bristol ( 18 march 2011 ) . bristol zoo teams up with womad to offer a wild music festival – 17/03/11 bristol zoo final acts revealed for womad music festival at bristol zoo . visit bristol . trio of acts complete line-up for zoo 's summer world music event . this is bristol ( 24 may 2011 ) . bristol university school of biological sciences womad at bristol zoo . bristol.ac.uk ( 2 june 2011 ) . with a subsequent event in 2012 . womad festival returns to bristol zoo gardens for another musical extravaganza – bristol24-7 . bristol247.com ( 16 march 2012 ) . music festival returns to the zoo . this is bristol ( 9 may 2012 ) . at bristol zoo 2012 » festivals . womad ( 22 june 2013 ) . . gallery . image : bristol.zoo.underwater.tunnel.arp.jpg seal and penguin coasts : the '' underwater '' tunnel , with south american fur seal image : bzflamingos.jpg greater flamingo ( phoenicopterus roseus ) image : humour.at.the.zoo.arp.jpg humour at the zoo image : elephanttower.jpg elephant tower sculpture , based on wendy who died in 2002 . see also . ape action africa wow ! gorillas . references . external links . panoramic images from the bbc