Reserve Officers' Training Corps

overview . while rotc graduate officers serve in all branches of the u.s . military , the u.s . marine corps and the u.s . coast guard do not have their own respective rotc programs , but graduates of naval rotc programs have the option to serve as officers in the marine corps contingent on meeting marine corps requirements . the coast guard has no rotc program and its officers can only be commissioned via the u.s . coast guard academy , coast guard officer candidate school , interservice transfer from another u.s . military service following completion of at least 4 years commissioned service in that other branch of the u.s . military ( e.g . such as interservice transfers for officers designated as army aviators , usn and usmc naval aviators and usaf pilots ) , or via the coast guard college student pre-commissioning initiative ( cspi ) , although the cspi program is only available at colleges and universities designated as a minority serving institute ( msi ) or with a student population of at least 50 % minorities for the past three years . in 2017 , rotc graduates constituted 58.5 percent of newly commissioned active-duty u.s . army officers , 3.0 percent of newly commissioned u.s . marine corps officers ( through nrotc ) , 21.4 percent of newly commissioned u.s . navy officers and 31.1 percent of newly commissioned u.s . air force officers , for a combined 36.9 percent of all active-duty officers in the department of defense commissioned that year . under rotc , a student may receive a competitive , merit-based scholarship covering all or part of college tuition , textbooks and lab fees , in return for an active-duty service obligation after graduation ( or completion of a graduate degree under an approved education delay ) . rotc students attend college like other students , but also receive basic military training and officer training for their chosen branch of service through the rotc unit at or nearby the college . the students participate in regular drills during the school year and off-campus training opportunities during the summer . army rotc units are organized as brigades , battalions and companies . air force rotc units are detachments with the students organized into wings , groups , squadrons and flights . army and air force rotc students are referred to as cadets . naval rotc units are organized as battalions and also include nrotc students under '' marine option '' who will eventually be commissioned as officers in the marine corps . marine nrotc students may be formed in a separate company when the program includes sufficient numbers . all naval rotc students are referred to as midshipmen . some of the summer training that is offered to cadets in the army rotc program are : airborne , air assault , mountain warfare , whinsec and other related schools . in addition to their mandatory pre-commissioning field training ( ft ) at maxwell afb , alabama ( 4 weeks for 4-year program cadets ; 6 weeks for 2-year program cadets ) , air force rotc cadets are also eligible for airborne training under the tutelage of the army at fort benning , georgia . naval rotc midshipmen will participate in summer cruise programs every summer , either afloat or ashore , similar to their u.s . naval academy midshipmen counterparts . history . the concept of rotc in the united states was created by alden partridge and began with the morrill act of 1862 which established the land-grant colleges . part of the federal government 's requirement for these schools was that they include military tactics as part of their curriculum , forming what became known as rotc . the college from which rotc originated is norwich university in northfield , vermont . norwich was founded in 1819 at norwich , vermont as the american literary , scientific and military academy . the university was founded by former west point instructor captain alden partridge , who promoted the idea of a '' citizen soldier '' —a man trained to act in a military capacity when his nation required , but capable of fulfilling standard civilian functions in peacetime . this idea eventually led to the formation of reservist and national guard units with regimented training in place of local militia forces . another root of the modern rotc program comes from the '' plattsburg idea '' . in 1915 , major general leonard wood instituted the citizen 's military training corps , the first series of training camps to make officers out of civilians . for the first time in history , an attempt was made to provide a condensed course of training and commissioning competent reserve line officers after only a summer of military training . over 5,000 men arrived at plattsburgh in may 1917 for the first of the large training corps . by the end of 1917 , over 17,000 men had been trained . by the eve of its entry into world war i , the u.s . had a prepared corps of officers including one of the earliest plattsburgh graduates , theodore roosevelt jr . during the 1930s , there were rotc programs in some larger city high schools ( memphis , tn ; charlotte , nc ; kansas city , mo ; new orleans , la ) . an interview with john hinde brooklyn oral history until the 1960s , many major universities required compulsory rotc for all of their male students . however , because of the protests that culminated in the opposition to u.s . involvement in the vietnam war , compulsory rotc was dropped in favor of voluntary programs . in some places rotc was expelled from campus altogether , although it was always possible to participate in off-campus rotc . currently , more than 1,700 high schools have junior reserve officers ’ training corps ( jrotc ) programs . army junior rotc program overview in the 21st century , the debate often focused around the congressional do n't ask , do n't tell law , signed into law by president bill clinton in 1993 and in force until 2011 , which forbade homosexuals serving in the united states military from disclosing their sexual orientation at the risk of expulsion . some schools believed this legal mandate would require them to waive or amend their non-discrimination policies . in recent years , concerted efforts are being made at some ivy league universities that have previously banned rotc ( including columbia ) to return rotc to campus . the harvard rotc was reinstated effective march 4 , 2011 following enactment of the do n't ask , do n't tell repeal act of 2010 . under current law , there are three types of rotc programs administered , each with a different element . the first are the programs at the six senior military college , also known as military schools . these institutions grant baccalaureate degrees ( at a minimum ) and organize all or some of their students into a cadet corps under some sort of military discipline . those participating in the cadet program must attend at least 2 years of rotc education . the second are programs at '' civilian colleges '' . as defined under army regulations , these are schools that grant baccalaureate or graduate degrees and are not operated on a military basis . the third category is programs at military junior college ( mjc ) . these are military schools that provide junior college education ( typically a.s . or a.a . degree ) . these schools do not grant baccalaureate degrees but they meet all other requirements of military colleges ( if participating in the early commissioning program ) and cadets are required to meet the same military standards as other schools ( if enrolled in ecp ) , as set by army cadet command . cadets can be commissioned as second lieutenants in the army reserve/army national guard as graduating sophomores . upon commissioning , these lieutenants are required to complete their bachelor 's degree at another institution ( of the lieutenant 's choosing ) while serving in their units . upon receiving their bachelors , ecp lieutenants can assess active duty and go onto active duty as a first lieutenant . only the army currently offers an early commissioning program . in time of war , mjc 's have played a significant role in producing officers for the army . during the vietnam war , the requirement to complete one 's bachelor 's degree was not in effect . therefore , upon commissioning lieutenants went straight onto active duty . one difference between civilian colleges and the senior or junior military colleges is enrollment option in rotc . rotc is voluntary for students attending civilian colleges and universities . however , with few exceptions ( as outlined in both army regulations and federal law ) it is required of students attending the senior and junior military colleges . another major difference between the senior military colleges and civilian colleges is that under federal law , graduates of the smcs are guaranteed active duty assignments if requested with the approval of the school 's professor of military science . u.s . army rotc . the army reserve officer training corps ( arotc ) program is the largest branch of rotc , as the army is the largest branch of the military . there are over 20,000 rotc cadets in 273 rotc programs at major universities throughout the united states . these schools are categorized as military colleges ( mc ) , military junior college ( mjc ) and civilian colleges ( cc ) . army rotc provides the majority of the army 's officer corps ; the remainder comes from west point , officer candidate school ( ocs ) , or direct commissions . arotc offers scholarships based on the time of enrollment in the program . newly graduated seniors in high school can enter the program with a full four-year scholarship while college students can enroll later and earn a scholarship that would cover the remainder of their college career . the two-year scholarship is available for students with two academic years of college remaining . an applicant for a two-year or four-year scholarship must meet the following requirements : u.s . citizen high school diploma or equivalent between ages 17 and 27 college gpa of at least 2.5 army physical fitness standard the applicant must agree to accept a commission and serve in the army on active duty or in a reserve component ( u.s . army reserve or army national guard ) . the four-year scholarship is for students who receive it out of high school or before entering college . the four-year scholarship can be extended with the same conditions to a 5-year scholarship if the major is in engineering . the two-and-a-half-year scholarship is available for students already enrolled in a college or university with three academic years remaining . an applicant for a two-and-a-half-year scholarship must meet the requirements for a two-year scholarship and also have a minimum sat score of 920 or act score of 19 . once an applicant has shown interest in the arotc program the cadre can select him for a scholarship if he/she excels in the three major pillars : grades- 2.5 gpa or better pt- score of 60 in each category ( push-ups , sit-ups , and a two-mile run ) participation- extracurricular activities in the program , community , or school prior to 2015 , a cadet had to have passed ldac between their summer of becoming a senior . ldac ( leadership developmental and assessment course ) was held at fort lewis , washington until its final year at fort knox , kentucky , where each cadet would be evaluated on leadership skills . the course was set up for a month of training with other peers and evaluated by prior servicemen . from 2015 , cadets attend advanced camp between their junior and senior year at fort knox , kentucky . for 2015 and 2016 , the training was not evaluated and simply pass/no pass beginning in 2017 advanced camp will become evaluated again . cadet summer training ( cst ) , including advanced camp and basic camp , is the u.s . army 's largest training event . u.s . navy rotc . the naval reserve officer training corps ( nrotc ) program was founded in 1926 and the u.s . marine corps joined the program in 1932 . the naval nrotc program is offered at over 150 colleges nationwide . the nation 's first marine corps oriented nrotc was established at the citadel in 1970 . . u.s . air force rotc . the first air force reserve officer training corps ( then air rotc ) units were established between 1920 and 1923 at the university of california , berkeley , the georgia institute of technology , the university of illinois , the university of washington , the massachusetts institute of technology and texas a & m university . after world war ii , the air force established rotc units at 77 colleges and universities throughout the united states . controversy . the solomon amendment denies federal funding to any university with a '' policy or practice '' that prevents the military from '' maintaining , establishing or operating '' rotc on its campus . such universities are allowed to require that rotc adhere to the same policies as the university 's other academic programs . according to diane mazur of the palm center , the military has withdrawn rotc from a number of universities rather than adapt to those policies or accept extracurricular status . in her analysis , both the military and academe ( as of the fall of 2010 ) preferred not to dispute the public perception that elite universities had banned rotc programs . she wrote : others argue that universities effectively ban rotc by erecting procedural hurdles motivated by anti-military sentiment and objections to discrimination based on sexual orientation that only serve to '' discourage their own presumably egalitarian , intelligent , and enlightened students from joining '' . stanford review : yishai kabaker , '' stanford 's anti-rotc policy is self-contradictory , '' april 27 , 2007 , accessed march 12 , 2012 rotc programs were subject to the military 's ban on service by open gays and lesbians known as '' do n't ask do n't tell '' . lgbt students occasionally protested rotc as a proxy for the policy . columbia spectator : robert mccaughey , '' do n't wait , do n't stall , '' february 18 , 2010 , accessed march 12 , 2012 harvard crimson : eric s . solowey and lisa a . taggart , '' students plan rotc protests , '' april 25 , 1989 , accessed march 12 , 2012 an act to repeal the policy was signed by president barack obama on december 22 , 2010 and implementation took effect september 20 , 2011 . non-u.s . rotc programs . other national armed forces in countries with strong historical ties to the united states have rotc programs . rotp in canada is a named academic training program for officer entry into the canadian armed forces . where educational requirements for specific programs are not available at royal military college , cadets may attend courses on suitable colleges or universities anywhere in canada . there is little formal military training during the academic year . however , they are subject to educational institution-specific military law and regulations . officers ' training corps for the british army was set up in 1908 . the university air squadron for the royal air force and the urnu for the royal navy are similar . although all members are commissioned as under officers in their respective services , they are employed on a territorial class b commission and there is no obligation to serve as a regular officer . rotc in the philippines began in 1912 during insular government with the creation of the first unit at the university of the philippines . the national rotc alumni association ( nraa ) of the philippines estimates that 75 percent of the officer corps of the armed forces of the philippines come from rotc . rotc in south korea started in 1961 . rotc in taiwan started in the 1960s with training courses being severely reduced over the years as an experiment before it was implemented again in 1997 . other countries have also institutionalized reservist training programs . reserve officer training in russia began in the 1920s , brazil has the cpor and the npor since 1928 , difference being that the officer formed by the cpor choose their area while specialization while the officer formed by the npor learn from their local army base . . student army training corps ( satc ) . during world war i , the united states created the student army training corps in an effort to encourage young men to receive both a college education and train for the military simultaneously . those young men who did exceptionally well in the satc classes were recommended for classes in the rotc . on february 10 , 1918 , the war department created the committee on education and special training . the purpose of this committee was to assess the needs of the military branches and attend to said needs . seeing a drastic need for trained soldiers , the student army training corps was created to provide '' special training for men entering the service through voluntary induction '' . training camps were held in the summer of 1918 to prepare institutions with at least one-hundred male students for the induction of the satc that fall . training started july 18 and lasted for sixty days . the satc officially began on october 1 , 1918 . it was located on 525 educational institutions and inducted 200,000 total students on the first day . unlike the selective service draft , enrollment in the satc was completely voluntary . however , doing so gave you the rank of private in the united states army , therefore this was not a way of avoiding enlistment . while attending the satc did allow for young men to stay on the home front , the ultimate goal of this was creating trained soldiers for the military . the satc was short lived . with the armistice being signed on november 11 , 1918 the army 's need for more soldiers ended . the satc was disbanded in december 1918 . see also . early commissioning program gold bar recruiter junior reserve officers ' training corps ( jrotc ) pershing rifles military junior college united states senior military college united states service academies . references . further reading . deborah d . avant ( 2005 ) the market for force : the consequences of privatizing security , cambridge university press . david axe ( 2007 ) army 101 : inside rotc in a time of war . charles johnson ( 2002 ) african americans and rotc : military , naval , and aeroscience programs at historically black colleges 1916 — 1973 . betty j . morden ( 1990 ) women 's army corps , p 287 . jennifer m . silva , '' rotc '' , chapter 35 of gender and higher education by barbara j . bank . harlow g unger ( 2007 ) encyclopedia of american education , p 938 . david atkinson ( 2012 ) ultimate rotc guidebook , the : tips , tricks , and tactics for excelling in reserve officers ' training corps . external links . u.s . air force rotc u.s . army rotc u.s . navy rotc