Thomas Friedman

environment . iran 's great weakness may be its oil , by thomas friedman , challenges and debates conflicts about oil . friedman states , '' the best tool we have for curbing iran 's influence is not containment or engagement , but getting the price of oil down in the long term with north american energy independence . let 's exploit iran 's oil addiction by ending ours '' . in hot , flat , and crowded , he says that '' any car company that gets taxpayer money must demonstrate a plan for transforming every vehicle in its fleet to a hybrid electric with flex-fuel capability , so its entire fleet can also run on next generation cellulosic ethanol '' . in a fresh dialogues interview , friedman described his motivations for writing the book : '' my concern is about america . demand for clean energy , clean fuel and energy efficiency is clearly going to explode ; it 's going to be the next great global industry . i know that as sure as i know that i 'm sitting here at de anza college talking to you . by being big in the next big thing , we 'll be seen by the rest of the world as working on the most important problem in the world . '' some of friedman 's environmental critics question his support of still-undeveloped coal pollution mitigation technology ( '' clean coal '' ) and coal mining as emblematic of friedman 's less than '' green '' commitment to renewable energy . the nyt 's thomas friedman january 2007 while friedman supports the elimination of coal-based power , he believes improving coal technology is necessary in the short term . israel . friedman has been criticized by organizations such as fairness and accuracy in reporting for defending israeli airstrikes in lebanon as a form of '' educating '' israel 's opponents ; according to fair , friedman was explicitly endorsing terrorism by israel against lebanese and palestinians . journalist glenn greenwald and professor noam chomsky also accused friedman of endorsing and encouraging terrorism by israeli forces . political reporter belen fernandez heavily critiques friedman 's commentary regarding israel . among other criticisms , fernandez singles out friedman 's suggestion that israeli forces were unaware that their allied lebanese militias carried out the sabra and shatila massacre while under their guard , contradicting the assessments of other journalists and observers ; his encouragement of strong-armed force by the israeli army against palestinians ; and his opposition to settlements only on the grounds that they are counter-productive , rather than because they violate international law or cause suffering for palestinians . fernandez suggests that friedman is most worried about successfully maintaining israel 's jewish ethnocracy and actively opposing a '' one-man , one-vote '' system of democracy . fernandez , belen . the imperial messenger : thomas friedman at work . verso books , 2011 , p 99-107 friedman has also come under criticism from supporters of israel . in an op-ed , yitzhak benhorin criticized friedman 's alleged suggestion that israel relinquish territory it had occupied in the 1967 middle eastern war . friedman sparked criticism for writing that congressional ovations for israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu were '' bought and paid for by the israel lobby . '' thomas l . friedman : newt , mitt , bibi and vladimir new york times 13 december 2011 . a letter from the american jewish committee objected that '' public opinion polls consistently show a high level of american . support for and identification with israel . this indicates that the people 's elected representatives are fully reflecting the will of the voters . '' new york times columnist tom friedman crossed a line jerusalem post , 19 december 2011 . friedman responded to criticism by writing : '' in retrospect i probably should have used a more precise term like 'engineered ' by the israel lobby – a term that does not suggest grand conspiracy theories that i do n't subscribe to . '' friedman responds to criticism over ‘ bought and paid for ’ jab at congress jta , december 20 , 2011 . friedman hailed the historic , trump-brokered peace agreement between israel and the united arab emirates as '' exactly what trump said it was in his tweet : a 'huge breakthrough . . china . in september 2009 , friedman wrote an article praising china 's one-party autocracy , saying that it was '' led by a reasonably enlightened group of people '' and that china 's leaders are '' boosting gasoline prices '' and '' overtaking us in electric cars , solar power , energy efficiency , batteries , nuclear power and wind power . '' the article was in turn subject to critical analysis : matt lewis who wrote , '' friedman 's apparent wish for a 'benign ' dictator is utopian , inasmuch as it ignores lord acton 's warning that 'absolute power corrupts absolutely . ' '' and william easterly who quotes friedman 's one-party autocracy assertions as part of his academic paper in which he concluded that , '' formal theory and evidence provides little or no basis on which to believe the benevolent autocrat story '' and that , '' economists should retain their traditional skepticism for stories that have little good theory or empirics to support them . '' however , in a july 2012 article in the nyt , he also wrote that the current chinese leadership has not used its surging economic growth to also introduce gradual political reform and that , '' corruption is as bad as ever , institutionalized transparency and rule of law remain weak and consensual politics nonexistent . '' when asked if he had '' china envy '' during a fresh dialogues interview , friedman replied , '' you detect the envy of someone who wants his own government to act democratically with the same effectiveness that china can do autocratically . '' likewise , in a 2011 interview with the bbc friedman says that he wants his children to live in a world where '' there 's a strong america counterbalancing a strong and thriving china , and not one where you have a strong and rising china and an america that is uncertain , weak and unable to project power economically and militarily it historically did . '' friedman 's work is popular in china . his book the world is flat was a bestseller in the country , although criticism of china in the book was removed when it was published in the country . a translated version of his article from the new york times , '' china needs its own dream '' , has been credited with popularizing the phrase '' chinese dream '' in china , a term that was later adopted as a slogan by xi jinping . friedman , in the magazine foreign policy , has attributed the phrase to peggy liu and her environmental ngo juccce . in september 2020 , friedman told cnbc that '' trump is not the american president america deserves , in my opinion . but he definitely is the american president china deserved . we needed to have a president who was going to call the game with china . and trump has done it , with i would say more grit and toughness than any of his predecessors . i give him credit for that . '' . iran . as the iran nuclear deal framework reached between iran and a group of world powers ( the p5+1 ) . in friedman 's interview , he mentioned that '' our view of the middle east is deeply colored by israel , saudi arabia and turkey and they all have their own interest . 15 of the 19 hijackers on 911 were from saudi arabia , none from iran ! iranians had a spontaneous demonstration to support americans on 911 . '' he added , '' what strikes you most about iran ( vs . saudi arabia ) is that iran has real politics . a country of 85 million people , a great civilization , many educated men and women , if they want to get a bomb they will get it . they have demonstrated they could do it under the most severe sanctions . show me where iranians have acted reckless like saddam hussein . these are survivors . '' . radical centrism . in the 2010s , friedman wrote several columns supporting the politics of radical centrism . in one he stated that , if the '' radical center wants to be empowered , it ca n't just whine . it needs its own grass-roots movement '' . friedman , thomas l . ( 20 march 2010 ) . '' a tea party without nuts '' . the new york times . retrieved 25 february 2013 . in another column friedman promoted americans elect , an organization trying to field a radical-centrist candidate for the 2012 u.s . presidential election . that column decried '' the two-party duopoly that has dominated american political life '' . friedman , thomas ( 23 july 2011 ) . '' make way for the radical center '' . the new york times . retrieved 23 february 2013 . friedman 's radical-centrist columns received a considerable amount of criticism , particularly from liberals . marx , greg ( 25 july 2011 ) . '' tom friedman 's 'radical ' wrongness '' . columbia journalism review . retrieved 28 february 2013 . . criticism . american journalist and former civil rights litigator glenn greenwald , writing for salon on july 25 , 2012 , commented : '' his status among american elites is the single most potent fact for understanding the nation 's imperial decline . '' john esposito criticized him in 2014 for writing twice that muslims do not speak up against terrorism , and yet '' his own newspaper has had these denunciations by muslims . '' some critics have derided friedman 's idiosyncratic prose style , with its tendency to use mixed metaphors and analogies . walter russell mead described his prose as being '' an occasionally flat midwestern demotic punctuated by gee-whiz exclamations about just how doggone irresistible globalization is – lacks the steely elegance of a lippmann , the unobtrusive serviceability of a scotty reston or the restless fireworks of a maureen dowd and is best taken in small doses . '' similarly , journalist matt taibbi has said of friedman 's writing that , '' friedman came up with lines so hilarious you could n't make them up even if you were trying – and when you tried to actually picture the 'illustrative ' figures of speech he offered to explain himself , what you often ended up with was pure physical comedy of the buster keaton/three stooges school , with whole nations and peoples slipping and falling on the misplaced banana peels of his literary endeavors . '' in a column for the new york press , alexander cockburn wrote : '' friedman exhibits on a weekly basis one of the severest cases known to science of lippmann 's condition , named for the legendary journalistic hot-air salesman , walter lippmann , and alluding to the inherent tendency of all pundits to swell in self-importance to zeppelin-like dimensions '' . cockburn said friedman 's hubris allowed him to pass off another war correspondent 's experience in beirut as his own . in december , 2017 , hamid dabashi wrote about friedman : '' thomas friedman is an ignorant fool - and i do not mean that as an insult . i mean it as a clinical diagnosis of an almost-illiterate man who has been cheated out of a proper undergraduate education , sold as a liberal zionist to the highest bidder , and thus has managed to ramble and blabber his way up as a top-notch new york times columnist . '' in april 2018 , barrett brown criticized friedman for '' his serial habit of giving the benefit of the doubt to whoever happens to hold power '' , such as friedman 's column supporting vladimir putin as a modernizing reformer , in which he urged americans to '' keep rootin ' for putin '' . brown also used this phrase in the title of his 2014 book '' keep rootin ' for putin : establishment pundits and the twilight of american competence '' . . documentaries . friedman has hosted several documentaries for the discovery channel from several locations around the world . in straddling the fence ( 2003 ) , he visited the west bank and spoke to israelis and palestinians about the israeli west bank barrier and its impact on their lives . also in 2003 , thomas l . friedman reporting : searching for the roots of 9/11 aired on the discovery times channel . this program investigated how the sept . 11th attacks in new york , pennsylvania , and the pentagon were viewed in the muslim world . in the other side of outsourcing ( 2004 ) , he visited a call centre in bangalore , interviewing the young indians working there , and then travelled to an impoverished rural part of india , where he debated the pros and cons of globalization with locals ( this trip spawned his later book the world is flat ) . in does europe hate us ? ( 2005 ) , friedman travelled through uk , france and germany , talking with academics , journalists , marshall and rhodes scholars , young muslims and others about the nature of the strained relationship between europe and the united states . addicted to oil ( 2006 ) premiered at the silverdocs documentary festival at 5:30 pm on june 16 , 2006 , and aired on june 24 , 2006 , on the discovery times channel . in it he examined the geopolitical , economic , and environmental consequences of petroleum use and ways that green technologies such as alternative fuels and energy efficiency and conservation can reduce oil dependence . in green : the new red , white and blue ( 2007 ) , friedman elaborates on the green technologies and efforts touched on in addicted to oil and in doing so , attempts to redefine green energy as geostrategic , geoeconomic , capitalistic and patriotic . he explores efforts by companies and individuals to reduce their carbon footprint and save money with conservation , efficiency , and technologies such as solar , wind , biomass , nuclear , and clean coal . in 2014 , friedman served as a correspondent for years of living dangerously , a documentary show about climate change . for the show 's first season , he traveled to cover the role climate change has played in conflicts in the region . he also interviewed u.s . president barack obama . for the show 's second season in 2016 , he traveled to africa . . personal life . friedman is married to ann bucksbaum , a teacher and daughter of the founder of a shopping mall empire , matthew bucksbaum . he was one of the founding members of kol shalom , a synagogue in rockville , maryland . friedman supported hillary clinton for president of the united states in the 2016 election , and supported michael bloomberg in the 2020 primaries . he supported joe biden in the 2020 united states presidential election . friedman is on the board of directors for planet word , a washington , d.c . based private museum dedicated to language . . published works . from beirut to jerusalem ( 1989 ; expanded edition 1990 ) – winner of the national book award in its first edition the lexus and the olive tree : understanding globalization ( 1999 ; revised edition 2000 ) longitudes and attitudes : exploring the world after september 11 ( 2002 ; reprinted 2003 as longitudes and attitudes : the world in the age of terrorism ) the world is flat : a brief history of the twenty-first century ( 2005 ; expanded edition 2006 ; revised edition 2007 ) hot , flat , and crowded : why we need a green revolution—and how it can renew america ( 2008 ) that used to be us : how america fell behind in the world it invented and how we can come back ( co-written with michael mandelbaum 2011 ) thank you for being late ( november , 2016 ) . awards and recognition . friedman has won the pulitzer prize three times : 1983 : for his coverage of the war in lebanon . a distinguished example of international reporting the 1983 pulitzer prize winner in international reporting : thomas l . friedman and loren jenkins of the new york times and the washington post , ( respectively ) , 2016 1988 : for coverage of israel : a distinguished example of reporting on international affairs the 1988 pulitzer prize winner in international reporting : thomas l . friedman of the new york times , pulitzer prize site , 2016 2002 : for his commentary illuminating the worldwide impact of the terrorist threat the 2002 pulitzer prize winner in commentary : thomas friedman of the new york times , pulitzer prize site , 2016 additionally , in 2005 he was elected as a member of the pulitzer prize board . in 2003 , he received the golden plate award of the academy of achievement . . see also . curiosity quotient new yorkers in journalism . references . external links . columns for the new york times