Rothwell, West Yorkshire

20th century . st george 's hospital was situated off wood lane where now exists castle lodge avenue and associated houses . it was built in 1903 to a design by leeds architect edward j . dodgshun by the rothwell , methley and hunslet joint isolation hospital committee which was formed under the isolation hospitals act 1893 by an order of the west riding county council 10 january 1900 . when first constructed it was known as the new union workhouse and infirmary for the hunslet union , on being taken over by the leeds public assistance committee in 1934 it was renamed st george ’ s hospital . in 1934 it was transferred to the leeds health committee . in 1948 , the hospital was managed by the leeds group b hospital management committee . after local government reorganisation in 1974 it was transferred to the leeds eastern district and soon after to the leeds western district . the hospital was closed in december 1991 . from 1934 the hospital provided accommodation for the elderly ill , patients with chronic and acute mental illness , persons with learning disability , a maternity ward and a separate isolation ward . the site was developed for housing at the start of the 21st century but the original tall clock tower remains . rothwell temperance band is a championship section brass band founded in rothwell in 1984 . although they do not rehearse in rothwell itself , they have strong connections with the town and hold many concerts for the local community . they actually rehearse in wakefield . the closest champion section brass band is the yorkshire imperial band , formerly of the yorkshire imperial copperworks based in stourton , from which the band is named . the imps , as they are more commonly known , merged with the original rothwell band ( founded 1881 ) in the 1990s . rothwell has a long history of coal mining . it was a site of early mining , using a system known as bell pits . coal mining has been carried out in the area for over 600 years , though coal production stopped on 9 december 1983 . there were many local pits including the fanny , the rose and rothwell water haigh . in 1995 , leeds city council and leeds groundwork formed a partnership which , together with local residents and community groups , transformed the former colliery into a 50-hectare country park . rothwell was constituted an urban district in the west riding of yorkshire under the local government act 1894 . in 1937 it was expanded by taking in the methley urban district and hunslet rural district . it was incorporated into the city of leeds metropolitan borough , west yorkshire by the local government act 1972 . its inclusion in the leeds district as opposed to the city of wakefield was controversial : originally planned for the leeds district , it was added to the wakefield district at the request of residents , but then moved to the leeds district by the house of lords . . 21st century . the introduction of leeds valley park in the early 21st century and its subsequent expansions have caused concerns for residents due to the parking problems caused on neighbouring wood lane . this is despite numerous efforts by local councillors , and the community , to include further parking restrictions . . rothwell urban district . between 1894 and 1972 , rothwell was constituted as an urban district . this district included the areas of rothwell , methley , oulton , woodlesford , stourton , carlton , robin hood , lofthouse and thorpe . the rothwell urban district had a total population of around 25,000 , but if it still existed today , that figure would be closer to 30,000 . in 1972 these areas were taken into the newly formed city of leeds metropolitan district , although thorpe , lofthouse , carlton and some parts of robin hood have a wakefield postcode . town centre . rothwell has a town centre which includes high street chains as well as boutique shops . there are a number of excellent independent restaurants and bars as well as a couple of traditional pubs . besides the two annual fairs , a christmas fayre takes place in the autumn , and a food and drink fayre in early spring . since 2007 , the town centre has experienced major redevelopments to respect the local area 's conservation status , pedestrianising and restoring the original route of commercial street . education . there are several primary schools in rothwell including : holy trinity rothwell primary school ( formerly rothwell church of england primary school ) rothwell primary school rothwell haigh road infant school rothwell victoria junior school rothwell st . mary 's catholic primary school there are two high schools in the rothwell area : royds school ( formerly royds specialist language college ) . the rodillian academy – the former rothwell grammar school ( actually in lofthouse ) . when it was built it was in the rothwell urban district . both royds and rodillian have sixth form colleges integrated in the school environment . other further education colleges in rothwell : leeds city college – formerly joseph priestley college wec international was based at springhead park house offering christian training in radio , and other media however has since moved . notable and former residents . thomas beckwith - f.a.s ( 1731–1786 ) english painter , genealogist and antiquary . mark bell – musician of lfo fame , worked with björk . john blenkinsop ( 1783–1831 ) – inventor of the rack railway system ( buried in the grounds of holy trinity church ) . martin kelner – journalist , author , and radio presenter . michelle hardwick – actress who portrayed lizzie hopkirk in the royal and vanessa woodfield in emmerdale lord newby of rothwell – liberal democrat & member of the house of lords . paul loughran – actor who portrayed emmerdale character butch dingle . joseph priestley – scientist . the pigeon detectives – indie rock band . jane tomlinson cbe – charity fundraiser , who raised over £1.5 & nbsp ; million whilst suffering from terminal cancer . sport . david batty - footballer , played for leeds united and blackburn rovers , when they were english football champions jason golden – harlequins rl footballer . ryan hall – leeds rhinos rugby league footballer . carl ablett – leeds rhinos rugby league footballer . jack hunt – professional footballer , currently playing for bristol city f.c . garry schofield – rugby league footballer & obe . alan smith – ex leeds united and england football player jamie thackray – hull f.c . rugby league footballer . sports . football . rothwell is home to 3 football clubs : rothwell town j.f.c s130468224.websitehome.co.uk ( 13 november 2010 ) . retrieved 10 february 2011 . – who are based at john o'gaunts recreation ground near rothwell labour club rothwell juniors – currently based at a purpose-built £1.5 & nbsp ; million development at fleet lane , woodlesford . open age teams known as simply 'rothwell fc ' . rothwell albion – a newly formed club in the area . there are numerous teams in the wider rothwell ward , these include ; carlton athletic and robin hood athletic , among others . golf . oulton hall golf course , which is currently owned by hotel group de vere is located adjacent to oulton lane . the only 5-star golf resort in the north of england . de vere : golf . devere-hotels.com . retrieved on 10 february 2011 . . bowling . bowling is also a popular sport , and there is a public bowling green in springhead park . tennis . there are four tennis courts located at springhead park . the courts are free to book and also offer paid for tennis coaching sessions too . squash & racketball . rothwell squash & racketball club offers facilities for players of all standards from juniors and beginners up to first team yorkshire league players . cricket . rothwell cricket club field two teams in the pontefract & district cricket league , with the 1st xi competing in the top division in 2020 . parkrun . every saturday morning a popular parkrun is held around springhead park . notable places of interest . oulton hall & golf course holy trinity church , rothwell rothwell methodist church ( founded 1764 ) . location grid . references . external links . ls26.org.uk - area website