Aflatoxin

major types and their metabolites . aflatoxin b1 is considered the most toxic and is produced by both aspergillus flavus and aspergillus parasiticus . aflatoxin m1 is present in the fermentation broth of aspergillus parasiticus , but it and aflatoxin m 2 are also produced when an infected liver metabolizes aflatoxin b 1 and b 2 . aflatoxin b 1 and b 2 ( afb ) , produced by aspergillus flavus and a . parasiticus aflatoxin g 1 and g 2 ( afg ) , produced by some group ii a . flavus and aspergillus parasiticus aflatoxin m 1 ( afm 1 ) , metabolite of aflatoxin b 1 in humans and animals ( exposure in ng levels may come from a mother 's milk ) aflatoxin m 2 , metabolite of aflatoxin b 2 in milk of cattle fed on contaminated foods aflatoxicol ( afl ) : metabolite produced by breaking down the lactone ring aflatoxin q 1 ( afq 1 ) , major metabolite of afb 1 in in vitro liver preparations of other higher vertebrates afm , afq , and afl retain the possibly to become an epoxide . nevertheless , they appear much less capable of causing mutagenesis than the unmetabolized toxin . . contamination conditions . aflatoxins are produced by both aspergillus flavus and aspergillus parasiticus , which are common forms of 'weedy ' molds widespread in nature . the presence of those molds does not always indicate that harmful levels of aflatoxin are present , but does indicate a significant risk . the molds can colonize and contaminate food before harvest or during storage , especially following prolonged exposure to a high-humidity environment , or to stressful conditions such as drought . the native habitat of aspergillus is in soil , decaying vegetation , hay , and grains undergoing microbiological deterioration , but it invades all types of organic substrates whenever conditions are favorable for its growth . favorable conditions include high moisture content ( at least 7 % ) and high temperature . aflatoxins have been isolated from all major cereal crops , and from sources as diverse as peanut butter and cannabis . the staple commodities regularly contaminated with aflatoxins include cassava , chilies , corn , cotton seed , millet , peanuts , rice , sorghum , sunflower seeds , tree nuts , wheat , and a variety of spices intended for human or animal consumption . aflatoxin transformation products are sometimes found in eggs , milk products , and meat when animals are fed contaminated grains . a study conducted in kenya and mali found that the predominant practices for drying and storage of maize were inadequate in minimizing exposure to aflatoxins . organic crops , which are not treated with fungicides , may be more susceptible to contamination with aflatoxins . . prevention . there is very limited evidence to show that agricultural and nutritional education can reduce exposure to aflatoxin in low to middle income countries . . pathology . no animal species is immune to the acute toxic effects of aflatoxins . adult humans have a high tolerance for aflatoxin exposure and rarely succumb to acute aflatoxicosis , but children are particularly affected , and their exposure can lead to stunted growth and delayed development , in addition to all the symptoms mentioned below . high-level aflatoxin exposure produces an acute liver necrosis ( acute aflatoxicosis ) , resulting later in cirrhosis or liver cancer . acute liver failure is made manifest by bleeding , edema , alteration in digestion , changes to the absorption and/or metabolism of nutrients , and mental changes and/or coma . chronic , subclinical exposure does not lead to symptoms so dramatic as acute aflatoxicosis . chronic exposure increases the risk of developing liver and gallbladder cancer , as aflatoxin metabolites may intercalate into dna and alkylate the bases through epoxide moiety . this is thought to cause mutations in the p53 gene , an important gene in preventing cell cycle progression when there are dna mutations , or signaling apoptosis ( programmed cell death ) . these mutations seem to affect some base pair locations more than others , for example , the third base of codon 249 of the p53 gene appears to be more susceptible to aflatoxin-mediated mutations than nearby bases . as with other dna-alkylating agents , aflatoxin b 1 can cause immune suppression , and exposure to it is associated with an increased viral load in hiv positive individuals . the expression of aflatoxin-related diseases is influenced by factors such as species , age , nutrition , sex , and the possibility of concurrent exposure to other toxins . the main target organ in mammals is the liver , so aflatoxicosis primarily is a hepatic disease . conditions increasing the likelihood of aflatoxicosis in humans include limited availability of food , environmental conditions that favour mould growth on foodstuffs , and lack of regulatory systems for aflatoxin monitoring and control . a regular diet including apiaceae , such as carrots , parsnips , celery , and parsley may reduce the carcinogenic effects of aflatoxin . there is no specific antidote for aflatoxicosis . symptomatic and supportive care tailored to the severity of the liver disease may include intravenous fluids with dextrose , active vitamin k , b vitamins , and a restricted , but high-quality protein diet with adequate carbohydrate content . in other animals . in dogs , aflatoxin has potential to lead to liver disease . low levels of aflatoxin exposure require continuous consumption for several weeks to months in order for signs of liver dysfunction to appear . some articles have suggested the toxic level in dog food is 100–300 ppb and requires continuous exposure or consumption for a few weeks to months to develop aflatoxicosis . no information is available to suggest that recovered dogs will later succumb to an aflatoxin-induced disease . turkeys are extremely susceptible to aflatoxicosis . recent studies have revealed that this is due to the efficient cytochrome p450 mediated metabolism of aflatoxin b 1 in the liver of turkeys and deficient glutathione-s-transferase mediated detoxification . some studies on pregnant hamsters showed a significant relationship between exposure of aflatoxin b 1 ( 4 & nbsp ; mg/kg , single dose ) and the appearance of teratology in their offspring . in 2005 , diamond pet foods discovered aflatoxin in a product manufactured at their facility in gaston , south carolina . fda inspection report-diamond gaston sc plant 12/21/2005-1/19/2006 . 2005 recall , fda in 23 states , diamond voluntarily recalled 19 products formulated with corn and manufactured in the gaston facility . testing of more than 2,700 finished product samples conducted by laboratories confirmed that only two date codes of two adult dog formulas had the potential to be toxic . akc standard article contaminated diamond pet food products and 'best by ' dates narrowed akcstandard.com in december 2020 and january 2021 , midwestern pet foods recalled dog food that contained fatal levels of aflatoxin . as many as 70 dogs had died from aflatoxin poisoning by january 12 , 2021 . . detection in humans . there are two principal techniques that have been used most often to detect levels of aflatoxin in humans . the first method is measuring the afb 1 -guanine adduct in the urine of subjects . the presence of this breakdown product indicates exposure to aflatoxin b 1 during the past 24 hours . this technique measures only recent exposure , however . due to the half-life of this metabolite , the level of afb 1 -guanine measured may vary from day to day , based on diet , it is not ideal for assessing long-term exposure . another technique that has been used is a measurement of the afb 1 -albumin adduct level in the blood serum . this approach provides a more integrated measure of exposure over several weeks or months . list of outbreaks . international sources of commercial peanut butter , cooking oils ( e.g . olive , peanut and sesame oil ) , and cosmetics have been identified as contaminated with aflatoxin . in some instances , liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry ( lc–ms/ms ) , and other analytical methods , revealed a range from 48 % to 80 % of selected product samples as containing detectable quantities of aflatoxin . in many of these contaminated food products , the aflatoxin exceeded the safe limits of the u.s . food and drug administration ( fda ) , or other regulatory agency . 2003 kenya : acute poisoning , 120 confirmed deaths . february–march 2013 : romania , serbia , croatia imported into western europe - 2013 aflatoxin contamination . february 2013 : iowa contamination . 2014 ( ongoing ) : nepal and bangladesh , neonatal exposures , found in umbilical cord blood . 2019 kenya : five brands of maize flour recalled due to contamination . 2021 usa : contamination of pet food manufactured by midwestern pet food , causing the deaths of at least 70 dogs .