A-side and B-side

history . the first sound recordings were produced in the late 19th century using cylinder records , which held approximately two minutes of audio stored upon a single round surface . one-sided disc records made of shellac co-existed with cylinders and had a similar capacity . in 1908 , columbia records introduced double-sided recordings with one selection on each side in european markets . although cylinders and discs remained comparable and competitive for a time ( both media would be able to hold between three and four minutes of sound by 1910 ) , ultimately , discs superseded the cylinder format , rendering it obsolete by 1912 , largely due to its shorter play times . record producers did not initially have reason to value either side of double-sided records as being more important than the other . there were no record charts until the 1930s , and most radio stations did not broadcast recorded music until the 1950s , when the top 40 overtook old-time radio legacy ) . in june 1948 , columbia records introduced the modern 33 rpm lp album microgroove vinyl record for commercial sales , and its rival rca victor , responded the next year with the seven-inch 45 rpm vinylite record , which would quickly replace the 78 for single record releases . the term '' single '' came into popular use with the advent of vinyl records in the early 1950s . during this period , most record labels would designate one song an a-side and the other a b-side at random . ( all records have specific identifiers for each side in addition to the catalog number for the record itself ; the '' a '' side would typically be assigned a sequentially lower number . ) under this random system , many artists had so-called '' double-sided hits '' , where both songs on a record made one of the national sales charts ( in billboard , cashbox , or other magazines ) , or would be featured on jukebox in public places . conventions shifted in the early 1960s , at which point record companies started assigning the song they wanted radio stations to play to side a , as 45 rpm single records ( '' 45s '' ) dominated most markets in terms of cash sales in comparison to album , which did not fare as well financially . throughout the decade the industry would slowly shift to an album-driven paradigm for releasing new music ; it was not until 1968 that the total production of albums on a unit basis finally surpassed that of singles in the united kingdom . macdonald , p . 296 in the late 1960s , stereo versions of pop and rock songs began appearing on 45s . however , since the majority of the 45s were played on am radio stations that were not yet equipped for stereo broadcast , stereo was not a priority . nevertheless , fm rock stations did not like to play monaural content , so the record companies adopted a protocol for promotional recording for disc jockeys with the mono version of a song on one side and a stereo version of the same song on the other . by the early 1970s , album sales had increased and double-sided hit singles had become rare . record companies started to use singles as a means of promoting albums ; they frequently placed album tracks that they wished to promote on side a and less accessible , non-album , instrumental songs on side b . in order to ensure that radio stations played the side that the record companies wanted to promote , they often marked one side of a record 's label as a '' plug side . '' the distinction between the two sides became less meaningful after the introduction of cassettes and compact disc singles in the late 1980s when 45 rpm vinyl records began to decline . at first , cassette singles would often have one song on each side , matching the arrangement of vinyl records . eventually though , cassette maxi-single containing more than two songs became more popular . as the one-sided audio compact disc became the dominant recording medium in the late 1990s , cassettes began vanishing and the a-side/b-side dichotomy became virtually extinct . the term “ b-side ” continued to enjoy varying levels of use in reference to the '' bonus '' tracks or '' coupling '' tracks on a cd single . in the last few decades , the industry has largely shifted away from physical media towards digital music distribution formats , further diminishing the relevance of terminology or marketing strategies based on “ sides . ” today , companies label non-album songs and tracks deemed less desirable or marketable using terms such as '' unreleased , ” , '' bonus , ” , '' non-album , ” '' rare , ” '' outtakes , ” or '' exclusive . ” such material is sometimes grouped for downloading or streaming together into “ bonus ” or “ extended ” versions of an artist 's albums on digital music platforms . significance . b-side songs may be released on the same record as a single to provide extra '' value for money '' . there are several types of material commonly released in this way , including a different version ( e.g . , instrumental , a cappella , live , acoustic , remixed version or in another language ) , or , in a concept album , a song that does not fit into the story line . additionally , it was common in the 1960s and 1970s for longer songs , especially by soul , funk , and r & b acts , to be broken into two parts for single release . examples of this include ray charles 's '' what 'd i say '' , the isley brothers ' '' shout '' , and a number of records by james brown , including '' papa 's got a brand new bag '' and '' say it loud - i 'm black and i 'm proud '' . typically , '' part one '' would be the chart hit , while '' part two '' would be a continuation of the same performance . a notable example of a non-r & b hit with two parts was the single release of don mclean 's '' american pie '' . with the advent of the 12-inch single in the late-1970s , the part one/part two method of recording was largely abandoned . modern day examples are fall out boy 's ep , my heart will always be the b-side to my tongue , or my chemical romance 's the black parade : the b-sides . since both sides of a single received equal royalties , some composers deliberately arranged for their songs to be used as the b-sides of singles by popular artists . this became known as the '' flipside racket '' . similarly , it has also been alleged that owners of pirate radio stations operating off the british coast in the 1960s would buy the publishing rights to the b-sides of records they expected to be hits , and then plug the a-sides in the hope of driving up sales and increasing their share of the royalties . occasionally , the b-side of a single would become the more popular song . this sometimes occurred because a dj preferred the b-side to its a-side and played it instead . some examples include '' i will survive '' by gloria gaynor ( originally the b-side of '' substitute '' ) , '' ice ice baby '' by vanilla ice ( originally the b-side of '' play that funky music '' ) , '' i 'll be around '' by the spinners ( originally the b-side of '' how could i let you get away '' ) and '' maggie may '' by rod stewart ( originally the b-side of '' reason to believe '' ) . probably the most well-known of these , however , is '' rock around the clock '' by bill haley & his comets ( originally the b-side of '' thirteen women ( and only one man in town ) ) '' . the song '' how soon is now ? '' by the smiths started out as the extra track on the 12-inch of william , it was really nothing but later gained a separate release as an a-side in its own right , as did oasis 's '' acquiesce '' , which originally appeared as a b-side to '' some might say '' in 1995 , but gained subsequent release in 2006 as part of an ep to promote their forthcoming compilation album , stop the clocks . feeder in 2001 and 2005 had the b-sides '' just a day '' from '' seven days in the sun '' , and '' shatter '' from '' tumble and fall '' released as a-sides after fan petitions and official website and fansite message board hype , and both charted at no . 12 and no . 11 in the uk . in 1986 , the first single from xtc 's record skylarking , '' grass '' , was eclipsed in the united states by its b-side , '' dear god '' – so much so that the record was almost immediately re-released with one song ( '' mermaid smiled '' ) removed and '' dear god '' put in its place , becoming one of the band 's better-known hits . on many reissued singles , the a- and b-sides are two hit songs from different albums that were not originally released together , or were by completely different artists , altogether . these were often made for the jukebox , as one record with two popular songs on it would make more money , or to promote an artist to the fans of another . for example , in 1981 kraftwerk released their new single '' computer love '' coupled with the b-side '' the model '' , from their 1978 lp the man-machine . with synthpop increasingly dominating the uk charts , the single was re-released with the sides reversed . in early 1982 '' the model '' reached number one . double a-side . a '' double a-side '' or '' aa-side '' is a single where both sides are designated the a-side , with no designated b-side ; that is , both sides are '' hits '' or prospective hit songs and neither side will be promoted over the other . in 1949 , savoy records promoted a new single by one of its artists , paul williams ' '' house rocker '' and '' he knows how to hucklebuck '' , as '' the new double side hit – both sides '' a '' sides '' . the term '' b/w '' , an abbreviation of '' backed with '' , is often used in listings to indicate the b-side of a record . the term '' c/w '' , for '' coupled with '' , is used similarly . . b-side compilations . notes . references . macdonald , ian . revolution in the head : the beatles ' records and the sixties – '' a history of the 45rpm record '' martland , peter . emi : the first 100 years –