Soyuz (spacecraft)

history . the first soyuz flight was uncrewed and started on 28 november 1966 . the first soyuz mission with a crew , soyuz 1 , launched on 23 april 1967 but ended with a crash due to a parachute failure , killing astronaut vladimir komarov . the soyuz 2 was uncrewed . soyuz 3 , launched on 26 october 1968 , became the program 's first successful crewed mission . the only other flight to suffer a fatal accident , soyuz 11 , killed its crew of three when the cabin depressurized prematurely just before reentry . these were the only humans to date to have died above the kármán line . despite these early incidents , soyuz is widely considered the world 's safest , most cost-effective human spaceflight vehicle , established by its unparalleled length of operational history . soyuz : the greatest spacecraft ever the best ride in the galaxy – coming back to earth in a soyuz soyuz spacecraft were used to carry cosmonauts to and from salyut and later mir soviet space stations , and are now used for transport to and from the international space station ( iss ) . at least one soyuz spacecraft is docked to iss at all times for use as an escape craft in the event of an emergency . the spacecraft is intended to be replaced by the six-person orel spacecraft . . design . a soyuz spacecraft consists of three parts ( from front to back ) : a spheroid orbital module , which provides accommodation for the crew during their mission ; a small aerodynamic reentry module , which returns the crew to earth ; a cylindrical service module with solar panels attached , which contains the instruments and engines . the orbital and service modules are single-use and are destroyed upon atmospheric entry . though this might seem wasteful , it reduces the amount of heat shielding required for reentry , saving mass compared to designs containing all of the living space and life support in a single capsule . this allows smaller rockets to launch the spacecraft or can be used to increase the habitable space available to the crew in apollo cm vs in soyuz ) in the mass budget . the orbital and reentry portions are habitable living space , with the service module containing the fuel , main engines and instrumentation . the soyuz is not reusable ; it is expendable . a new soyuz spacecraft must be made for every mission . soyuz can carry up to three crew members and provide life support for about 30 person days . the life support system provides a nitrogen/oxygen atmosphere at sea level partial pressures . the atmosphere is regenerated through potassium superoxide ( ko 2 ) cylinders , which absorb most of the carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) and water produced by the crew and regenerates the oxygen , and lithium hydroxide ( lioh ) cylinders which absorb leftover co 2 . the vehicle is protected during launch by a payload fairing , which is jettisoned along with the sas at minutes into launch . it has an automatic docking system . the ship can be operated automatically , or by a pilot independently of ground control . launch escape system . the vostok spacecraft utilized an ejector seat to bail out the cosmonaut in the event of a low-altitude launch failure , as well as during reentry , however it would probably have been ineffective in the first 20 seconds after liftoff when the altitude would be too low for the parachute to deploy . inspired by the mercury les , soviet designers began work on a similar system in 1962 . this included developing a complex sensing system to monitor various launch vehicle parameters and trigger an abort if a booster malfunction occurred . based on data from r-7 launches over the years , engineers developed a list of the most likely failure modes for the vehicle and could narrow down abort conditions to premature separation of a strap-on booster , low engine thrust , loss of combustion chamber pressure , or loss of booster guidance . the spacecraft abort system ( sas ; could also be manually activated from the ground , but unlike american spacecraft , there was no way for the cosmonauts to trigger it themselves . since it turned out to be almost impossible to separate the entire payload shroud from the soyuz service module cleanly , the decision was made to have the shroud split between the service module and descent module during an abort . four folding stabilizers were added to improve aerodynamic stability during ascent . two test runs of the sas were carried out in 1966–1967 . the basic design of the sas has remained almost unchanged in 50 years of use and all soyuz launches carry it . the only modification was in 1972 when the aerodynamic fairing over the sas motor nozzles was removed for weight-saving reasons as the redesigned soyuz 7k-t spacecraft carried extra life support equipment . the uncrewed progress resupply ferry has a dummy escape tower and removes the stabilizer fins from the payload shroud . there have been three failed launches of a crewed soyuz vehicle , soyuz 18a in 1975 , soyuz t-10a in 1983 and soyuz ms-10 in october 2018 . the 1975 failure was aborted after escape tower jettison . in 1983 , soyuz t-10a 's sas successfully rescued the cosmonauts from an on-pad fire and explosion of the launch vehicle . most recently in 2018 , the sas sub-system in the payload shroud of soyuz ms-10 successfully rescued the cosmonauts from a rocket failure 2 minutes and 45 second after liftoff after the escape tower had already been jettisoned . orbital module . the forepart of the spacecraft is the orbital module , also known as habitation section . it houses all the equipment that will not be needed for reentry , such as experiments , cameras or cargo . the module also contains a toilet , docking avionics and communications gear . internal volume is , living space . on the latest soyuz versions ( since soyuz tm ) , a small window was introduced , providing the crew with a forward view . a hatch between it and the descent module can be closed so as to isolate it to act as an airlock if needed , crew members exiting through its side port ( near the descent module ) . on the launch pad , the crew enter the spacecraft through this port . this separation also lets the orbital module be customized to the mission with less risk to the life-critical descent module . the convention of orientation in a micro-g environment differs from that of the descent module , as crew members stand or sit with their heads to the docking port . also the rescue of the crew whilst on the launch pad or with the sas system is complicated because of the orbital module . separation of the orbital module is critical for a safe landing ; without separation of the orbital module , it is not possible for the crew to survive landing in the descent module . this is because the orbital module would interfere with proper deployment of the descent module 's parachutes , and the extra mass exceeds the capability of the main parachute and braking engines to provide a safe soft landing speed . in view of this , the orbital module was separated before the ignition of the return engine until the late 1980s . this guaranteed that the descent module and orbital module would be separated before the descent module was placed in a reentry trajectory . however , after the problematic landing of soyuz tm-5 in september 1988 this procedure was changed and the orbital module is now separated after the return maneuver . this change was made as the tm-5 crew could not deorbit for 24 hours after they jettisoned their orbital module , which contained their sanitation facilities and the docking collar needed to attach to mir . the risk of not being able to separate the orbital module is effectively judged to be less than the risk of needing the facilities in it , including the toilet , following a failed deorbit . descent module . the descent module , also known as a reentry capsule , is used for launch and the journey back to earth . half of the descent module is covered by a heat-resistant covering to protect it during reentry ; this half faces forward during reentry . it is slowed initially by the atmosphere , then by a braking parachute , followed by the main parachute which slows the craft for landing . at one meter above the ground , solid-fuel braking engines mounted behind the heat shield are fired to give a soft landing . one of the design requirements for the descent module was for it to have the highest possible volumetric efficiency ( internal volume divided by hull area ) . the best shape for this is a sphere – as the pioneering vostok spacecraft 's descent module used – but such a shape can provide no lift , which results in a purely atmospheric entry . ballistic reentries are hard on the occupants due to high deceleration and can not be steered beyond their initial deorbit burn . that is why it was decided to go with the '' headlight '' shape that the soyuz uses – a hemispherical forward area joined by a barely angled ( seven degrees ) conical section to a classic spherical section heat shield . this shape allows a small amount of lift to be generated due to the unequal weight distribution . the nickname was thought up at a time when nearly every headlight was circular . the small dimensions of the descent module led to it having only two-man crews after the death of the soyuz 11 crew . the later soyuz t spacecraft solved this issue . internal volume of soyuz sa is ; is usable for crew ( living space ) . service module . at the back of the vehicle is the service module . it has a pressurized container shaped like a bulging can ( instrumentation compartment , that contains systems for temperature control , electric power supply , long-range radio , telemetry , and instruments for orientation and control . a non-pressurized part of the service module ( propulsion compartment , contains the main engine and a liquid-fuelled propulsion system for maneuvering in orbit and initiating the descent back to earth . the ship also has a system of low-thrust engines for orientation , attached to the intermediate compartment . outside the service module are the sensors for the orientation system and the solar array , which is oriented towards the sun by rotating the ship . an incomplete separation between the service and reentry modules led to emergency situations during soyuz 5 , soyuz tma-10 and soyuz tma-11 , which led to an incorrect reentry orientation ( crew ingress hatch first ) . the failure of several explosive bolts did not cut the connection between the service and reentry modules on the latter two flights . reentry procedure . the soyuz uses a method similar to the united states apollo command and service module to deorbit itself . the spacecraft is turned engine-forward and the main engine is fired for deorbiting on the far side of earth ahead of its planned landing site . this requires the least propellant for reentry ; the spacecraft travels on an elliptical hohmann transfer orbit to the entry interface point where atmospheric drag slows it enough to fall out of orbit . early soyuz spacecraft would then have the service and orbital modules detach simultaneously from the descent module . as they are connected by tubing and electrical cables to the descent module , this would aid in their separation and avoid having the descent module alter its orientation . later soyuz spacecraft detached the orbital module before firing the main engine , which saved propellant . since the soyuz tm-5 landing issue , the orbital module is once again detached only after the reentry firing , which led to ( but did not cause ) emergency situations of soyuz tma-10 and tma-11 . the orbital module can not remain in orbit as an addition to a space station , as the airlock hatch between the orbital and reentry modules is a part of the reentry module , and the orbital module therefore depressurizes after separation . reentry firing is usually done on the '' dawn '' side of the earth , so that the spacecraft can be seen by recovery helicopters as it descends in the evening twilight , illuminated by the sun when it is above the shadow of the earth . the soyuz craft is designed to come down on land , usually somewhere in the deserts of kazakhstan in central asia . this is in contrast to the early united states crewed spacecraft , which splashed down in the ocean . spacecraft systems . thermal control system – life support system – power supply system – communication and tracking systems – rassvet ( dawn ) radio communications system , onboard measurement system ( sbi ) , kvant-v spacecraft control , klyost-m television system , orbit radio tracking ( rko ) onboard complex control system – combined propulsion system – chaika-3 motion control system ( sud ) optical/visual devices ( ovp ) – vsk-4 , night vision device ( vnuk-k , , docking light , pilot 's sight ( vp-1 , , laser rangefinder ( lpr-1 , kurs rendezvous system docking system – teleoperator control mode – entry actuators system – landing aids kit – portable survival kit – , containing a tp-82 cosmonaut survival pistol or makarov pistol soyuz launch escape system – ; orbital module ( a ) :1 docking mechanism :2 , 4 kurs rendezvous radar antenna :3 television transmission antenna :5 camera :6 hatch ; descent module ( b ) : :7 parachute compartment :8 periscope :9 porthole :11 heat shield ; service module ( c ) : :10 , 18 attitude control engines :12 earth sensors :13 sun sensor :14 solar panel attachment point :15 thermal sensor :16 kurs antenna :17 main propulsion :19 communication antenna :20 fuel tanks :21 oxygen tank . variants . 700px the soyuz spacecraft has been the subject of continuous evolution since the early 1960s . thus several different versions , proposals and projects exist . specifications . . soyuz 7k ( part of the 7k-9k-11k circumlunar complex ) ( 1963 ) . sergei korolev initially promoted the soyuz a-b-v circumlunar complex ( 7k-9k-11k ) concept ( also known as l1 ) in which a two-man craft soyuz 7k would rendezvous with other components ( 9k and 11k ) in earth orbit to assemble a lunar excursion vehicle , the components being delivered by the proven r-7 rocket . first generation . thumb thumb the crewed soyuz spacecraft can be classified into design generations . soyuz 1 through soyuz 11 ( 1967 & ndash ; 1971 ) were first-generation vehicles , carrying a crew of up to three without spacesuits and distinguished from those following by their bent solar panels and their use of the igla automatic docking navigation system , which required special radar antennas . this first generation encompassed the original soyuz 7k-ok and the soyuz 7k-oks for docking with the salyut 1 space station . the probe and drogue docking system permitted internal transfer of cosmonauts from the soyuz to the station . the soyuz 7k-l1 was designed to launch a crew from the earth to circle the moon , and was the primary hope for a soviet circumlunar flight . it had several test flights in the zond program from 1967 & ndash ; 1970 ( zond 4 to zond 8 ) , which produced multiple failures in the 7k-l1 's reentry systems . the remaining 7k-l1s were scrapped . the soyuz 7k-l3 was designed and developed in parallel to the soyuz 7k-l1 , but was also scrapped . soyuz 1 was plagued with technical issues , and cosmonaut vladimir komarov was killed when the spacecraft crashed during its return to earth . this was the first in-flight fatality in the history of spaceflight . the next crewed version of the soyuz was the soyuz 7k-oks . it was designed for space station flights and had a docking port that allowed internal transfer between spacecraft . the soyuz 7k-oks had two crewed flights , both in 1971 . soyuz 11 , the second flight , depressurized upon reentry , killing its three-man crew . second generation . thumb the second generation , called soyuz ferry or soyuz 7k-t , comprised soyuz 12 through soyuz 40 ( 1973 & ndash ; 1981 ) . it was developed out of the military soyuz concepts studied in previous years and was capable of carrying 2 cosmonauts with sokol space suits ( after the soyuz 11 accident ) . several models were planned , but none actually flew in space . these versions were named soyuz p , soyuz ppk , soyuz r , soyuz 7k-vi , and soyuz ois ( orbital research station ) . the soyuz 7k-t version was used for the flights to the military almaz space station . soyuz 7k-tm was the spacecraft used in the apollo–soyuz in 1975 , which saw the first and only docking of a soyuz spacecraft with an apollo command and service module . it was also flown in 1976 for the earth-science mission , soyuz 22 . soyuz 7k-tm served as a technological bridge to the third generation . third generation . thumb the third generation soyuz-t ( t : spacecraft ( 1976 & ndash ; 1986 ) featured solar panels allowing longer missions , a revised igla rendezvous system and new translation/attitude thruster system on the service module . it could carry a crew of three , now wearing spacesuits . fourth generation . . soyuz-tm ( 1986–2003 ) . thumb the soyuz-tm crew transports ( m : were fourth generation soyuz spacecraft , and were used from 1986 to 2003 for ferry flights to mir and the international space station ( iss ) . soyuz-tma ( 2003–2012 ) . image : soyuz tma-6 spacecraft.jpg thumb 290px the soyuz tma-6 soyuz tma ( a : features several changes to accommodate requirements requested by nasa in order to service the international space station ( iss ) , including more latitude in the height and weight of the crew and improved parachute systems . it is also the first expendable vehicle to feature '' glass cockpit '' technology . soyuz-tma looks identical to a soyuz-tm spacecraft on the outside , but interior differences allow it to accommodate taller occupants with new adjustable crew couches . soyuz tma-m ( 2010–2016 ) . the soyuz tma was an upgrade of the baseline soyuz-tma , using a new computer , digital interior displays , updated docking equipment , and the vehicle 's total mass was reduced by 70 kilograms . the new version debuted on 7 october 2010 with the launch of soyuz tma-01m , carrying the iss expedition 25 crew . the soyuz tma-08m mission set a new record for the fastest crewed docking with a space station . the mission used a new six-hour rendezvous , faster than the previous soyuz launches , which had , since 1986 , taken two days . . soyuz ms ( since 2016 ) . thumb soyuz ms is the final planned upgrade of the soyuz spacecraft . its maiden flight was in july 2016 with mission soyuz ms-01 . name '' soyuzms2017 '' > major changes include : more efficient solar panels modified docking and attitude control engine positions for redundancy during docking and de-orbit burns new kurs na approach and docking system which weighs half as much and consumes a third of the power of previous system new tsvm-101 computer , about one eighth the weight ( 8.3 kg versus 70 kg ) and much smaller than the previous argon-16 computer unified digital command/telemetry system ( mbits ) to relay telemetry via satellite , and control spacecraft when out of sight of ground stations ; also provides the crew with position data when out of ground tracking range glonass/gps and cospas-sarsat satellite systems for more accurate location during search/rescue operations after landing . related craft . the uncrewed progress spacecraft are derived from soyuz and are used for servicing space stations . while not being direct derivatives of soyuz , the chinese shenzhou spacecraft uses soyuz tm technology sold in 1984 and the indian gaganyaan follow the same general layout as that pioneered by soyuz . image gallery . image : soyuz national space centre.jpg early 7k-ok soyuz at national space centre in leicester , england image : soyuz 19 ( apollo soyuz test project ) spacecraft.jpg soyuz spacecraft of the apollo–soyuz test project ( astp ) image : soyuz acoplada mir.jpg soyuz docked to mir image : soyuz tma-19 docked to the rassvet mini-research module.jpg soyuz docked to iss image : soyuz spacecraft.jpg a soyuz mock-up shows how its modules are connected image : soyuz tm-31 transported to launch pad.jpg soyuz tm-31 moves to launch pad on 29 october 2000 image : soyuz tma-2 launch.jpg soyuz tma-2 launch from baikonur on april 26 , 2003 image : expedition 28 landing.jpg soyuz tma-21 with parachute deployed image : soyuz tma-17 retro-rockets firing during landing.jpg soyuz landing sequence image : jsc2006e33951.jpg training session in a soyuz simulator . image : space shuttle vs soyuz tm - to scale drawing.png space shuttle orbiter and soyuz-tm ( drawn to scale ) .