Max Fleischer

career . the rotoscope . by 1914 , the first commercially-produced animated cartoons began to appear in movie theaters . they tended to be stiff and jerky . fleischer devised an improvement in animation through a combined projector and easel for tracing images from live action film . this device , known as the rotoscope , enabled fleischer to produce the first realistic animation since the initial works of winsor mccay . although his patent was granted in 1917 , max and his brothers joe and dave fleischer made their first series of tests between 1914 and 1916 . first venture . the pathé exchange offered max his first opportunity as a producer due in part to the fact that dave had been working there as a film cutter since 1914 . max chose a political satire of a hunting trip by theodore roosevelt . after several months of labor , the film was rejected , and max was making the rounds again when he was reunited with john r . bray at paramount . bray had a distribution contract with paramount at the time , and hired max as production supervisor for his studio . with the outbreak of world war i , max was sent to fort sill , oklahoma to produce the first army training films on subjects that included contour map reading , operating the stokes mortar , firing the lewis machine gun , and submarine mine laying . following the armistice , fleischer returned to bray and the production of theatrical and educational films . the inkwell studios . fleischer produced his out of the inkwell films featuring '' the clown '' character , which his brother dave originated ; he had worked as a sideshow clown at coney island . it was one of the later tests made from footage of dave as a clown that interested bray . fleischer 's initial series was first produced at the bray studios and released as a monthly installment in the bray-goldwyn pictograph screen magazine from 1919 to 1921 . in addition to producing out of the inkwell , max 's position at bray was primarily production manager , and supervisor of a number of educational and technical films such as the electric bell , all aboard for the moon , and hello , mars . and it was as production manager that fleischer hired his first animator , roland crandall , who remained with him throughout the active years of fleischer 's studio . out of the inkwell featured the novelty of combining live action and animation and served as semi-documentaries with the appearance of max fleischer as the artist who dipped his pen into the ink bottle to produce the clown figure on his drawing board . while the technique of combining animation with live action was already established by others at the bray studio , it was fleischer 's clever use of it combined with fleischer 's realistic animation that made his series unique . in 1921 , max and dave established out of the inkwell films , incorporated , and continued production of out of the inkwell through various states-rights distributors . '' the clown '' had no name until 1924 , when dick huemer came aboard after animating on the early mutt and jeff cartoons . he set the style for the series , redesigning '' the clown '' , and named him '' ko-ko '' . huemer created ko-ko 's canine companion , known as fitz , and moved the fleischers away from their dependency on the rotoscope for fluid animation , leaving it for special uses and reference points where compositing was involved . because max valued huemer 's work , he instructed huemer to make just the key poses and have an assistant fill in the remaining drawings . max assigned art davis as huemer 's assistant and this was the beginning of the animation position of '' inbetweener '' , which was essentially another fleischer '' invention '' that resulted in efficient production and was adopted by the entire industry by the 1930s . it was during this time that max developed the '' rotograph '' , a means of photographing live action film footage with animation cels for a composited image . this was an improvement over the method used by bray where a series of 8 '' x 10 '' stills were made from motion picture film and used as backgrounds behind animation cels . the rotograph technique went into more general use as '' aerial image photography '' and was a staple in animation and optical effects companies for making titles and various forms of matte composites . in addition to the theatrical comedy films , fleischer produced technical and educational films including that little big fellow and now you 're talking for a.t . & t . in 1923 , he made two 20-minute features explaining albert einstein 's theory of relativity and charles darwin 's evolution using animated special effects and live action . red seal . in 1924 , fleischer partnered with edwin miles fadiman , hugo riesenfeld and lee de forest to form red seal pictures corporation , which owned 36 theaters on the east coast , extending as far west as cleveland , ohio . during this period , fleischer invented the '' bouncing ball ( music ) '' technique in his ko-ko song car-tunes series of animated sing-along shorts . in these films , the lyrics of a song appear on screen and theater patrons are encouraged to sing along with the characters . an animated ball bounces across the top of the lyrics to indicate when words should be sung . of the 36 song car-tunes 12 used the de forest phonofilm sound-on-film process , the first of which was my old kentucky home in 1926 . this preceded walt disney 's steamboat willie ( 1928 ) , which has been erroneously cited for decades as the first cartoon to synchronize sound with animation . the song car-tunes series lasted until early 1927 and was interrupted by the bankruptcy of the red seal company—just five months before the start of the sound era . alfred weiss , owner of artcraft pictures , approached fleischer with a contract to produce cartoons for paramount . due to legal complications of the bankruptcy , the out of the inkwell series was renamed the inkwell imps and ran from 1927 to 1929 . this was the start of fleischer 's relationship with the huge paramount organization , which lasted for the next 15 years . after a year , the fleischer brothers started experiencing mismanagement under weiss , and left the company in late 1928 . inkwell films , inc . filed bankruptcy in january 1929 , and fleischer formed fleischer studios , inc . in march 1929 . fleischer studios , inc . fleischer first set up operations at carpenter-goldman laboratories in queens with a small staff ( see fleischer studios ) . after eight months , his new company was solvent enough to move back to its former location at 1600 broadway , where it remained until 1938 . at carpenter-goldman , fleischer began producing industrial films including finding his voice ( 1929 ) , a demonstration film illustrating the western electric variable density sound recording and reproduction method . in spite of the conflicts with weiss , fleischer managed to negotiate a new contract with paramount to produce a revised version of the '' song car-tunes '' , produced with sound and renamed screen songs , beginning with the sidewalks of new york . at this early stage in the sound era , fleischer produced many technically advanced films that were the result of his continued research and development that perfected the post-production method of sound recording . several of these devices provided visual cues for the musical conductor to follow . as dialogue and songs became major elements , more precise analysis of soundtracks was possible through other inventions from fleischer such as '' the cue meter '' . betty boop . max fleischer 's betty boop character was born out of a cameo caricature in the early talkartoon , dizzy dishes ( 1930 ) . fashioned after popular singer helen kane , she originated as a hybrid poodle/canine figure and was such a sensation in the new york preview that paramount encouraged fleischer to develop her into a continuing character . while she originated under animator grim natwick , she was transformed into a human female under seymour kneitel and berny wolf and became fleischer 's most famous character . the '' betty boop '' series began in 1932 , and became a big success for fleischer . that same year , helen kane filed a lawsuit against fleischer , fleischer studios , and paramount claiming that the cartoons were a deliberate caricature of her , created unfair competition , and had ruined her career . the suit went to trial in 1934 . an early-sound test film of an obscure black performer , baby esther , was shown as key evidence—disproving kane 's claims as originator of the singing style . fleischer , richard ( 2005 ) . out of the inkwell : max fleischer and the animation revolution , lexington : university press of kentucky , p . 57 . judge edward j . mcgoldrick ruled , '' the plaintiff has failed to sustain either cause of action by proof of sufficient probative force . '' in his opinion , the '' baby '' technique of singing did not originate with kane . the mansfield news , may 5 , 1934 . . popeye the sailor . fleischer 's greatest business decision came with his licensing of the comic strip character popeye the sailor , who was introduced to audiences in the betty boop cartoon short , popeye the sailor ( 1933 ) . popeye became one of the most successful screen adaptations of a comic strip in cinema history . much of this success was due to the perfect match of the fleischer studio style combined with its unique use of music . by the late 1930s , a survey indicated that popeye had eclipsed mickey mouse in popularity , challenging disney 's preeminence in the market . paramount . during its zenith by the mid-1930s , fleischer studios was producing four series , betty boop , popeye , screen songs , and color classics , resulting in 52 releases each year . from the very beginning , fleischer 's business relationship with paramount was a joint financial and distribution arrangement , making his studio a service company supplying product for the company 's theaters . during the great depression , paramount went through four bankruptcy reorganizations , which affected their operational expenses . as founding member of the society of motion picture engineers , fleischer was aware of the technical advancements of the industry , particularly in the development of color cinematography . due to paramount 's financial restructuring , he was unable to acquire the three-color technicolor process from the start . this created the opportunity for walt disney , who was then a small fledgling producer , to acquire a four-year exclusivity . with this , he created a new market for color cartoons beginning with flowers and trees ( 1932 ) . in 1934 paramount approved color production for fleischer , but he was left with the limited two-color processes of cinecolor ( red and blue ) and two-color technicolor ( red and green ) for the first year of his color classics . the first entry , poor cinderella ( 1934 ) was made in the two-emulsion/two color cinecolor process and starred betty boop in her only color appearance . by 1936 , disney 's exclusivity had expired , and fleischer had the benefit of the three-color technicolor process beginning with play safe . these color cartoons were often augmented with fleischer 's patented three-dimensional effects promoted as the '' stereoptical process '' , a precursor to disney 's multiplane animation . this technique used 3-d model sets replacing flat pan backgrounds , with the animation cels photographed in front . this technique was used to the greatest degree in the two-reel popeye features popeye the sailor meets sinbad the sailor ( 1936 ) and popeye the sailor meets ali baba 's forty thieves ( 1937 ) . these double-length cartoons demonstrated fleischer 's interest in animated feature films . while fleischer petitioned for this for three years , it was not until the new york opening at radio city of disney 's snow white and the seven dwarfs ( february 1938 ) that paramount executives realized the value of animated features and ordered one for a 1939 christmas release . decline . the popularity of the popeye cartoons created a demand for more . to meet paramount 's demands , the studio was challenged with rapid expansion , production speed ups , and crowded working conditions . finally in may 1937 , fleischer studios was affected by a five-month strike , resulting in a boycott that kept the studio 's releases off theater screens until november . having a paternal attitude towards his employees , max took it personally , as if he had been betrayed , and thus developed an ulcer . following the strike , max and dave fleischer decided to move the studio for more space and to escape further labor agitation . in march 1938 , paramount approved max 's proposal to produce a feature just when he was preparing to move the studio from new york city to miami , florida . once in miami relations between max and dave began deteriorating , beginning with the pressures to deliver their first feature , complicated further by dave 's adulterous affair with his secretary , mae schwartz . jonathan swift 's classic , gulliver 's travels , was a favorite of max 's , and was pressed into production . fleischer and paramount originally budgeted the film at 500,000—the same miscalculation made by disney with snow white . the final cost for gulliver 's travels was three times budget , or 1.5 million . it played limited engagements in only 30 theaters during the christmas season 1939 , but grossed more than 3 million , giving paramount a profit of 1.5 million before going into foreign release . but fleischer studios was penalized 350,000 for going over budget , and the contract did not allow max and fleischer studios participation in the foreign earnings . this was the beginning of the financial difficulties of fleischer studios with reduced royalties due to this debt to paramount . in 1940 , max was relegated to business affairs and continued technical development . his efforts resulted in a reflex camera viewfinder and line transfer methods to replace the time-consuming and tedious process of cel inking . that same year fleischer and paramount experienced lost revenues due to the failure of the new series gabby , animated antics , and stone age , all launched under the leadership of dave . after republic studios allegedly failed to develop superman as a live action serial , max acquired the license that fall and initiated development . the cost for the superman series has been grossly overstated for decades , based on dave fleischer 's 1968 interview . the actual figure stated in fleischer 's contract was in the 30,000 range , twice the cost of a popeye cartoon . superman was a reflection of the type of '' serious '' cartoons that were not being made by rival studios . their science fiction fantasy elements appealed to max 's interests , finally leading the studio into maturity and relevance for the 1940s . the early returns on gulliver prompted paramount president , barney balaban , to order a second feature for their 1941 christmas release . this second feature , mr . bug goes to town , was unique , having a contemporary setting . it was technically superior to gulliver 's travels . paramount had high hopes for its christmas 1941 release , which was well-received by critics during its december 5 preview . however , the exhibitors rejected it , fearing that it would not do business , and with attack on pearl harbor two days after the preview , the original christmas release was cancelled . with the cancellation of the release of mr . bug goes to town , max was called to a meeting with balaban in new york , where max was asked for his resignation . dave had resigned the month before , following the completion of post-production on the film . paramount finished out the remaining five months of the 1941 fleischer contract with the absence of both max and dave fleischer , and the name change to famous studios became official on may 27 , 1942 . paramount installed new management , among them max 's son-in-law , seymour kneitel . later career . unable to form a studio due to the demand for military training films , fleischer was brought in as head of the animation department for the industrial film company , the jam handy organization in detroit , michigan . while there he supervised the technical and cartoon animation departments , producing training films for the army and navy . fleischer was also involved with top secret research and development for the war effort including an aircraft bomber sighting system . in 1944 , he published noah 's shoes , a metaphoric account of the building and loss of his studio , casting himself as noah . following the war , he supervised the production of the animated adaptation of rudolph the red-nosed reindeer ( 1948 ) , sponsored by montgomery ward . fleischer left handy in 1953 and returned as production manager for the bray studios in new york , where he developed an educational television pilot about unusual birds and animals titled , imagine that ! in 1954 , max 's son , richard fleischer , was directing 20,000 leagues under the sea for walt disney . this brought about the honorary luncheon that united max with his former competitor , and reunited him with a number of former fleischer animators who were then employed by disney . this meeting of the former rivals seemed cordial , and max remarked that he was very happy making educational films at this point in his career . however , in his collection of memoirs entitled just tell me when to cry , richard relates how , at the mere mention of disney 's name , max would mutter , '' that son-of-a-bitch . '' fleischer won a lawsuit against paramount in 1955 over the removal of his name from the credits of his films . while fleischer had issues over the breach of contract , he had avoided suing for a decade to protect his son-in-law , seymour kneitel , who was a lead director at paramount 's famous studios . in 1958 , fleischer revived out of the inkwell films , inc . and partnered with his former animator hal seeger , to produce 100 color out of the inkwell ( 1960–1961 ) cartoons for television . actor larry storch performed the voices for koko and supporting characters kokonut and mean moe . while max appeared in the un-aired pilot , he became too ill to appear in the series , and , in poor health , he spent the rest of his life attempting to regain ownership of '' betty boop '' . fleischer and wife essie moved to the motion picture country house in 1967 . fleischer died from arterial sclerosis of the brain on september 25 , 1972 , two months after his 89th birthday , and in announcing his passing the press labeled him '' dean of animated cartoons '' . his death preceded the reclaiming of his star character , '' betty boop , '' and a national retrospective . the betty boop scandals of 1974 started the fleischer renaissance with new 35mm prints of a selection of the best fleischer cartoons made between 1928 and 1934 . this was followed by the popeye follies . these special theatrical programs generated interest in max fleischer as the alternative to walt disney , spawning a new wave of film research devoted to an expanded interest in animation beyond trivial entertainment . references . ; notes ; citations . bibliography . . external links . freely downloadable max fleischer cartoons the history of the fleischer 's popeye series max fleischer biography out of the inkwell ko-ko song car tunes