Giuseppe Marc'Antonio Baretti

biography . baretti was intended by his father for the profession of law , but at the age of sixteen fled from turin and went to guastalla , where he was for some time employed in a mercantile house . he devoted himself to the study of literature and criticism , in which he became an expert , though his writings were so controversial that he had to leave italy . for many years he led a wandering life , supporting himself chiefly by his writings . at length he arrived in london , where he remained for the remainder of his life ( when not travelling ) . he was appointed secretary to the royal academy of arts , piccioni , luigi . baretti , giuseppe . in : enciclopedia italiana treccani and became acquainted with samuel johnson , garrick and others of that society . baretti was a frequent visitor at the home of hester thrale , and his name occurs repeatedly in boswell 's life . in 1769 baretti was tried for murder after inflicting a mortal wound with his fruit knife on a man who had assaulted him on the street . johnson and others gave evidence in his favour at the trial , which resulted in baretti 's acquittal . he died in london in may , 1789 . he was buried in marylebone chapel with a monument by thomas banks . rupert , gunnis ( 1968 ) . dictionary of british sculptors 1660–1851 . london : the abbey library . works . baretti 's first notable work was the italian library ( 1757 ) , a useful catalogue of the lives and works of several italian authors . the lettere famigliari , giving an account of his travels through spain , portugal and france during the years 1761–1765 , were well received , and when afterwards published in english ( 4 vols . , 1770 ) , were highly commended by johnson . baretti was an enemy of the english hispanist john bowle , and published a scathing and personal attack on him : tolondron . speeches to john bowle about his edition of don quixote , together with some account of spanish literature . while in italy on his travels baretti started a journal of literary criticism , titled frusta letteraria ( literary scourge ) . the publication met with considerable difficulties and was soon discontinued . his many other works include a dictionary and grammar of the italian language , a similar dictionary of the spanish language , baretti , joseph , ( 1807 ) . a dictionary , spanish and english , and english and spanish , containing the signification of their words and their different uses ; together with the terms of arts , sciences , and trades . london : wingrave and dissertations on shakespeare and voltaire . his collected works were published at milan in 1838 . the words of the recantation attributed to galileo , '' eppur si muove '' ( meaning '' nevertheless it moves '' ) , were first set down by baretti in his italian library . this record was published some 125 years after galileo is purported to have made the statement sotto voce ( under his breath ) . murder trial . on 6 october 1769 baretti was involved in a scuffle at the haymarket , an area which was notorious as a place of prostitution and frequented by footpads , with many coffeehouses and shops . this quarrel caused the death of a man , evan morgan . in a trial at the old bailey on 18 october 1769 , baretti was accused of having stabbed morgan and was charged with murder . being a wealthy man baretti did not have to suffer very much unpleasant conditions . after having being heard by john fielding , he had been sent to tothill fields bridewell till they could gather more information about the conditions of evan morgan , who died the day following the scuffle . baretti did not walk to the prison , instead a coach was called and once there he paid for a private room , where he had also some food and drinks . this was not the case of ordinary poor people , who normally had to suffer much worse and primitive treatments , being pushed into an overcrowded cell , without much provision . in this trial baretti was called with the english name joseph . being italian he had the right to be tried by a jury of half foreigners , which he refused , as we read from the first lines of the proceedings , so that he was normally tried by a jury of englishmen , thus demonstrating intentionally his regard towards the english justice . it is necessary to consider that most information about the trial come from the proceedings , a publication which from 1664 to 1913 took note and told all ( or at least most ) of the trials which took place at the old bailey . however , in these accounts and transcriptions of what was said in court we do not find everything . many details are missing , therefore these are not to be intended as fully and complete accounts of trials . emsley , clive ; hitchcock , tim ; shoemaker , robert . the proceedings – publishing history of the proceedings , old bailey proceedings online ( www.oldbaileyonline.org , version 7.0 , 10 december 2015 ) . prosecution testimonies . the trial opened with the testimony of elizabeth ward , a well-known prostitute who described when and where the events started . following her own account , in the evening on 6 october 1769 , between nine and ten , she was sitting down on a step together with another woman in the haymarket , when the other woman approached baretti , who was passing through there , and ward said she thought the other woman had touched him . ward then accused him of having struck her . she said in that moment there was nobody around , but when she cried out three men arrived , namely evan morgan , thomas patman and john clark . one of them asked baretti how he could strike a woman and then a scuffle followed , baretti ending up on the ground . ward saw baretti take out his knife , but she did not see him using it . she also said that then baretti ran away and they ran after him . she saw him going into a shop in panton street . in cross-examination she was asked to give more information about the woman who was with her and ward said she did not know her , but could only describe her physically . she was asked also more and more details , for example where the other woman put her hands when grabbing baretti , and she answered she put them towards his private parts . this was possible because eighteenth-century breeches had some slits on the side , and prostitute often tried to slip a hand as a way of attracting a possible client . hitchcock , tim ; shoemaker , robert ( 2007 ) . tales from the hanging court , london : hodder education she added she did not know the three men who arrived , but that she remembered having kissed one of them ( namely clark ) the night before . the court asked if baretti had been insulted , she firstly denied , then seemed to be unsure , and added at the end that maybe somebody called him bad names , but she did not know who . the second person to testify was thomas patman , one of the three men who came up at the haymarket . he told the court he was with the other two men that evening , they had been drinking together and then decided to go to golden square , but when they were in the haymarket they saw a gentleman , meaning baretti , striking elisabeth ward . patman said he was pushed against baretti , who gave him a stab wound : '' i received a blow from him directly on my left side : the blood ran down into my shoe '' . he denied any insult or offense to baretti . he said also that morgan ran after baretti and was struck by him too . in cross-examination he was asked about the stabbing he received . john clark was the next to speak and confirmed the version of patman . in particular he was asked about the stabbings , how , when , where they happened and he claimed morgan was stabbed in panton street . however , there seemed to be some inconsistencies about when it happened : during the trial clark said morgan was stabbed after patman , but during the examination by the magistrate and coroner he had said morgan was the first to be stabbed . he then also added that somedoby then collared baretti and he stated he thought it was morgan himself . about his having kissed ward the night before , he claimed he never saw the woman before . john lambert testified as he was the constable who apprehended baretti . in eighteenth-century england there was not a police force in the terms we intend it today and baretti was actually apprehended by a constable . these were ordinary men whose job was to prevent crime and to arrest people suspected of felony by taking them to a justice of the peace . emsley , clive ; hitchcock , tim ; shoemaker , robert . crime and justice – policing in london , old bailey proceedings online ( www.oldbaileyonline.org , version 7.0 , 10 december 2015 ) lambert said he was having dinner that night when he heard the cry of '' murderer '' or '' stop murderer '' and saw a man pursued by other two or three going into the grocer 's shop opposite his house . he went there and saw patman had blood on him and heard him say he had been stabbed by baretti . in the meanwhile a crowd gathered and lambert asked baretti to surrender . he then said he thought of carrying baretti to the round-house , but hearing the name of john fielding baretti expressed his will to go to him . in cross-examinations lambert confirmed that baretti did not try to escape nor to conceal the knife . he added that he himself also tried to find the other prostitute at the haymarket responsible for having importuned baretti , but could not . finally , it was the turn of two patients and a surgeon , who were at the hospital when patman and morgan were brought there . john llyod and robert lelcock were two patients who were in middlesex hospital that night and they were told the story by morgan , the victim . morgan told them he had been stabbed thrice and this was then confirmed by the doctor , john wyatt . the surgeon said that morgan 's death was caused by the abdomen wound and he again recollected the sequence of the events , as they were narrated to him . in the prosecution testimonies there are many cross-examinations , each witness was actually further inquired . however , it is not clear who did this , it could have been baretti himself , the judge or even a lawyer . shoemaker pointed out that prosecution lawyers first appeared at the old bailey in around the 1730s , followed almost immediately by lawyers for the defence , so by the time baretti was prosecuted there might have been one of them present in the court . moreover , it is necessary to consider that for most eighteenth-century interventions of lawyers are not reported or are unclear in the proceedings . shoemaker , robert ( 2012 ) . representing the adversary criminal trial : lawyers in the old bailey proceedings , 1770–1800 . in : crime , courtrooms and the public sphere in britain , 1700–1850 . farnham : ashgate the possibility that baretti had a lawyer who carried out all the cross-examinations we read in the trial transcription is therefore not to be excluded . defence testimonies . after having heard different versions of the facts of the prosecution testimonies , the court let baretti defend himself and he took the chance to read a text he had previously prepared and written in his defence . he started by narrating the facts of that day . he had spent his day at home working , correcting his italian and english dictionary and then after 4 pm he went to the club of the royal academicians in soho and he went on explaining his other movements , up until he got to the haymarket . he said he was passing near there when he saw a woman , who firstly asked him for a glass of wine and then clapped his hand on his genitals with violence , hurting him very much . he also said there might have been two women , as other testimonies claimed , but he only saw one : '' they say there were two , but i took notice of but one , as i hope god will save me : there might have been two , though i only saw one : that is a fact '' . therefore , he stroke her hand and the woman insulted him for being a foreigner , he said '' she called me several bad names . among which french bugger , d-ed frenchman , and a woman-hater , were the most audible '' . by then he was going away when a man struck him with a fist , asking him how he dared strike a woman . he was beat by them and other people who surrounded him , but found a way to escape , even if they then caught him . when he later managed to get into a grocer 's shop to find protection , he said he was grateful for the arrival of the constable and other people who gathered there . he said he then went to fieldings and he also described his several wounds and bruises on his face and body . having concluded his own account of the facts , baretti turned to the jury saying '' i hope your lordship , and every person present , will think that a man of my age , character and way of life , would not spontaneously quit my pen , to engage in an outrageous insult . '' and finally he explained his short-sight as a possible cause for not having seen the other woman . as for what regards his carrying a knife with him , he said as justification : '' i wear it to carve fruit and sweetmeats , and not to kill my fellow-creature '' – it was a common custom in france where people did not use to put knives on tables , and ladies too carried them in their pockets . moreover , he explained his refusal to be tried by a jury of half foreigners , saying that he did for his life and for his honour , '' i chose to be tried by a jury of this country ; for if my honour is not saved , i can not much wish for the preservation of my life '' . in this way he concluded his speech , showing he trusted england 's law system and with the confidence that he would have been acquitted , as he believed he had the right to . as we read in the proceedings the next to testify was a passer-by , ann thomas , who told the story and what she saw . she was apparently the only eye-witness testifying in the trial and said she was in panton street with her child when she saw a group of people at the end of the street by the haymarket and said she '' saw a gentleman run from among them on the side of the way i was . they all ran after him : they were all in a great bustle '' . she did not add much information and she seemed to be unsure about how many men there were . what we find next are a series of testimonies of baretti 's friends or acquaintances , who all testify for him . the first to talk were mr . peter molini and mr . low , who said they saw themselves the night following the scuffle the bruises on baretti 's body , on his back , shoulders , cheek and jaw . they also affirmed it was common for them too , to use and carry knives such as the one baretti had , confirming in this way the explanation baretti had previously given . other gentlemen commented upon the haymarket , describing it as an unsafe place to go . justice kelnynge and mr . perrin stated it was a place '' impossible to walk up . in the evening '' because of the indecent women you could find there and kelnynge said that a similar episode happened to him as well before . major alderton added that around the haymarket aggressions happened frequently . there were then many witnesses which testified to baretti 's good character and quiet lifestyle . hon . mr . beauclerck described him as a gentleman of letters and a studious man . joshua reynolds said he was a man with great humanity and '' very active in endeavouring his friends '' , he outlined his sober disposition , saying that he never drank more than three glasses with him and he added : '' i never heard of his being in passions or quarreling '' . doctor johnson described him as very diligent and peaceable , a man who did not frequent prostitutes . edmund burke claimed he was an ingenious man , '' a man of remarkable humanity ; a thorough good-natured man '' , whereas david garrick said of him he was a man of great probity and morals . as we read from the proceedings there were other several gentlemen who were there to testify for baretti 's good character , but the court did not think it necessary to call them all . baretti did not only have a lot of people who were willing to testify for him , but these were also all eminent people of the time . this trial is reported in hitchcock and shoemaker 's book tales from the hanging court as an example of how important were testimonies of friends and neighbours , who could assert for the good character of the accused . defendants usually tried to call them to testify , to account of the accused good behaviour , quiet ways etc . these testimonies could influence a lot the perception of the accused person and also affect the jury 's verdict and their choice of the punishment . . verdict . evan morgan died at the middlesex hospital the day after the quarrel took place . the death was caused by one of the three wounds baretti gave him with his knife . baretti could have been sentenced to death , as the felony he was accused of was murder , which led to capital punishment . however , baretti was found not guilty and acquitted , as his action was considered self-defense . baretti was extremely satisfied with the outcome of the trial , in particular with the kind demonstration of affection he received from his friends , so much that he felt himself even more connected with england than before , a country which had given him justice and real friendship . he later revealed to his friend lord charlemont that '' those i had about me did their part so well that they have made me an englishman forever '' . o'connor , desmond ( 2004 ) . baretti , giuseppe marc'antonio ( 1719–1789 ) . in : oxford dictionary of national biography . oxford university press , accessed 11 dec 2015 . notes . references . hitchcock t . , shoemaker r . , ( 2007 ) , tales from the hanging court , hodder education . external links . guide to giuseppe marco antonio baretti letters at houghton library , harvard university account of the full trial on the old bailey online locating london 's past website : to locate places of eighteenth-century london