Saṃsāra

etymology and terminology . saṃsāra ( devanagari : संसार ) means '' wandering '' , as well as '' world '' wherein the term connotes '' cyclic change '' . saṃsāra , a fundamental concept in all indian religions , is linked to the karma theory and refers to the belief that all living beings cyclically go through births and rebirths . the term is related to phrases such as '' the cycle of successive existence '' , '' transmigration '' , '' karmic cycle '' , '' the wheel of life '' , and '' cyclicality of all life , matter , existence '' . many scholarly texts spell saṃsāra as samsara . according to monier-williams , saṃsāra is rooted in the term saṃsṛ ( संसृ ) , which means '' to go round , revolve , pass through a succession of states , to go towards or obtain , moving in a circuit '' . a conceptual form from this root appears in ancient texts as saṃsaraṇa , which means '' going around through a succession of states , birth , rebirth of living beings and the world '' , without obstruction . the term shortens to saṃsāra , referring to the same concept , as a '' passage through successive states of mundane existence '' , a transmigration , metempsychosis , a circuit of living where one repeats previous states , from one body to another , a worldly life of constant change , that is rebirth , growth , decay and redeath . the concept is then contrasted with the concept of moksha , also known as mukti , nirvana , nibbana or kaivalya , which refers to liberation from this cycle of aimless wandering . the concept of samsara developed in the post-vedas times , and is traceable in the samhita layers such as in sections 1.164 , 4.55 , 6.70 and 10.14 of the rigveda . while the idea is mentioned in the samhita layers of the vedas , there is lack of clear exposition there , and the idea fully develops in the early upanishads . damien keown states that the notion of '' cyclic birth and death '' appears around 800 bc . the word saṃsāra appears , along with moksha , in several principal upanishads such as in verse 1.3.7 of the katha upanishad , katha upanishad प्रथमोध्यायः/तृतीयवल्ली wikisource verse 6.16 of the shvetashvatara upanishad , shvetashvatara upanishad षष्ठः अध्यायः wikisource verses 1.4 and 6.34 of the maitri upanishad . maitri upanishad wikisource , quote : ३ चित्तमेव हि संसारम् तत्प्रयत्नेन शोधयेत् ga jacob ( 1963 ) , a concordance to the principal upanishads and bhagavad gita , motilal banarsidass , pp . 947–48 the word samsara is related to saṃsṛti , the latter referring to the '' course of mundane existence , transmigration , flow , circuit or stream '' . . definition and rationale . the word literally means '' wandering through , flowing on '' , states stephen j . laumakis , in the sense of '' aimless and directionless wandering '' . the concept of saṃsāra is closely associated with the belief that the person continues to be born and reborn in various realms and forms . the earliest layers of vedic text incorporate the concept of life , followed by an afterlife in heaven and hell based on cumulative virtues ( merit ) or vices ( demerit ) . however , the ancient vedic rishis challenged this idea of afterlife as simplistic , because people do not live an equally moral or immoral life . between generally virtuous lives , some are more virtuous ; while evil too has degrees , and the texts assert that it would be unfair for god yama to judge and reward people with varying degrees of virtue or vices , in an '' either or , ” and disproportionate manner . they introduced the idea of an afterlife in heaven or hell in proportion to one 's merit , and when this runs out , one returns and is reborn . this idea appears in ancient and medieval texts , as the cycle of life , death , rebirth and redeath , such as section 6:31 of the mahabharata and section 6.10 of devi bhagavata purana . yuvraj krishan ( 1988 ) , is karma evolutionary ? , journal of indian council of philosophical research , volume 6 , pp . 24–26 . history . the historical origins of a concept of a cycle of repeated reincarnation are obscure but the idea appears in texts of both india and ancient greece during the first millennium bc . the idea of samsara is hinted in the late vedic texts such as the rigveda , but the theory is absent . a.m . boyer ( 1901 ) , etude sur l'origine de la doctrine du samsara , journal asiatique , volume 9 , issue 18 , pp . 451–53 , 459–68 the late textual layers of the vedas mention and anticipate the doctrine of karma and rebirth , however states stephen laumakis , the idea is not fully developed . it is in the early upanishads where these ideas are more fully developed , but there too the discussion does not provide specific mechanistic details . the detailed doctrines flower with unique characteristics , starting around the mid 1st millennium bc , in diverse traditions such as in buddhism , jainism and various schools of hindu philosophy . some scholars state that the samsara doctrine may have originated from the sramana traditions and was then adopted by the brahmanical traditions ( hinduism ) . gavin d . flood ( 1996 ) , an introduction to hinduism , cambridge university press , , p . 86 , quote : “ the origin and doctrine of karma and samsara are obscure . these concepts were certainly circulating amongst sramanas , and jainism and buddhism developed specific and sophisticated ideas about the process of transmigration . it is very possible that the karmas and reincarnation entered the mainstream brahmanical thought from the sramana or the renouncer traditions . yet , on the other hand , although there is no clear doctrine of transmigration in the vedic hymns , there is the idea of redeath , that a person having died in this world , might die yet again in the next . ” padmanabh s . jaini 2001 “ collected paper on buddhist studies ” motilal banarsidass , , p . 51 , quote : '' yajnavalkya ’ s reluctance to discuss the doctrine of karma in public ( . ) can perhaps be explained by the assumption that it was , like that of the transmigration of soul , of non-brahmanical origin . in view of the fact that this doctrine is emblazoned on almost every page of sramana scriptures , it is highly probable that it was derived from them . '' govind chandra pande , ( 1994 ) life and thought of sankaracarya , motilal banarsidass , p . 135 , quote : ( . ) they sramanas could have been connected with the harappan civilization which is itself enigmatic . it seems that some upanishad thinkers like yajnavalkya were acquainted with this kind sramanic thinking ( . ) and tried to incorporate these ideas of karma , samsara and moksa into the traditional vedic thought . the evidence for who influenced whom in the ancient times , is slim and speculative , and the odds are the historic development of the samsara theories likely happened in parallel with mutual influences . ; quote : '' there was such constant interaction between vedism and buddhism in the early period that it is fruitless to attempt to sort out the earlier source of many doctrines , they lived in one another 's pockets , like picasso and braque ( who were , in later years , unable to say which of them had painted certain paintings from their earlier , shared period ) . '' . punarmrityu : redeath . while saṃsāra is usually described as rebirth and reincarnation of living beings , the chronological development of the idea over its history began with the questions on what is the true nature of human existence and whether people die only once . this led first to the concepts of punarmṛtyu ( '' redeath '' ) and punaravṛtti ( '' return '' ) . these early theories asserted that the nature of human existence involves two realities , one unchanging absolute atman ( soul ) which is somehow connected to the ultimate unchanging immortal reality and bliss called brahman , and that the rest is the always-changing subject ( body ) in a phenomenal world ( maya ) . redeath , in the vedic theosophical speculations , reflected the end of '' blissful years spent in svarga or heaven '' , and it was followed by rebirth back in the phenomenal world . samsara developed into a foundational theory of the nature of existence , shared by all indian religions . rebirth as a human being , states john bowker , was then presented as a '' rare opportunity to break the sequence of rebirth , thus attaining moksha , release '' . each indian spiritual tradition developed its own assumptions and paths ( marga or yoga ) for this spiritual release , with some developing the ideas of jivanmukti ( liberation and freedom in this life ) , klaus klostermaier , mokṣa and critical theory , philosophy east and west , vol . 35 , no . 1 ( jan . , 1985 ) , pp . 61–71 norman e . thomas ( april 1988 ) , liberation for life : a hindu liberation philosophy , missiology , volume 16 , number 2 , pp . 149–60 gerhard oberhammer ( 1994 ) , la délivrance dès cette vie : jivanmukti , collège de france , publications de l'institut de civilisation indienne . série in-8° , fasc . 61 , édition–diffusion de boccard ( paris ) , , pp . 1–9 while others content with videhamukti ( liberation and freedom in after-life ) . m . von brück ( 1986 ) , imitation or identification ? , indian theological studies , vol . 23 , issue 2 , pp . 95–105 paul deussen , , pp . 356–57 . external links . samsara ( hinduism ) , georgetown university reincarnation : a simple explanation the wheel of life , c . george boeree , shippensburg university the difference between samsara and nirvana , minnesota state university , mankato saṃsāra and rebirth , buddhism , oxford bibliographies