St. Regis Mohawk Reservation

geography . the reservation is at the international border of canada and the united states along the st . lawrence river . according to the united states census bureau , the indian reservation has a total area of . of it is land , and of it ( 9.76 % ) is water . it is bordered by the new york towns of fort covington ( east ) , bombay ( south ) , brasher ( southwest ) , and massena ( west ) , and by the akwesasne indian reserve to the north in the canadian provinces of quebec and ontario . the nearest city is cornwall , ontario , which lies to the northwest , across the akwesasne reserve . history . the original settlement was known as akwesasne , called saint régis by french jesuit missionaries , after john francis regis , the priest canonized as a catholic saint in 1737 , who had expressed a desire to be a missionary to the iroquois people . william c . sturtevant handbook of north american indians 1978 p473 '' it was named saint regis in memory of jean francois regis , a french ecclesiastic canonized in 1737 who before his death in 1640 at the age of 43 had wanted to become a missionary to the iroquois ( hough 1853:113-114 ) . '' it was founded about 1755 by several catholic iroquois families , primarily mohawk , who moved upriver from the mission village of kahnawake ( now known as kahnawake ) . they were seeking better lives for their families , as they were concerned about negative influences of traders at caughnawaga , who plied the mohawk with rum . the mohawk families were accompanied by jesuit missionaries from caughnawaga . after the united states acquired this territory in settlement of its northern border , relations among the people and the varying jurisdictions became more complex . but according to the 1795 jay treaty settling the border , the mohawk retained the right to travel freely over the border . since the reservation was established , the mohawk on both sides of the st . lawrence river have lost land and been adversely affected by major infrastructure projects conducted by state and federal authorities . these include construction of the st . lawrence seaway , what is now known as the three nations crossing bridge , and dams on the rivers for hydroelectric power projects . since 1762 , mills and dams were built by private , non-native interests on the st . regis river at what developed as the village of hogansburg . it is now within the st . regis mohawk reservation . in 1929 erie boulevard hydropower built an 11-foot-high dam at the site to generate hydroelectric power . it disrupted the annual salmon fish run from the st . lawrence , depriving the citizens of the reservation of one of their staple foods , and adversely affecting the populations of salmon and other migratory fish . by 2010 the dam had become uneconomical . it would have cost too much to upgrade , which would have included current requirements to provide for fish passage in efforts to preserve the species . the owner gave up its federal license . the saint regis mohawk tribal government applied to the federal energy and regulatory commission ( ferc ) to take over and dismantle the dam , which they did in 2016 . based on restoration of fisheries after such dam removals in other locations across the country , they are optimistic that salmon and other migratory fish , such as walleye , will quickly return to the region . thus 275 miles of the st . regis river has been reopened to migratory fish that spend part of their lives in the atlantic ocean . karen graham , '' hogansburg hydroelectric dam taken down by native american tribe '' , digital journal , 11 december 2016 ; accessed 20 january 2018 in 2013 the tribe received a 19 million settlement from '' gm , alcoa , and reynolds for pollution of tribal fishing and hunting grounds along the st . lawrence river '' . the companies have undertaken cleanup of the pollution . the tribe intends to use this money to redevelop the former dam site as '' the focus of a cultural restoration program that will pair tribal elders with younger members of the tribe to restore the mohawk language and pass on traditional practices such as fishing , hunting , basket weaving , horticulture and medicine , to name a few . '' . demographics . as of the census of 2000 , there were 2,699 people , 904 households , and 668 families residing in the indian reservation within the us boundary . the population density was 142.2/mi 2 ( 54.9/km 2 ) . there were 977 housing units at an average density of 51.5/mi 2 ( 19.9/km 2 ) . the racial makeup of the indian reservation was 97.41 % native american , 2.07 % white , 0.07 % from other races , and 0.44 % from two or more races . hispanic or latino of any race were 0.74 % of the population . there were 904 households , out of which 44.8 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 40.9 % were marriage living together , 23.9 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 26.0 % were non-families . 22.9 % of all households were made up of individuals , and 6.4 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . the average household size was 2.97 and the average family size was 3.44 . in the indian reservation , the population was spread out , with 34.1 % under the age of 18 , 9.2 % from 18 to 24 , 30.8 % from 25 to 44 , 18.1 % from 45 to 64 , and 7.7 % who were 65 years of age or older . the median age was 30 years . for every 100 females , there were 98.6 males . for every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 96.2 males . the median income for a household in the indian reservation was 32,664 , and the median income for a family was 34,336 . males had a median income of 27,742 versus 21,774 for females . the per capita income for the indian reservation was 12,017 . about 19.4 % of families and 22.4 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 31.3 % of those under age 18 and 14.9 % of those age 65 or over . controversies . drug and human smuggling . because of the latitude of this area , rivers freeze in winter , providing shortcuts for the mohawk crossing the international border . these conditions also make the border more porous for smugglers of many items , including liquor , cigarettes , drugs , and people , including human trafficking . the new york times covered this issue in february 2006 in an article headlined '' drug traffickers find haven in shadows of indian country '' . sarah kershaw , '' drug traffickers find haven in shadows of indian country '' , new york times , 19 february 2006 ; accessed 20 january 2018 the akwesasne police and government spokespersons have defended their work , saying they have had to take on an unfair federal burden of border enforcement while not receiving additional funding . due to a quirk in the law , they were not eligible to receive grants from the federal department of homeland security that were available to local jurisdictions to support the extra work at the border . the chief of the akwesasne mohawk police noted that drug smuggling was a problem that extended along the canadian-us border and was not limited to akwesasne . in march 2006 , the st . regis mohawk reservation was awarded a 263,000 grant from the us bureau of indian affairs office of legal services , in order to '' fight drug use , violent crime , and drug and human smuggling . '' the fbi said that 300 people were caught illegally passing through the reservation from september 1995 to september 1996 . . collection of state sales tax . for decades new york state has threatened to collect sales tax from sales of gasoline and cigarettes on native american reservations but has not done so . the legislature often passes such a resolution but the federally recognized tribe says that it has sovereign authority on its reservation and does not need to collect the state tax . new york citizens fail to report their applicable use taxes ; this has become a problem both here and at areas surrounding other indian reservations across new york . merchants near the reservations complain that the tax-free sales constitute an unfair advantage for native american-owned businesses . the mohawk frequently respond that this is their only advantage , as they have suffered from centuries of discrimination and being dispossessed of their land . while the government officials argue , a zogby poll commissioned in 2006 by the seneca nation of new york , also iroquois and allies of the mohawk , showed that 79 % of new york residents did not think sales taxes should be collected from reservation sales . . in popular culture . the reservation is the setting for the 2008 movie frozen river . it depicts smuggling of illegal immigrants by mohawk and associated americans across the international border between canada and the u.s . the film was shot in plattsburgh , new york . the reservation was the setting for the first , original tom swift children 's book series ( 1910–1941 ) . was in season 2 , episode 5 of the cbs drama fbi : most wanted . where a racist militia takes up arms against the tribe to defend the us border . patent income . in 2017 , the tribe entered into an agreement with allergan plc , under which allergan transferred intellectual property rights to the drug restasis to the tribe in an attempt to shield those patent rights from legal challenges . allergan will pay the tribe 13.75 million , plus 15 million a year in annual revenues . on february 23 , 2018 , the u.s . patent and trademark office deemed the restasis patents invalid and rejected the st regis tribe 's ability to use sovereign immunity to protect the restais patents . following the announcement , both allergan and the st . regis mohawk tribe appealed the ruling . . see also . you are on indian land ( 1969 , a documentary about a 1968 protest by the st . regis mohawk and akwesasne over control of their land . references . external links . tribal constitution '' saint regis mohawk first tribe approved for clean air plan '' , environment news service akwesasne cultural center , library and museum mohawk casino mohawk bingo palace and class ii casino moore , evan . '' gambling , murder split reservation 'it 's nothing but a damn war zone ' '' , houston chronicle , 6 may 1990 . a1 .