Thermoplastic

acrylic . today ’ s acrylics industry can be divided into two distinct multibillion-dollar markets : on one hand the polyacrylic acids ( paa ) and its ester derivatives ( pac ) market , on the other hand , the poly ( methyl methacrylate ) ( pmma ) market . handbook of thermoplastics , second edition , o . olabisi & k . adewale ( ed . ) crc press , taylor & francis group , boca raton , florida , u . s . a . , 2016 pmma is also known by trade names such as lucite , perspex and plexiglas . it serves as a sturdy substitute for glass for items such as aquariums , buttons , motorcycle helmet visors , aircraft windows , viewing ports of submersibles , and lenses of exterior lights of automobiles . it is extensively used to make signs , including lettering and logos . in medicine , it is used in bone cement and to replace eye lenses . acrylic paint consists of pmma particles suspended in water.button for many decades , pmma has been the predominant methacrylic ester produced worldwide . major players in the pmma market are mitsubishi rayon ( japan ) , arkema sa ( france ) , lg mma ( south korea ) , chi mei corp . ( taiwan ) , sumimoto chemical company ltd ( japan ) , evonik industries ( germany ) , basf ( germany ) , dow chemical company ( u.s . ) , akzonobel ( the netherlands ) , quinn plastics ( uk ) and cytec industries ( u.s . ) . regarding the paa and pac market , key manufacturers are nippon shokubai company ltd . ( japan ) , arkema sa ( france ) , evonik industries ( germany ) , basf ( germany ) and dow chemical company ( u.s . ) . abs . acrylonitrile butadiene styrene ( abs ) is a terpolymer synthesized from styrene and acrylonitrile in the presence of polybutadiene . abs is a light-weight material that exhibits high impact resistance and mechanical toughness . it poses few risks to human health under normal handling . it is used in many consumer products , such as toys , appliances , and telephones . nylon . nylon belongs to a class of polymers called polyamides . it has served as a substitute mainly for hemp , cotton and silk , in products such as parachutes , cords , sails , flak vests and clothing . nylon fibres are useful in making fabrics , rope , carpets and musical strings , whereas , in bulk form , nylon is used for mechanical parts including machine screws , gears and power tool casings . in addition , it is used in the manufacture of heat-resistant composite materials . pla . polylactic acid ( polylactide ) is a compostable thermoplastic aliphatic polyester derived from renewable resources , such as corn starch ( in the united states ) , beet pulp ( in europe ) , tapioca roots , chips or starch ( mostly in asia ) , or sugarcane . it is one of the materials used for 3d printing with fused deposition modeling ( fdm ) techniques . polybenzimidazole . polybenzimidazole ( pbi , short for poly-2,2 ’ - ( m-phenylen ) -5,5 ’ -bisbenzimidazole ) fiber is a synthetic fiber with a very high melting point . it has exceptional thermal and chemical stability and does not readily ignite . it was first discovered by american polymer chemist carl shipp marvel in the pursuit of new materials with superior stability , retention of stiffness , toughness at elevated temperature . due to its high stability , polybenzimidazole is used to fabricate high-performance protective apparel such as firefighter 's gear , astronaut space suits , high temperature protective gloves , welders ’ apparel and aircraft wall fabrics . in recent years , polybenzimidazole found its application as membrane in fuel cells . polycarbonate . polycarbonate ( pc ) thermoplastics are known under trademarks such as lexan , makrolon , makroclear , and arcoplus . they are easily worked , molded , and thermoformed for many applications , such as electronic components , construction materials , data storage devices , automotive and aircraft parts , check sockets in prosthetics , and security glazing . polycarbonates do not have a unique resin identification code . items made from polycarbonate can contain the precursor monomer bisphenol a ( bpa ) . susceptible to uv light , exposure results in yellowing ( degradation is especially visible in headlamps that lost or did n't have proper protective coating ) . polyether sulfone . polyether sulfone ( pes ) or polysulfone is a class of specially engineered thermoplastics with high thermal , oxidative , and hydrolytic stability , and good resistance to aqueous mineral acids , alkalis , salt solutions , oils and greases . polyoxymethylene . polyoxymethylene ( pom ) , also known as acetal,2 polyacetal and polyformaldehyde , is an engineering thermoplastic used in precision parts requiring high stiffness , low friction , and excellent dimensional stability . as with many other synthetic polymers , it is produced by different chemical firms with slightly different formulas and sold variously by such names as delrin , celcon , ramtal , duracon , kepital and hostaform . polyether ether ketone . polyether ether ketone ( peek ) is a colourless organic thermoplastic polymer in the polyaryletherketone ( paek ) family , used in engineering applications . it was originally introduced by victrex plc , then ici ( imperial chemical industries ) in the early 1980s . it has attractive properties like good abrasion resistance , low flammability and emission of smoke and toxic gases . polyetherimide . polyetherimide ( pei ) , produced by a novel nitro displacement reaction involving bisphenol a , 4 , 4 ’ -methylenedianiline and 3-nitrophthalic anhydride , has high heat distortion temperature , tensile strength and modulus . they are generally used in high performance electrical and electronic parts , microwave appliances , and under-the-hood automotive parts . polyethylene . polyethylene ( polyethene , polythene , pe ) is a family of similar materials categorized according to their density and molecular structure . it is also known as poly and is obtained by the addition polymerisation of ethylene . it may be of low density or high density depending upon the process used in its manufacturing . it is resistant to moisture and most of the chemicals . it is flexible at room temperature ( and low temperature ) and can be heat sealed . since it is an inexpensive plastic it is made in large amounts to cater to the demand . for example : ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene ( uhmwpe ) is tough and resistant to chemicals . it is used to manufacture moving machine parts , bearings , gears , artificial joints and some bulletproof vests . high-density polyethylene ( hdpe ) , recyclable plastic no . 2 , is commonly used as milk jugs , liquid laundry detergent bottles , outdoor furniture , margarine tubs , portable gasoline cans , drinking water distribution systems , water drainage pipes , and grocery bags . medium-density polyethylene ( mdpe ) is used for packaging film , sacks and gas pipes and fittings . low-density polyethylene ( ldpe ) is flexible and is used in the manufacture of squeeze bottles , milk jug caps , retail store bags and linear low-density polyethylene ( lldpe ) as stretch wrap in transporting and handling boxes of durable goods , and as the common household food covering . polyphenylene oxide . polyphenylene oxide ( ppo ) , which is obtained from the free-radical , step-growth oxidative coupling polymerization of 2,6-xylenol , has many attractive properties such as high heat distortion and impact strength , chemical stability to mineral and organic acids , and low water absorption . ppo is difficult to process , and hence the commercial resin ( noryl ) is made by blending ppo with high-impact polystyrene ( hips ) , which serves to reduce the processing temperature . polyphenylene sulfide . polyphenylene sulfide ( pps ) obtained by the condensation polymerization of p-dichlorobenzene and sodium sulfide , has outstanding chemical resistance , good electrical properties , excellent flame retardance , low coefficient of friction and high transparency to microwave radiation . pps is principally used in coating applications . this is done by spraying an aqueous slurry of pps particles and heating to temperatures above 370 & nbsp ; °c . particular grades of pps can be used in injection and compression molding at temperatures ( 300 to 370 & nbsp ; °c ) at which pps particles soften and undergo apparent crosslinking . principal applications of injection and compression molded pps include cookware , bearings , and pump parts for service in various corrosive environments . polypropylene . polypropylene ( pp ) is useful for such diverse products as reusable plastic food containers , microwave- and dishwasher-safe plastic containers , diaper lining , sanitary pad lining and casing , ropes , carpets , plastic moldings , piping systems , car batteries , insulation for electrical cables and filters for gases and liquids . in medicine , it is used in hernia treatment and to make heat-resistant medical equipment . polypropylene sheets are used for stationery folders and packaging and clear storage bins . polypropylene is defined by the recyclable plastic number 5 . although relatively inert , it is vulnerable to ultraviolet radiation and can degrade considerably in direct sunlight . polypropylene is not as impact-resistant as the polyethylenes ( hdpe , ldpe ) . it is also somewhat permeable to highly volatile gases and liquids . polystyrene . polystyrene is manufactured in various forms that have different applications . extruded polystyrene ( ps ) is used in the manufacture of disposable cutlery , cd and dvd cases , plastic models of cars and boats , and smoke detector housings . expanded polystyrene foam ( eps ) is used in making insulation and packaging materials , such as the '' peanuts '' and molded foam used to cushion fragile products . polystyrene copolymers are used in the manufacture of toys and product casings . polyvinyl chloride . polyvinyl chloride ( pvc ) is a tough , lightweight material that is durable , fairly rigid and versatile , and is resistant to acids and bases . much of it is used by the construction industry , such as for vinyl siding , drainpipes , gutters and roofing sheets . it is also converted to flexible forms with the addition of plasticizers , thereby making it useful for items such as hoses , tubing , electrical insulation , coats , jackets and upholstery . flexible pvc is also used in inflatable products , such as water beds and pool toys . pvc is also a common material in vinyl action figures , especially in countries such as japan , where the material is used extensively in so-called sofubi figures . as pvc bends easily and has a tendency to be bent during transit , a method to mitigate this deformation is to heat the plastic until it becomes mobile , then reform the material into the desired shape . pvc is produced in many specific modifications to affect its chemical and physical properties . in plasticized polyvinyl chloride ( ppvc ) , plasticizers are added to the raw material before molding to make it more flexible or pliable . early on , the health and environmental aspects of this were poorly understood and replacements and product bans resulted after studies . the original form is often referred to as unplasticized polyvinyl chloride ( upvc ) , which is the more commonly used type for installations such as water , waste , and sewer conveyance plumbing . chemical modification often produces more drastic changes in properties . chlorinated polyvinyl chloride ( cpvc ) is produced through exposing pvc to the continued free-radical chlorination reaction that originally formulates the pvc polymer . the chlorination reaction continues to add chlorine atoms to the polymer hydrocarbon backbone until most commercial applications reach a percent range between 56 and 74 % total chlorine . this increase in elemental chlorine content contributes to cpvc 's increased expression of chlorine-based characteristics , such as chemical durability , resistance to acids , bases , and salts ; susceptibility to ammonia-based compounds , aromatics , esters , ketones ; chemical stability ; heat energy transfer resistance . cpvc is commonly used in water , chemical , hot and cold , delivery systems for residential , commercial , and industrial applications . polyvinylidene fluoride . polyvinylidene fluoride , pvdf , belongs to the fluoropolymer class of thermoplastics and is known for its high chemical inertness and resistance . pvdf is obtained through the polymerization of the vinylidene fluoride monomer . pvdf thermoplastic is fabricated into sheets and pipes for engineering uses as well as powders and coatings that can be dissolved in solvents and applied across a product surface . pvdf is widely used in the chemical industry as piping for aggressive chemicals and high purity liquids . the pvdf material is used in construction , transportation , chemical processes , electricity , batteries , waste water and treatment . . polytetrafluoroethylene ( teflon ) . polytetrafluoroethylene ( ptfe ) is a synthetic fluoropolymer of tetrafluoroethylene is commonly recognized under the brand name teflon . ptfe is hydrophobic : aqueous liquids do not wet the material , as fluorocarbons demonstrate mitigated london dispersion forces due to the high electronegativity of fluorine . this also supports its use in coatings of cooking ware . the polymer has one of the lowest coefficients of friction of any solid and is therefore commonly used for bearings and support of moving mechanical parts . references . external links .