Moshing

history . etymology . the term mosh came into use in the early 1980s american hardcore scene in washington , d.c . early on , the dance was frequently spelled mash in fanzines and record liner notes , but pronounced mosh , as in the 1982 song '' total mash '' by the d.c.-based hardcore band scream . h.r . of the band bad brains , regarded as a band that '' put moshing on the map , '' used the term mash in lyrics and in concert stage banter to both incite and to describe the aggressive and often violent dancing of the scene . to '' mash it up '' was to go wild with the frenzy of the music . due to his jamaican-accented pronunciation of the word , fans heard this as mosh instead . by the mid-1980s , the term was appearing in print with its current spelling . by the time thrash metal band anthrax used the term in their song '' among the living '' , christie , ian , sound of the beast : the complete headbanging history of heavy metal the word was already a mainstay of hardcore and thrash scenes . scott ian and charlie benante of anthrax and s.o.d . have both been credited with the term originating from vinnie stigma of the new york hardcore band agnostic front . through the mainstream success of bands like anthrax , stormtroopers of death , and multiple thrash metal bands in the late 1980s the term came into the popular vernacular . origins . the first dance identifiable as moshing may have originated in orange county , california , during the first wave of american hardcore . examples of this early moshing can be seen in the documentaries another state of mind , urban struggle , the decline of western civilization , and american hardcore , as well as footage from the shows of the era . dave wood , an avid concert-goer and roadie of the weirdos , popularized moshing at a show at the roxy in 1977 . at the time , california hardcore punk bands such as black flag and fear were becoming popular in orange county . jerry roach 's club , the cuckoo 's nest in costa mesa was known as the '' birthplace of slam dancing '' . fear 's 1981 musical performance on saturday night live also helped to expose moshing to a much wider audience . . crossover into mainstream genres . by the end of the 1980s , the initial wave of american hardcore punk had waned and split into other subgenres . the seattle-based grunge movement was among the many styles of music that directly evolved from hardcore . through the mainstream success of several grunge bands , the word mosh entered the popular north american vocabulary and the dance spread to many other music genres . according to john linnell of they might be giants , '' it didn ’ t matter what kind of music you were playing or what kind of band you were ; everybody moshed to everything . it was just kind of the enforced rule of going to concerts . '' . variations . the pogo was the first form of moshing . according to the filth and the fury , it was invented by sex pistols bassist sid vicious in 1976 . a circle pit is a form of moshing in which participants run in a circular motion around the edges of the pit , often leaving an open space in the centre . a wall of death is a form of moshing which sees participants split into two halves , before slamming the two sides into one another . according to noisecreep , the consensus is that it was invented by american hardcore punk band sick of it all . however , the band 's vocalist lou koller , has stated that he merely revived the practice in 1996 , as he often saw a similar act performed in the 1980s new york hardcore scene . loudwire senior writer graham hartmann referred to it as '' perhaps the most bad ass and dangerous ritual you can experience in a mosh pit '' . venues will often ask bands not to organize the wall of death themselves due to the inherent risk involved and liability . hardcore dancing is a term that covers multiple style of moshing including windmilling two stepping , floorpunching , picking up pennies , axehandling and bucking wheelbarrowing . the practice began in new york city in the 1980s . . physical properties of emergent behavior . researchers from cornell university in ithaca studied the emergent behavior of crowds at mosh pits by analyzing online videos , finding similarities with models of 2-d gases in equilibrium . . summarized in simulating the crowds with computer models , they found out that a simulation dominated by flocking parameters produced highly ordered behavior , forming vortex like those seen in the videos . opposition , criticism and controversy . the american post-hardcore band fugazi opposed slamdancing at their live shows . members of fugazi were reported to single out and confront specific members of the audience , politely asking them to stop hurting other audience members , or hauling them on stage to apologize on the microphone . consolidated , an industrial dance group of the 1990s , stood against moshing . on their third album , play more music , they included the song '' the men 's movement '' , which proclaimed the inappropriate nature of slamdancing . the song consisted of audio recordings during concerts from the audience and members of consolidated , arguing about moshing . in the 1990s , the smashing pumpkins took a stance against moshing , following two incidents which resulted in fatalities . at a 1996 pumpkins concert in dublin , ireland , 17-year-old bernadette o'brien was crushed by moshing crowd members and later died in the hospital , despite warnings from the band that people were getting hurt . at another concert , singer billy corgan said to the audience : another fan died at a smashing pumpkins concert in vancouver , british columbia , canada on september 24 , 2007 . the 20-year-old male was dragged out of the mosh pit , unconscious , to be pronounced dead at a hospital after first-aid specialists attempted to save him . reel big fish 's 1998 album why do they rock so hard ? included their mosh-criticizing song '' thank you for not moshing '' , which contained lyrics that suggested that at least some individuals in the mosh pit were simply bullies who were finding conformity in the violence . mike portnoy , founder and ex-drummer of dream theater , and avenged sevenfold where he briefly filled in after the death of the rev , criticized moshing in an interview published on his website : sixteen-year-old jessica michalik was an australian girl who died as a result of asphyxiation after being crushed in a mosh pit during the 2001 big day out festival during a performance by nu metal band limp bizkit . at that same festival , post-hardcore band at the drive-in ended their set early after only three songs due to the audience ’ s moshing . groove metal group five finger death punch had an incident when , during the song '' white knuckles '' at a concert in hartford , connecticut , a young man received a compound fracture on his ankle in a mosh pit . ivan moody , the band 's lead singer , stopped the show , leaped into the crowd with zoltan bathory , the band 's rhythm guitarist , and carried the injured fan onto the stage , from where he was taken to the hospital . moody has been quoted as saying : '' i looked him square in the face and asked him if he was okay , or if there was anything i could do for him . he looked over at me , still in shock , and said 'you guys fucking rock ! ' '' moody stated '' i 've felt bad because of what has happened . i miss the old pantera kids who would just throw each other . just respect other people ; come on . '' bathory stated : '' because he broke his leg i threw down my guitar . we just finished when he broke his leg , and i came out and i stayed with him until the paramedics picked him up . these are my people and that 's how it is . '' joey demaio of american heavy metal band manowar has been known to temporarily stop concerts upon seeing moshing and crowd surfing , claiming it is dangerous to other fans . former slipknot percussionist chris fehn spoke about the state of audience interaction following the onstage incident and subsequent legal issues involving lamb of god ’ s randy blythe , who was eventually found innocent of criminal wrongdoing in the death of a concertgoer , despite being held '' morally responsible '' . fehn briefly addressed the blythe situation , stating '' i think , especially in america , moshing has turned into a form of bullying . the big guy stands in the middle and just trucks any small kid that comes near him . they don ’ t mosh properly anymore . it sucks because that ’ s not what it ’ s about . those guys need to be kicked out . a proper mosh pit is a great way to be as a group and dance , and just do your thing . '' . see also . headbanging crowd surfing skank ( dance ) stage diving praisepit , a colloquial name given to a mosh pit which occurs at a pentecostal christian church service . references . external links . mtv : the social history of the mosh pit ( 2002 ) berger , tom ( 2004 ) in the pit – how to survive mosh pits and bodysurfing ! ( online book ) how to mosh in a mosh pit on wikihow ( detailed listing of steps to follow , tips , and warnings ) '' crowd surfing and moshing '' at safeconcerts ( includes information on injuries sustained )