Johann Friedrich Herbart

life . herbart was born on 4 may 1776 in oldenburg . growing up as a fragile child because of an unfortunate accident , herbart was taught by his mother at home until the age of 12 . he continued his schooling at the gymnasium for six years , and showed interest in philosophy , logic and kant 's work involving the nature of knowledge obtained from experience with reality . his education then continued at jena , whereupon he studied philosophy and came to disagree with his teacher fichte precisely because fichte had taught him to think in a logical manner . he composed a few essays , which he had given to fichte during his years at jena , criticising the works of schelling and advocating his contention for the german idealism promoted by others like kant at the time . leaving jena after three years , he tutored the children of herr von steiger , who was the governor of interlaken . during these three years , his tutoring job sparked his interest in educational reform . while tutoring in switzerland , herbart met and came to know pestalozzi , the swiss educator involved with issues of reform in the schools . resigning from his tutoring position , herbart went on to study greek and mathematics at bremen for three years , and then eventually moved on to attend göttingen from 1801 to 1809 . while there , he received a privat-docent for his endeavours in educational studies after receiving his doctoral degree . he gave his first philosophical lectures at göttingen around 1805 , whence he removed in 1809 to occupy the chair formerly held by kant at königsberg . here he also established and conducted a seminary of pedagogy till 1833 , when he returned once more to göttingen , and remained there as professor of philosophy till his death . herbart gave his last lecture in perfectly good health and then unexpectedly died two days later from apoplexy . he is buried in albanifriedhof in göttingen . herbart was very much focused on his studies , and “ he barely saw the world outside his study and the classrooms ” making “ his world the world of books and only books ” . regardless of his relentless studying , he met an eighteen-year-old english girl named mary drake one night when playing a game of charades . he became acquainted with her and asked her for her hand in marriage . they lived a happy life with mary supporting all of her husband 's pursuits and contributions to the fields of pedagogy and psychology . philosophy . philosophy , according to herbart , begins with reflection upon our empirical conceptions , and consists in the reformation and elaboration of these , its three primary divisions being determined by as many distinct forms of elaboration . logic , which stands first , has to render our conceptions and the judgments and reasonings arising from them clear and distinct . but some conceptions are such that the more distinct they are made the more contradictory their elements become ; so to change and supplement these as to make them at length thinkable is the problem of the second part of philosophy , or metaphysics . there is still a class of conceptions requiring more than a logical treatment , but differing from the last in not involving latent contradictions , and in being independent of the reality of their objects , the conceptions that embody our judgments of approval and disapproval ; the philosophic treatment of these conceptions falls under aesthetics . logic . in herbart 's writings logic receives comparatively meagre notice ; he insisted strongly on its purely formal character and expressed himself in the main at one with kantians such as fries and krug . metaphysics . as a metaphysician he starts from what he terms the higher scepticism of the humean–kantian sphere of thought , the beginnings of which he discerns in locke 's perplexity about the idea of substance . the validity of even the forms of experience is called in question on account of the contradictions they are found to involve . and yet that these forms are given to us , as truly as sensations are , follows beyond doubt when we consider that we are as little able to control the one as the other . to attempt at this stage a psychological inquiry into the origin of these conceptions would be doubly a mistake ; for we should have to use these illegitimate conceptions in the course of it , and the task of clearing up their contradictions would still remain , whether we succeeded in our enquiry or not . but how are we to set about this task ? we have given to us a conception a uniting among its constituent marks two that prove to be contradictory , say m and n ; and we can neither deny the unity nor reject one of the contradictory members . for to do either is forbidden by experience ; and yet to do nothing is forbidden by logic . we are thus driven to the assumption that the conception is contradictory because incomplete ; but how are we to supplement it ? what we have must point the way to what we want , or our procedure will be arbitrary . experience asserts that m is the same ( i.e . a mark of the same concept ) as n , while logic denies it ; and so it being impossible for one and the same m to sustain these contradictory positions there is but one way open to us ; we must posit several ms . but even now we can not say one of these ms is the same as n , another is not ; for every m must be both thinkable and valid . we may , however , take the ms not singly but together ; and again , no other course being open to us , this is what we must do ; we must assume that n results from a combination of ms . this is herbart 's method of relations , the counterpart in his system of the hegelian dialectic . in ontology , this method is employed to determine what in reality corresponds to the empirical conceptions of substance and cause , or rather of inherence and change . but first we must analyse this notion of reality itself , to which our scepticism had already led us , for , though we could doubt whether the given is what it appears , we can not doubt that it is something ; the conception of the real thus consists of the two conceptions of being and quality . that which we are compelled to posit , which can not be aufheben , is that which is , and in the recognition of this lies the simple conception of being . but when is a thing thus posited ? when it is posited as we usually posit the things we see and taste and handle . if we were without sensations , i.e . were never bound against our will to endure the persistence of a presentation , we should never know what being is . keeping fast hold of this idea of absolute position , herbart leads us next to the quality of the real : this must exclude everything negative ; for non-a sublates instead of positing , and is not absolute , but relative to a . the real must be absolutely simple ; for if it contain two determinations , a and b , then either these are reducible to one , which is the true quality , or they are not , when each is conditioned by the other and their position is no longer absolute . all quantitative conceptions are excluded , for quantity implies parts , and these are incompatible with simplicity . but there may be a plurality of reals , albeit the mere conception of being can tell us nothing as to this . the doctrine here developed is the first cardinal point of herbart 's system , and the name pluralistic realism has been proposed for it by otto pfleiderer . otto pfleiderer , the philosophy of religion on the basis of its history , volume 2 , williams and norgate , 1887 , pp . 116 , 215 , 298 . the contradictions he finds in the common-sense conception of inherence , or of a thing with several attributes , will now become obvious . take some thing , say a , having n attributes , a , b , c . : we are forced to posit each of these because each is presented in intuition . but in conceiving a we make , not n positions , still less n+1 positions , but one position simply ; for common sense removes the absolute position from its original source , sensation . so when we ask , what is the one posited ? we are told the possessor of a , b , c or in other words , their seat or substance . but if so , then a , as a real , being simple , must be equal to a ; similarly it must be b ; and so on . now this would be possible if a , b , c . were only contingent aspects of a , as for example 2 3 , , 4+3+1 are contingent aspects of 8 . such , of course , is not the case , and so we have as many contradictions as there are attributes ; for we must say a is a , is not a , is b , is not b , etc . there must then , according to the method of relations , be several as . for a let us assume a 1 +a 1 +a 1 . & nbsp ; ; for b , a 2 +a 2 +a 2 . ; and so on for the rest . but now what relation can there be among these several as , which will restore to us the unity of our original a or substance ? there is just one ; we must assume that the first a of every series is identical , just as the centre is the same point in every radius . by way of concrete illustration herbart instances “ the common observation that the properties of things exist only under external conditions . bodies , we say , are coloured , but color is nothing without light , and nothing without eyes . they sound , but only in a vibrating medium , and for healthy ears . colour and tone present the appearance of inherence , but on looking closer we find they are not really immanent in things but rather presuppose a communion among several . ” the result then is briefly thus : in place of the one absolute position , which in some unthinkable way the common understanding substitutes for the absolute positions of the n attributes , we have really a series of two or more positions for each attribute , every series , however , beginning with the same ( as it were , central ) real ( hence the unity of substance in a group of attributes ) , but each being continued by different reals ( hence the plurality and difference of attributes in unity of substance ) . where there is the appearance of inherence , therefore , there is always a plurality of reals ; no such correlative to substance as attribute or accident can be admitted at all . substantiality is impossible without causality , and to this as its true correlative we now turn . the common-sense conception of change involves at bottom the same contradiction of opposing qualities in one real . the same a that was a , b , c . becomes a , b , d . ; and this , which experience thrusts upon us , proves on reflection unthinkable . the metaphysical supplementing is also fundamentally as before . since c depended on a series of reals a 3 +a 3 +a 3 . in connection with a , and d may be said similarly to depend on a series a 4 +a 4 +a 4 . , then the change from c to d means , not that the central real a or any real has changed , but that a is now in connection with a 4 , etc . , and no longer in connection with a 3 , etc . but to think a number of reals in connection ( zusammensein ) will not suffice as an explanation of phenomena ; something or other must happen when they are in connection ; what is it ? the answer to this question is the second hinge-point of herbart 's theoretical philosophy . what actually happens as distinct from all that seems to happen , when two reals a and b are together is that , assuming them to differ in quality , they tend to disturb each other to the extent of that difference , at the same time that each preserves itself intact by resisting , as it were , the others disturbance . and so by coining into connection with different reals the self-preservations of a will vary accordingly , a remaining the same through all ; just as , by way of illustration , hydrogen remains the same in water and in ammonia , or as the same line may be now a normal and now a tangent . but to indicate this opposition in the qualities of the reals a+b , we must substitute for these symbols others , which , though only contingent aspects of a and b , i.e . representing their relations , not themselves , yet like similar devices in mathematics enable thought to advance . thus we may put a & alpha ; + & beta ; - & gamma ; , b m+n+ & gamma ; ; & gamma ; then represents the character of the self-preservations in this case , and & alpha ; + & beta ; +m+n represents all that could be observed by a spectator who did not know the simple qualities , but was himself involved in the relations of a to b ; and such is exactly our position . having thus determined what really is and what actually happens , our philosopher proceeds next to explain synthetically the objective semblance ( der objective schein ) that results from these . but if this construction is to be truly objective , i.e . valid for all intelligences , ontology must furnish us with a clue . this we have in the forms of space , time and motion which are involved whenever we think the reals as being in , or coming into , connection and the opposite . these forms then can not be merely the products of our psychological mechanism , though they may turn out to coincide with these . meanwhile , let us call them intelligible , as being valid for all who comprehend the real and actual by thought , although no such forms are predicable of the real and actual themselves . the elementary spatial relation herbart conceives to be “ the contiguity ( aneinander ) of two points , ” so that every “ pure and independent line ” is discrete . but an investigation of dependent lines which are often incommensurable forces us to adopt the contradictory fiction of partially overlapping , i.e . divisible points , or in other words , the conception of continuity . hence herbart gave the name synechology to this branch of metaphysics , instead of the usual one , cosmology . but the contradiction here is one we can not eliminate by the method of relations , because it does not involve anything real ; and in fact as a necessary outcome of an intelligible form , the fiction of continuity is valid for the objective semblance . by its help we are enabled to comprehend what actually happens among reals to produce the appearance of water . when three or more reals are together , each disturbance and self-preservation will ( in general ) be imperfect , i.e . of less intensity than when only two reals are together . but objective semblance corresponds with reality ; the spatial or external relations of the reals in this case must , therefore , tally with their inner or actual states . had the self-preservations been perfect , the coincidence in space would have been complete , and the group of reals would have been inextended ; or had the several reals been simply contiguous , i.e . without connection , then , as nothing would actually have happened , nothing would appear . as it is we shall find a continuous molecule manifesting attractive and repulsive forces ; attraction corresponding to the tendency of the self-preservations to become perfect , repulsion to the frustration of this . motion , even more evidently than space , implicates the contradictory conception of continuity and can not , therefore , be a real predicate , though valid as an intelligible form and necessary to the comprehension of the objective semblance . for we have to think of the reals as absolutely independent and yet as entering into connections . this we can only do by conceiving them as originally moving through intelligible space in rectilinear paths and with uniform velocities . for such motion no cause need be supposed ; motion , in fact , is no more a state of the moving real than rest is , both alike being but relations , with which , therefore , the real has no concern . the changes in this motion , however , for which we should require a cause , would be the objective semblance of the self-preservations that actually occur when reals meet . further , by means of such motion these actual occurrences , which are in themselves timeless , fall for an observer in a definite time — a time which becomes continuous through the partial coincidence of events . but in all this it has been assumed that we are spectators of the objective semblance ; it remains to make good this assumption , or , in other words , to show the possibility of knowledge ; this is the problem of what herbart terms eidolology , and forms the transition from metaphysic to psychology . here , again , a contradictory conception blocks the way , that , viz . of the ego as the identity of knowing and being , and as such the stronghold of idealism . the contradiction becomes more evident when the ego is defined to be a subject ( and so a real ) that is its own object . as real and not merely formal , this conception of the ego is amenable to the method of relations . the solution this method furnishes is summarily that there are several objects which mutually modify each other , and so constitute that ego we take for the presented real . but to explain this modification is the business of psychology ; it is enough now to see that the subject like all reals is necessarily unknown and that , therefore , the idealist 's theory of knowledge is unsound . but though the simple quality of the subject or soul is beyond knowledge , we know what actually happens when it is in connection with other 's reals , for its self-preservations then are what we call sensations . and these sensations are the sole material of our knowledge ; but they are not given to us as a chaos but in definite groups and series , whence we come to know the relations of those reals , which , though themselves unknown , our sensations compel us to posit absolutely . principles of education . herbart 's pedagogy emphasised the connection between individual development and the resulting societal contribution . in platonic tradition , herbart espoused that only by becoming productive citizens could people fulfill their true purpose : “ he believed that every child is born with a unique potential , his individuality , but that this potential remained unfulfilled until it was analysed and transformed by education in accordance with what he regarded as the accumulated values of civilisation ” . only formalised , rigorous education could , he believed , provide the framework for moral and intellectual development . the five key ideas which composed his concept of individual maturation were inner freedom , perfection , benevolence , justice and equity or recompense . according to herbart , abilities were not innate but could be instilled , so a thorough education could provide the framework for moral and intellectual development . in order to develop an educational paradigm that would provide an intellectual base that would lead to a consciousness of social responsibility , herbart advocated that teachers utilise a methodology with five formal steps : “ using this structure a teacher prepared a topic of interest to the children , presented that topic , and questioned them inductively , so that they reached new knowledge based on what they had already known , looked back and deductively summed up the lesson 's achievements , then related them to moral precepts for daily living ” . in order to appeal to learners ' interests , herbart advocated using literature and historical stories instead of the drier basal readers that were popular at the time . whereas the moralistic tales in many of the primers and readers of the period were predictable and allegorical , herbart felt that children would appreciate the psychological and literary nuances of the masterpieces of the canon . though he died in 1841 , his pedagogy enjoyed a renaissance of sorts in the mid-19th century ; while germany was its intellectual centre , it '' found a ready echo in those countries such as the united kingdom , france , and the united states in which the development of individuality into character appeared particularly well attuned to the prevailing economic , political and social circumstances . '' among those who espoused and advocated his ideas in the united kingdom was catherine isabella dodd . c . i . dodd ( 1904 ) . the combination of individual potentiality and civic responsibility seemed to reflect democratic ideals . though the emphasis on character building through literary appreciation diminished somewhat after the movement toward utilitarianism following the first world war , herbart 's pedagogy continues to influence the field by raising important questions about the role of critical thinking , and literary appreciation in education . aesthetics and ethics . aesthetics elaborates the ideas involved in the expression called forth by those relations of object which acquire for them attribution of beauty or the reverse . the beautiful is to be carefully distinguished from the allied conceptions of the useful or the pleasant , which vary with time , place and person ; whereas beauty is predicated absolutely and involuntarily by all who have attained the right standpoint . ethics , which is but one branch of aesthetics , although the chief , deals with such relations among volitions ( willensverhältnisse ) as thus unconditionally please or displease . these relations herbart finds to be reducible to five , which do admit of further simplification ; and corresponding to them are as many moral ideas ( musterbegriffe ) , as follows : internal freedom , the underlying relation being that of the individual 's will to his judgment of it perfection , the relation being that of his several volitions each other in respect of intensity , variety and concentration benevolence , the relation being that between his own will and the thought of another's right , in case of actual conflict with other retribution or equity , for intended good or evil the ideas of a final society , a system of rewards and punishments , a system of administration , a system of culture and an animated society , corresponding to the ideas of law , equity , benevolence , perfection and internal freedom respectively , result when we take account of a number of individuals . virtue is the perfect conformity of the will with the moral ideas ; of this the single virtues are but special expressions . the conception of duty arises from the existence of hindrances to the attainment of virtue . a general scheme of principles of conduct is possible , but the sublimation of special cases under these must remain matter of fact . the application of ethics to things as they are with a view to the realisation of the moral ideas is moral technology ( tugendlehre ) , which the chief divisions are paedagogy and politics . theology . in theology , herbart held the argument from design to be as valid of divine activity as for human , and to justify the belief in a supersensible real , concerning which , however , exact knowledge is neither tenable nor on practical grounds desirable . psychology . herbart 's concept of the real . building upon the teaching methods of pestalozzi , herbart contributed to pedagogy a psychological basis to help facilitate better learning as well as to ensure children 's character development . he was the first individual to point out how important a role psychology plays on education . in developing his ideas about psychology , herbart came to disagree with kant about how true knowledge is obtained . kant believed that we become knowledgeable through studying the innate categories of thought , while herbart believed that one learns only from studying external and real objects in the world as well as the ideas that come about from observing them . examining the difference between the actual existence of an object and its appearance , herbart concluded that “ the world is a world of things-in-themselves and the things-in-themselves are perceivable . ” everything 's appearance indicates that it exists . he considered all external objects existing in the world as reals , which can be compared to leibniz 's concept of monads . subscribing to locke 's empiricist viewpoint involving the tabula rasa , herbart believed that the soul had no innate ideas or no already pre-established kantian categories of thought . the soul , considered to be a real , was thought to be completely passive initially as well as very resistant to changes outside factors exert and force upon it . even though reals are disrupted by other forces appearing to cause a change in the reals themselves , they are thought to be unchangeable . reals tend to collide and struggle with one another so much so that each real fights for its own self-preservation ( selbsterhaltung ) . the way in which the soul helps to preserve itself from its outwardly perceived destruction is through herbart 's concept of vorstellungen , or ideas or mental representations . these ideas were regarded as dynamic forces that herbart attempted to explain by means of mathematical formulas . newton 's influence can be seen in herbart 's beliefs about how forces mechanically interact with one another in the world to affect perceptions of reality . the mechanics of ideas involved their ability to move in different ways , whether they be moving up into the conscious or delving down into the unconscious . different ideas come into contact with each other and result in more complex ideas through the processes of blending , fusing , fading and combining in a multitude of approaches . it is evident herbart thought that ideas were not precise imitations of the existing items in the world but that they were the direct consequence of the interactions of individuals ’ experiences with the external environment . an individual can only gain all the facts and their associated truth by understanding how their mental representations combine and potentially inhibit or contribute to one another . apperception . herbart believed ideas crossed a limen of consciousness , or a boundary between the conscious and the unconscious , as they became clearer and strong enough to preserve themselves against their struggle with other forces . the ideas powerful enough to break through to the conscious formed the apperceiving mass , or a congregation of similar and related ideas dominating the conscious at any given moment . expounding upon leibniz ’ s concept of pétites perceptions and the idea of apperception , herbart believed the apperceiving mass to be crucial in selecting similar ideas from down in the unconscious to join its forces in the conscious . although the individual is focusing all of his/her attention on those complex ideas a part of the apperceiving mass in the conscious , it is possible for ideas in the unconscious to combine with other ideas related to them and struggle to break through the limen into the conscious , disrupting the present ideas a part of the apperceiving mass . apperception played a key role in herbart 's educational theory . he saw apperception as more pivotal in the classroom than sense-perception because focusing on a child 's apperceiving mass in relation to the material being taught can inform teachers of how to implement the material in such a way as to direct the child 's ideas and thoughts to attend to certain information . biographies . there is a life of herbart in hartenstein 's introduction to his kleinere philosophische schriften und abhandlungen ( 1842–1843 ) and by f . h . t . allihn in zeitschrift für exacte philosophie ( leipzig , 1861 ) , the organ of herbart and his school , which ceased to appear in 1873 . in america the national society for the scientific study of education was founded as the national herbart society . bibliography . herbart 's works were collected and published by his disciple g . hartenstein ( leipzig , 1850–1852 ; reprinted at hamburg , with supplementary volume , 1883–1893 ) ; another edition by karl kehrbach ( leipzig , 1882 , and langensalza , 1887 ) . the following are the most important : allgemeine pädagogik ( 1806 ; new ed . , 1894 ) hauptpunkte der metaphysik ( 1808 ) allgemeine praktische philosophie ( 1808 ) lehrbuch zur einleitung in die philosophie ( 1813 ; new ed . by hartenstein , 1883 ) lehrbuch der psychologie ( 1816 , ; new ed . by hartenstein , 1887 ) psychologie als wissenschaft ( 1824–25 ) allgemeine metaphysik ( 1828–29 ) encyklopädie der philosophie ( 2nd ed . , 1841 ) umriss pädagogischer vorlesungen ( 2nd ed . , 1841 ) psychologische untersuchungen ( 1839–40 ) some of his works have been translated into english under the following titles : textbook in psychology , by m . k . smith ( 1891 ) the science of education and the aesthetic revelation of the world ( 1892 ) and letters and lectures on education ( 1898 ) , by h . m . and e . felkin abc of sense perception and minor pedagogical works ( new york , 1896 ) , by w . j . eckhoff and others application of psychology to the science of education ( 1898 ) , by b . c . mulliner outlines of educational doctrine , by a . f . lange ( 1901 ) . see also . neo-kantianism . notes . citations . references . dodd , c . i . , introduction to the herbartian principles of teaching ( 1904 ) with prologue by richard robinson , epilogue by norman a . stahl , and history of reading since by p . david pearson . ; attribution . further reading . boring , e.g . ( 1950 ) . “ german psychology before 1850 : kant , herbart , and lotze . ” in r.m . elliott ( ed . ) , a history of experimental psychology ( 2nd ed . ) . new york : appleton-century-crofts . crary , j . ( 1992 ) . “ techniques of the observer . ” in j . crary ( ed . ) , techniques of the observer : on vision and modernity in the nineteenth century , ( pp . & nbsp ; 100–102 ) . massachusetts : mit press . retrieved from de garmo , c . ( 1895 ) . herbart and the herbartians . new york : c . scribner 's sons . jahoda , g . ( 2009 ) . “ the metaphysical mechanics of the mind . ” psychologist , 22 ( 6 ) , 558-559 . watson , r.i . ( 1968 ) . “ kant and herbart : continental philosophical psychology . ” in c.p . duncan & j . wishner ( eds . ) , the great psychologists : from aristotle to freud ( 2nd ed . ) . philadelphia : j.b . lippincott company . older literature . h . a . fechner , zur kritik der grundlagen von herbarts metaphysik ( leipzig , 1853 ) julius kaftan , sollen und sein in ihrem verhältnis zueinander : eine studie zur kritik herbarts ( leipzig , 1872 ) moritz wilhelm drobisch , über die fortbildung der philosophie durch herbart ( leipzig , 1876 ) k . s . just , die fortbildung der kant'schen ethik durch herbart ( eisenach , 1876 ) christian ufer , vorschule der pädagogik herbarts ( 1883 ; eng . tr . by jc zinser , 1895 ) g . közie , die pädagogische schule herbarts und ihre lehre ( gutersloh , 1889 ) l . strümpell , das system der pädagogik herbarts ( leipzig , 1894 ) j . christinger , herbarts erziehungslehre und ihre fortbildner ( zurich , 1895 ) o . h . lang , outline of herbart 's pedagogics ( 1894 ) h . m . and e . felkin , introduction to herbart 's science and practice of education ( 1895 ) c . de garmo , herbart and the herbartians ( new york , 1895 ) e . wagner , die praxis der herbartianer ( langensalza , 1887 ) and vollständige darstellung der lehre herbarts ( 1888 ) j . adams , the herbartian psychology applied to education ( 1897 ) f . h . hayward , the student 's herbart ( 1902 ) , the critics of herbartianism ( 1903 ) , three historical educators : pestalozzi , fröbel , herbart ( 1905 ) , the secret of herbart ( 1907 ) , the meaning of education as interpreted by herbart ( 1907 ) w . kinkel , j . f . herbart : sein leben und seine philosophie ( 1903 ) a . darroch , herbart and the herbartian theory of education ( 1903 ) j . davidson , a new interpretation of herbart 's psychology and educational theory through the philosophy of leibniz ( 1906 ) j . m . baldwin , dictionary of psychology and philosophy ( 1901–05 ) . external links . herbart 's works archive.org