Crystalis

gameplay . crystalis is an action role-playing game . the world is presented in a top-down perspective so the player character can be moved in eight directions using the d-pad . one action button is used for attacking with a sword while the second is mapped to either an equipped magical power or an item from the player 's inventory . the start and select buttons bring up the status screen and the inventory menu , respectively . in addition , the player can equip various suits of armor and shields . defeating monsters allows the player to gain experience points which increases his level thus boosting his health , defense , and attack strength . the primary means of defeating monsters is through the use of four elemental swords scattered throughout the game ( the fifth sword , crystalis , is obtained in the final dungeon ) . the swords are capable of both normal slashes and powered-up attacks that launch elemental projectiles . each of the four swords is imbued with a distinct elemental power ( wind , fire , water , and thunder ) , making each sword more effective than the others in various situations . the elemental nature of each sword also provides a necessary means of traversing otherwise impassable obstacles ; certain barriers succumb to the power blasts of individual swords , and the sword of water creates a bridge of ice across some shallow , narrow sections of rivers . some enemies are immune to certain types of elements and must be killed using the opposing element ( for instance , ice creatures are weak against fire ) . also bosses and enemies require the hero be a certain level or else they can not be harmed , even if the correct sword is used . the player can also jump over enemies , and certain enemies can form puddles to slide under the sword 's reach . synopsis . plot . crystalis takes place in a post-apocalyptic world , in 2097 , one hundred years after '' 1997 , october 1 , the end day , '' when a global thermonuclear war began that reverted civilization to a primitive , medieval existence populated with fierce mutated creatures . science and advanced technology have been abandoned , with the survivors deciding to study the ways of magic . the survivors of the destruction built a floating '' tower '' to prevent any future cataclysms , as its occupants would have the power to govern the world due to the tower 's weapons systems . a man known as draygon , however , revived the forbidden ways of science and combined them with magic . with these skills , he controls the world 's last remaining military power and seeks to conquer what is left of the planet by attempting to enter the tower . the protagonist awakens with no memory , but , guided by four wise sages , gradually learns that the world is sinking into turmoil due to the draygonia empire 's destructive influence . entrusted with the sword of wind , he seeks to aid mesia , another survivor from his time , and to combine the four elemental swords of wind , fire , water , and thunder into the legendary sword , crystalis . together , they must defeat draygon before he uses the tower to achieve his evil ambitions . characters . the anonymity male protagonist ( named snk by default in the nes version , simea in the game boy color version ) and his female accomplice , mesia , are scientists who were cryogenically frozen , to be released when the tower began to activate . the protagonist is assisted by four sages named zebu , tornel , asina , and kensu , primarily in learning magic spells and gaining information about the world and the quest . they are encountered frequently throughout the game , and the player can seek their advice using the telepathy spell . in the gbc version , the sages are each responsible for creating one of the four swords : zebu for wind , tornel for fire , asina for water , and kensu for thunder . the original game does not mention who forged the ancient swords . there are also four recurring boss characters , '' dragonia 's finest four . '' comprising this group are : general kelbesque , sabera the witch , the swordsman mado , and karmine the wizard . each of them has a distinct elemental weakness and with the exception of karmine , each is encountered twice during the adventure . though not the final adversary in the game , emperor draygon is the ultimate antagonist and the root of all of evil in crystalis . after defeating his false self , the hero encounters the real one and reveals his true , dragon-like form . after defeating the real draygon , the hero gains access to the tower for a final showdown with a machine called dyna . development . two of the characters from crystalis are subtle nods to earlier snk characters who later became part of the king of fighters series ; the latter two sages , kensu and asina , are based on sie kensou and athena asamiya from the psycho soldier arcade game . in the king of fighters series , kensou is well known for his obsession with athena , a quality demonstrated even in crystalis . release . the game was released in japan on april 13 , 1990 , and released in north america in july 1990 . game boy color version . nearly ten years after the game 's initial release , nintendo , with licensing from snk , re-released crystalis for the game boy color on june 26 , 2000 . this version , however , is a significantly different game , exemplified by a different opening sequence . the nature of the tower 's origin and its purpose were fundamentally altered , with the tower now being a weapon created by the game 's antagonist , and the protagonist has been elevated to a hero of ancient prophecy destined to save the world . other major changes include an almost completely new soundtrack , re-translation differences ( for example , draygon is now known as dragonia , as in the japanese version ) and rewriting of story-items and events ( kensu 's body and the dialogue in the dwarven village , for example ) . the game now has a longer end due to the incorporation of a new dungeon , the tower dungeon being redone , and the re-ordering of the ultimate and penultimate boss battles , which were excluded from the original game due to space constraints ( draygon 's second form serves as the final boss in the remake as opposed to dyna ) . also , a digital voice was added to state the name of each sword upon discovery . unlike the original version , enemies are not immune to certain elemental swords . the lower resolution of the game boy color screen , compared to that of the nes , results in a field of view smaller than in the original , making the gbc port more difficult ; some enemies can now attack the player from off-screen . snk 40th anniversary collection version . snk re-released crystalis for the nintendo switch on november 13 , 2018 as part of the snk 40th anniversary collection . it was announced on january 10 , 2019 that the snk 40th anniversary collection , again including crystalis , would be released on the sony playstation 4 on march 19 , 2019 . . reception . the original nes version of crystalis was praised for its advanced graphics , high quality soundtrack , and elaborate plot . critics remarked that the story and art design seemed to draw heavily from the hayao miyazaki anime film nausicaä of the valley of the wind . the main criticism of the game was its repetitive gameplay , as many enemies can be overcome by continuous rapid pressing of one button . pocket squirrel also mentioned flawed collision detection in his review for rpgfan . the japanese gaming magazine famitsu gave the game a score of 28 out of 40 . famitsu writers compared it as similar to both ys and legend of zelda . in december 2005 , nintendo power ranked the nes release of crystalis at number 115 in a list of the 200 best games ever to appear on a nintendo system , the '' np top 200 '' . in a retrospective , kotaku states , '' crystalis has flaws , but makes up for it with bold strides in its narrative and gameplay . '' 1up.com called it a '' hidden gem '' for the nes , and said it was one of the better games inspired by zelda on the system , contrasting it with willow , which they said was quite poor . the game boy color port was not received as favorably , the majority of reviews citing it as an inferior copy , due to reduced screen resolution and altered plot , as well as its being seen as dated compared to more recently made games . the music is regarded as one of the port 's worst aspects . the port was given an 8.0 rating by ign , however , which denotes an '' impressive '' game . ign criticized the game for being too linear and having a low difficulty level but praised its large world and visually detailed '' cinema cutscenes '' . gamespot also gave the game boy color port an 8.0 , saying of the original nes release : '' crystalis ' sheer depth - and the quality of its presentation - was without peer , and it is still regarded as a milestone title in the action rpg genre . '' . notes . references . external links .