Robert H. Jackson

death and legacy . on march 30 , 1954 , jackson suffered a massive heart attack . he was confined to the hospital until may 17 when he returned to the court . he remained functioning in his position as justice until october 4 , 1954 . on saturday , october 9 , 1954 , jackson suffered a myocardial infarction . at 11:45 & nbsp ; a.m . he died at age 62 . funeral services were held in washington 's national cathedral and later in jamestown 's st . luke 's church . all eight of the other supreme court justices traveled together to jamestown , new york , to attend his funeral service ; the last time , for security purposes , that the supreme court all traveled together . other prominent guests included thomas e . dewey . he was interred near his boyhood home in frewsburg , new york . his headstone reads '' he kept the ancient landmarks and built the new . '' the robert h jackson center , located in robert h . jackson 's hometown of jamestown , new york , offers guided tours to visitors who can see exhibits on jackson 's life , collections of his writings , and photos from the international military tribunal . an extensive collection of jackson 's personal and judicial papers is archived at the manuscript division of the library of congress and is open for research . smaller collections are available at several other repositories . there are statues dedicated to robert h . jackson outside the robert h . jackson center in jamestown , new york , as well as the robert h . jackson field at the chautauqua county-jamestown airport . the united states district court for the western district of new york main courthouse , which is located in buffalo and opened in november , 2011 , is dedicated to justice jackson and is named the robert h . jackson united states courthouse . gsa , robert h . jackson united states courthouse , buffalo , ny ; barry a . muskat , great buildings : inside the federal courthouse , ( feb . 2012 ) . . portrayal in popular culture . robert h . jackson has been portrayed by the following actors in film , television , and theater productions : andrzej łapicki , in the 1970 polish tv production , epilog norymberski by jerzy antczak henderson forsythe , in the 1991 telefilm , separate but equal alec baldwin , in the 2000 canadian/u.s . tv production nuremberg edmund dehn , in the 2005 german tv miniseries speer und er colin stinton , in the 2006 british television docudrama nuremberg : nazis on trial . see also . list of justices of the supreme court of the united states list of u.s . supreme court justices by time in office united states supreme court cases during the stone court united states supreme court cases during the vinson court united states supreme court cases during the warren court robert h . jackson center united states constitution . references . bibliography . abraham , henry j . , justices and presidents : a political history of appointments to the supreme court . 3d ed . new york , ny : oxford university press , 1992 . cushman , clare , the supreme court justices : illustrated biographies , 1789–1995 ( 2nd ed . ) ( supreme court historical society ) . congressional quarterly books , 2001 ; . department of state . report of robert h . jackson , united states representative , to the international conference on military trials . createspace independent publishing platform , 2013 . frank , john p . , the justices of the united states supreme court : their lives and major opinions ( leon friedman and fred l . israel , eds . ) . new york , ny : chelsea house publishers , 1995 , . gerhart , eugene . robert h . jackson : country lawyer , supreme court justice , america 's advocate . getzville , ny : william s . hein & co . , 2003 , . harris , whitney . tyranny on trial : the trial of the major german war criminals at the end of world war ii , at nuremberg , germany , 1945-46 . college station , tx : texas a & m university press , 1999 , . hockett , jeffrey d . new deal justice : the constitutional jurisprudence of hugo l . black , felix frankfurter , and robert h . jackson . lanham , md : rowman & littlefield publishers , 1996 . jackson , robert h . the case against the nazi war criminals . new york , ny : alfred a . knopf , 1946 . jackson , robert h . fbi law enforcement bulletin volume 9 , no . 3 , march , 1940 . federal bureau of investigation , 1940 . jackson , robert h . general welfare and industrial prosperity : address prepared by robert h . jackson , solicitor general of the united states , for delivery at the convention in rockford , illinois , on september 14th , 1938 . the department of justice , 1938 . jackson , robert . the meaning of liberalism : an address by robert h . jackson to the liberal voters ' league of montgomery co . , md , rockville , md , november 22nd , 1938 . 1938 . jackson , robert h . the nurnberg case , as presented by robert h . jackson . new york , ny : alfred a . knopf , 1947 . jackson , robert h . the reminiscences of robert h . jackson . washington , d.c . : supreme court of united states , 1955 . jackson , robert h . struggle for judicial supremacy . new york , ny : alfred a . knopf , 1941 . jackson , robert h . the supreme court in the american system of government . cambridge , ma : harvard university press , 1955 . jackson , robert h . statement by robert h . jackson to the judiciary committee of the senate . the department of justice , 1937 . jackson , robert h . that man : an insider 's portrait of franklin d . roosevelt . john q . barrett , ed . new york , ny : oxford university press , 2003 . jackson , robert h . trial of german war criminals : opening address by robert h . jackson . literacy licensing , llc , 2003 . jarrow , gail . new deal lawyer , supreme court justice , nuremberg prosecutor . honesdale , pa : calkins creek , 2008 . massa , stephen j . justice jackson and the perpetrators : robert h . jackson , the third reich , wwii , nuremberg , the defendants . eagles publishing , 2012 . martin , fenton s . and goehlert , robert u . , the u.s . supreme court : a bibliography . congressional quarterly books , 1990 . nielsen , james . robert h . jackson : the middle ground . 6 la . l . rev . / the university of louisiana , 1945 . o'brien , david m . justice robert h . jackson 's unpublished opinion in brown vs . board : conflict , compromise , and constitutional interpretation . lawrence , ks : university press of kansas , 2017 . shubert , glendon . dispassionate justice : a synthesis of the judicial opinions of robert h . jackson . indianapolis , in : bobbs-merrill company , 1969 . tusa , ann and tusa , john , the nuremberg trial . london : macmillan , 1983 . united states of america . nomination of robert h . jackson to be an associate justice of the supreme court . hearings , seventy-seventh congress , first session . 1941 . urofsky , melvin i . , the supreme court justices : a biographical dictionary . new york : garland publishing , 1994 . 590 pp . & nbsp ; ; . external links . the robert h . jackson center 's website the international humanitarian law dialogs the jackson list : justice jackson , the supreme court , nuremberg , and related topics the nuremberg timeline ( timeline of the international military tribunal ) jackson 's nuremberg report discussion of the concept of supreme crime introduced by justice jackson , as chief prosecutor for the united states at the nuremberg trials , with applications to today nuremberg opening statement nuremberg closing statement justice robert h . jackson ( character ) on imdb - -