Cold War espionage

background information . soviet espionage in the united states during the cold war was an outgrowth of world war ii nuclear espionage , with both sides utilizing and evolving techniques and practices developed during world war ii . cold war espionage has been fictionally depicted in works such as the james bond and matt helm books and movies . the cold war was a state of political and military tension after world war ii led by the united states ( and the western bloc ) and the soviet union ( and the eastern bloc ) . after world war ii , the victory of the soviet union over germany granted them considerable territorial spoils ; the soviet union banded together these states economically and politically creating a superpower challenging the might of the united states . prior even to the united states ' use of nuclear bombs in hiroshima and nagasaki , the soviet union had been developing the technology to make similar devices . although the two powers never engaged in an full scale war , both countries were constantly preparing for an all-out nuclear war . cold war espionage was focused on gaining an advantage in information about the enemies ' capabilities , especially related to atomic weaponry . during the cold war , information was a key commodity . it was vital to know what the adversary was up to , and the possibility of using the hi-tech surveillance that is used today was not around . instead of trusting technology , states relied on spies : people who infiltrated enemy territory and tried to discover information while staying undetected . espionage activities continued from prior to the beginning of the cold war in the late thirties- early forties , and all the way through the late 1960s and even continuing through today . due to the nature of espionage , the information that we can gather about these activities is limited , equally as limited is the prosecutorial reach with regards to people who commit espionage are subjected to ( especially in the united states ) . these spies were decoding encrypted information , and using many skills to gain an advantage over enemy countries . major spy rings . cambridge five : the cambridge five consisted of five members that were recruited from the university of cambridge in the 1930s . there is debate surrounding the exact timing of their recruitment , but it is generally believed that they were not recruited as agents until after they had graduated . the group included kim philby ( cryptonym 'stanley ' ) , donald maclean ( cryptonym 'homer ' ) , guy burgess ( cryptonym 'hicks ' ) , anthony blunt ( cryptonyms 'tony ' , 'johnson ' ) , and john cairncross ( cryptonym 'liszt ' ) . there were many others that were accused of being a part of the cambridge spy ring , but these five members were collectively known as the cambridge five . portland spy ring : the portland spy ring operated in england , as a soviet spy ring , from the 1950s until 1961 when the core of the network were arrested by british security services . this spy ring was unique because they did not use the cover of an embassy as the cover for their spies . its members included harry houghton , ethel gee , gordon lonsdale , and most famously morris and lona cohen ( cryptonym peter and helen kroger ) . ware group : sleeper spy ring in us headed by j . peters , first organized under harold ware , inherited by whittaker chambers ( under orders from peters ) , and also included : john abt , marion bachrach ( abt 's sister ) , lee pressman , alger hiss , donald hiss , charles kramer , nathan witt , henry collins , george silverman , john herrmann , nathaniel weyl , and victor perlo . when chambers defected in 1938 , the ware group went dormant and then broke up . harry dexter white ( below ) contributed materials to chambers but not as part of the ware group . silvermaster spy ring : the silvermaster spy ring was led by harry dexter white , assistant secretary of the treasury and the second most influential member of the treasury department . his job was to aid placement of soviet spies within the united states government . the united states treasury department was successfully infiltrated by many soviet spies , the most successful of which belonged to the silvermaster spy ring . harold glasser , elizabeth bentley , and nathan silvermaster were other major members of the silvermaster spy ring . atomic spies : while the atomic spies were not exactly a network of spies , the collective information that was obtained by this group of soviet spies was critical to the soviet union 's ability to build an atomic bomb . many of the members of the atomic spies group worked for , or around , the manhattan project , or the united states building of the atomic bomb . this group included : klaus fuchs : a german-born british theoretical physicist . he worked with the british delegation on the manhattan project . morris cohen : an american who gained insight to the plans from the secret laboratory at los alamos and delivered it to the designers of the soviet atomic bomb . harry gold : an american who was a courier for klaus fuchs and david greenglass . david greenglass : an american machinist at los alamos during the manhattan project . he gave crude schematics of lab experiments to the russians . theodore hall : an american , and the youngest physicist at los alamos , gave a detailed description of the fat man plutonium bomb and several processes for purifying plutonium to the soviets . george koval : an american-born son of a russian family . he obtained information from the oak ridge national laboratory and the dayton project about the urchin ( detonator ) used for the fat man plutonium bomb . irving lerner : an american film director who was caught photographing the cyclotron at the university of california in 1944 . alan nunn may : a british physicist who worked for the british nuclear research and then in canada on the manhattan project . his uncovering in 1946 was responsible for the united states mcmahon act with the british . julius and ethel rosenberg : americans who were involved in the coordinating and recruiting of an espionage network . ethel 's brother was david greenglass . saville sax : an american who acted as a courier for klaus fuchs and theodore hall . morton sobell : an american engineer who admitted to spying for the soviets and uncovered how extensive the rosenberg 's recruiting network was . . chronology . - united states navy chief warrant officer and communications specialist . convicted of espionage for the soviet union from 1968-1985 . was required to testify against former chief petty officer jerry whitworth . walker 's job duties allowed him to inform the soviet union where the united states ' submarines would be located . surveillance devices of the cold war . sight unseen - an f21 'ammer ' spy camera . currently on exhibit in berlin , germany . used by the stasi secret police . cold war fashion accessory - produced by the dmz for the kgb . the camera was be concealed in a tie with the lens of the camera being in the tie pin . it took 8.5x11 millimeter photos . sedgley oss . 38 - 0.38 single shot pistol . designed by stanley m . height . the bullet must be fired at point-blank range to be effective . maxwell smart 's other shoe - a miniature camera stowed in the heel of the spy 's shoe . this gadget was used by most spies at the time including those in the cia . bulgarian umbrella - this umbrella had a very small attachment that allowed it to inject a small poisonous dart ( usually containing ricin ) into the spy 's target . can you hear me now ? - an eavesdropping device lipstick gun - a 4.5mm gun that was placed inside a tube of lipstick . many museums and historians refer to it as the '' kiss of death . '' just a simple twist would fire a bullet . spy pens - a kind of felt pen that was used for video recording purposes and made by carl zeiss . only ten were made for foreign espionage . photo overdrive - a tool that was much larger than many other spy equipment . technicians created a car door that would take hidden , infrared camera images at night . kgb disappearing ink pen - invisible inks were very commonly used by spies during the cold war . when used a spy would need to steam the ink , dry the paper , and re-steam it in order to get rid of any indentations . '' belly buster '' drill - a cia gadget developed in the 1960s . used to drill holes into rooms for the planting or mounting of listening devices letter remover insectothopter - classified as a uav ( unmanned aerial vehicle ) . contained a hidden camera and designed to look like a dragonfly . microdot camera - using a period sized film , this device was used to film pages of secret documents . spy wallet - a camera hidden inside a wallet f-21 pocket camera - issued by the kgb . concealed in a buttonhole with a wire running to a device that allows the spy to take a picture . louder , please , mywatch ca n't hear you american-british spy tunnel . american satellite surveillance systems . weapons system 117l - weapons system 117l was the first program designed to develop space-based reconnaissance satellite systems . several satellite systems would be developed through this program including corona , the satellite and missile observation system ( samos ) , and the missile detection alarm system ( midas ) . samos - samos or the satellite and missile observation system was one of the first of a series of short lived satellite systems developed by the united states , operated from october 1960 to november 1962 . the samos satellite system was one of the first systems developed through the ws-117l program . the system consisted of three primary components : visual reconnaissance , communications , and electronic intelligence gathering . of the eleven launched attempted , 8 were successful . the program was likely cancelled because of poor image quality . the satellite could produce photos with 100 foot resolution . it was also heavily overshadowed by the corona system operated by the cia . midas - midas or the missile defense alarm system was a satellite system operated by the united states between 1960 and 1966 . this system was designed to be made of twelve satellites , although only nine satellites were successfully launched . the system was designed to provide early warning of soviet missile launches . the system was eventually cancelled because of the high price and because of the slow warning times . this system , however , would be directly responsible for technologies used in its successors . corona - corona was among the first of a series of reconnaissance satellite systems developed through the ws-117l program . the corona program was headed by the central intelligence agency along with the air force . corona satellites were used to photograph soviet and other installations . the first successful corona mission began on august 10 , 1963 . the corona satellite system was expedited largely in part to the u-2 incident in 1960 . all of the corona missions , with the exception of the kh-11 kennan program , would make use of photographic film , which would have to survive re-entry through the atmosphere and be recovered . keyhole - keyhole was the designation for the initial corona launches , which included kh-1 , kh-2 , kh-3 , kh-4a , and kh-4b . the name was used because it is analogous to spying through the keyhole of a door . 144 satellites would be launched through this program , and 102 returned usable photos . kh-5 argon ( kh-5 ) - argon was the designation the surveillance satellites , manufactured by lockheed , used by the united states from february 1961 to august 1964 . argon made use of photographic film in a way similar of the original corona satellites . of the twelve known launches , seven were not successful for varying reasons . kh-6 lanyard ( kh-6 ) - lanyard was the designation for the first , albeit unsuccessful , attempt to establish a high resolution , optical satellite system . this program would be led by the newly established national reconnaissance office , and operated from march–july 1963 . because it was only able to achieve a resolution similar to that of the kh-4 satellites , it was discontinued after only 3 launches . kh-7 gambit ( kh-7 ) - gambit was the next of a series of satellites operated by the united states , by the national reconnaissance office , from july 1963 to june 1967 . it was among the first successful corona missions as it produced some of the first high resolution photos . these photos were typically of soviet and chinese missile emplacements . gambit satellites would make use of a three camera system and missions would last typically up to eight days . kh-8 gambit 3 ( kh-8 ) - the gambit iii satellite system was amongst the longest serving satellite reconnaissance programs operated by the united states during the cold war . this satellite system would operate from july 1966 to april 1984 . of the fifty-four launch attempts , only three would fail , all of which were attributed to rocket failure . the average mission time of the gambit iii satellite systems were thirty-one days . the gambit iii satellites would differ from the gambit i satellites in that the gambit iii had a four camera system , which carried over twelve thousand feet of film , and were able to produce resolutions as small as four inches . kh-9 hexagon ( kh-9 ) - the hexagon satellite system , commonly known as big bird , this satellite system was operated from 1971 and 1986 . the hexagon system was officially known as the broad coverage photo reconnaissance satellites . these satellites photographed large areas of the earth at a time with moderate resolution . these satellites were also used for mapping missions , which were used in map making . three hexagon missions also included electronic intelligence or elint gathering capabilities . these were used to eavesdrop on soviet communications and on soviet missile launches . twenty launches were attempted , only one was unsuccessful . these satellites operated for an increasing duration of time , with the longest mission lasting 275 days . kh-11 kennen ( kh-11 ) - the kh-11 kennan , which goes under the code name crystal , was first launched in 1976 , and missions are still ongoing to this day . according to leaked documents , this program is currently operation under the code name evolved enhanced crystal . the kennan satellite system was the first satellite system to use electro-optical imaging , which gives real time imaging capabilities . the resolution of these satellites is estimated to be as low as 2 inches . these satellites are unique in that they have been placed in sun-synchronous orbits , which allow them to use shadows to help discern ground features . these satellites became famous in 1978 when a cia employee tried to leak the design of the satellite to the soviets . he was tried and convicted of espionage . keyhole/improved crystal ( kh-12 ) – the later kh-11 satellites have been called kh-12 improved crystal or ikon satellites . these satellites also had increased download times which allowed for faster processing of photos . it is also suspected that these satellites may have stealth technology to avoid detection by other satellites . vela - the vela satellite system was developed to by the united states to ensure that the soviet union complied with the partial test ban treaty which was ratified in 1963 . the satellites were designed to monitor for nuclear explosions in space and in the atmosphere by measuring for neutrons and gamma rays . a total of twelve vela satellites were launched during the course of the cold war . the vela satellites became publicly famous because of the vela incident which occurred on 22 september 1979 . it was theorized at the time that it was a nuclear test conducted by south africa and israel , but new evidence does not support this theory . they have also been used in the study of gamma-ray burst . american surveillance aircraft . u-2 – the u-2 aircraft , known as the '' dragon lady '' , was developed by the lockheed skunk works , and was first flown on august 1 , 1955 . the aircraft was initially flown by the cia , but control was later transferred to the air force . the aircraft was designed to fly at altitudes of 70,000 & nbsp ; ft . the u-2 was equipped with a camera which had a resolution of 2.5 feet at an altitude of 60,000 & nbsp ; ft . the first overflights of the soviet union by the u-2 began in may 1956 . the aircraft became publicly prominent after a u-2 aircraft flown by francis gary powers was hit by an sa-2 missile and crash landed in the ussr . sr-71 – the sr-71 blackbird is a long-range reconnaissance aircraft developed by lockheed skunk works , and designed by kelly johnson . the aircraft is known for setting speed and altitude records . the sr-71 was equipped with optical and infrared imaging systems , electronic intelligence gathering systems , side looking airborne radar , and recorders for those systems which are listed . the aircraft required two personnel to pilot it , one to pilot the aircraft , and a reconnaissance systems officer ( rso ) to operate the systems . soviet satellite surveillance systems . zenit ( zenith ) - the zenith satellite program , was a satellite program developed by the soviet union and used from 1961 to 1994 . during the course of its lifespan over 500 zenith satellites were launched , making it the most used satellite system ever . the soviets concealed the nature of the system by giving the satellites the kosmos designation . the zenith satellites had an advantage over the satellites developed by the united states , in that they could be reused . a total of eight variants would be developed for a variety of mission types , ranging from high-resolution photography to elint to cartographic and topographic missions . yantar - the yantar satellites , designed to replace the zenit satellite system , are among the newest russian satellites . yantar satellites have been launched as recently as 2015 . two variants of the satellite have been developed for high-resolution photography and for medium-resolution broad spectrum imaging . historiography . after 1990s new memoirs and archival materials have opened up the study of espionage and intelligence during the cold war . scholars are reviewing how its origins , its course , and its outcome were shaped by the intelligence activities of the united states , the soviet union , and other key countries . raymond l . garthoff , '' foreign intelligence and the historiography of the cold war . '' journal of cold war studies 6.2 ( 2004 ) : 21-56 . michael f . hopkins , '' continuing debate and new approaches in cold war history . '' historical journal 50.4 ( 2007 ) : 913-934 . special attention is paid to how complex images of one 's adversaries were shaped by secret intelligence that is now publicly known . paul maddrell , ed . the image of the enemy : intelligence analysis of adversaries since 1945 ( georgetown up , 2015 ) . the soviet union proved especially successful in placing spies in britain and west germany . it was largely unable to repeat its successes in the 1930s in the united states . nato , on the other hand , also had a few successes of importance , of whom oleg gordievsky was perhaps the most influential . he was a senior kgb officer who was a double agent on behalf of britain 's mi6 , providing a stream of high-grade intelligence that had an important influence on the thinking of margaret thatcher and ronald reagan in the 1980s . he was spotted by aldrich ames a soviet agent who worked for the cia , but he was successfully exfiltrated from moscow in 1985 . biographer ben mcintyre argues he was the west 's most valuable human asset , especially for his deep psychological insights into the inner circles of the kremlin . he convinced washington and london that the fierceness and bellicosity of the kremlin was a product of fear , and military weakness , rather than an urge for world conquest . thatcher and reagan concluded they could moderate their own anti-soviet rhetoric , as successfully happened when mikhail gorbachev took power , thus ending the cold war . ben macintyre , the spy and the traitor : the greatest espionage story of the cold war ( 2018 ) . excerpt . footnotes . references . sulick , michael ( 2015 ) . intelligence in the cold war : guide to study of intelligence . virginia : afio . trahair , richard ( 2012 ) . encyclopedia of cold war espionage , spies , and secret operations . new york : enigma books . . further reading . . external links . noc by nicholasanderson , ebook published 2008 , the traditional book published by enigma books 2009 . fictionalised ( as stipulated by uk law ) autobiography of a british sis/mi6 intelligence officer 's stories from the cold war . original non-fiction version vetoed in 2000 per uk official secrets act and appeared in banned books listing in 2003 as seen at fatchuck.com the literature of intelligence : a bibliography of materials , with essays , reviews , and comments . an extensive bibliography compounded by j . ransom clark .