Analog recording

phonautograph . the phonautograph is the earliest known device for recording sound . the phonograph . the phonograph was the first machine used to capture and reproduce analog sound , and was invented by the well-known inventor thomas edison in 1877 . edison incorporated various elements into his phonograph that would become staples that can be found in recording devices to this day . . recording . for a sound to be recorded by the phonograph , it has to go through three distinct steps . first , the sound enters a cone-shaped component of the device , called the microphone diaphragm . that sound causes the microphone diaphragm , which is connected to a small metal needle , to vibrate . the needle then vibrates in the same way , causing its sharp tip to etch a distinctive groove into a cylinder , which was made out of tinfoil . playback . in order to playback the sound recorded on one of the tinfoil cylinders , the recording process is essentially reversed . as the cylinder spins , the needle follows the groove created by the previous recording session . this causes the needle to vibrate , and then the diaphragm . this vibration comes out of the diaphragm , which is now functioning as a sort of sound amplification device , much like the bell on any wind instrument . the result is an audible reproduction of the originally recorded sound . phonograph problems . edison 's phonograph was the first of its kind , but drawbacks were nevertheless obvious . the biggest of these , and the one that ended up being fixed first , came from the physical contact between the phonograph needle and the tinfoil diaphragm . because the needle had to continually make contact with the groove in the diaphragm every time the recording was played , the groove would wear down . this meant that every single time a recording was played , it was one step closer to being gone forever . another problem with the phonograph was the permanence of its recordings . unlike music today , which can be edited endlessly , the music captured by phonograph machines were single-take , live recordings . the last problem with the phonograph was related to fidelity . fidelity is the similarity/difference between the original recorded sound , and that same sound after it has been reproduced by a playback device , in this case the phonograph . as can be expected from such an early audio recording machine , the fidelity of edison 's phonograph was extremely low . this lack of sound quality is why the phonograph was originally used to record speeches , meetings , and telephone calls , rather than music . gramophone . fans of modern record players are already familiar with one very early improvement on the phonograph , known as the gramophone . inventor emile berliner created the device in 1887 , only ten years after edison 's original device . . advantages . berliner 's main improvement to the phonograph was related to the component of the device that actually held the recorded information . the previously used tinfoil cylinders were awkwardly shaped , making them hard to store . they could also not be reproduced economically , which was another reason why they were not seen as a viable option for recorded music . berliner realized these disadvantages , and set out to create a better version of the tinfoil cylinder . what he came up with was not a cylinder at all , but was rather a flat circular disc much like modern vinyl records . these discs could not only be easily stacked and stored for safe-keeping , but were also comparatively easy to reproduce . this quality allowed for the mass production of recorded discs , which was the first step towards commercially recorded music . problems . unfortunately , though the gramophone was a large step up from the phonograph commercially , it still had many of the same problems . the mass production possibilities created by berliner ’ s flat discs got companies thinking about recording music , but since nothing had been done to address the low fidelity issue , the industry had yet to really take off . the problems with finality and breakdown of recordings started by the phonograph were equally as prominent with the gramophone . telegraphone - the wire recorder . the next great advancement in analog sound recording came in the form of the telegraphone , which was created by danish inventor valdemar poulsen between 1898 and 1900 . this machine was vastly different from the gramophone or the phonograph , in that instead of recording sound mechanically , it recorded using a process called magnetic storage . poulsen was able to transmit an electrical signal , much like the one that would broadcast over the radio or a telephone , and then capture it on a magnetizable element , in this case a length of steel wire , which was wrapped around a bass drum . problems . poulsen 's telegraphone was not without its share of problems . first , the reels of steel wire were extremely heavy , weighing approximately each . secondly , steel 's scarcity at the time raised the price of recording ; a single minute of recording would cost a full dollar , and the price was further increased because multiple recordings were necessary in order to capture the best rendition . moreover , steel wire could be dangerous , with a risk comparable to that of a bandsaw . like the recording devices that came before it , the telegraphone recordings were nearly impossible to edit . rather than cutting and splicing together multiple takes , as could easily be done with scissors or a computer in future recording devices , this machine required both a welding torch and a soldering tool to modify . magnetophon - the first tape recorder . in 1935 , inventor fritz pfleumer took the magnetic storage idea and took it to the next level . rather than using heavy , expensive , and dangerous steel wire like poulsen , pfleumer realized that he could coat normal strips of paper with tiny particles of iron . the iron would allow the paper to be magnetized in the same way as the steel wire , but would eliminate most of its shortcomings . the magnetophon operated with a process nearly identical to that of the telegraphone . an inscriber , called the recording head , passes over the electromagnetic paper strip , creating patterns of varying magnetic polarity within it , which can later be played back . the playback is achieved using a reversal of the recording process . the pre-magnetized paper , which had come to be known as tape , passed over a coil , creating changes in magnetic flux . these changes were translated into an electric current , which when amplified produced a replica of the previously recorded sounds . advantages . there were many advantages of tape recording , but the most important was that it led to the development of multitracking . multitracking occurs when multiple takes of a performance , which were recorded at separate times , are brought together to play simultaneously . this is the method all recording studios use to this day , in order to record all of the separate instruments of a song , and get the best possible takes from all of the musicians . a reel of tape could also hold far more recorded information than previous mediums . for instance , berliner 's discs held only a few minutes of recording , meaning that each disc usually contained a single song , or multiple short clips . pfleumer 's tape reels , on the other hand , could hold up to thirty minutes of sound . this ability is what eventually led to the concept of a music '' album '' , or collection of multiple songs . problems . the original magnetophon had its share of setbacks as well . namely , the problem of low fidelity found in previous devices had yet to be solved . though audiences and inventors had not yet experienced what high fidelity recording would even sound like , they knew that the sound they were hearing from recordings needed to be improved before any kind of recorded music industry could be expected . modern tape recorder . the introduction of tape bias to recording systems improved fidelity to acceptable and eventually high-fidelity performance . adding a dc bias to the signal sent to the recording head reduced distortion in the recording . the use of an ac bias further reduced distortion and greatly improved the frequency response of recording systems . fritz pfleumer 's work was further developed by the german electronics companies aeg and basf , but due to the outbreak of world war ii , largely kept secret . it was only after the war that it was developed into commercially viable formats . a wide variety of audio tape recorders and formats were then developed , most significantly reel-to-reel and compact cassette both of which were very widely used throughout most of the late 20th century . from 1950 onwards , video was also recorded to tape , with the two most successful formats being betacam for professional use , and vhs for consumers . nowadays , while digital recording to flash memory and hard disk has largely supplanted magnetic tape for most purposes , tape as a verb and as a noun has remained the common parlance for the recording process . see also . comparison of analog and digital recording history of sound recording magnetic tape timeline of audio formats . references .