The Jerky Boys: The Movie

plot . the film opens in a new york police station as a pair of '' low-lifes from queens '' named johnny b . ( johnny brennan ) and kamal ( kamal ahmed ) are taken into police custody and interrogated by an nypd detective named robert worzic ( brad sullivan ) . worzic demands to know exactly how the pair got into their situation , so johnny explains that for the past twenty years , he and kamal frequently entertained themselves by performing prank calls on the telephone . he brings up an early call where he got his neighbor brett weir , the local goody-two-shoes kid , in trouble with his mother by impersonating an angry citizen and claiming that brett has been spitting and cursing . one day twenty years later ( the beginning of the film 's present day ) , johnny and kamal are adults and still performing prank calls , but johnny 's mother mrs . b ( suzanne shepherd ) demands that they get jobs . johnny argues that they get fired from everything they try , even though their reason for termination usually stems from their inability to not insult people over radios and intercoms . mrs . b compares them to brett weir ( james lorinz ) , who has grown to live a very successful life and now owns his own house , and tells them to get out of the house and job-hunt . johnny and kamal decide to head to mickey 's , their local bar , and knock back a few drinks placed on their sizable tab . they happen to meet brett , who buys them drinks and brags that he is on his way to a meeting at a fancy restaurant . curious , johnny calls brett 's new friends at the restaurant as '' frank rizzo '' and tells the people on the other end ( in no polite terms ) that '' his men '' johnny and kamal have just gotten in from chicago and need to be cared for . unbeknownst to the pair , brett 's friends are actually the local mafia run by ernie lazzaro ( alan arkin ) , who is confused and bewildered at '' rizzo '' and his vulgarity but nonetheless gives the boys a limousine ride and a fully comped meal . feeling that they have stumbled onto a good job , johnny calls again as '' rizzo '' the next day and demands another good time for him and kamal . this time , lazzaro and his right-hand man tony scarboni ( vincent pastore ) introduce the pair to the many mafia leaders and officials on their payroll . they are given money as an advance on their first assignment : beat up mickey so the mob can take over his bar and tear it down . at this point , the boys realize what they are in and that they are in deep . as they try ( and fail ) to convince mickey ( alan north ) to lay low , brett recognizes them and reveals to lazzaro that they are not mobsters at all . scarboni 's men geno ( brian tarantina ) and sonny ( peter appel ) later grab johnny and kamal and takes them to a hot dog-processing plant so that scarboni can run them through the grinder as punishment . using their vocal talents , the boys distract their captors and escape . johnny and kamal lead scarboni and his men through the city , crashing a local concert , stealing a cab , and wrecking a nightclub magic show along the way . they eventually make it back to johnny 's house in queens , only to get arrested by worzic for all the trouble they caused . returning to the present situation , johnny and kamal insist to worzic that everything was just a big misunderstanding and try to tell him of lazzaro 's many rackets in the city . worzic , however , only cares about '' frank rizzo '' ( who apparently is an actual mafia boss that he wants arrested ) and throws the boys in a jail cell . they are each given one phone call : johnny calls his mother , who is threatened by scarboni to tell them where he is , while kamal calls a local demolition crew . they are later released on bail and picked up by scarboni 's men so that they can take them to lazzaro and scarboni , who are now fitting mrs . b with cement shoes . johnny insists that '' frank rizzo '' can set everything straight and calls his house , where he had previously set up a tape-recording of '' rizzo '' to play on the answering machine . though it seems to work well enough to make lazzaro brag about his operation , brett sees through the deception and the rest of the mob chase after the boys and mrs . b . barely making it back to queens , johnny and kamal immediately call worzic and tells them that they have taped evidence to incriminate lazzaro . instead , the detective is revealed to be on the take ( explaining his prior refusal to help ) and joins lazzaro in chasing the boys , but they are distracted when lazzaro recognizes the next-door neighbor uncle freddie ( william hickey ) as a mafia boss from long ago . this gives the boys the chance to escape downtown and call every news outlet they can think of with their evidence that exposes lazzaro . they credit '' frank rizzo '' as the informant , who in turn credits johnny and kamal as '' the jerky boys '' . lazzaro , scarboni , worzic , and all their accomplices are arrested , while johnny and kamal are made heroes and given a cushy office job in a high-rise building . not surprisingly , they start off by prank calling the white house and demanding to know bill clinton . meanwhile , brett weir has just gotten out of prison after making a deal with prosecutors , only to see his house getting torn down by the demolition crew that the jerky boys had called earlier . characters . johnny – ( himself ) one of the two prank callers . kamal – himself , one of the two prank callers . ernie lazzaro – ( alan arkin ) a powerful mob boss who the prank callers get tangled up with . tony scarboni – ( vincent pastore ) lazarro 's right-hand man . geno – ( brian tarantina ) scarboni 's bumbling underling . sonny – ( peter appel ) scarboni 's bumbling underling . robert worzic – ( brad sullivan ) a detective who is trying to bring a fictional '' frank rizzo '' down brett weir – ( james lorinz ) johnny 's weaselly mob-connected neighbor . a victim to the jerky boys . mrs . b – ( suzanne shepherd ) johnny 's long-suffering mother . uncle freddy – ( william hickey ) johnny 's neighbor , seemingly a harmless old kook but really an old-time mob boss mickey – ( alan north ) owns the bar johnny b . and kamal frequent . construction foreman – ( joe lisi ) a construction worker , who fires johnny and kamal . burger bob customer – ( ron ostrow ) a customer ordering lunch at burger bob 's drive through . band manager – ( ozzy osbourne ) band manager for helmet . henry bogdan – ( himself ) one of the four members of helmet . rob echeverria – ( himself ) one of the four members of helmet . page hamilton – ( himself ) one of the four members of helmet . john stanier – ( himself ) one of the four members of helmet . production and delay of release . after the 1993 release of the the jerky boys ( album ) , johnny b . , kamal , along with james melkonian and rich wilkes , commenced writing a screenplay for a proposed jerky boys film for producers joe roth and roger birnbaum 's production company caravan pictures . the film was shot between april and june 1994 in new york city , under the direction of james melkonian . the project 's distributor , buena vista , originally planned to release the film in 1994 but the release was delayed until after the release of the jerky boys 2 . the film was released theatrically on february 3 , 1995 by buena vista through its touchstone pictures label . the copyright date of this movie is 1994 and the same date appears on the disc and back cover of the soundtrack . home media . the jerky boys was initially released by touchstone pictures on vhs on march 5 , 1996 . the jerky boys on vhs at amazon.com a widescreen laserdisc was also released by touchstone pictures . the first ( and only ) release on dvd was in march 2004 in europe and the united kingdom . the jerky boys movie became available for streaming via itunes and amazon , as of early 2012 . reception . the film received mostly negative reviews . on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 9 % , based on 11 reviews , and an average rating of 1.4/10 . being a significant part of the jerky boys ' career , it has a cult following among jerky boys fans , which johnny brennan discussed at length on his late podcast . . references . external links .