Perak

languages . as a multi-ethnic state , perak is also linguistically diverse . the main malay language dialect , perak malay , is characterised by its '' e '' ( as in '' red '' , and its '' r '' , like the french '' r '' . it is commonly spoken in central perak , more specifically in the districts of kuala kangsar and perak tengah . speakers of the northern kedah malay dialect are also found in the northern part of perak , comprising kerian , pangkor island , and larut , matang and selama districts . in the northeastern part of perak ( hulu perak ) , and some parts of selama and kerian , the malay people speak another distinct malay language variant known as basa ulu/grik ( named after grik ) , which is most closely related to kelantan-pattani malay in kelantan and southern thailand ( yawi ) due to geographical proximity and historical assimilation . in the southern parts of perak ( hilir perak and batang padang ) , and also in the districts of kampar and kinta and several parts of manjung , the dialect spoken is heavily influenced by the southern malay dialects of the peninsula such as selangor , malacca , and johore-riau malay . it is also influenced by several languages of the indonesian archipelago : javanese , banjar , rawa ( a variety of minangkabau ) , batak ( mandailing ) , and buginese , as a result of historical immigration , civil wars such as the klang war , and other factors . among perak 's various chinese ethnicities , malaysian cantonese has become the lingua franca , although a number of dialects are spoken including cantonese , hakka , mandarin , teochew , hokkien , and hokchiu . the tamil community mainly speaks a malaysian dialect of the tamil language ; the malayalees speak malayalam ; the telugus speak the telugu language ; and the sikhs speak punjabi . over time , tamil became a lingua franca among perak 's different indian communities as tamil-speaking people became the majority in several west coast malaysian states with higher indian populations . most of the sikhs in perak are known to speak fluent tamil , unlike sikhs from other states in malaysia . a small number of sinhala speakers also found in parts of the state capital , ipoh . several orang asli languages are spoken within the state , all belonging to the aslian branch of the austroasiatic languages . these languages are lanoh , temiar , jahai , kensiu , kintaq , and semai . members of the siamese community mainly speak a southern thai variant , and are fluent in malay , also having some knowledge of some of the chinese dialects . with the multi-ethnic make-up of perak 's society , some people speak more than one language . . culture . perak 's multicultural society reflects the influences of different ethnicities throughout its history . several malay art forms , such as embroidery and performances like dabus , show apparent arab culture influence . the state 's characteristic embroidery , tekat emas ( gold embroidery ) , was once presented to royalty . designs are based on floral , animal , and geometric motifs . dabus has existed for some 300 years , and is inseparable from a ritual involving incantation . it was brought to perak by traders from sumatra , and practised by the malay community in lumut , pasir panjang laut village in sitiawan , and teluk intan . the traditional malay pottery handicraft called labu sayong is part of the art heritage of kuala kangsar . its unique design is uninfluenced by foreign techniques . labu sayong is associated with a dance called the sayong . another dance local to the malays of perak is the bubu , known for 120 years , which originates from tanjung bidara village on tiga parit island . cantonese opera once flourished in the town of ipoh , as the majority of chinese there were cantonese . the history of china , and particularly hong kong , is recreated in qing xin ling leisure and cultural village ( nicknamed little guilin ) in ipoh , with painted wooden structures around a lake set among limestone hills and caves . another ethnic chinese cultural location in perak is bercham , originally called wo tau kok in cantonese in the 1950s . the area was formerly a tin mining centre , which also become one of the relocation points for malayan ethnic chinese during the british era under the government 's briggs ' plan to protect and distance them from communist influence . perak 's malay , chinese , and indian communities , representing its three main ethnic groups , each have their own traditional arts and dance associations to maintain and preserve their respective cultural heritage . . cuisine . as a melting pot of different cultures , perak features various cuisines . lemang , a malay delicacy made from glutinous rice cooked in a bamboo tube over a slow fire , is very popular in the state . it is mainly served during the festivities of eid al-fitr ( hari raya aidilfitri ) and eid al-adha ( hari raya haji ) , along with rendang . the method of its preparation is believed to derive partly from the indigenous orang asli of perak , explaining the origins of the dish . another popular malay delicacy is tempoyak , a durian extract that is preserved and kept in a traditional urn . it is commonly mixed with bird 's eye chillies , and eaten with other dishes . chinese cuisine is very common in perak , because of the state 's history of chinese migration and trade relations over centuries . it was traditionally popular chiefly in ipoh . through over 2,000 years of contact with india , the malaysian indian cuisine also spread in perak . the state is particularly known as a producer of the bali pomelo ( limau bali ) . this fruit was introduced by hugh low , perak 's fourth british resident , who brought seedlings from the neighbouring dutch east indies and distributed them both in penang and in perak ( mainly in tambun ) . other districts are also known for their agricultural production : bidor for its guava , hulu perak ( durian ) , menglembu ( peanut ) , and tapah ( petai ) . ipoh white coffee , a popular malaysian drink , traces its origin to ipoh . . sports . perak became a part of malaya since 1957 , and its athletes have represented malaya , and later malaysia , at the summer olympic games , commonwealth games , asian games , and southeast asian games . the perak state youth and sports department was established in 1964 to raise the standard of sports in the state . perak hosted the sukma games in 1994 and 2018 . the state has a number of sports complexes , located around ipoh and in other districts . the state government allocates funds for sports development to each district-level sports association . ipoh 's perak stadium is the main stadium for perak fa . the team was formed in 1951 , although the state had had a football team since 1921 . perak fa won the malaysia fa cup in 1990 and 2004 ; the malaysia cup in 1926 , 1931 , 1957 , 1967 , 1970 , 1998 , 2000 , and 2018 ; was runner-up in the malaysia super league in 2006–07 and 2018 ; and won the president cup malaysia in 2006–07 , 2012 and 2014 . the state women 's football team was runner-up in the tun sharifah rodziah cup in 1977 , 1979 and 1992 . another notable stadium in the state is naval base stadium in lumut . the annual field hockey tournament in perak , the sultan azlan shah cup , traced its roots to former state sultan named azlan shah , an avid fan of the sport . perak was the first malaysian state to introduce e-sports , in the sukma games . the state government is further targeting e-sports development with the increase in youth interest .