United States Pacific Fleet

origins . a pacific fleet was created in 1907 when the asiatic squadron and the pacific squadron were combined . in 1910 , the ships of the first squadron were organized back into a separate asiatic fleet . the general order 94 of 6 december 1922 organized the united states fleet , with the battle force as the pacific presence . until may 1940 , the battle force was stationed on the west coast of the united states . headquarters , battleships , aircraft carriers and heavy cruisers were stationed at san pedro close to the long beach naval shipyard . light cruisers , destroyers and submarines were stationed at san diego . during the summer of that year , as part of the u.s . response to japanese expansionism , it was instructed to take an '' advanced '' position at pearl harbor , hawaii . long term basing at pearl harbor was so strongly opposed by the commander , admiral james o . richardson , that he personally protested in washington . political considerations were thought sufficiently important that he was relieved by admiral husband e . kimmel , who was in command at the time of attack on pearl harbor . the pacific fleet was formally recreated on 1 february 1941 , when general order 143 split the united states fleet into separate atlantic , pacific , and asiatic fleets . composition of the pacific fleet in december 1941 . on 7 december , the fleet consisted of the battle force , scouting force , base force , amphibious force ( comphibpac ) , orbat.com/niehorster , administrative order of battle 7 december 1941 cruiser force ( comcrupac ) , destroyer force ( comdespac ) , and the submarine force ( comsubpac ) . also in hawaii was the fourteenth naval district , commanded by rear admiral claude c . bloch . the battle force consisted of combatpac , made up of three batdiv : battleship division 1 battleship division 2 battleship division 4 these nine battleships were intended to counterbalance the ten battleships of the imperial japanese navy . at the time of the attack on pearl harbor , was in dry dock undergoing maintenance , and was in the midst of a refit at bremerton navy yard , washington . was mated with and at that time . other components of the battle force included aircraft , battle force , with carrier division one and carrier division two , plus cruiser divisions 4 , 5 , and 6 , as well as destroyers , battle force . : destroyers , battle force destroyer flotilla 1 carrier division 1 carrier division 2 cruiser division 4 cruiser division 5 cruiser division 6 when the attack took place , all three carriers were absent - saratoga was in san diego collecting her air group following a major refit , enterprise was en route back to hawaii following a mission to deliver aircraft to wake island , while lexington had just departed on a similar mission to midway . the scouting fleet included cruiser division three , cruiser division nine and comsubpac . cruisers , battle force , u.s . pacific fleet , 7.12.1941 cruiser division 3 cruiser division 9 the amphibious force was formally known as commander , amphibious forces , pacific fleet ( comphibpac ) . on 7 december 1941 the amphibious force comprised the army 's 3rd infantry division at fort lewis , under army operational control , the 2nd marine division , the 2nd marine aircraft wing , the 2nd defense battalion ( see marine defense battalions ) , and a depot . orbat.com/niehorster , amphibious force , u.s . pacific fleet one of phibpac 's subordinate commands during world war ii was transports , amphibious force , pacific fleet , or transphibpac . the commander of transphibpac was known as comtransphibpac . in december 1941 , the fleet consisted of nine battleships , three aircraft carriers , 12 cruiser , eight cruiser , 50 destroyers , 33 submarines , and 100 patrol bombers . this was approximately the fleet 's strength at the time of the japanese attack on pearl harbor . that day , the japanese combined fleet carried out the attack on pearl harbor , drawing the united states into world war ii in the pacific . the pacific fleet 's battle line took the brunt of the attack , with two battleships destroyed , two salvageable but requiring lengthy reconstruction , and four more lightly to moderately damaged , forcing the u.s . navy to rely primarily on aircraft carriers and submarines for many months afterward . subsequently , pacific fleet engagements during world war ii included the battle of guam , the marshalls-gilberts raids , the doolittle raid , the solomon islands campaign , the battle of the coral sea , the battle of midway , the battle of the eastern solomons , the battle of the santa cruz islands , the battle of the philippine sea , the gilbert and marshall islands campaign , the battle of leyte gulf , and the battle of okinawa . more minor battles included the battle of dutch harbor . the submarine force began a sustained campaign of commerce raiding against japan 's merchant marine , beginning the first day of the war , which ultimately claimed 1,314 ships totalling about 5.3 million tons ( by the imperfect postwar reckoning of the joint army-navy assessment committee , janac ) . blair , pp.877-8 . the west loch disaster occurred at pearl harbor on 21 may 1944 . post-1945 . the pacific fleet took part in operation magic carpet , the return of u.s . servicemen , after the end of the second world war . the organization of the pacific fleet in january 1947 is shown in hal m . friedman 's arguing over the american lake : bureaucracy and rivalry in the u.s . pacific , 1945-1947 . hal m . friedman , 'arguing over the american lake : bureaucracy and rivalry in the u.s . pacific , 1945-47 ' texas a & m university press , 2009 , , 105-108 . since 1950 the pacific fleet has been involved in the korean war , the vietnam war , the two taiwan straits crises , and a number of other operations including the mayaguez incident of 1975 , as well as post-vietnam related operations such as operation new arrivals . the rimpac exercise series began in 1971 . on 7 march 1984 , the secretaries of transportation and navy signed a memorandum of agreement which created the maritime defense zones ( mdz ) . jeffrey hartman , 'guarding alaska : a memoir of coast guard missions on the last frontier ' , iuniverse , 2012 , , , p . & nbsp ; 104 . the pacific mdz is an echelon three navy command under the commander u.s . pacific fleet . the pacific mdz has responsibility for coastal defense up to around the u.s . west coast , aleutian islands , and hawaii during times of hostility . on 1 october 1990 , commander u.s . naval forces alaska ( comusnavak ) was established as the naval component commander to commander , alaskan command ( comalcom ) . since its inception , comusnavak has grown to become responsible for coordinating all navy activity in the alaska and aleutian area , for detailed planning and coordination for the naval portion of the joint and combined exercise northern edge , and coordinates high-visibility u.s . navy ship visits throughout alaska in support of public relations and recruiting initiatives . the very large pacex 89 in the north pacific involved the usn , canadian navy , japanese maritime self-defence force , and rok navy . at the end of exercise pacex '89 a 54-ship formation was assembled for photos . it included the flagship , , the battle group , the battle group , two battleship surface action groups formed around and , and a japanese maritime self-defence force task force . missouri and new jersey performed a simultaneous gunfire demonstration for the aircraft carriers and during pacex . the highlight of pacex for missouri was a port visit in pusan , republic of korea . see missouri command history other operations undertaken since include participation in the alaskan oil spill joint task force , including participation of commander , amphibious group three , as deputy cjtf . this was the defence response to the exxon valdez oil spill of march 1989 . also , the pacific fleet was involved in joint task force philippines during the december 1989 coup attempt there , which involved two carrier battle groups , uss midway and uss enterprise-with their associated air wings operating in the philippine sea , chopped to jtf philippines . during the operations , the carriers maintained deck alerts and 24-hour coverage of manila with e-2c aircraft . center for naval analysis , joint task force operations since 1983 , crm94-42 , july 1994 around 10 september 1990 , and the visited vladivostok . this marked the first united states navy visit to the soviet union 's pacific port of vladivostok since before world war ii . before the visit was completed , the crew received word that their pacific cruise was canceled . they returned to long beach and joined the battle group preparing to deploy to the persian gulf . during operation fiery vigil in june 1991 , the following vessels participated in the sealift phase of the evacuation : the abraham lincoln battle group ( comcargru 3 embarked ) : , , , , , , , amphibious ready group alpha ( comphibron 3 embarked ) : , , , , and a large number of other vessels : , , , , , , , , , , , , usns passumpsic , , , , . ( cna , 1994 , 113 ) further operations included jtf marianas ( august–september 1992 ) and jtf hawaii ( september–october 1992 ) . other contingency operation after 1991 included operation sea angel ( bangladesh relief ) ( led by commander iii marine expeditionary force ) , operation eastern exit , and involvement in the somali civil war - 'restore hope ' . during 'restore hope , ' navy command arrangements underwent a number of changes during the operation . at the start , the principal naval forces were the ranger battle group ( with commander , carrier group one embarked on as commander , naval forces ) , the kitty hawk battle group , an amphibious task unit including , , , and mv lummus , and three ships from mpsron two ( mv anderson , mv bonnyman , and mv phillips ) . other events led to the departure of the carriers and , as a result , commander , naval forces responsibilities devolved first to commander , carrier group three , on kitty hawk , and thence to commander , amphibious group three . finally commander , amphibious squadron 3 became comnavfor on 15 january with the departure of comphigru three after the completion of the mpf offload . ( cna , 1994 , 168 ) in 1995 pacific fleet surface ships were reshuffled . kitsap sun , pacific fleet changes , july 25 , 1995 effective 1 oct . 1995 the u.s . pacific fleet 's surface ships were to be reorganized into six core battle groups and eight destroyer squadrons . permanent core battle groups were to include a battle group commander , aircraft carrier , carrier air wing and at least two cruisers . commander cruiser-destroyer group 1/uss constellation battle group : and comcrudesgru 3/uss carl vinson battle group : , and comcrudesgru 5/uss kitty hawk battle group : and commander carrier group 7 ( comcargru 7 ) /uss nimitz battle group : and comcar gru 3/uss abraham lincoln battle group : and commander carrier group five/uss independence battle group : and commander , naval surface forces pacific probably directed . destroyer squadron 1 : , , , , , , and destroyer squadron 5 : , , , , destroyer squadron 7 : , , , and destroyer squadron 9 : , , , , and destroyer squadron 15 : , , , , , and destroyer squadron 21 : , , , , and destroyer squadron 23 : , , , , and destroyer squadron 31 : , , and in 1996 two carrier battle groups were sent to the taiwan area during the third taiwan straits crisis . later ships of the pacific fleet , notably the provided support to the entry of interfet in east timor in 1999 . between 25–27 march 2006 , carrier strike group nine participated in a series of anti-submarine warfare exercises ( asw ) in hawaiian waters while en route to the u.s . seventh fleet 's area of responsibility . in addition to the strike group , the exercise also included the nuclear-powered attack submarines , , , , and , as well as land-based lockheed p-3 orion from commander patrol and reconnaissance wing 2 and associated patrol squadrons vp-4 , vp-9 , and vp-47 . as of 2011 , the pacific fleet has authority over : numbered third and seventh fleets naval air force , pacific commander , naval surface forces pacific ; comsubpac naval shore commands over which pacflt has authority : commander naval forces korea commander naval forces japan commander naval forces marianas see list of units of the united states navy . commanders . see also . history of the united states navy military history of the united states pacific partnership united states fleet forces command united states seventh fleet . notes .