Tweeter

operation . nearly all tweeters are electrodynamic drivers using a voice coil suspended within a fixed magnetic field . these designs operate by applying current from the output of an amplifier circuit to a coil of wire called a voice coil . the voice coil produces a varying magnetic field , which works against the fixed magnetic field of a magnet around which the cylindrical voice coil is suspended , forcing the voice coil and the diaphragm attached to it to move . this mechanical movement resembles the waveform of the electronic signal supplied from the amplifier 's output to the voice coil . since the coil is attached to a diaphragm , the vibratory motion of the voice coil transmits to the diaphragm ; the diaphragm in turn vibrates the air , thus creating air motions or audio waves , which is heard as high sounds . modern tweeters are typically different from older tweeters , which were usually small versions of woofers . as tweeter technology has advanced , different design applications have become popular . many soft dome tweeter diaphragms are thermoformed from polyester film , or silk or polyester fabric that has been impregnated with a polymer resin . hard dome tweeters are usually made of aluminium , aluminium-magnesium alloys , or titanium . tweeters are intended to convert an electrical signal into mechanical air movement with nothing added or subtracted , but the process is imperfect , and real-world tweeters involve tradeoffs . among the challenges in tweeter design and manufacture are : providing adequate damping , to stop the dome 's motion rapidly when the signal ends ; ensuring suspension linearity , allowing high output at the low end of its frequency range ; ensuring freedom from contact with the magnet assembly , keeping the dome centered as it moves ; and providing adequate power handling without adding excessive mass . tweeters can also work in collaboration with the woofers that are responsible for generating the low frequencies or bass . some tweeters sit outside the main enclosure in their own semi-independent unit . examples include '' super tweeters and the novel '' egg tweeter '' by ohm . the latter plugs in and swivels to adjust the soundfield depending on listener position and user preference . the separation from the baffle is considered to be optimal under the theory that the smallest baffle possible is optimal for tweeters . . range . most tweeters are designed to reproduce frequencies up to the formally defined upper limit of the human hearing range ( typically listed as 20 & nbsp ; khz ) ; some operate at frequencies up to approximately in between 5khz to 20khz tweeters with a greater upper range have been designed for psychoacoustic testing , for extended-range digital audio such as super audio cd intended for audiophiles , for biologists performing research on animal response to sounds , and for ambient sound systems in zoos . ribbon tweeters have been made that can reproduce 80 & nbsp ; khz and even 100 & nbsp ; khz . . dome materials . all dome materials have advantages and disadvantages . three properties designers look for in domes are low mass , high stiffness and good damping . celestion were the first manufacturers to fabricate dome tweeters out of a metal , copper . nowadays other metals such as aluminium , titanium , magnesium , and beryllium , as well as various alloys thereof , are used , being both light and stiff but having low damping ; their resonant modes occur above 20 & nbsp ; khz . more exotic materials , such as synthetic diamond , are also being used for their extreme stiffness . polyethylene terephthalate film and woven silk suffer less ringing , but are not nearly as stiff , which can limit their very high frequency output . in general , smaller dome tweeters provide wider dispersion of sound at the highest frequencies . however , smaller dome tweeters have less radiating area , which limits their output at the lower end of their range ; and they have smaller voice coils , which limit their overall power output . ferrofluid . ferrofluid is a suspension of very small ( typically 10 & nbsp ; nm ) iron oxide magnetic particles in a very low volatility liquid , typically a synthetic oil . a wide range of viscosity and magnetic density variants allow designers to add damping , cooling , or both . ferrofluid also aids in centering the voice coil in the magnetic gap , reducing distortion . the fluid is typically injected into the magnetic gap and is held in place by the strong magnetic field . if a tweeter has been subjected to elevated power levels , some thickening of the ferrofluid occurs , as a portion of the carrier liquid evaporates . in extreme cases , this can degrade the sound quality and output level of a tweeter , and the fluid must be removed and new fluid installed . professional sound applications . tweeters designed for sound reinforcement and musical instrument applications are broadly similar to high fidelity tweeters , though they 're usually not referred to as tweeters , but as '' high frequency drivers '' . key design requirement differences are : mountings built for repeated shipping and handling , drivers often mounted to horn structures to provide for higher sound levels and greater control of sound dispersion , and more robust voice coils to withstand the higher power levels typically encountered . high frequency drivers in pa horns are often referred to as '' compression drivers '' from the mode of acoustic coupling between the driver diaphragm and the horn throat . various materials are used in the construction of compression driver diaphragms including titanium , aluminium , phenolic impregnated fabric , polyimide and pet film , each having its own characteristics . the diaphragm is glued to a voice coil former , typically made from a different material from the dome , since it must cope with heat without tearing or significant dimensional change . polyimide film , nomex , and glassfibre are popular for this application . the suspension may be a continuation of the diaphragm and is glued to a mounting ring , which may fit into a groove , over locating pins , or be fastened with machine screws . the diaphragm is generally shaped like an inverted dome and loads into a series of tapered channels in a central structure called a phase plug , which equalizes the path length between various areas of the diaphragm and the horn throat , preventing acoustic cancellations between different points on the diaphragm surface . the phase plug exits into a tapered tube , which forms the start of the horn itself . this slowly expanding throat within the driver is continued in the horn flare . the horn flare controls the coverage pattern , or directivity , and as an acoustic transformer , adds gain . a professional horn and compression driver combination has an output sensitivity of between 105 and 112 & nbsp ; db/watt/meter . this is substantially more efficient ( and less thermally dangerous to a small voice coil and former ) than other tweeter construction . types of tweeters . cone tweeter . image : conetweetermarantz.jpg thumb right the cone tweeter from a marantz 5g loudspeaker cone tweeters have the same basic design and form as a woofer with optimizations to operate at higher frequencies . the optimizations usually are : a very small and light cone so it can move rapidly ; cone materials chosen for stiffness ( e.g . , ceramic cones in one manufacturer 's line ) , or good damping properties ( e.g . , paper , silk or coated fabric ) or both ; a suspension ( or spider ) that is stiffer than for other drivers—less flexibility is needed for high frequency reproduction ; small voice coils ( 3/4 inch is typical ) and light ( thin ) wire , which also helps the tweeter cone move rapidly . cone tweeters were popular in older stereo hi-fi speakers designed and manufactured in the 1960s and 1970s as an alternative to the dome tweeter ( which was developed in the late 1950s ) . cone tweeters today are often relatively cheap , but many of those in the past were of high quality , such as those made by audax/polydax , bozak , cts , jbl , tonegen and seas . these vintage cone tweeters exhibited very flat frequency response , low distortion , fast transient response , a low resonance frequency and a gentle low-end roll-off , easing crossover design . typical of the 1960s/1970s-era was the cts '' phenolic ring '' cone tweeters , exhibiting flat response from 2,000 to 15,000 & nbsp ; hz , low distortion and fast transient response . the cts '' phenolic ring '' tweeter gets its name from the orange-colored edge suspension ring that it has which is made from phenolic . it was used in many makes and models of well-regarded vintage speakers , and was a mid-priced unit . cone tweeters have a narrower dispersion characteristic that is the same as a cone woofer 's . many designers therefore believed this made them a good match to cone midranges and woofers , allowing for superb stereo imaging . however , the '' sweet spot '' created by the narrow dispersion of cone tweeters is small . speakers with cone tweeters offered the best stereo imaging when positioned in the room 's corners , a common practice in the 1950s , 1960s and early 1970s . during the 1970s and 1980s , the widespread introduction of higher quality audiophile discs and the advent of the cd caused the cone tweeter to fall out of popularity because cone tweeters seldom extend past 15 & nbsp ; khz . audiophiles felt that cone tweeters lacked the '' airiness '' of dome tweeters or other types . nevertheless , many high-end cone tweeters remained in limited production by audax , jbl and seas until the mid-1980s . cone tweeters are now rarely used in modern hi-fi usage and are routinely seen in low cost applications such as factory car speakers , compact stereo systems , and boom boxes . some boutique speaker manufacturers recently have returned to high-end cone tweeters , especially recreations of cts phenolic ring models , to create a vintage-sounding product . dome tweeter . a dome tweeter is constructed by attaching a voice coil to a dome ( made of woven fabric , thin metal or other suitable material ) , which is attached to the magnet or the top plate via a low compliance suspension . these tweeters typically do not have a frame or basket , but a simple front plate attached to the magnet assembly . dome tweeters are categorized by their voice coil diameter , and range from 19 & nbsp ; mm ( 0.75 & nbsp ; in ) , through 38 & nbsp ; mm ( 1.5 & nbsp ; in ) . the overwhelming majority of dome tweeters presently used in hi-fi speakers are 25 & nbsp ; mm ( 1 & nbsp ; in ) in diameter . a variation is the ring radiator in which the 'suspension ' of the cone or dome becomes the major radiating element . these tweeters have different directivity characteristics when compared to standard dome tweeters . piezo tweeter . a piezo ( or piezo-electric ) tweeter contains a piezoelectric crystal coupled to a mechanical diaphragm . an audio signal is applied to the crystal , which responds by flexing in proportion to the voltage applied across the crystal 's surfaces , thus converting electrical energy into mechanical . the conversion of electrical pulses to mechanical vibrations and the conversion of returned mechanical vibrations back into electrical energy is the basis for ultrasonic testing . the active element is the heart of the transducer as it converts the electrical energy to acoustic energy , and vice versa . the active element is basically a piece of polarized material ( i.e . some parts of the molecule are positively charged , while other parts of the molecule are negatively charged ) with electrodes attached to two of its opposite faces . when an electric field is applied across the material , the polarized molecules will align themselves with the electric field , resulting in induced dipoles within the molecular or crystal structure of the material . this alignment of molecules will cause the material to change dimensions . this phenomenon is known as electrostriction . in addition , a permanently polarized material such as quartz ( sio 2 ) or barium titanate ( batio 3 ) will produce an electric field when the material changes dimensions as a result of an imposed mechanical force . this phenomenon is known as the piezoelectric effect . piezo tweeters rarely get used in high-end audio because of their low fidelity , although they did feature in some high-end designs of the late ‘ 70s , such as the celef pe1 in which they were utilised as a super tweeter in combination with a conventional dome tweeter . they are often used in toys , buzzers , alarms , bass guitar speaker cabinets , cheap computer or stereo speakers and pa horns . ribbon tweeter . image : tweeterspeakercone.jpg upright thumb right a philips ribbon tweeter . a ribbon tweeter uses a very thin diaphragm ( often of aluminum , or perhaps metalized plastic film ) that supports a planar coil frequently made by deposition of aluminium vapor , suspended in a powerful magnetic field ( typically provided by neodymium magnets ) to reproduce high frequencies . the development of ribbon tweeters has more or less followed the development of ribbon microphones . the ribbon is of very lightweight material and so capable of very high acceleration and extended high frequency response . ribbons have traditionally been incapable of high output ( large magnet gaps leading to poor magnetic coupling is the main reason ) . but higher power versions of ribbon tweeters are becoming common in large-scale sound reinforcement line array systems , which can serve audiences of thousands . they are attractive in these applications since nearly all ribbon tweeters inherently exhibit useful directional properties , with very wide horizontal dispersion ( coverage ) and very tight vertical dispersion . these drivers can easily be stacked vertically , building a high frequency line array that produces high sound pressure levels much farther away from the speaker locations than do conventional tweeters . planar-magnetic tweeter . some loudspeaker designers use a planar-magnetic tweeter , sometimes called a quasi-ribbon . planar magnetic tweeters are generally less expensive than true ribbon tweeters , but are not precisely equivalent as a metal foil ribbon is lighter than the diaphragm in a planar magnetic tweeter and the magnetic structures are different . usually a thin piece of pet film or plastic with a voice coil wire running numerous times vertically on the material is used . the magnet structure is less expensive than for ribbon tweeters . electrostatic tweeter . thumb an electrostatic tweeter operates on the same principles as a full-range electrostatic speaker or a pair of electrostatic headphones . this type of speaker employs a thin diaphragm ( generally plastic and typically pet film ) , with a thin conductive coating , suspended between two screens or perforated metal sheets , referred to as stators . the output of the driving amplifier is applied to the primary of a step-up transformer with a center-tapped secondary , and a very high voltage—several hundred to several thousand volts—is applied between the center tap of the transformer and the diaphragm . electrostatics of this type necessarily include a high voltage power supply to provide the high voltage used . the stators are connected to the remaining terminals of the transformer . when an audio signal is applied to the primary of the transformer , the stators are electrically driven 180 degrees out of phase , alternately attracting and repelling the diaphragm . an uncommon way of driving an electrostatic speaker without a transformer is to connect the plates of a push-pull vacuum tube amplifier directly to the stators , and the high voltage supply between the diaphragm and ground . electrostatics have reduced even-order harmonic distortion because of their push-pull design . they also have minimal phase distortion . the design is quite old ( the original patents date to the 1930s ) , but occupies a very small segment of the market because of high costs , low efficiency , large size for full range designs , and fragility . amt tweeter . the air motion transformer tweeter works by pushing air out perpendicularly from the pleated diaphragm . its diaphragm is the folded pleats of film ( typically pet film ) around aluminium struts held in a strong magnetic field . in past decades , ess of california produced a series of hybrid loudspeakers using such tweeters , along with conventional woofers , referring to them as heil transducers after their inventor , oskar heil . they are capable of considerable output levels and are rather more sturdy than electrostatics or ribbons , but have similar low-mass moving elements . most of the current amt drivers in use today are similar in efficiency and frequency response to the original oskar heil designs of the 1970s . horn tweeter . a horn tweeter is any of the above tweeters coupled to a flared or horn structure . horns are used for two purposes — to control dispersion , and to couple the tweeter diaphragm to the air for higher efficiency . the tweeter in either case is usually termed a compression driver and is quite different from more common types of tweeters ( see above ) . properly used , a horn improves the off-axis response of the tweeter by controlling ( i.e . , reducing ) the directivity of the tweeter . it can also improve the efficiency of the tweeter by coupling the relatively high acoustic impedance of the driver to the lower impedance of the air . the larger the horn , the lower the frequencies at which it can work , since large horns provide coupling to the air at lower frequencies . there are different types of horns , including radial and constant directivity ( cd ) . horn tweeters may have a somewhat 'different ' sonic signature than simple dome tweeters . poorly designed horns , or improperly crossed-over horns , have predictable problems in the accuracy of their output , and the load that they present to the amplifier . perhaps concerned about the image of poorly designed horns , some manufacturers use horn loaded tweeters , but avoid using the term . their euphemisms include '' elliptical aperture '' '' semi-horn '' and '' directivity controlled '' . these are , nonetheless , a form of horn loading . plasma or ion tweeter . because ionized gas is electrically charged and so can be manipulated by a variable electrical field , it is possible to use a small sphere of plasma as a tweeter . such tweeters are called a '' plasma '' tweeter or '' ion '' tweeter . they are more complex than other tweeters ( plasma generation is not required in other types ) , but offer the advantage that the moving mass is optimally low , and so very responsive to the signal input . these types of tweeters are not capable of high output , nor of other than very high frequency reproduction , and so are usually used at the throat of a horn structure to manage usable output levels . one disadvantage is that the plasma arc typically produces ozone , a poison gas , in small quantities as a by-product . because of this , german-made magnat '' magnasphere '' speakers were banned from import to the united states in the 1980s . in the past , the dominant supplier was dukane near st louis in the us , who made the ionovac ; also sold in a uk variant as the ionophane . electro-voice made a model for a short time under license from dukane . these early models were finicky and required regular replacement of the cell in which the plasma was generated ( the dukane unit used a precision machined quartz cell ) . as a result , they were expensive units in comparison to other designs . those who have heard the ionovacs report that , in a sensibly designed loudspeaker system , the highs were 'airy ' and very detailed , though high output was n't possible . in the 1980s , the plasmatronics speaker also used a plasma tweeter , though the manufacturer did not stay in business very long and very few of these complex units were sold . see also . loudspeaker enclosure audio crossover full-range speaker super tweeter midrange speaker woofer subwoofer plasma speaker . references .