Albert Barnes (theologian)

biography . albert barnes held a prominent place in the new school branch of the presbyterians during the old school-new school controversy , to which he adhered on the division of the denomination in 1837 ; he had been tried ( but not convicted ) for heresy in 1836 , mostly due to the views he expressed in notes on romans ( 1834 ) selectable text : sacred-texts.com of the imputation of the sin of adam , original sin and the atonement ; the bitterness stirred up by this trial contributed towards widening the breach between the conservative and the progressive elements in the church . during the old school-new school split in the presbyterian church in the united states of america , barnes allied himself with the new school branch . he served as moderator of the general assembly to the new school branch in 1851 . he was an eloquent preacher , but his reputation rests chiefly on his expository works , which are said to have had a larger circulation both in europe and america than any others of their class . of the well-known notes on the new testament , it is said that more than a million volumes had been issued by 1870 . the notes on job , the psalms , isaiah and daniel were also popularly distributed . the popularity of these works rested on how barnes simplified biblical criticism so that new developments in the field were made accessible to the general public . barnes was the author of several other works , including scriptural views of slavery ( 1846 ) and the way of salvation ( 1863 ) . a collection of his theological works was published in philadelphia in 1875 . in his famous 1852 oratory , '' what to the slave is the fourth of july ? '' , frederick douglass quoted barnes as saying : '' there is no power out of the church that could sustain slavery an hour , if it were not sustained in it . '' barnes was an abolitionist . in his book the church and slavery ( 1857 ) , barnes excoriates slavery as evil and immoral , and calls for it to be dealt with from the pulpit '' as other sins and wrongs are '' ( most pointedly in chapter vii , '' the duty of the church at large on the subject of slavery '' ) . barnes was elected to the american philosophical society in 1855 . while serving as pastor at the first presbyterian church of philadelphia , barnes became the president of the pennsylvania bible society ( located at 7th and walnut ) in 1858 – a position he served until his death in 1870 . he served at first presbyterian church ( philadelphia ) until 1868 . he was then granted the title pastor emeritus . . death . barnes died in philadelphia on december 24 , 1870 , of natural causes , 23 days after his 72nd birthday . his widow wrote , '' his death was sudden and entirely unexpected . his health , with the exception of his eyesight , seemed to be perfect , -- mind and body active and full of energy . the day he died , he spent the morning in the city , dined with us cheerfully as usual , and afterwards walked with my daughter about a mile and a quarter into the country , to visit some friends in deep affliction . they reached the house , and he conversed for a few minutes , when he threw back his head , breathed rather heavily , and before the physician , who was immediately summoned , could arrive , he had passed away . in an instant , as it seemed , without pain or any consciousness of entering the 'dark valley , ' he was with his saviour . '' . bibliography . barnes , albert . essays on intemperance . morristown , new jersey : j . mann , 1828 . barnes , albert . '' the way of salvation '' : a sermon , delivered at morristown , new jersey , february 8 . 1829 , together with mr . barnes ' defence of the sermon , read before the synod of philadelphia , at lancaster , october 29 , 1830 , and his '' defence '' before the second presbytery of philadelphia , in reply to the charges of the rev . dr . george junkin . 7th ed . new york : leavitt , lord , 1836 . barnes , albert . albert barnes on the maine liquor law : the throne of iniquity , or , sustaining evil by law : a discourse in behalf of a law prohibiting the traffic in intoxicating drinks—delivered in the first presbyterian church , philadelphia , feb . 1 , 1852 , and in the presbyterian church , harrisburg , feb . 29 , 1852 . philadelphia : t . b . peterson , 1852 . barnes , albert . an inquiry into the scriptural views of slavery . philadelphia : parry and mcmillan , 1857 . reprint , new york : negro universities , 1969 . barnes , albert . the church and slavery . philadelphia : parry and mcmillan , 1857 . reprint , new york : negro universities , 1969 . barnes , albert . the atonement in its relations to law and moral government . philadelphia : parry & mcmillan , 1859 . selectable text : & selectable text : & selectable text : selectable text : barnes , albert . notes on the new testament : explanatory and practical . vol . v : i corinthians barnes , albert . notes on the new testament : explanatory and practical . vol . vi : ii corinthians and galatians barnes , albert . notes on the new testament : explanatory and practical . vol . vii : ephesians , philippians , and colossians barnes , albert . notes on the new testament : explanatory and practical . vol . viii : thessalonians , timothy , titus , and philemon barnes , albert . notes on the new testament : explanatory and practical . vol . ix : hebrews barnes , albert . notes on the new testament : explanatory and practical . vol . x : james , peter , john , and jude barnes , albert . notes on the new testament : explanatory and practical . vol . xi : revelation barnes , albert . notes on the old testament : explanatory and practical : job vol . 1 barnes , albert . notes on the old testament : explanatory and practical : psalms vol . 1 barnes , albert . notes on the old testament : explanatory and practical : psalms vol . 2 barnes , albert . notes on the old testament : explanatory and practical : psalms vol . 3 barnes , albert . notes on the old testament : explanatory and practical : isaiah vol . 1 barnes , albert . notes on the old testament : explanatory and practical : isaiah vol . 2 barnes , albert . notes on the old testament : explanatory and practical : daniel vol . 1 barnes , albert . notes on the old testament : explanatory and practical : daniel vol . 2 barnes , albert . notes on the new testament . london , blackie & son , 1884 . reprint , grand rapids : baker books , 1998 . barnes , albert . notes on the old testament . london , blackie & son , 1884 . reprint , grand rapids : baker books , 1998 . archival collections . the presbyterian historical society in philadelphia , pennsylvania , has a collection of barnes ’ original manuscripts , notes , sermons and lectures . the burke library archives of the union theological seminary in new york city , new york also has a collection of barnes ' sermons . . references . . external links . '' the way of salvation , '' the published form of the 1829 sermon that precipitated heresy charges against barnes by old school presbyterians notes on the bible by albert barnes ( 1834 ) at the internet sacred text archive albert barnes – new testament notes short biography of barnes