Georg Solti

life and career . early years . solti was born györgy stern on maros utca , in the hegyvidék district of the buda side of budapest . pappenheim , mark . '' classical : an honourable homecoming – at last '' , the independent , 3 april 1998 , accessed 20 march 2016 he was the younger of the two children of teréz and móricz '' mor '' stern , both of whom were jewish . follows , stephen . '' solti , sir georg ( 1912–1997 ) '' , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 ; online edition , january 2011 , accessed 22 february 2012 in the aftermath of the first world war it became the accepted practice in hungary for citizens with germanic surnames to adopt hungarian ones . the right wing regime of miklós horthy enacted a series of magyarisation laws , including a requirement that state employees with foreign-sounding names must change them . mor stern , a self-employed merchant , felt no need to change his surname , but thought it prudent to change that of his children . he renamed them after solt , a small town in central hungary . his son 's given name , györgy , was acceptably hungarian and was not changed . fox , sue . '' georg solti & nbsp ; – a childhood '' , the times , 1 july 1995 solti described his father as '' a kind , sweet man who trusted everyone . he should n't have , but he did . jews in hungary were tremendously patriotic . in 1914 , when war broke out , my father invested most of his money in a war loan to help the country . by the time the bonds matured , they were worthless . '' mor stern was a religious man , but his son was less so . late in life solti recalled , '' i often upset him because i never stayed in the synagogue for longer than ten minutes . '' teréz stern was from a musical family , and encouraged her daughter lilly , by eight years the elder of the children , to sing , and györgy to accompany her on the piano . solti remembered , '' i made so many mistakes , but it was invaluable experience for an opera conductor . i learnt to swim with her . '' he was not a diligent student of the piano : '' my mother kept telling me to practise , but what ten-year-old wants to play the piano when he could be out playing football ? '' solti enrolled at the ernő fodor school of music in budapest at the age of ten , transferring to the more prestigious franz liszt academy two years later . when he was 12 he heard a performance of beethoven 's fifth symphony conducted by erich kleiber , which gave him the ambition to become a conductor . edward greenfield . '' sir georg solti '' , gramophone , october 1982 , p . 22 his parents could not afford to pay for years of musical education , and his rich uncles did not consider music a suitable profession ; from the age of 13 solti paid for his education by giving piano lessons . the faculty of the franz liszt academy included some of the most eminent hungarian musicians , including béla bartók , leó weiner , ernő dohnányi and zoltán kodály . solti studied under the first three , for piano , chamber music and composition respectively . some sources state that he also studied with kodály , arthur jacobs and josé a . bowen . '' solti , sir georg '' , grove music online , oxford music online , accessed 22 february 2012 '' solti , sir georg '' , who was who , a & c black , 1920–2008 ; online edition , oxford university press , december 2007 , accessed 22 february 2012 but in his memoirs solti recalled that kodály , whom he would have preferred , turned him down , leaving him to study composition first with albert siklós and then with dohnányi . solti , pp . 17 and 22 not all the academy 's tutors were equally distinguished : solti remembered with little pleasure the conducting classes run by ernő unger , '' who instructed his pupils to use rigid little wrist motions . i attended the class for only two years , but i needed five years of practical conducting experience before i managed to unlearn what he had taught me '' . solti . p . 20 . pianist and conductor . after graduating from the academy in 1930 solti was appointed to the staff of the hungarian state opera . he found that working as a répétiteur , coaching singers in their roles and playing at rehearsals , was a more fruitful preparation than unger 's classes for his intended career as a conductor . in 1932 he went to karlsruhe in germany as assistant to josef krips , but within a year , krips , anticipating the imminent rise to power of hitler and the nazis , insisted that solti should go home to budapest , where at that time jews were not in danger . solti , p . 31 other jewish and anti-nazi musicians also left germany for budapest . among other musical exiles with whom solti worked there were otto klemperer , fritz busch , and kleiber . before austria fell under nazi control , solti was assistant to arturo toscanini at the 1937 salzburg festival : after further work as a répétiteur at the opera in budapest , and with his standing enhanced by his association with toscanini , solti was given his first chance to conduct , on 11 march 1938 . the opera was the marriage of figaro . during that evening , news came of the german invasion of austria . '' sir georg solti & nbsp ; – obituary '' , the times , 8 september 1997 many hungarians feared that hitler would next invade hungary ; he did not do so , but horthy , to strengthen his partnership with the nazis , instituted anti-semitic laws , mirroring the nuremberg laws , restricting hungary 's jews from engaging in professions . levy , p . 323 solti 's family urged him to move away . he went first to london , where he made his covent garden debut , conducting the london philharmonic for a russian ballet season . '' opera and ballet '' , the times , 2 july 1938 , p . 10 the reviewer in the times was not impressed with solti 's efforts , finding them '' too violent , for he lashed at the orchestra and flogged the music so that he endangered the delicate , evocative atmosphere . '' '' covent garden ballet & nbsp ; – carnaval '' , the times , 15 july 1938 , p . 14 at about this time solti dropped the name '' györgy '' in favour of '' georg '' . solti , p . 5 after his appearances in london solti went to switzerland to seek out toscanini , who was conducting in lucerne . solti hoped that toscanini would help find him a post in the us . he was unable to do so , but solti found work and security in switzerland as vocal coach to the tenor max hirzel , who was learning the role of tristan in wagner 's opera . throughout the second world war , solti remained in switzerland . he did not see his father again : mor stern died of diabetes in a budapest hospital in 1943 . solti , p . 54 solti was reunited with his mother and sister after the war . solti , p . 55 in switzerland he could not obtain a work permit as a conductor , but earned his living as a piano teacher . solti , p . 59 after he won the 1942 geneva international music competition he was permitted to give piano recitals , but was still not allowed to conduct . solti , p . 56 during his exile , he met hedwig ( hedi ) oeschli , daughter of a lecturer at zürich university . they married in 1946 . in his memoirs he wrote of her , '' she was very elegant and sophisticated . hedi gave me a little grace and taught me good manners & nbsp ; – although she never completely succeeded in this . she also helped me enormously in my career '' . '' salzburg & swiss exile '' , georg solti , accessed 23 february 2012 . munich and frankfurt . with the end of the war solti 's luck changed dramatically . he was appointed musical director of the bavarian state opera in munich in 1946 . robinson , p . 13 in normal circumstances this prestigious post would have been an unthinkable appointment for a young and inexperienced conductor , but the leading german conductors such as wilhelm furtwängler , clemens krauss and herbert von karajan were prohibited from conducting pending the conclusion of denazification proceedings against them . under solti 's direction , the company rebuilt its repertoire and began to recover its pre-war eminence . he benefited from the encouragement of the elderly richard strauss , in whose presence he conducted der rosenkavalier . strauss was reluctant to discuss his own music with solti , but gave him advice about conducting . solti , pp . 78–79 in addition to the munich appointment solti gained a recording contract in 1946 . he signed for decca records , not as a conductor but as a piano accompanist . culshaw ( 1967 ) , p 30 he made his first recording in 1947 , playing brahms 's first violin sonata with the violinist georg kulenkampff . he was insistent that he wanted to conduct , and decca gave him his first recording sessions as a conductor later in the same year , with the zurich tonhalle orchestra in beethoven 's egmont overture . twenty years later solti said , '' i 'm sure it 's a terrible record , because the orchestra was not very good at that time and i was so excited . it is horrible , surely horrible & nbsp ; – but by now it has vanished . '' culshaw ( 1967 ) , p . 31 he had to wait two years for his next recording as a conductor . it was in london , haydn 's drum roll symphony , in sessions produced by john culshaw , with whose career solti 's became closely linked over the next two decades . culshaw ( 1967 ) , p . 32 reviewing the record , the gramophone said , '' the performance of the london philharmonic orchestra under georg solti ( a fine conductor who is new to me ) is remarkable for rhythmic playing , richness of tone , and clarity of execution . '' '' haydn symphony no . 103 in e flat '' , the gramophone , july 1950 , p . 16 the record guide compared it favourably with emi 's rival recording by thomas beecham and the royal philharmonic . sackville-west , p . 355 in 1951 solti conducted at the salzburg festival for the first time , partly through the influence of furtwängler , who was impressed by him . solti , pp . 85–86 the work was idomeneo , which had not been given there before . in munich solti achieved critical and popular success , but for political reasons his position at the state opera was never secure . the view persisted that a german conductor should be in charge ; pressure mounted , and after five years solti accepted an offer to move to frankfurt in 1952 as musical director of the oper frankfurt . the city 's opera house had been destroyed in the war , and solti undertook to build a new company and repertoire for its recently completed replacement . he also conducted the symphony concerts given by the opera orchestra . frankfurt 's was a less prestigious house than munich 's and he initially regarded the move as a demotion , solti , p . 94 but he found the post fulfilling and remained at frankfurt from 1952 to 1961 , presenting 33 operas , 19 of which he had not conducted before . solti , p . 127 frankfurt , unlike munich , could not attract many of the leading german singers . solti recruited many rising young american singers such as claire watson and sylvia stahlman , solti , pp . 100 ( watson ) and 101 ( stahlman ) to the extent that the house acquired the nickname '' amerikanische oper am main '' . in 1953 the west german government offered solti german citizenship , which , being effectively stateless as a hungarian exile , he gratefully accepted . he believed he could never return to hungary , by then under communist rule . solti , p . 96 he remained a german citizen for two decades . solti , p . 105 during his frankfurt years solti made appearances with other opera companies and orchestras . he conducted in the americas for the first time in 1952 , giving concerts in buenos aires . solti , p . 92–93 in the same year he made his debut at the edinburgh festival as a guest conductor with the visiting hamburg state opera . robinson , p . 16 the following year he was a guest at the san francisco opera with elektra , die walküre and tristan und isolde . solti , p . 102 in 1954 he conducted don giovanni at the glyndebourne festival . the reviewer in the times said that no fault could be found in solti 's '' vivacious and sensitive '' conducting . '' glyndebourne opera & nbsp ; – 'don giovanni ' '' , the times , 8 july 1954 , p . 5 in the same year solti made his first appearance with the chicago symphony orchestra , at the ravinia festival . '' career highlights '' , georg solti , accessed 23 february 2012 in 1960 he made his debut at the metropolitan opera in new york , conducting tannhäuser , and he continued to appear there until 1964 . search : '' solti '' , metropolitan opera archives , accessed 10 june 2012 in the recording studios solti 's career took off after 1956 , when john culshaw was put in charge of decca 's classical recording programme . culshaw believed solti to be '' the great wagner conductor of our time '' , culshaw ( 1967 ) , p . 52 and was determined to record the four operas of der ring des nibelungen with solti and the finest wagner singers available . culshaw ( 1967 ) , pp . 52–53 the cast culshaw assembled for the cycle included kirsten flagstad , hans hotter , birgit nilsson and wolfgang windgassen . culshaw ( 1967 ) , pp . 273–274 apart from arabella in 1957 , in which he substituted when karl böhm withdrew , solti had made no complete recording of an opera until the sessions for das rheingold , the first of the ring tetralogy , in september and october 1958 . in their respective memoirs culshaw and solti told how walter legge of decca 's rival emi predicted that das rheingold would be a commercial disaster ( '' 'very nice , ' he said , 'very interesting . but of course you wo n't sell any . ' '' ) culshaw ( 1967 ) , p . 91 the success of the recording took the record industry by surprise . it featured for weeks in the billboard charts , the sole classical album alongside best sellers by elvis presley and pat boone , and brought solti 's name to international prominence . culshaw ( 1967 ) , p . 124 he appeared with leading orchestras in new york , vienna and los angeles , and at covent garden he conducted der rosenkavalier and britten 's a midsummer night 's dream . . covent garden . in 1960 solti signed a three-year contract to be music director of the los angeles philharmonic from 1962 . even before he took the post the philharmonic 's autocratic president , dorothy chandler , breached his contract by appointing a deputy music director without solti 's approval . although he admired the chosen deputy , zubin mehta , solti felt he could not have his authority undermined from the outset , and he withdrew from his appointment . he accepted an offer to become musical director of the royal opera , london . when first sounded out about the post , he had declined it . after 14 years of experience at munich and frankfurt he was uncertain that he wanted a third successive operatic post . haltrecht , p . 257 moreover , founded only 15 years earlier , the covent garden company was not yet the equal of the best opera houses in europe . haltrecht , p . 237 bruno walter convinced solti that it was his duty to take covent garden on . haltrecht , p . 259 the biographer montague haltrecht suggests that solti seized the breach of his los angeles contract as a convenient pretext to abandon the philharmonic in favour of covent garden . haltrecht , p . 258 however , in his memoirs solti wrote that he wanted the los angeles position very much indeed . solti , pp . 124–125 he originally considered holding both posts in tandem , but later acknowledged that he had had a lucky escape , as he could have done justice to neither post had he attempted to hold both simultaneously . solti took up the musical directorship of covent garden in august 1961 . haltrecht , p . 264 the press gave him a cautious welcome , but there was some concern that under him there might be a drift away from the company 's original policy of opera in english . solti , however , was an advocate of opera in the vernacular , '' what sort of opera for covent garden ? '' , the times , 9 december 1960 , p . 18 and he promoted the development of british and commonwealth singers in the company , frequently casting them in his recordings and important productions in preference to overseas artists . haltrecht , p . 295 he demonstrated his belief in vernacular opera with a triple bill in english of l'heure espagnole , erwartung and gianni schicchi . '' solti 's success with opera in english '' , the times , 18 june 1962 , p . 5 as the decade went on , however , more and more productions had to be sung in the original language to accommodate international stars . '' sir david webster 's 21 years at covent garden '' , the times , 12 april 1965 , p . 14 like his predecessor rafael kubelík , and his successor colin davis , solti found his early days as musical director marred by vituperative hostility from a small clique in the covent garden audience . haltrecht , pp . 207 ( kubelik ) and 271 ( solti ) ; and canning , hugh . '' forget the booing , remember the triumph '' , the guardian , 19 july 1986 , p . 11 ( davis ) rotten vegetables were thrown at him , and his car was vandalised outside the theatre , with the words '' solti must go ! '' scratched on its paintwork . haltrecht , p . 271 some press reviews were strongly critical ; solti was so wounded by a review in the times of his conducting of the marriage of figaro that he almost left covent garden in despair . the chief executive of the opera house , sir david webster , persuaded him to stay with the company , and matters improved , helped by changes on which solti insisted . haltrecht , p . 279 the chorus and orchestra were strengthened , and in the interests of musical and dramatic excellence , solti secured the introduction of the stagione system of scheduling performances , rather than the traditional repertory system . he received honorary fellowships or degrees from the royal college of music and depaul , furman , harvard , leeds , london , oxford , surrey and yale universities . in celebration of his 75th birthday in 1987 , a bronze bust of solti by elisabeth frink was dedicated in lincoln park , chicago , outside the lincoln park conservatory . eckert , thor jr . '' milestone for maestro solti – chicago style '' , the christian science monitor , 15 october 1987 , accessed 21 march 2012 it was first displayed temporarily at the royal opera house in london . '' grant park : sir georg solti bust '' , chicago park district , accessed 21 march 2012 the sculpture was moved to grant park in 2006 in a new solti garden , near orchestra hall in symphony center . '' sir george solti bust ( in grant park ) '' , explore chicago , accessed 28 february 2012 in 1997 , to commemorate the 85th anniversary of his birth , the city of chicago renamed the block of east adams street adjacent to symphony center as '' sir georg solti place '' in his memory . '' solti to be honored with own street sign '' , chicago tribune , 22 october 1997 record industry awards to solti included the grand prix mondial du disque ( 14 times ) and 31 grammy awards ( including a special trustees ' grammy award , shared with john culshaw , for the recording of the ring ( 1967 ) and a grammy lifetime achievement award ( 1996 ) ) . he won more grammys than any other recording artist , whether classical or popular . in september 2007 , as a tribute on the 10th anniversary of his death , decca published a recording of his final concert . after solti 's death his widow and daughters set up the solti foundation to assist young musicians . '' the foundation '' , the solti foundation , accessed 28 february 2012 solti 's memoirs , written with the assistance of harvey sachs , were published the month after his death . solti and sachs , passim solti 's life was also documented in a 1997 film by peter maniura , sir georg solti : the making of a maestro . in 2012 a series of events under the banner of '' solti 100 '' was announced , to mark the centenary of solti 's birth . among the events were concerts in new york city and chicago , and commemorative exhibitions in london , chicago , vienna and new york . in the same year solti was voted into the inaugural gramophone '' hall of fame '' . '' sir georg solti '' gramophone , accessed 10 april 2012 the sir georg solti international conductors ' competition , which occurs every two years in frankfurt , is named in his honour . franks , rebecca . '' winners of international conductors ' competition sir georg solti announced '' , bbc music magazine , 25 september 2012 . notes . references . sources . . further reading . continued on page 59 duffie , bruce ( october 1995 ) two conversations with sir georg solti . the instrumentalist . external links . georg solti official website the solti foundation official website '' music , first and last '' : scores from the sir georg solti archive , virtual exhibit , eda kuhn loeb music library , harvard library there are also significant archival holdings at cso rosenthal archives , the british national archives , and the metropolitan opera archives .