1993 in literature

events . september 24 – former president and writer zviad gamsakhurdia returns to georgia to establish a government in exile in the city of zugdidi . november 17 – annie proulx wins the national book award in the united states for her novel the shipping news . unknown dates indrani aikath gyaltsen 's novel cranes ' morning appears in india , but proves to be plagiarized from elizabeth goudge 's the rosemary tree ( 1956 ) ; its author will commit suicide in 1994 . professor stephen hawking 's a brief history of time becomes the longest-running book on the sunday times uk bestseller list . reality television contest million 's poet ( شاعر المليون ) is launched in the united arab emirates . todur zanet 's translation of jean racine 's bajazet is produced by moldova 1 , a seminal moment in the development of gagauz-language theatre . the guodian chu slips , including the oldest known version of laozi 's tao te ching , a chapter from the book of rites , content from the book of documents and the previously lost xing zi ming chu , written on bamboo and dated before 300 bce ( later warring states period ) , are found in a tomb near guodian , jingmen ( hubei province of china ) . . new books . fiction . stephen ambrose – band of brothers jeffrey archer – honour among thieves david banks – iceberg iain banks – complicity pat barker – the eye in the door greg bear – moving mars daniel blythe – the dimension riders william boyd – the blue afternoon sandra boynton – barnyard dance ! christopher bulis – shadowmind anthony burgess – a dead man in deptford ramsey campbell – alone with the horrors : the great short fiction of ramsey campbell 1961-1991 tom clancy – without remorse deborah joy corey – losing eddie bernard cornwell – rebel robert crais – free fall maurice g . dantec – la sirène rouge peter darvill-evans – deceit hollace davids and paul davids – mission from mount yoda lindsey davis – poseidon 's gold l . sprague de camp – rivers of time stephen r . donaldson – a dark and hungry god arises roddy doyle – paddy clarke ha ha ha helen dunmore – zennor in darkness shusaku endo ( 遠藤 周作 ) – deep river ( 深い河 ) steve erickson – arc d ' x jeffrey eugenides – the virgin suicides richard paul evans – the christmas box sebastian faulks – birdsong amanda filipacchi – nude men neil gaiman the sandman : a game of you ( graphic novel ; fifth in the sandman series ) the sandman : fables & reflections ( graphic novel ; sixth in the sandman series ) john gardner – never send flowers ernest gaines – a lesson before dying william gibson – virtual light john grisham – the client hal ( a macintosh iicx computer ) and scott french ( programmer ) – just this once jesse lee kercheval – the museum of happiness stephen king – nightmares & dreamscapes nancy kress – the aliens of earth john le carré – the night manager lois lowry – the giver robert ludlum – the scorpio illusion amin maalouf – le rocher de tanios david a . mcintee – white darkness andy mcnab – bravo two zero david malouf – remembering babylon gita mehta – a river sutra ( short stories ) jim mortimore blood heat ( with andy lane ) – lucifer rising taslima nasrin – lajja patrick o'brian – clarissa oakes kate orman – the left-handed hummingbird tim pears – in the place of fallen leaves neil penswick – the pit terry pratchett – men at arms e . annie proulx – the shipping news jean raspail – sept cavaliers ishmael reed – japanese by spring anne rice – lasher gareth roberts – the highest science j . jill robinson – lovely in her bones nigel robinson – birthright w . g . sebald – the emigrants will self – my idea of fun vikram seth – a suitable boy ahdaf soueif – in the eye of the sun danielle steel – vanished emil tode ( tõnu õnnepalu ) – piiririik ( border state ) jesús torbado – el peregrino sue townsend – adrian mole : the wilderness years scott turow – pleading guilty kathy tyers – the truce at bakura buket uzuner – the sound of fishsteps ( balık i̇zlerinin sesi ) andrew vachss – shella mario vargas llosa – death in the andes ( lituma en los andes ) ivan vladislavic – the folly robert james waller – slow waltz at cedar bend irvine welsh – trainspotting herman wouk – the hope austin wright – tony and susan timothy zahn – the last command roger zelazny – a night in the lonesome october . children and young people . janet and allan ahlberg – it was a dark and stormy night nelson algren ( posthumous ) – he swung and he missed chris van allsburg – the sweetest fig malorie blackman – operation gadgetman ! susan cooper – the boggart richard dalby – mistletoe & mayhem : horrific tales for the holidays mem fox – time for bed cornelia funke – wild chicks johanna hurwitz & ndash ; new shoes for silvia jim murphy – across america on an emigrant train larry niven ( with alicia austin ) – bridging the galaxies rodman philbrick – freak the mighty allen say – grandfather 's journey marjorie w . sharmat – nate the great and the pillowcase francisco calvo serraller ( with willi glasauer ) – grandes maestros de la pintura theresa tomlinson – the forestwife ( first in the forestwife trilogy ) nancy willard – a starlit somersault downhill . drama . parv bancil – ungrateful dead april de angelis – playhouse creatures david hare – the absence of war tom stoppard – arcadia . poetry . leonard cohen – stranger music paul durcan – a snail in my prime : new and selected poems dejan stojanović – krugovanje : 1978–1987 ( circling : 1978–1987 ) web page titled dejan stojanović , krugovanje , front cover by dejan stojanović at the internet archive . non-fiction . martin amis – visiting mrs nabokov : and other excursions khursheed kamal aziz – the murder of history in pakistan : a critique of history textbooks used in pakistan malcolm bradbury – the modern british novel richard dawkins – viruses of the mind shobha de and khushwant singh – uncertain liaisons alexandre farnoux – cnossos : l'archéologie d'un rêve zlata filipović – zlata 's diary bob flowerdew – the organic gardener tamala krishna goswami – happiness is a science – aditi 's vow linda holmen , mary santella-johnson and bill watterson – teaching with calvin and hobbes laënnec hurbon – voodoo : truth and fantasy linda johns – sharing a robin 's life leon m . lederman and dick teresi – the god particle james lees-milne – people and places : country house donors and the national trust jean marigny – vampires : the world of the undead scott mccloud – understanding comics ram swarup – hindu view of christianity and islam miranda seymour – ottoline morrell : life on the grand scale howard stern – private parts walter stewart – too big to fail margaret thatcher – the downing street years gordon s . wood – the radicalism of the american revolution . deaths . january 6 – ștefan baciu , romanian and brazilian poet , novelist and literary promoter ( born 1918 ) january 18 – eleanor hibbert ( jean plaidy , etc . ) , english historical novelist ( born 1906 ) january 22 – kōbō abe ( 安部 公房 ) , japanese novelist and playwright ( born 1924 ) january 29 – gustav hasford , american marine , novelist , journalist , poet and book thief ( born 1947 ) february 5 – william pène du bois , american author and illustrator ( born 1916 ) march 9 – c . northcote parkinson , english naval historian and critic of business methods ( born 1909 ) april 15 leslie charteris , anglo-american thriller writer ( born 1907 ) robert westall , english novelist and children 's writer ( born 1929 ) april 23 – bertus aafjes , dutch poet ( born 1914 ) may 6 – dorothy b . hughes , american crime writer and critic ( born 1904 ) june 19 – sir william golding , english novelist and poet ( born 1911 ) july 10 – ruth krauss , american children 's author and poet ( born 1901 ) august 28 – e . p . thompson , english political historian ( born 1924 ) september 7 – eugen barbu , romanian novelist , playwright and journalist ( born 1924 ) september 16 – oodgeroo noonuccal , aboriginal australian poet ( born 1920 ) november 1 – maeve brennan , irish short story writer and journalist ( born 1917 ) november 22 – anthony burgess , english novelist ( born 1917 ) december 4 – margaret landon , american historical novelist ( born 1903 ) december 28 – william l . shirer , historian ( born 1904 ) december 31 – zviad gamsakhurdia , georgian dissident , scientist and writer ( possible suicide , born 1913 ) thousands pay tribute to the first president , civil georgia , march 31 , 2007 . unknown date – parijat ( bishnu kumari waiba ) , nepalese novelist and poet ( born 1937 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : toni morrison camões prize : rachel de queiroz . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : helen demidenko , the hand that signed the paper c . j . dennis prize for poetry : les murray , translations from the natural world kenneth slessor prize for poetry : les murray , translations from the natural world mary gilmore prize : jill jones , the mask and jagged star miles franklin award : alex miller , the ancestor game . canada . see 1993 governor general 's awards for a complete list edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : liza potvin ( co-winner ) , white lies ( for my mother ) & nbsp ; wilfrid laurier university edna staebler award for creative non-fiction – previous winners – 1993 : liza potvin , ( retrieved 11/20/2012 ) edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : elizabeth hay ( co-winner ) , the only snow in havana wilfrid laurier university edna staebler award for creative non-fiction – previous winners – 1993 : elizabeth hay , ( retrieved 11/20/2012 ) . france . prix goncourt : amin maalouf , le rocher de tanios prix décembre : rené de obaldia . exobiographie prix médicis french : emmanuèle bernheim , sa femme prix médicis international : paul auster , leviathan . united kingdom . booker prize : roddy doyle , paddy clarke ha ha ha carnegie medal for children 's literature : robert swindells , stone cold james tait black memorial prize for fiction : caryl phillips , crossing the river james tait black memorial prize for biography : richard holmes , dr johnson and mr savage cholmondeley award : patricia beer , george mackay brown , p . j . kavanagh , michael longley costa book awards : joan brady , theory of war the sunday express book of the year : william boyd , the blue afternoon . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : natasha saj , red under the skin aiken taylor award for modern american poetry : george starbuck american academy of arts and letters gold medal for belles lettres , elizabeth hardwick bernard f . connors prize for poetry : stephen yenser , '' blue guide '' compton crook award : holly lisle , fire in the mist frost medal : william stafford national book award for fiction : e . annie proulx , the shipping news national book critics circle award : alan lomax , the land where the blues began nebula award : kim stanley robinson , red mars newbery medal for children 's literature : cynthia rylant , missing may pen/faulkner award for fiction : e . annie proulx , postcards pulitzer prize for drama : tony kushner , angels in america : millennium approaches pulitzer prize for fiction : robert olen butler , a good scent from a strange mountain pulitzer prize for poetry : louise gluck , the wild iris whiting awards : : fiction : jeffrey eugenides , dagoberto gilb , sigrid nunez , janet peery , lisa shea : plays : kevin kling : poetry : mark levine , nathaniel mackey ( poetry/fiction ) , dionisio d . martinez , kathleen peirce writers guild of america awards 1993 ( march 13 ) : best adapted screenplay : steven zaillian , schindler 's list . elsewhere . premio nadal : rafael argullol murgadas , la razón del mal . references .