Lanolin

composition . a typical high-purity grade of lanolin is composed predominantly of long chain waxy esters ( approximately 97 % by weight ) with the remainder being lanolin alcohols , lanolin acids and lanolin hydrocarbons . an estimated 8,000 to 20,000 different types of lanolin esters are present in lanolin , resulting from combinations between the 200 or so different lanolin acids and the 100 or so different lanolin alcohols identified so far . lanolin ’ s complex composition of long-chain esters , hydroxyesters , diesters , lanolin alcohols , and lanolin acids means in addition to it being a valuable product in its own right , it is also the starting point for the production of a whole spectrum of lanolin derivatives , which possess wide-ranging chemical and physical properties . the main derivatisation routes include hydrolysis , fractional solvent crystallisation , esterification , hydrogenation , alkoxylation and quaternisation . lanolin derivatives obtained from these processes are used widely in both high-value cosmetics and dermatology products . hydrolysis of lanolin yields lanolin alcohols and lanolin acids . lanolin alcohols are a rich source of cholesterol ( an important skin lipid ) and are powerful water-in-oil emulsifiers ; they have been used extensively in skincare products for over 100 years . notably , approximately 40 % of the acids derived from lanolin are alpha-hydroxy acids ( ahas ) . the use of ahas in skin care products has attracted a great deal of attention in recent years . details of the ahas isolated from lanolin can be seen in the table below . modern developments . in addition to general purity requirements , lanolin must meet official requirements for the permissible levels of pesticide residues . the fifth supplement of the united states pharmacopoeia xxii published in 1992 was the first to specify limits for 34 named pesticides . a total limit of 40 & nbsp ; ppm ( i.e . 40 & nbsp ; mg/kg ) total pesticides was stipulated for lanolin of general use , with no individual limit greater than 10 & nbsp ; ppm . a second monograph also introduced into the us pharmacopoeia xxii in 1992 was entitled 'modified lanolin ' . lanolin conforming to this monograph is intended for use in more exacting applications , for example on open wounds . in this monograph , the limit of total pesticides was reduced to 3 & nbsp ; ppm total pesticides , with no individual limit greater than 1 & nbsp ; ppm . in 2000 , the european pharmacopoeia introduced pesticide residue limits into its lanolin monograph . this requirement , which is generally regarded as the new quality standard , extends the list of pesticides to 40 and imposes even lower concentration limits . some very high-purity grades of lanolin surpass monograph requirements . new products obtained using complex purification techniques produce lanolin esters in their natural state , removing oxidative and environmental impurities resulting in white , odourless , hypoallergenic lanolin . these ultra-high-purity grades of lanolin are ideally suited to the treatment of dermatological disorders such as eczema and on open wounds . lanolin attracted attention owing to a misunderstanding concerning its sensitising potential . a study carried out at new york university hospital in the early 1950s had shown about 1 % of patients with dermatological disorders were allergic to the lanolin being used at that time . by one estimate , this simple misunderstanding of failing to differentiate between the general healthy population and patients with dermatological disorders exaggerates the sensitising potential of lanolin by 5,000–6,000 times . the european cosmetics directive , introduced in july 1976 , contained a stipulation that cosmetics which contained lanolin should be labelled to that effect . this ruling was challenged immediately , and in the early 1980s , it was overturned and removed from the directive . despite only being in force for a short period of time , this ruling did harm both to the lanolin industry and to the reputation of lanolin in general . the cosmetics directive ruling only applied to the presence of lanolin in cosmetic products ; it did not apply to the many hundreds of its different uses in dermatological products designed for the treatment of compromised skin conditions . modern analytical methods have revealed lanolin possesses a number of important chemical and physical similarities to human stratum corneum lipids ; the lipids which help regulate the rate of water loss across the epidermis and govern the hydration state of the skin . cryogenic scanning electron microscopy has shown that lanolin , like human stratum corneum lipids , consists of a mass of liquid crystalline material . polarized light microscopy has shown the lamellar vesicles formed by lanolin are identical to those formed by human stratum corneum lipids . the incorporation of bound water into the stratum corneum involves the formation of multilamellar vesicles . skin bioengineering studies have shown the durational effect of the emollient ( skin smoothing ) action produced by lanolin is very significant and lasts for many hours . lanolin applied to the skin at 2 & nbsp ; mg/cm 2 has been shown to reduce roughness by about 35 % after one hour and 50 % after two hours , with the overall effect lasting for considerably more than eight hours . lanolin is also known to form semiocclusive ( breathable ) films on the skin . when applied daily at around 4 & nbsp ; mg/cm 2 for five consecutive days , the positive moisturising effects of lanolin were detectable until 72 & nbsp ; hours after final application . lanolin may achieve some of its moisturising effects by forming a secondary moisture reservoir within the skin . the barrier repair properties of lanolin have been reported to be superior to those produced by both petrolatum and glycerol . in a small clinical study conducted on volunteer subjects with terribly dry ( xerotic ) hands , lanolin was shown to be superior to petrolatum in reducing the signs and symptoms of dryness and scaling , cracks and abrasions , and pain and itch . in another study , a high purity grade of lanolin was found to be significantly superior to petrolatum in assisting the healing of superficial wounds . applications . thumb lanolin and its many derivatives are used extensively in both the personal care ( e.g . , high value cosmetics , facial cosmetics , lip products ) and health care sectors such as topical liniments . lanolin is also found in lubricants , rust-preventive coatings , shoe polish , and other commercial products . lanolin is a relatively common allergen and is often misunderstood as a wool allergy . however , allergy to a lanolin-containing product is difficult to pinpoint and often other products containing lanolin may be fine for use . patch testing can be done if a lanolin allergy is suspected . it is frequently used in protective baby skin treatment and for sore nipples in breastfeeding mothers . lanolin is used commercially in many industrial products ranging from rustproof coatings to lubricants . some sailors use lanolin to create slippery surfaces on their propellers and stern gear to which barnacles can not adhere . commercial products ( e.g . lanocote ) containing up to 85 % lanolin are used to prevent corrosion in marine fasteners , especially when two different metals are in contact with each other and saltwater . the water-repellent properties make it valuable in many applications as a lubricant grease where corrosion would otherwise be a problem . 7-dehydrocholesterol from lanolin is used as a raw material for producing cholecalciferol by irradiation with ultraviolet light . baseball players often use it to soften and break in their baseball gloves ( shaving cream with lanolin is popularly used for this ) . anhydrous liquid lanolin , combined with parabens , has been used in trials as artificial tears to treat dry eye . anhydrous lanolin is also used as a lubricant for brass instrument tuning slides . lanolin can also be restored to woollen garments to make them water and dirt repellent , such as for cloth diaper covers . lanolin is also used in lip balm products such as carmex . for some people , it can irritate the lips . lanolin is sometimes used by people on continuous positive airway pressure therapy to reduce irritation with masks , particular nasal pillow masks that can often create sore spots in the nostrils . lanolin is a popular additive to moustache wax , particularly 'extra-firm ' varieties . lanolin is used as a primary lubricating component in aerosol-based brass lubricants in the ammunition reloading process . mixed warm 1:12 with highly concentrated ethanol ( usually 99 % ) , the ethanol acts as a carrier which evaporates quickly after application , leaving a fine film of lanolin behind to prevent brass seizing in resizing dies . lanolin , when mixed with ingredients such as neatsfoot oil , beeswax and glycerol , is used in various leather treatments , for example in some saddle soaps and in leather care products . production . crude lanolin constitutes about 5–25 % of the weight of freshly shorn wool . the wool from one merino sheep will produce about 250–300 & nbsp ; ml of recoverable wool grease . lanolin is extracted by washing the wool in hot water with a special wool scouring detergent to remove dirt , wool grease ( crude lanolin ) , suint ( sweat salts ) , and anything else stuck to the wool . the wool grease is continuously removed during this washing process by centrifuge separators , which concentrate it into a waxlike substance melting at approximately . . references . external links .