Andrew Young

congress . in 1970 , young ran as a democrat for congress from georgia , but was unsuccessful . after his defeat , rev . fred c . bennette jr . introduced him to murray m . silver , an atlanta attorney , who served as his campaign finance chairman . young ran again in 1972 and won . he later was re-elected in 1974 and in 1976 . during his four-plus years in congress , he was a member of the congressional black caucus , and was involved in several debates regarding foreign relations , including the decision to stop supporting the portuguese attempts to hold on to their colonies in southern africa . young also sat on the powerful rules committee and the banking and urban development committee . young opposed the vietnam war , helped enact legislation that established the u.s . institute for peace , established the chattahoochee river national recreation area and negotiated federal funds for marta and the atlanta highways . ambassador to the united nations . in 1977 , president jimmy carter appointed young to serve as the united states ambassador to the united nations . young was the first african american to hold the position . atlanta city councilman wyche fowler won the special election to fill young 's seat in congress . although the us and the un enacted an arms embargo against south africa , as president carter 's un ambassador , young vetoed economic sanctions . young caused controversy when , during a july 1978 interview with french newspaper le matin de paris while discussing the soviet union and its treatment of political dissidents , he said , '' we still have hundreds of people that i would categorize as political prisoners in our prisons , '' in reference to jailed civil-rights and anti-war protestors . in response , us representative larry mcdonald ( d-ga ) sponsored a resolution to impeach young , but the measure failed 293 to 82 . carter referred to it in a press conference as an '' unfortunate statement . '' in 1979 , young played a leading role in advancing a settlement in rhodesia with robert mugabe and joshua nkomo , who had been two of the military leaders in the rhodesian bush war , which had ended in 1979 . the settlement paved the way for mugabe to take power as prime minister of the newly formed republic of zimbabwe . there had been a general election in 1979 , bringing bishop abel muzorewa to power as leader of the united african national council leading to the short-lived country of zimbabwe rhodesia . young refused to accept the election results and described the election as '' neofascist , '' a sentiment echoed by united nations security council resolution 445 and 448 . the situation was resolved the next year with the lancaster house agreement and the establishment of zimbabwe . young 's favoring of mugabe and nkomo over muzorewa and his predecessor and ally , ian smith , has been controversial . many african-american activists , including jesse jackson and coretta scott king , supported the anticolonialism represented by mugabe and nkomo . however , it was opposed by others , including civil-rights leader bayard rustin , who argued that the 1979 election had been '' free and fair '' , as well as senators harry f . byrd jr . ( i-va ) and jesse helms ( r-nc ) . it was later criticized in 2005 by gabriel shumba , executive director of the anti-mugabe zimbabwe exiles forum . in july 1979 , young discovered that an upcoming report by the united nations division for palestinian rights called for the creation of a palestinian state . young wanted to delay the report because the carter administration was dealing with too many other issues at the time . he met with the un representatives of several arab countries to try to convince them the report should be delayed ; they agreed in principle but insisted that the palestine liberation organization also had to agree . as a result , on july 20 , young met with zehdi terzi , the un representative of the plo , at the apartment of the un ambassador from kuwait . on august 10 , news of the meeting became public when the mossad leaked its illegally-acquired transcript of the meeting first to prime minister menachem begin , and then through his office to newsweek . the meeting was highly controversial since the united states had already promised israel that it would not meet directly with the plo until it recognized israel 's right to exist . during the controversy , young took a break and was invited by john f . kennedy jr . to speak about apartheid in south africa at brown university . young 's un ambassadorship ended on august 14 . carter denied any complicity in what was called the '' andy young affair '' and asked young to resign . asked about the incident by time soon afterward , young stated , '' it is very difficult to do the things that i think are in the interest of the country and maintain the standards of protocol and diplomacy . i really do n't feel a bit sorry for anything that i have done . '' soon afterward , on the television show meet the press , he stated that israel was '' stubborn and intransigent . '' after his ambassadorship ended , young became a guest lecturer at michigan state university in east lansing , michigan . . atlanta mayor . in 1981 , after being urged by a number of people , including coretta scott king , the widow of martin luther king jr . , young ran for mayor of atlanta . he was elected later that year with 55 % of the vote , succeeding maynard jackson . as mayor of atlanta , he brought in 70 billion of new private investment . he continued and expanded jackson 's programs for including minority and female-owned businesses in all city contracts . the mayor 's task force on education established the dream jamboree college fair that tripled the college scholarships given to atlanta public school graduates . in 1985 , he was involved in renovating the atlanta zoo , which was renamed zoo atlanta . young was re-elected as mayor in 1985 with more than 80 % of the vote . atlanta hosted the 1988 democratic national convention during young 's tenure . he was prohibited by term limits from running for a third term . during his tenure , he talked about how he was '' glad to be mayor of this city , where once the mayor had me thrown in jail . '' . 1990 georgia gubernatorial election . after leaving the mayor 's office in early 1990 , young launched a bid for the democratic nomination for governor in 1990 . he ran in a primary that included three former or future governors of georgia : then lieutenant governor zell miller , then-state senator roy barnes , and former governor lester maddox . the field also contained then state representative lauren '' bubba '' mcdonald . the first poll put young at 38 percent to miller 's 30 percent , 15 percent for maddox and 10 percent for barnes with mcdonald trailing at 7 percent . young campaigned hard but by the primary , with no central message , his campaign ran into trouble against the well-heeled and prepared lieutenant governor . miller led the primary with 40 percent to young 's 29 percent and 21 percent for barnes , maddox got 7 percent and mcdonald rounded out at 3 percent . future u.s . senator johnny isakson won the republican nomination . after miller 's stunning and broad-based primary win , young 's campaign floundered . many think he failed in his effort by trying to garner support amongst rural , conservative white voters , rather than turning out his urban and african-american base . also , young never found an issue that roused supporters , unlike miller , who won voters by championing a state lottery . miller won the runoff , 2 to 1 and ended young 's gubernatorial aspirations for good . . post-mayoral career . young has been a director of the drum major institute for public policy , and is also the chairman of the board for the global initiative for the advancement of nutritional therapy . in 1996 , young was co-chairman of the 1996 summer olympic games . from 2000 to 2001 , young served as president of the national council of churches . in 2003 , young founded the andrew young foundation , an organization meant to support and promote education , health , leadership and human rights in the united states , africa and the caribbean . from february to august 2006 , young served as the public spokesman for working families for wal-mart , an advocacy group for the retail chain wal-mart . young resigned from the position soon after a controversial interview with the los angeles sentinel , in which , when asked about wal-mart hurting independent businesses , he replied , '' you see those are the people who have been overcharging us , and they sold out and moved to florida . i think they 've ripped off our communities enough . first it was jews , then it was koreans and now it 's arabs . '' in 2007 , goodworks productions released the documentary film rwanda rising , about rwanda 's progress since the rwandan genocide of 1994 . young also served as the film 's narrator . rwanda rising premiered as the opening night selection at the pan african film festival in los angeles in 2007 . an edited version of rwanda rising served as the pilot episode of andrew young presents , a series of quarterly , hour-long specials airing on nationally syndicated television . on january 22 , 2008 , young appeared as a guest on the television show the colbert report . host stephen colbert invited young to appear during the writers ' strike , because , in 1969 , young and colbert 's father had worked together to mediate a hospital workers ' strike . young made another appearance on the colbert report on november 5 , 2008 , to talk about the election of barack obama to the presidency . on january 9 , 2015 , young gave the keynote address at vanderbilt university 's martin luther king jr . commemoration day . the theme was '' dismantling segregation : race , poverty , and privilege '' , and young spoke about his experiences in selma , stories of traveling with king , and his advice to the next generation of leaders . on may 13 , 2019 , young gave the keynote address at emory university 's spring commencement ceremony . on may 29 , 2020 , young remarked on the protests in atlanta in reaction to the killing of george floyd . he stated that riots , violence , and looting '' hurt the cause instead of helping it '' . young is co-chairman of rodney cook sr . park along with national monuments foundation president rodney mims cook jr . this peace park is located in the vine city neighborhood on atlanta 's westside and has a strong civil rights focus . . personal life and family . young has four children with his first wife , jean childs young , who died of liver cancer in 1994 . his mother-in-law was idella jones childs . he married carolyn mcclain in 1996 . in september 1999 , young was diagnosed with prostate cancer which was successfully removed with surgery in january 2000 . . books . an easy burden : the civil rights movement and the transformation of america . ( january 1998 ) ; a way out of no way . ( june 1996 ) ; andrew young at the united nations . ( january 1978 ) ; andrew young , remembrance & homage . ( january 1978 ) ; the history of the civil rights movement . ( 9 volumes ) ( september 1990 ) ; trespassing ghost : a critical study of andrew young . ( january 1978 ) ; walk in my shoes : conversations between a civil rights legend and his godson on the journey ahead with kabir sehgal . ( may 2010 ) ; . writings . young , andrew , harvey newman , and andrea young . 2016 . andrew young and the making of modern atlanta . macon , ga : mercer university press . awards and honors . presidential medal of freedom ; france 's légion d'honneur ; the naacp spingarn medal ; four freedom award for the freedom of worship ; more than 45 honorary degrees including awards from dartmouth , yale , notre dame , clark atlanta , emory , oglethorpe university , lakeland university and the university of georgia ; 1983 golden plate award of the academy of achievement 1995 eagle award from the united states sports academy . the eagle award is the academy 's highest honor and was awarded to young for his significant contribution to international sport . honorary co-chair of the world justice project ; 2005 '' louisiana legend '' by louisiana public broadcasting in baton rouge , along with timber industrialist roy o . martin jr . , comedian kix brooks , and the louisiana state university athletic legends paul dietzel and sue gunter 2010 heroes , saints and legends honoree , given by the foundation of wesley woods ; the 2011 lifetime achievement emmy award , for his involvement on look up and live ; 2012 georgia trustee . given by the georgia historical society , in conjunction with the governor of georgia , to individuals whose accomplishments and community service reflect the ideals of the founding body of trustees , which governed the georgia colony from 1732 to 1752 . 2018 ivan allen jr . prize for social courage . . places named after andrew young . in 1999 georgia state university in atlanta renamed its public policy school the andrew young school of policy studies to honor young . international boulevard , near centennial olympic park , was renamed andrew young international boulevard , in honor of his involvement in bringing the 1996 summer olympics to atlanta . the andrew young center for international affairs at morehouse college was named after young . the andrew and walter young ymca , the only full-service ymca operating in southwest atlanta , is named after young and his younger brother . a delta air lines boeing 767 bears young 's name in recognition of his civil rights achievements . . in popular culture . young is played by andre holland in the 2014 film selma .