Coharie

demographics . the coharie population of harnett and sampson counties has steadily increased from 755 in 1970 to almost 2,700 estimated in 2007 . as of 2011 , there are 2,791 enrolled coharie members . according to the 2000 census , the coharie population in sampson county is 1029 , and 752 in harnett county , for a total of 1,781 . the coharie tribe consists of 2,632 enrolled members , with approximately 20 % residing outside the tribal communities in harnett and sampson counties . the coharie community consists of four settlements : holly grove , new bethel , shiloh , and antioch . government . the state of north carolina recognized the coharie tribe in 1971 . clinton , north carolina is the tribal seat . in 1975 , the tribe chartered the coharie intra-tribal council to serve as a private non-profit organization established to promote the health , education , social , and economic well-being of the native people of sampson and harnett counties . the coharie intra-tribal council is housed in the old eastern carolina indian school building , a school that served the native americans of sampson , harnett , cumberland , columbus , person , and hoke counties from 1942 until 1966 . at that time , the 1964 federal civil rights act had ended legal racial segregation of public schools . the coharie indian tribe elected their first tribal chief in 1910 . tribal affairs are led by a tribal chief and seven tribal council members . the coharie political leadership oversees the four communities of coharie indians from three geographical locations in sampson county and one region in harnett county . many members are affiliated with churches in their communities : new bethel baptist church : northern sampson county holly grove holiness church : southern sampson county shiloh holiness church : western sampson county antioch baptist church : harnett county the coharie tribal center is located : 7531 north us 421 hwy . clinton , north carolina 28328 . tribal government structure . when european explorers arrived in what is now north carolina , american indians already had long-established ways of organizing and governing their communities . colonization forced most tribes to give up their lands and abandon their ways of life . since the 1800s , many tribes have reunited and recovered their heritage . they have fought — and are still fighting — for respect , recognition , and the right to govern themselves . the coharie tribe has a tribal governing body . the governing bodies consist of two boards . the coharie people board is a governing body elected by the tribal community . this board oversees the tribal functions and the tribal office building . tribal functions include the annual powwow in september and the annual coharie princess pageant in july . the board consists of nine people . this board has a chairman , vice chair , secretary , treasurer , and members . from this board , three members are voted and agreed upon to go to the coharie intra-tribal council board . this board oversees and governs all the finances , ( e.g . grants ) , petitions for federal recognition , tribal enrollment , staffing , and other executive duties . this board consists of an elected chairman , vice chair , secretary , and members . the tribe also has an elected tribal chief whose duties are mainly of traditional stature ( e.g . naming ceremonies , blessing of powwow arena , representing the tribe at other tribal and statewide functions ) . janella williams et . all , '' learn nc : about the coharie '' , date accessed april 1 , 2015 , . relationships to other north carolina tribes . the coharie have intermarried predominantly with the lumbee and tuscarora indians of robeson county , as well as with the eastern band of cherokee indians . history . seventeenth century . historians generally contend that the coharie are descendants of the iroquoian-speaking neusiok and coree , as well as the tuscarora , and the siouan waccamaw , who occupied what is now the central portion of north carolina . in the early seventeenth century , the coree lived along the big coharie and the little coharie rivers in present-day sampson county . eighteenth century . between 1730 and 1745 , intertribal conflicts as well as competition over land and resources between native peoples and english colonials caused numerous wars . the trade in deerskins and indians found some tribes capturing members of traditional enemy tribes to sell as slaves to the colonists . in addition , eurasian infection diseases such as measles and smallpox , to which the natives had no natural immunity , decimated many communities . the epidemics disrupted their societies . nineteenth century . throughout the 1800s , the coharie indians built their community in sampson county . the coharie indians held the right under state law to own and use firearms , and vote in local elections . but , the 1830s brought events that reduced their civil rights . the federal indian removal policy of the 1830s forced tribes from the east to move west of the mississippi river . more significantly , following nat turner 's slave rebellion of 1831 , the state passed legislation on 1835 reducing the rights of non white people . they lost their right to vote and bear arms . the convention of 1868 removed the ban . weeks . '' lost colony of roanoke '' as cited in grady , don avasco . '' the coharie indians of sampson county , north carolina : a collection of oral folk history '' ( phd . diss , unc chapel hill,1981 ) in 1859 , the coharie indians established their own subscription school . in 1910 , the coharie indians established an indian school in dismal township . in 1911 , the coharie indians established new bethel indian school . in 1943 , the state of north carolina established and built east carolina indian school , the first primary through high school indian school , in herring township in sampson county . see also . sampson county george edwin butler . references . sources . brownwell , margo s . '' note : who is an indian ? searching for an answer to the question at the core of federal indian law '' , university of michigan journal of law reform 34 ( fall-winter 2001–2002 ) : 275–320 . lederer , john . the discoveries of john lederer . charlottesville , va : university of virginia press , 1958 . mcpherson , o.m . indians of north carolina : a report on the condition and tribal rights of the indians of robeson and adjoining counties of north carolina . washington , dc : government printing office , 1915 . '' pamphlet '' , n.c . commission of indian affairs , 1990 . ross , thomas e . american indians in north carolina , southern pines , nc : karo hollow/carolinas press , 1998 , pp . & nbsp ; 149–162 smith , martin t . archeology of aboriginal culture change in the interior southeast : depopulation during the early historic period , gainesville , fla : university of florida press , 1987 .