Mayan languages

history . proto-mayan . mayan languages are the descendants of a proto-language called proto-mayan or , in kʼicheʼ maya , nabʼee mayaʼ tzij ( '' the old maya language '' ) . the proto-mayan language is believed to have been spoken in the cuchumatanes highlands of central guatemala in an area corresponding roughly to where qʼanjobalan is spoken today . the earliest proposal was that of which identified the chiapas-guatemalan highlands as the likely '' cradle '' of mayan languages was published by the german antiquarian and scholar karl sapper . see attribution in terrence kaufman and john justeson have reconstructed more than 3000 lexical items for the proto-mayan language . according to the prevailing classification scheme by lyle campbell and terrence kaufman , the first division occurred around 2200 bce , when huastecan split away from mayan proper after its speakers moved northwest along the gulf coast of mexico . proto-yucatecan and proto-chʼolan speakers subsequently split off from the main group and moved north into the yucatán peninsula . speakers of the western branch moved south into the areas now inhabited by mamean and quichean people . when speakers of proto-tzeltalan later separated from the chʼolan group and moved south into the chiapas highlands , they came into contact with speakers of mixe–zoque languages . according to an alternative theory by robertson and houston , huastecan stayed in the guatemalan highlands with speakers of chʼolan–tzeltalan , separating from that branch at a much later date than proposed by kaufman . in the archaic period ( before 2000 bce ) , a number of loanwords from mixe–zoquean languages seem to have entered the proto-mayan language . this has led to hypotheses that the early maya were dominated by speakers of mixe–zoquean languages , possibly the olmec . this theory was first proposed by in the case of the xincan and lencan languages , on the other hand , mayan languages are more often the source than the receiver of loanwords . mayan language specialists such as campbell believe this suggests a period of intense contact between maya and the lencan and xinca people , possibly during the classic period ( 250–900 ) . . classic period . during the classic period the major branches began diversifying into separate languages . the split between proto-yucatecan ( in the north , that is , the yucatán peninsula ) and proto-chʼolan ( in the south , that is , the chiapas highlands and petén basin ) had already occurred by the classic period , when most extant glyphic writing were written . both variants are attested in hieroglyphic inscriptions at the maya sites of the time , and both are commonly referred to as '' classic maya language '' . although a single prestige language was by far the most frequently recorded on extant hieroglyphic texts , evidence for at least three different varieties of mayan have been discovered within the hieroglyphic corpus—an eastern chʼolan variety found in texts written in the southern maya area and the highlands , a western chʼolan variety diffused from the usumacinta region from the mid-7th century on , and a yucatecan variety found in the texts from the yucatán peninsula . the reason why only few linguistic varieties are found in the glyphic texts is probably that these served as prestige dialects throughout the maya region ; hieroglyphic texts would have been composed in the language of the elite . stephen houston , john robertson and david stuart have suggested that the specific variety of chʼolan found in the majority of southern lowland glyphic texts was a language they dub '' classic chʼoltiʼan '' , the ancestor language of the modern chʼortiʼ and chʼoltiʼ languages . they propose that it originated in western and south-central petén basin , and that it was used in the inscriptions and perhaps also spoken by elites and priests . however , mora-marín has argued that traits shared by classic lowland maya and the chʼoltiʼan languages are retentions rather than innovations , and that the diversification of chʼolan in fact post-dates the classic period . the language of the classical lowland inscriptions then would have been proto-chʼolan . colonial period . during the spanish colonization of central america , all indigenous languages were eclipsed by spanish , which became the new prestige language . the use of mayan languages in many important domains of society , including administration , religion and literature , came to an end . yet the maya area was more resistant to outside influence than others , the last independent maya kingdom ( tayasal ) was not conquered until 1697 , some 170 years after the first conquistadores arrived . during the colonial and postcolonial periods , maya peoples periodically rebelled against the colonizers , such as the caste war of yucatán , which extended into the 20th century . and perhaps for this reason , many maya communities still retain a high proportion of monolingual speakers . the maya area is now dominated by the spanish language . while a number of mayan languages are moribund or are considered endangered , others remain quite viable , with speakers across all age groups and native language use in all domains of society . grenoble & whaley ( 1998 ) characterized the situation this way : '' mayan languages typically have several hundreds of thousands of speakers , and a majority of mayas speak a mayan language as a first language . the driving concern of maya communities is not to revitalize their language but to buttress it against the increasingly rapid spread of spanish . rather than being at the end of a process of language shift , mayan languages are . at the beginning . '' . modern period . as maya archaeology advanced during the 20th century and nationalist and ethnic-pride-based ideologies spread , the mayan-speaking peoples began to develop a shared ethnic identity as maya , the heirs of the maya civilization . writes : '' in the recent maya cultural activism , maintenance of mayan languages has been promoted in an attempt to support 'unified maya identity ' . however , there is a complex array of perceptions about mayan language and identity among mayans who i researched in momostenango , a highland maya community in guatemala . on the one hand , mayans denigrate kʼicheʼ and have doubts about its potential to continue as a viable language because the command of spanish is an economic and political necessity . on the other hand , they do recognize the value of mayan language when they wish to claim the 'authentic mayan identity ' . it is this conflation of conflicting and ambivalent ideologies that inform language choice . '' the word '' maya '' was likely derived from the postclassical yucatán city of mayapan ; its more restricted meaning in pre-colonial and colonial times points to an origin in a particular region of the yucatán peninsula . the broader meaning of '' maya '' now current , while defined by linguistic relationships , is also used to refer to ethnic or cultural traits . most mayans identify first and foremost with a particular ethnic group , e.g . as '' yucatec '' or '' kʼicheʼ '' ; but they also recognize a shared maya kinship . language has been fundamental in defining the boundaries of that kinship . fabri writes : '' the term maya is problematic because maya peoples do not constitute a homogenous identity . maya , rather , has become a strategy of self-representation for the maya movements and its followers . the academia de lenguas mayas de guatemala ( almg ) finds twenty-one distinct mayan languages . '' this pride in unity has led to an insistence on the distinctions of different mayan languages , some of which are so closely related that they could easily be referred to as dialects of a single language . but , given that the term '' dialect '' has been used by some with racism overtones in the past , as scholars made a spurious distinction between amerindian '' dialects '' and european '' languages '' , the preferred usage in mesoamerica in recent years has been to designate the linguistic varieties spoken by different ethnic group as separate languages . see chapter 2 for a thorough discussion of the usage and meanings of the words '' dialect '' and '' language '' in mesoamerica . in guatemala , matters such as developing standardized orthographies for the mayan languages are governed by the academia de lenguas mayas de guatemala ( almg ; guatemalan academy of mayan languages ) , which was founded by maya organisations in 1986 . following the 1996 peace accords , it has been gaining a growing recognition as the regulatory authority on mayan languages both among mayan scholars and the maya peoples . . genealogy and classification . relations with other families . the mayan language family has no demonstrated genetic relationship to other language families . similarities with some languages of mesoamerica are understood to be due to diffusion of linguistic traits from neighboring languages into mayan and not to common ancestry . mesoamerica has been proven to be an area of substantial linguistic diffusion . a wide range of proposals have tried to link the mayan family to other language families or isolates , but none is generally supported by linguists . examples include linking mayan with the uru–chipaya languages , mapuche , the lencan languages , purépecha and huave . mayan has also been included in various hokan and penutian hypotheses . the linguist joseph greenberg included mayan in his highly controversial amerind languages , which is rejected by most historical linguists as unsupported by available evidence . writing in 1997 , lyle campbell , an expert in mayan languages and historical linguistics , argued that the most promising proposal is the '' macro-mayan '' hypothesis , which posits links between mayan , the mixe–zoque languages and the totonacan languages , but more research is needed to support or disprove this hypothesis . in 2015 , campbell noted that recent evidence presented by david mora-marin makes the case for a relationship between mayan and mixe-zoquean languages '' much more plausible '' . subdivisions . the mayan family consists of thirty languages . typically , these languages are grouped into 5-6 major subgroups ( yucatecan , huastecan , chʼolan–tzeltalan , qʼanjobʼalan , mamean , and kʼichean ) . the mayan language family is extremely well documented , and its internal genealogical classification scheme is widely accepted and established , except for some minor unresolved differences . one point still at issue is the position of chʼolan and qʼanjobalan–chujean . some scholars think these form a separate western branch ( as in the diagram below ) . other linguists do not support the positing of an especially close relationship between chʼolan and qʼanjobalan–chujean ; consequently they classify these as two distinct branches emanating directly from the proto-language . an alternative proposed classification groups the huastecan branch as springing from the chʼolan–tzeltalan node , rather than as an outlying branch springing directly from the proto-mayan node . distribution . studies estimate that mayan languages are spoken by more than 6 million people . most of them live in guatemala where depending on estimates 40 % -60 % of the population speaks a mayan language . in mexico the mayan speaking population was estimated at 2.5 million people in 2010 , whereas the belizean speaker population figures around 30,000 . western branch . the chʼolan languages were formerly widespread throughout the maya area , but today the language with most speakers is chʼol , spoken by 130,000 in chiapas . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) . ethnologue report on chʼol de tila , ethnologue report on chʼol de tumbalá , both accessed march 07 , 2007 . its closest relative , the chontal maya language , chontal maya is not to be confused with the tequistlatecan languages that are referred to as '' chontal of oaxaca '' . is spoken by 55,000 gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) . ethnologue report on chontal de tabasco , accessed march 07 , 2007 . in the state of tabasco . another related language , now endangered , is chʼortiʼ , which is spoken by 30,000 in guatemala . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) . chʼortiʼ : a language of guatemala . ethnologue.com , accessed march 07 , 2007 . it was previously also spoken in the extreme west of honduras and el salvador , but the salvadorian variant is now extinct and the honduran one is considered moribund . chʼoltiʼ , a sister language of chʼortiʼ , is also extinct . chʼolan languages are believed to be the most conservative in vocabulary and phonology , and are closely related to the classic maya language found in the central lowlands . they may have served as prestige languages , coexisting with other dialects in some areas . this assumption provides a plausible explanation for the geographical distance between the chʼortiʼ zone and the areas where chʼol and chontal are spoken . the closest relatives of the chʼolan languages are the languages of the tzeltalan branch , tzotzil and tzeltal , both spoken in chiapas by large and stable or growing populations ( 265,000 for tzotzil and 215,000 for tzeltal ) . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) family tree for tzeltalan accessed march 26 , 2007 . tzeltal has tens of thousands of monolingual speakers . lewis , m . paul , gary f . simons , and charl47547es d . fennig ( eds . ) . '' tzeltal '' ethnologue : languages of the world , eighteenth edition , ( 2015 ) . dallas , texas : sil international . qʼanjobʼal is spoken by 77,700 in guatemala 's huehuetenango department , with small populations elsewhere . the region of qʼanjobalan speakers in guatemala , due to genocidal policies during the civil war and its close proximity to the mexican border , was the source of a number of refugees . thus there are now small qʼanjobʼal , jakaltek , and akatek populations in various locations in mexico , the united states ( such as tuscarawas county , ohio and los angeles , california , and , through postwar resettlement , other parts of guatemala . jakaltek ( also known as poptiʼ gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) . gordon ( 2005 ) recognizes eastern and western dialects of jakaltek , as well as mochoʼ ( also called mototzintlec ) , a language with less than 200 speakers in the chiapan villages of tuzantán and mototzintla . ) is spoken by almost 100,000 in several municipalities jakaltek is spoken in the municipios of jacaltenango , la democracia , concepción , san antonio huista and santa ana huista , and in parts of the nentón municipio . of huehuetenango . another member of this branch is akatek , with over 50,000 speakers in san miguel acatán and san rafael la independencia . lewis , m . paul , gary f . simons , and charles d . fennig ( eds . ) . '' akateko '' ethnologue : languages of the world , eighteenth edition , ( 2015 ) . dallas , texas : sil international . chuj is spoken by 40,000 people in huehuetenango , and by 9,500 people , primarily refugees , over the border in mexico , in the municipality of la trinitaria , chiapas , and the villages of tziscau and cuauhtémoc . tojolabʼal is spoken in eastern chiapas by 36,000 people . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) tojolabal : a language of mexico . and chuj : a language of guatemala . both accessed march 19 , 2007 . . eastern branch . the quichean–mamean languages and dialects , with two sub-branches and three subfamilies , are spoken in the guatemalan highlands . qʼeqchiʼ ( sometimes spelled kekchi ) , which constitutes its own sub-branch within quichean–mamean , is spoken by about 800,000 people in the southern petén , izabal and alta verapaz departments of guatemala , and also in belize by 9,000 speakers . in el salvador it is spoken by 12,000 as a result of recent migrations . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) . ethnologue report on qʼeqchi , accessed march 07 , 2007 . the uspantek language , which also springs directly from the quichean–mamean node , is native only to the uspantán municipio in the department of el quiché , and has 3,000 speakers . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) ethnologue report for uspantec , accessed march 26 , 2007 . within the quichean sub-branch kʼicheʼ language , the mayan language with the largest number of speakers , is spoken by around 1,000,000 kʼicheʼ maya in the guatemalan highlands , around the towns of chichicastenango and quetzaltenango and in the cuchumatán mountains , as well as by urban emigrants in guatemala city . the famous maya mythological document , popol vuh , is written in an antiquated kʼicheʼ often called classical kʼicheʼ language . the kʼicheʼ culture was at its pinnacle at the time of the spanish conquest . qʼumarkaj , near the present-day city of santa cruz del quiché , was its economic and ceremonial center . achi is spoken by 85,000 people in cubulco and rabinal , two municipios of baja verapaz . in some classifications , e.g . the one by campbell , achi is counted as a form of kʼicheʼ . however , owing to a historical division between the two ethnic groups , the achi maya do not regard themselves as kʼicheʼ . the ethnologue considers the dialects spoken in cubulco and rabinal to be distinct languages , two of the eight languages of a quiché-achi family . raymond g . , gordon jr . ( ed . ) . ethnologue , ( 2005 ) . language family tree for mayan , accessed march 26 , 2007 . the kaqchikel language is spoken by about 400,000 people in an area stretching from guatemala city westward to the northern shore of lake atitlán . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) . family tree for kaqchikel , accessed march 26 , 2007 . tzʼutujil has about 90,000 speakers in the vicinity of lake atitlán . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) . ethnologue report on eastern tzʼutujil , ethnologue report on western tzʼutujil , both accessed march 26 , 2007 . other members of the kʼichean branch are sakapultek , spoken by about 15,000 people mostly in el quiché department , lewis , m . paul , gary f . simons , and charles d . fennig ( eds . ) . '' sakapulteko '' ethnologue : languages of the world , eighteenth edition , ( 2015 ) . dallas , texas : sil international . and sipakapense , which is spoken by 8,000 people in sipacapa , san marcos . lewis , m . paul , gary f . simons , and charles d . fennig ( eds . ) . '' sipakapense '' ethnologue : languages of the world , eighteenth edition , ( 2015 ) . dallas , texas : sil international . the largest language in the mamean sub-branch is mam , spoken by 478,000 people in the departments of san marcos and huehuetenango . awakatek is the language of 20,000 inhabitants of central aguacatán , another municipality of huehuetenango . ixil ( possibly three different languages ) is spoken by 70,000 in the '' ixil triangle '' region of the quiché ( department ) . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) ethnologue report on nebaj ixil , chajul ixil & san juan cotzal ixil , accessed march 07 , 2008 . tektitek ( or teko ) is spoken by over 6,000 people in the municipality of tectitán , and 1,000 refugees in mexico . according to the ethnologue the number of speakers of tektitek is growing . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) ethnologue report for tektitek , accessed march 07 , 2007 . the poqom languages are closely related to core quichean , with which they constitute a poqom-kʼichean sub-branch on the quichean–mamean node . poqomchiʼ is spoken by 90,000 people gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) , ( 2005 ) . ethnologue report on eastern poqomam , ethnologue report on western poqomchiʼ , both accessed march 07 , 2007 . in purulhá , baja verapaz , and in the following municipalities of alta verapaz : santa cruz verapaz , san cristóbal verapaz , tactic , tamahú and tucurú . poqomam is spoken by around 49,000 people in several small pockets in guatemala . lewis , m . paul , gary f . simons , and charles d . fennig ( eds . ) . '' poqomam '' ethnologue : languages of the world , eighteenth edition , ( 2015 ) . dallas , texas : sil international . . yucatecan branch . yucatec maya ( known simply as '' maya '' to its speakers ) is the most commonly spoken mayan language in mexico . it is currently spoken by approximately 800,000 people , the vast majority of whom are to be found on the yucatán peninsula . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) . ethnologue , ( 2005 ) . población hablante de lengua indígena de 5 y más años por principales lenguas , 1970 a 2005 inegi it remains common in yucatán and in the adjacent states of quintana roo and campeche . lewis , m . paul , gary f . simons , and charles d . fennig ( eds . ) . '' maya , yucatec '' ethnologue : languages of the world , eighteenth edition , ( 2015 ) . dallas , texas : sil international . the other three yucatecan languages are mopan , spoken by around 10,000 speakers primarily in belize ; itzaʼ , an extinct or moribund language from guatemala 's petén basin ; there were only 12 remaining native speakers in 1986 according to gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) . ethnologue , ( 2005 ) . and lacandón or lakantum , also severely endangered with about 1,000 speakers in a few villages on the outskirts of the selva lacandona , in chiapas . lewis , m . paul , gary f . simons , and charles d . fennig ( eds . ) . '' lacandon '' ethnologue : languages of the world , eighteenth edition , ( 2015 ) . dallas , texas : sil international . . huastecan branch . wastek ( also spelled huastec and huaxtec ) is spoken in the mexican states of veracruz and san luis potosí by around 110,000 people . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) . ethnologue ( 2005 ) . it is the most divergent of modern mayan languages . chicomuceltec was a language related to wastek and spoken in chiapas that became extinct some time before 1982 . phonology . proto-mayan sound system . proto-mayan ( the common ancestor of the mayan languages as reconstructed using the comparative method ) has a predominant cvc syllable structure , only allowing consonant clusters across syllable boundaries . proto-mayan allowed roots of the shape , and ( where is , , or ; see most proto-mayan roots were monosyllabic except for a few disyllabic nominal roots . due to subsequent vowel loss many mayan languages now show complex consonant clusters at both ends of syllables . following the reconstruction of lyle campbell and terrence kaufman , the proto-mayan language had the following sounds . it has been suggested that proto-mayan was a tonal language , based on the fact that four different contemporary mayan languages have tone ( yucatec , uspantek , san bartolo tzotzil mistakenly writes tzeltal for tzotzil , states that the reports of a fully developed tone contrast in san bartolome tzotzil are inaccurate and mochoʼ ) , but since these languages each can be shown to have innovated tone in different ways , campbell considers this unlikely . only the stem of 𝕡 is doubled , but that is not supported by unicode . a ligature ꜩ for tz is used alongside ꜭ and ꜫ . the yucatec convention of dz for is retained in maya family names such as dzib . modern orthography . since the colonial period , practically all maya writing has used a latin script . formerly these were based largely on the spanish alphabet and varied between authors , and it is only recently that standardized alphabets have been established . the first widely accepted alphabet was created for yucatec maya by the authors and contributors of the diccionario maya cordemex , a project directed by alfredo barrera vásquez and first published in 1980 . the cordemex contains a lengthy introduction on the history , importance , and key resources of written yucatec maya , including a summary of the orthography used by the project ( pp . 39a-42a ) . subsequently , the guatemalan academy of mayan languages ( known by its spanish acronym almg ) , founded in 1986 , adapted these standards to 22 mayan languages ( primarily in guatemala ) . the script is largely phonemic , but abandoned the distinction between the apostrophe for ejective consonants and the glottal stop , so that ejective and the non-ejective sequence ( previously tʼ and t7 ) are both written tʼ . josephe dechicchis , '' revisiting an imperfection in mayan orthography '' , journal of policy studies 37 ( march 2011 ) other major maya languages , primarily in the mexican state of chiapas , such as tzotzil , tzeltal , chʼol , and tojolabʼal , are not generally included in this reformation , and are sometimes written with the conventions standardized by the chiapan '' state center for indigenous language , art , and literature '' ( celali ) , which for instance writes '' ts '' rather than '' tz '' ( thus tseltal and tsotsil ) . literature . from the classic language to the present day , a body of literature has been written in mayan languages . the earliest texts to have been preserved are largely monumental inscriptions documenting rulership , succession , and ascension , conquest and calendrical and astronomical events . it is likely that other kinds of literature were written in perishable media such as codices made of bark , only four of which have survived the ravages of time and the campaign of destruction by spanish missionaries . shortly after the spanish conquest , the mayan languages began to be written with latin letters . colonial-era literature in mayan languages include the famous popol vuh , a mythico-historical narrative written in 17th century classical quiché but believed to be based on an earlier work written in the 1550s , now lost . the título de totonicapán and the 17th century theatrical work the rabinal achí are other notable early works in kʼicheʼ , the latter in the achí dialect . see for a thorough treatment of colonial quiché literature . the annals of the cakchiquels from the late 16th century , which provides a historical narrative of the kaqchikel , contains elements paralleling some of the accounts appearing in the popol vuh . the historical and prophetical accounts in the several variations known collectively as the books of chilam balam are primary sources of early yucatec maya traditions . read for a thorough treatment of colonial yucatec literature . the only surviving book of early lyric poetry , the songs of dzitbalche by ah bam , comes from this same period . in addition to these singular works , many early grammars of indigenous languages , called '' artes '' , were written by priests and friars . languages covered by these early grammars include kaqchikel , classical quiché , tzeltal , tzotzil and yucatec . some of these came with indigenous-language translations of the catholic catechism . while mayan peoples continued to produce a rich oral literature in the postcolonial period ( after 1821 ) , very little written literature was produced in this period . see for examples of the tzotzil tradition of oral literature . because indigenous languages were excluded from the education systems of mexico and guatemala after independence , mayan peoples remained largely illiterate in their native languages , learning to read and write in spanish , if at all . however , since the establishment of the cordemex and the guatemalan academy of mayan languages ( 1986 ) , native language literacy has begun to spread and a number of indigenous writers have started a new tradition of writing in mayan languages . notable among this new generation is the kʼicheʼ poet humberto akʼabʼal , whose works are often published in dual-language spanish/kʼicheʼ editions , as well as kʼicheʼ scholar luis enrique sam colop ( 1955–2011 ) whose translations of the popol vuh into both spanish and modern kʼicheʼ achieved high acclaim . . see also . mayan sign language cauque mayan ( mixed language ) . notes . citations . . references . . external links . the guatemalan academy of mayan languages – spanish/mayan site , the primary authority on mayan languages corpus of maya hieroglyphic inscriptions program at the peabody museum of archaeology and ethnology , harvard university corpus of maya hieroglyphic inscriptions , volumes 1–9 . published by the peabody museum press and distributed by harvard university press swadesh lists for mayan languages ( from wiktionary 's swadesh-list appendix ) mayan languages and linguistics books from cholsamaj online bibliography of mayan languages at the university of texas universidad autonoma de yucatan mayan-spanish dictionary ( spanish )