Backpack

terminology . the word backpack was coined in the united states in the 1910s . moneybag and packsack were used prior , and now occur mainly as dialect . the word rucksack is a german loanword mainly used in the uk , us and in other western military forces . in middle high german ruck ( e ) means '' back '' ( dorsum ) , which lead to the upper german and swiss word ruggsack . in modern german the word '' der rucksack '' is commonly used . the name rucksack is cognate with the danish rygsæk , norwegian ryggsekk , dutch rugzak , afrikaans rugsak , swedish ryggsäck , and russian рюкзак ( rjukzak ) . the word knapsack was the usual name for a rucksack or backpack up until the middle of the 20th century . this is commonly used in canada . alternative names include haversack from the german hafersack meaning '' oat sack '' ( which more properly describes a small cloth bag on a strap worn over one shoulder and originally referred to the bag of oats carried as horse fodder ) , kraxe ( a german rucksack with a rigid framework ) , and bergen ( a large load-carrying rucksack , from a design issued by the british army during the second world war ) . in fact , britons used to call alpine-style backpacks '' bergen rucksacks '' , maybe from the name of their creator , norwegian ole f . bergan , combined with the name of the norwegian city of bergen . backpacks can often simply be referred to as '' packs '' , especially in outdoors contexts ; though sometimes ambiguous compared to other bags such as saddlebags and duffel bags , context is generally sufficient for identification . they are also used in recreational activities , and have long since been used to carry sports equipment and other materials . long before its various terminologies began appearing in print , evidence of early backpacks was scarce . a contender for the earliest was found within the mummified remains of ötzi in 3300bc . . backpack designs . backpacks in general fall into one of four categories : frameless , external frame , internal frame , and bodypack . a pack frame , when present , serves to support the pack and distribute the weight of its contents across the body more appropriately , by transferring much of the weight to the hips and legs . most of the weight is therefore taken off the shoulders , reducing the chance of injury from shoulder strap pressure ( many backpacks equipped solely with shoulder straps can affect the posture of a person carrying more than 14 & nbsp ; kg ( 30 & nbsp ; lbs ) ) , as well as being less restrictive of the upper body range of motion . most backpacks are capable of being closed with either a buckle mechanism , a zipper , or a dry-bag type closure , though a few models use a drawstring fitted with a cord lock for the main compartment . a bodypack is a backpack fitted with one or more pockets that are suspended on the wearer 's chest and loaded in such a way that the load in the front and the load in the back are close to equal . the majority of the load in a bodypack is carried by the hips . the ideal load carrying system should not disturb the wearer 's natural posture , balance and maneuverability . the load must be dispersed onto the skeletal structure in an even manner , and should not produce unbalanced forces on the body . frameless . the simplest backpack design is a bag attached to a set of shoulder straps . such packs are used for general transportation of goods , and have variable capacity . the simplest designs consist of one main pocket . this may be combined with webbing or rope straps , while more sophisticated models add extra pockets , waist straps , chest straps , padded shoulder straps , padded backs , and sometimes reflective materials for added safety at night . these packs are generally produced inexpensively . some outdoor packs , particularly those sold for day hikes , ultralight backpacking and mountaineering are sometimes frameless as well . sports . sports and hydration backpacks are smaller with a profile closer to the body , wider straps and can come with water bladders and hip belts for running , cycling or hiking . running hydration packs are the smallest and lightest , many under 2 litres and most under six litres . compression straps across the top of one 's body are common as are hip belts . cycling hydration packs are six to ten litres sitting high on the back . although daypacks are small averaging ten to thirty litres , all trekking and hiking hydration packs are generally the largest and heaviest . thirty five up to sixty five litres and above are common . external frame packs . external frame packs were designed to carry heavy loads ( > 20 & nbsp ; kg or 40 & nbsp ; lb ) , giving the wearer more support and protection and better weight distribution than a simple , frameless strapped bag . wooden pack frames were used for centuries around the world . ötzi the iceman may have used one in copper age alpine italy , though some archaeologists believe the frame found with the body was part of a snowshoe . such packs are common in military and mountaineering applications ; metal versions first appeared in the mid-20th century . the external frame is typically made from aluminum , other lightweight metal alloy , and recently reinforced synthetic polymers or plastic and is equipped with a system of straps and tautly-stretched netting which prevents contact between the metal frame and user 's back . in addition to comfort , this '' stand-off '' provides the additional benefit of creating air circulation between the frame and the wearer 's back . for this reason , external frame packs are generally considered to be a '' cooler load '' than internal frame designs . external frame packs have a fabric '' sack '' portion which is usually smaller than that of internal frame packs , but have exposed frame portions above and below the sack to accommodate attachment of larger items . in addition , the sack can often be removed entirely , permitting the user to customize the configuration of their load , or to transport a non-conventional load such as a quartered game animal . military packs are often external frame designs due to their ability to carry loads of different shapes , sizes and weights . the other type of external frame which recently was proposed , is made from composite plastic which is not flexible like current backpack straps and also it is a kind of material that can be shaped like human spine curvature . in this type of backpack , load directly transfers to the shoulders through the non-flexible straps . this non-flexible structure diminishes the momentum at lumbar region of the back . strap curvature is shaped close to spine curvature and there are two flexible drawstrings to prevent backpack movement in transverse plane . the straps of this backpack are wide enough to distribute the pressure on shoulders and also a white glass wool layer is added to the internal part of them to absorb dynamic forces , which could be produced through walking . this backpack type is an experimental sample that need further options to be prepared for usage . one of the benefits of backpack with external frame is preventing the spine to incline forward during walking that would be helpful in preventing damage of long term backpack carrying . . internal frame packs . the internal frame backpack is a recent innovation , invented in 1967 by greg lowe , who went on to found lowe alpine and lowepro , companies specializing in backpacks and other forms of carrying bags for various equipment . an internal-frame pack has a large fabric section around an internal frame composed of strips of either aluminum , titanium or plastic , sometimes with additional metal stays to reinforce the frame . a complex series of straps works with the frame to distribute the weight and hold it in place . the internal frame permits the pack to fit closely to the wearer 's back and minimizes shifting of the load , which is desirable when participating in activities that involve upper-body movement such as scrambling over rocky surfaces and skiing . however , the tight fit reduces ventilation , so these type of packs tend to be more sweaty than external frame packs . the internal construction also allows for a large storage compartment ; a few lash points ( including webbing loops and straps for sleeping bags and other large items ) may be present , but as the frame is completely integrated , it is difficult to securely lash larger and heavier items which do not fit inside the compartment to the outside of the pack . internal frame packs originally suffered from smaller load capacity and less comfortable fit during steady walking , but newer models have improved greatly in these respects . in addition , because of their snug fit , the improved internal frame models have largely replaced external frame backpacks for many activities . daily use . a daypack is a smaller , frameless backpack that can hold enough contents for a day hike , or a day 's worth of other activities . they are not large enough for average wilderness backpacking that use full-sized sleeping bags and backpacking tents , but may be large enough for ultralight backpacking . padded or unpadded waist straps may be provided to distribute weight across the body . in many countries , backpacks are heavily identified with students , and are a primary means of transporting educational materials to and from school . bruce horovitz , '' new 'badge ' of cool : high-tech , high-fashion backpacks , '' usa today , 20 august 2007 , 1a . in this context they are sometimes known as bookbags or schoolbags . the purchase of a suitably fashionable , attractive , and useful backpack is a crucial back-to-school ritual for many students . horovitz , 1a . typical school backpacks generally lack the rigid frame of an outdoor-style backpack and include only a few pockets in the front in addition to the main storage compartment . while traditionally very simple in design , school backpacks are often made with padded shoulder straps and backs as well as additional reinforcement to hold large numbers of heavy textbooks , as well as safety features such as reflective panels to make the wearer of the pack more visible at night . backpacks are sometimes worn as fashion accessories , in which they perform the same function as a purse . some such backpacks designed specifically for women are no larger than a typical purse , and are generally associated with younger women . special-purpose backpacks . some backpacks are specifically designed to carry certain items . common examples include backpacks for small valuable items such as laptops and cameras ; backpacks designed to hold laptop computers in particular generally have a padded compartment to hold the computer and medium-sized pockets and flaps to accommodate accessories such as charger cables and mice . these are especially common in college and university settings . in order to supply these devices with electricity , a few high-end backpacks are equipped with solar panels . rolling backpacks are backpacks with wheels on the bottom and an extending handle . because of their design , rolling backpacks reduce the strain on the user , though the shoulder straps may be used to carry the pack for short distances when the terrain is not suitable for wheels . rolling backpacks are most commonly used while traveling by airplane or train . hydration backpacks are also available . these light daypacks are especially designed to hold water in a special water bladder ( also known as reservoir ) , and their purpose is to allow the carrier constant fluid hydration handsfree , so that the carrier can focus on the mission ahead without having to stop for water breaks . professional use . backpacks are a standard part of the load-bearing equipment of soldiers , especially infantry , in most countries , and military-style packs are regularly available to civilians in military surplus stores . well-known examples include the united states alice field pack and the british army plce rucksack attachment , both of which are widely available to civilian markets both as actual military surplus ( new or used ) and as replicas . such packs are often , though not always ( e.g . the usmc 's ilbe pack ) , external-frame packs , with the pack itself lashed or pinned to a metal or plastic carrying frame . for units that are entering combat situations , packs may be loaded heavily and can weigh in excess of . each soldier may carry extra weapons , ammunition , rations , medical supplies , tents or other shelter material , and extra clothing . many police tactical units , as well as players of military-style combat games such as paintball and airsoft , use these military-style tactical backpacks and webbing for storing gear and ammunition . there is also a small but thriving industry devoted to creating historical reproductions of military gear ; such companies generally produce period-appropriate uniforms and other gear in addition to backpacks . some more recent military/tactical designs , especially the molle and ilbe packs used by the united states armed forces , are covered with webbing loop attachment points for increased carrying capacity . recently , at least one brand of backpack has been specially designed for professional cooks and culinary students . this sort of backpack is meant to safely carry knives , cooking tools , and other miscellaneous equipment such as notebooks , towels , and uniforms . specialist backpacks are used by fire services for wildfire fighting , as well as by rescue services for search and rescue . these backpacks are generally very modular , allowing the pack to be reconfigured to the users wishes and are designed to load around the wearers hips . they may include features such as sections for water bladders and specially designed pouches , such as those used to carry personal fire shelters . image gallery . . backpacks for travel . backpacks are sometimes used as luggage , particularly as carry-on bags for airplane travel . in addition to their use in outdoors pursuits , backpacks are sometimes used in other sports as well . hydration packs , sometimes used by athletes and military personnel , carry water ( in either a bladder or a rigid bottle ) and have a tube connected to them from which the wearer can drink without removing the pack ; this feature is also included in some more general-purpose hiking backpacks . backpacks that carry skateboards have also become more popular in the youth culture . see also . backpack palsy bindle duffel bag fanny pack hydration pack messenger bag papoose pasiking satchel shoulder strap . references . external links .