Non-volatile random-access memory

early nvrams . early computers used core and drum memory systems which were non-volatile as a byproduct of their construction . the most common form of memory through the 1960s was magnetic-core memory , which stored data in the polarity of small magnets . since the magnets held their state even with the power removed , core memory was also non-volatile . other memory types required constant power to retain data , such as vacuum tube or solid-state flip-flops , williams tubes , and semiconductor memory ( static or dynamic ram ) . advances in semiconductor fabrication in the 1970s led to a new generation of solid state memories that magnetic-core memory could not match on cost or density . today dynamic ram forms the vast majority of a typical computer 's main memory . many systems require at least some non-volatile memory . desktop computers require permanent storage of the instructions required to load the operating system . embedded systems , such as an engine control computer for a car , must retain their instructions when power is removed . many systems used a combination of ram and some form of rom for these roles . custom rom integrated circuits were one solution . the memory contents were stored as a pattern of the last mask used for manufacturing the integrated circuit , and so could not be modified once completed . prom improved on this design , allowing the chip to be written electrically by the end-user . prom consists of a series of diodes that are initially all set to a single value , '' 1 '' for instance . by applying higher power than normal , a selected diode can be '' burned out '' ( like a fuse ) , thereby permanently setting that bit to '' 0 '' . prom facilitated prototyping and small volume manufacturing . many semiconductor manufacturers provided a prom version of their mask rom part , so that development firmware could be tested before ordering a mask rom . currently , the best-known form of both nv-ram and eeprom memory is flash memory . some drawbacks to flash memory include the requirement to write it in larger blocks than many computers can automatically address , and the relatively limited longevity of flash memory due to its finite number of write-erase cycles ( as of january 2010 most consumer flash products can withstand only around 100,000 rewrites before memory begins to deteriorate ) . another drawback is the performance limitations preventing flash from matching the response times and , in some cases , the random addressability offered by traditional forms of ram . several newer technologies are attempting to replace flash in certain roles , and some even claim to be a truly universal memory , offering the performance of the best sram devices with the non-volatility of flash . '' a survey of architectural approaches for managing embedded dram and non-volatile on-chip caches '' , mittal et al . , ieee tpds , 2014 . as of june 2018 these alternatives have not yet become mainstream . those who required real ram-like performance and non-volatility typically have had to use conventional ram devices and a battery backup . for example , ibm pc 's and successors beginning with the ibm pc at used nonvolatile bios memory , often called cmos ram or parameter ram , and this was a common solution in other early microcomputer systems like the original apple macintosh , which used a small amount of memory powered by a battery for storing basic setup information like the selected boot volume . ( the original ibm pc and pc xt instead used dip switches to represent up to 24 bits of system configuration data ; dip or similar switches are another , primitive type of programmable rom device that was widely used in the 1970s and 1980s for very small amounts of data & mdash ; typically no more than 8 bytes . ) before industry standardization on the ibm pc architecture , some other microcomputer models used battery-backed ram more extensively : for example , in the trs-80 model 100/tandy 102 , all of the main memory ( 8 kb minimum , 32 kb maximum ) is battery-backed sram . also , in the 1990s many video game software cartridges ( e.g . for consoles such as the sega genesis ) included battery-backed ram to retain saved games , high scores , and similar data . also , some arcade video game cabinets contain cpu modules that include battery-backed ram containing keys for on-the-fly game software decryption . much larger battery backed memories are still used today as caches for high-speed databases that require a performance level newer nvram devices have not yet managed to meet . floating-gate mosfet . a huge advance in nvram technology was the introduction of the floating-gate mosfet transistor , which led to the introduction of erasable programmable read-only memory , or eprom . eprom consists of a grid of transistors whose gate terminal ( the '' switch '' ) is protected by a high-quality insulator . by '' pushing '' electrons onto the base with the application of higher-than-normal voltage , the electrons become trapped on the far side of the insulator , thereby permanently switching the transistor '' on '' ( '' 1 '' ) . eprom can be re-set to the '' base state '' ( all '' 1 '' s or '' 0 '' s , depending on the design ) by applying ultraviolet light ( uv ) . the uv photons have enough energy to push the electrons through the insulator and return the base to a ground state . at that point the eprom can be re-written from scratch . an improvement on eprom , eeprom , soon followed . the extra '' e '' stands for electrically , referring to the ability to reset eeprom using electricity instead of uv , making the devices much easier to use in practice . the bits are re-set with the application of even higher power through the other terminals of the transistor ( source and drain ) . this high power pulse , in effect , sucks the electrons through the insulator , returning it to the ground state . this process has the disadvantage of mechanically degrading the chip , however , so memory systems based on floating-gate transistors in general have short write-lifetimes , on the order of 10 5 writes to any particular bit . one approach to overcoming the rewrite count limitation is to have a standard sram where each bit is backed up by an eeprom bit . in normal operation the chip functions as a fast sram and in case of power failure the content is quickly transferred to the eeprom part , from where it gets loaded back at the next power up . such chips were called novrams by their manufacturers . the basis of flash memory is identical to eeprom , and differs largely in internal layout . flash allows its memory to be written only in blocks , which greatly simplifies the internal wiring and allows for higher densities . memory storage density is the main determinant of cost in most computer memory systems , and due to this flash has evolved into one of the lowest cost solid-state memory devices available . starting around 2000 , demand for ever-greater quantities of flash have driven manufacturers to use only the latest fabrication systems in order to increase density as much as possible . although fabrication limits are starting to come into play , new multi-level cell appear to be able to double or quadruple the density even at existing linewidths . newer approaches . flash and eeprom 's limited write-cycles are a serious problem for any real ram-like role , however . in addition , the high power needed to write the cells is a problem in low-power roles , where nvram is often used . the power also needs time to be '' built up '' in a device known as a charge pump , which makes writing dramatically slower than reading , often as much as 1,000 times . a number of new memory devices have been proposed to address these shortcomings . ferroelectric ram . to date , the only such system to enter widespread production is ferroelectric ram , or f-ram ( sometimes referred to as feram ) . f-ram is a random-access memory similar in construction to dram but ( instead of a dielectric layer like in dram ) contains a thin ferroelectric film of lead zirconate titanate pb ( zr , ti ) o 3 , commonly referred to as pzt . the zr/ti atoms in the pzt change polarity in an electric field , thereby producing a binary switch . unlike ram devices , f-ram retains its data memory when power is shut off or interrupted , due to the pzt crystal maintaining polarity . due to this crystal structure and how it is influenced , f-ram offers distinct properties from other nonvolatile memory options , including extremely high endurance ( exceeding 10 16 access cycles for 3.3 & nbsp ; v devices ) , ultra low power consumption ( since f-ram does not require a charge pump like other non-volatile memories ) , single-cycle write speeds , and gamma radiation tolerance . ramtron international has developed , produced , and licensed ferroelectric ram ( f-ram ) , and other companies that have licensed and produced f-ram technology include texas instruments , rohm , and fujitsu . magnetoresistive ram . another approach to see major development effort is magnetoresistive random-access memory , or mram , which uses magnetic elements and in general operates in a fashion similar to core , at least for the first-generation technology . only one mram chip has entered production to date : everspin technologies ' 4 mbit part , which is a first-generation mram that utilizes cross-point field induced writing . two second-generation techniques are currently in development : thermal assisted switching ( tas ) , which is being developed by crocus technology , and spin-transfer torque ( stt ) on which crocus , hynix , ibm , and several other companies are working . stt-mram appears to allow for much higher densities than those of the first generation , but is lagging behind flash for the same reasons as feram & ndash ; enormous competitive pressures in the flash market . phase-change ram . another solid-state technology to see more than purely experimental development is phase-change ram , or pram . pram is based on the same storage mechanism as writable cds and dvds , but reads them based on their changes in electrical resistance rather than changes in their optical properties . considered a '' dark horse '' for some time , in 2006 samsung announced the availability of a 512 mbit part , considerably higher capacity than either mram or feram . the areal density of these parts appears to be even higher than modern flash devices , the lower overall storage being due to the lack of multi-bit encoding . this announcement was followed by one from intel and stmicroelectronics , who demonstrated their own pram devices at the 2006 intel developer forum in october . intel and stmicroelectronics are now selling pram based devices to consumers , under the names 3d xpoint optane , and quantx . . millipede memory . perhaps one of the more innovative solutions is ibm millipede , developed by ibm . millipede is , in essence , a punched card rendered using nanotechnology in order to dramatically increase areal density . although it was planned to introduce millipede as early as 2003 , unexpected problems in development delayed this until 2005 , by which point it was no longer competitive with flash . in theory the technology offers storage densities on the order of 1 tbit/in² ( ≈394 gbit/cm² ) , greater than even the best hard drive technologies currently in use ( perpendicular recording offers 636 gbit/in² ( ≈250.4 gbit/cm² ) as of dec . 2011 ) , but future heat-assisted magnetic recording and patterned media together could support densities of 10 tbit/in² ( ≈3.95 tbit/cm² ) . however , slow read and write times for memories this large seem to limit this technology to hard drive replacements as opposed to high-speed ram-like uses , although to a very large degree the same is true of flash as well . fefet memory . an alternative application of ( hafnium oxide based ) ferroelectrics is fe fet based memory , which utilises a ferroelectric between the gate and device of a field-effect transistor . such devices are claimed to have the advantage that they utilise the same technology as hkmg ( high-l metal gate ) based lithography , and scale to the same size as a conventional fet at a given process node . as of 2017 32mbit devices have been demonstrated at 22 nm . others . a number of more esoteric devices have been proposed , including nano-ram based on carbon nanotube , but these are currently far from commercialization . the advantages that nanostructures such as quantum dots , carbon nanotubes and nanowires offer over their silicon-based predecessors include their tiny size , speed and their density . several concepts of molecular-scale memory devices have been developed recently . research has also been done in designing racetrack memory , also called domain wall memory . also seeing renewed interest is silicon-oxide-nitride-oxide-silicon ( sonos ) memory . see also . nova ( filesystem ) spin-transfer torque spintronics uefi . references . external links . supporting filesystems in persistent memory , lwn.net , september 2 , 2014 , by jonathan corbet