Genealogical Office

jurisdiction . the tradition of the irish abroad seeking grants of arms from the chief herald continues to the present . the office accepts petitions for grant of arms from the following : applying for a grant of arms , national library of ireland , accessed 3 march 2014 a citizen of ireland or a person who has an entitlement to become a citizen . a person resident in the state for at least the five-year period immediately before the date of the application . a public or local authority , corporate body or other entity which has been located or functioning in ireland for at least five years . an individual , corporate body or other entity not resident or located in ireland but who or which has substantial historical , cultural , educational , financial or ancestral connections with ireland . an application for a grant of arms should be made to the chief herald , on a prescribed form , setting out , in the case of a personal application , basic personal information and accompanied by supporting certificates or other appropriate documents . for a grant of arms to a corporate body or other entity , the application should include information about the legal status ( if any ) of the organisation , its structure , its activities and business , the length of time during which it has operated and , if relevant , information about membership . where appropriate , a certified copy of the resolution of the council , board , or other controlling body should be submitted . if an application appears to be in order the matter is considered in detail by a herald of arms who will consult with the applicant about possible designs . a preliminary painting is then made for the approval of the applicant who will also be shown a draft of the letters patent . the final document is issued on vellum and includes a hand-painted exemplification of the arms . the grant of arms is recorded in the register of arms and is a matter of public record . in november 1945 the chief herald granted the coat of arms of ireland to the state itself . at the request of the irish government a grant of arms was made to us presidents john f . kennedy in 1963 and bill clinton in 1995 . mr clinton 's arms are blazoned thus : or a lion rampant gules charged with three bars argent holding in the dexter paw a branch of olive proper between in the dexter chief and sinister base a cross crosslet fitchée sable and in the sinister chief and dexter base a shamrock slipped vert . and the crest : an anchor erect azure on the stock the letters spes argent . with the motto : an leon do bheir an chraobh ( english : the lion who bears away the branch ) genealogical office : register of arms , 1982–95 , go ms 111 w+x , folio x77 , grant dated 13 june 1995 . . titles of nobility . article 40.2.1 of the constitution of ireland prohibits the conferral of a new title of nobility by the state , and article 40.2.2 prohibits acceptance by any citizen of any title of nobility or of honour '' without the prior approval of the government . '' the constitution does not prohibit the grantings of honours , other than titles of nobility , by the state . the constitution is also silent as to untitled nobility . the government acknowledges titles of nobility that have in the past derived from the british crown as the fount of honour then exercising sovereignty over ireland , and in fact such titles continue to be mentioned in confirmations of arms by the chief herald of ireland . chiefs of the name . when the kingdom of ireland was created in 1541 , the dublin administration wanted to involve the gaelic chiefs into the new entity , creating new titles for them such as the baron upper ossory , earl of tyrone , or the barons inchiquin . in the process they were granted new coats of arms from 1552 . the associated policy of surrender and regrant involved a change to succession to a title by primogeniture , and not by tanistry where a group of male cousins of a chief were eligible to succeed by election . this was accepted by the new title-holders but not by some of their cousins . thereafter the chiefs of the name succeeded by primogeniture for several centuries , in a similar way to the clan chiefs in scotland . many other clan chiefs were never given formal titles or knighthoods from the kingdom of ireland , but were issued with arms and usually registered their genealogies with the heralds in dublin , and became a significant part of the landed gentry . after the battle of kinsale in 1601 and the subsequent flight of the earls , some dozens of the old gaelic aristocracy scattered throughout catholic europe . some of their descendants were granted courtesy recognition in 1943 by the chief herald as chiefs of the name , signifying that they are the senior male line descendant from the last recognised chief of the name . the issue of the chiefs ' succession arose again after the creation of the chief herald of ireland in 1943 . some chiefs of the name favour tanistry while others see primogeniture as a more practical system . in an address to the irish senate in december 2006 john o'donoghue , the then minister for arts , sport and tourism also expressed the opinion that it was a matter for those who bore these titles to decide on the system they used for succession , but that he found it strange that an english system had been used for the succession of titles originally created under a native irish system . following advice from the attorney general that the recognition of chiefs of the name was without basis in law , the practice of courtesy recognition was abandoned in july 2003 . questions over legal status of the office . due reportedly to uncertainty concerning the legal validity of grants of arms in the republic of ireland , the post of chief herald remained vacant from september 2003 until august 2005 . it had been assumed that the prerogatives of the british crown , including the power to grant arms , had been inherited after irish independence in 1922 . while many functions had passed under the irish free state ( agreement ) act 1922 to the then provisional government of the irish free state in april 1922 , the pre-existing office of the ulster king of arms continued unchanged until 1943 . in may 2005 the government enacted section 13 of the national cultural institutions act 1997 . section 13 text online this enables the board of the national library to '' designate a member of its staff to perform the duty of researching , granting and confirming coats of arms and such member shall use the appellation chief herald of ireland or , in the irish language , príomh-aralt na héireann , while performing such duties '' . national cultural institutions act , 1997 , section 13 ( irish statute book ) , accessed 25 october 2007 while this was intended to legitimise the granting of arms in ireland , it actually initiated a debate as to whether any grants made since 1943 were valid . an irish arms crisis , sean j murphy , accessed 25 october 2007 these would include the 1945 grant of the coat of arms of ireland to the state itself . in may 2006 the genealogy & heraldry bill genealogy & heraldry bill , 2006 . was introduced into seanad éireann to reform the office and provide a firm legal basis for grants and confirmations of arms . the bill was withdrawn on 12 december 2006 with consent of the sponsoring senator , and was referred to the board of the national library for consideration by john o'donoghue , the then minister for arts , sport and tourism . parliamentary debates ( official report – unrevised ) seanad éireann tuesday , 12 december 2006 in september 2007 a notice was added to the national library website noting the suspension of grants of arms until the legal situation was clarified . following the receipt of legal advice , the board of the national library was '' satisfied that it can exercise the heraldic powers conferred on it by the 1997 act '' , and grants are again being made . the board did , however , note that '' doubts exist regarding the legal basis of heraldic functions exercised in the state prior to the establishment of the board '' and that '' with minor amendment , the wording of the act could be made more succinct '' . press release , board of the national library of ireland , 24 october 2007 while the issue of the legality of grants of arms by the chief herald has been resolved , no penalties or jurisdiction have yet been legislated for to discourage anyone from designing and using a new coat of arms . the specific emblazonments of self-designed arms may be protected by the current copyright law of ireland . chief heralds . edward mclysaght ( 1943–54 ) gerard slevin ( 1954–81 ) donal begley ( 1981–95 ) patricia donlon ( 1995–97 ) brendan o donoghue ( 1997–2003 ) post vacant 2003–05 fergus gillespie ( 2005–2009 ) collette byrne ( 2009–2010 ) colette o'flaherty ( 2010– ) . costs of granting and preparing arms . an applicant will be expected to provide genealogy information including birth , marriage and death certificates back to an ancestor that bore arms . alternatively , an entirely new grant of arms can be discussed and designed . applying for a grant of arms booklet ( national library of ireland , bi-lingual , undated ) since 7 october 2013 the basic cost of a grant of arms ( or confirmation of a prior grant ) has been : individual €4,400 corporate bodies ( commercial ) €17,250 local authorities , government offices and agencies €8,600 schools , clubs , professional associations and other non-profit organizations €8,600 the sum of €400 is payable when lodging the application ; half of the remaining fee is payable when work on the design begins ; and the balance must be paid before work on the actual grant of arms is put in hand by the herald painter . references . citations . . sources . . external links . chief herald of ireland an irish arms crisis — critical essay on status of the office of the chief herald . full text and explanatory memorandum of genealogy & heraldry bill , 2006 .