Boiler

heat sources . in a fossil fuel power plant using a steam cycle for power generation , the primary heat source will be combustion of coal , oil , or natural gas . in some cases byproduct fuel such as the carbon monoxide rich offgasses of a coke battery can be burned to heat a boiler ; biofuels such as bagasse , where economically available , can also be used . in a nuclear power plant , boilers called steam generators are heated by the heat produced by nuclear fission . where a large volume of hot gas is available from some process , a heat recovery steam generator or recovery boiler can use the heat to produce steam , with little or no extra fuel consumed ; such a configuration is common in a combined cycle power plant where a gas turbine and a steam boiler are used . in all cases the combustion product waste gases are separate from the working fluid of the steam cycle , making these systems examples of external combustion engines . materials . the pressure vessel of a boiler is usually made of steel ( or alloy steel ) , or historically of wrought iron . stainless steel , especially of the austenitic types , is not used in wetted parts of boilers due to corrosion and stress corrosion cracking . however , ferritic stainless steel is often used in superheater sections that will not be exposed to boiler water , and electrically-heated stainless steel shell boilers are allowed under the european '' pressure equipment directive '' for production of steam for sterilizers and disinfectors . bs en 14222 : '' stainless steel shell boilers '' in live steam models , copper or brass is often used because it is more easily fabricated in smaller size boilers . historically , copper was often used for fireboxes ( particularly for steam locomotives ) , because of its better formability and higher thermal conductivity ; however , in more recent times , the high price of copper often makes this an uneconomic choice and cheaper substitutes ( such as steel ) are used instead . for much of the victorian '' age of steam '' , the only material used for boilermaking was the highest grade of wrought iron , with assembly by riveting . this iron was often obtained from specialist ironworks , such as those in the cleator moor ( uk ) area , noted for the high quality of their rolled plate , which was especially suitable for use in critical applications such as high-pressure boilers . in the 20th century , design practice moved towards the use of steel , with welded construction , which is stronger and cheaper , and can be fabricated more quickly and with less labour . wrought iron boilers corrode far more slowly than their modern-day steel counterparts , and are less susceptible to localized pitting and stress-corrosion . that makes the longevity of older wrought-iron boilers far superior to that of welded steel boilers . cast iron may be used for the heating vessel of domestic water heaters . although such heaters are usually termed '' boilers '' in some countries , their purpose is usually to produce hot water , not steam , and so they run at low pressure and try to avoid boiling . the brittleness of cast iron makes it impractical for high-pressure steam boilers . energy . the source of heat for a boiler is combustion of any of several fuels , such as wood , coal , oil , or natural gas . electric steam boilers use resistance- or immersion-type heating elements . nuclear fission is also used as a heat source for generating steam , either directly ( bwr ) or , in most cases , in specialised heat exchangers called '' steam generators '' ( pwr ) . heat recovery steam generators ( hrsgs ) use the heat rejected from other processes such as gas turbine . boiler efficiency . there are two methods to measure the boiler efficiency according asme performance test code ( ptc ) for boilers asme ptc 4 and for hrsg asme ptc 4.4 and en 12952-15 for water tube boilers : input output method ( direct method ) heat loss method ( indirect method ) . input output method ( direct method ) . direct method of boiler efficiency test is more usable or more common . boiler efficiency power out / power in ( q ( hg - hf ) ) / ( q gcv ) 100 % q rate of steam flow in kg/h hg enthalpy of saturated steam in kcal/kg hf enthalpy of feed water in kcal/kg q rate of fuel use in kg/h gcv gross calorific value in kcal/kg ( e.g . pet coke 8200 kcal/kg ) . heat loss method ( indirect method ) . to measure the boiler efficiency in indirect method , parameter like these are needed : ultimate analysis of fuel ( h 2 , s 2 , s , c , moisture constraint , ash constraint ) percentage of o 2 or co 2 at flue gas flue gas temperature at outlet ambient temperature in °c and humidity of air in kg/kg gcv of fuel in kcal/kg ash percentage in combustible fuel gcv of ash in kcal/kg . configurations . boilers can be classified into the following configurations : pot boiler or haycock boiler/haystack boiler : a primitive '' kettle '' where a fire heats a partially filled water container from below . 18th century haycock boilers generally produced and stored large volumes of very low-pressure steam , often hardly above that of the atmosphere . these could burn wood or most often , coal . efficiency was very low . flued boiler with one or two large flues—an early type or forerunner of fire-tube boiler . 225pxfire-tube boiler : here , water partially fills a boiler barrel with a small volume left above to accommodate the steam ( steam space ) . this is the type of boiler used in nearly all steam locomotives . the heat source is inside a furnace or firebox that has to be kept permanently surrounded by the water in order to maintain the temperature of the heating surface below the boiling point . the furnace can be situated at one end of a fire-tube which lengthens the path of the hot gases , thus augmenting the heating surface which can be further increased by making the gases reverse direction through a second parallel tube or a bundle of multiple tubes ( two-pass or return flue boiler ) ; alternatively the gases may be taken along the sides and then beneath the boiler through flues ( 3-pass boiler ) . in case of a locomotive-type boiler , a boiler barrel extends from the firebox and the hot gases pass through a bundle of fire tubes inside the barrel which greatly increases the heating surface compared to a single tube and further improves heat transfer . fire-tube boilers usually have a comparatively low rate of steam production , but high steam storage capacity . fire-tube boilers mostly burn solid fuels , but are readily adaptable to those of the liquid or gas variety . fire-tube boilers may also be referred to as '' scotch-marine '' or '' marine '' type boilers . rightwater-tube boiler : in this type , tubes filled with water are arranged inside a furnace in a number of possible configurations . often the water tubes connect large drums , the lower ones containing water and the upper ones steam and water ; in other cases , such as a mono-tube boiler , water is circulated by a pump through a succession of coils . this type generally gives high steam production rates , but less storage capacity than the above . water tube boilers can be designed to exploit any heat source and are generally preferred in high-pressure applications since the high-pressure water/steam is contained within small diameter pipes which can withstand the pressure with a thinner wall . these boilers are commonly constructed in place , roughly square in shape , and can be multiple stories tall . flash boiler : a flash boiler is a specialized type of water-tube boiler in which tubes are close together and water is pumped through them . a flash boiler differs from the type of mono-tube steam generator in which the tube is permanently filled with water . in a flash boiler , the tube is kept so hot that the water feed is quickly flashed into steam and superheated . flash boilers had some use in automobiles in the 19th century and this use continued into the early 20th century . fire-tube boiler with water-tube firebox . sometimes the two above types have been combined in the following manner : the firebox contains an assembly of water tubes , called thermic siphons . the gases then pass through a conventional firetube boiler . water-tube fireboxes were installed in many hungary locomotives , but have met with little success in other countries . sectional boiler . in a cast iron sectional boiler , sometimes called a '' pork chop boiler '' the water is contained inside cast iron sections . these sections are assembled on site to create the finished boiler . safety . to define and secure boilers safely , some professional specialized organizations such as the american society of mechanical engineers ( asme ) develop standards and regulation codes . for instance , the asme boiler and pressure vessel code is a standard providing a wide range of rules and directives to ensure compliance of the boilers and other pressure vessels with safety , security and design standards . historically , boilers were a source of many serious injuries and property destruction due to poorly understood engineering principles . thin and brittle metal shells can rupture , while poorly welded or riveted seams could open up , leading to a violent eruption of the pressurized steam . when water is converted to steam it expands to over 1,000 times its original volume and travels down steam pipes at over . because of this , steam is an efficient method of moving energy and heat around a site from a central boiler house to where it is needed , but without the right boiler feedwater treatment , a steam-raising plant will suffer from scale formation and corrosion . at best , this increases energy costs and can lead to poor quality steam , reduced efficiency , shorter plant life and unreliable operation . at worst , it can lead to catastrophic failure and loss of life . collapsed or dislodged boiler tubes can also spray scalding-hot steam and smoke out of the air intake and firing chute , injuring the firemen who load the coal into the fire chamber . extremely large boilers providing hundreds of horsepower to operate factories can potentially demolish entire buildings . an article on a massive pabst brewing company boiler explosion in 1909 that destroyed a building , and blew parts onto the roof of nearby buildings . this document also contains a list of day-by-day boiler accidents and accident summaries by year , and discussions of boiler damage claims . a boiler that has a loss of feed water and is permitted to boil dry can be extremely dangerous . if feed water is then sent into the empty boiler , the small cascade of incoming water instantly boils on contact with the superheated metal shell and leads to a violent explosion that can not be controlled even by safety steam valves . draining of the boiler can also happen if a leak occurs in the steam supply lines that is larger than the make-up water supply could replace . the hartford loop was invented in 1919 by the hartford steam boiler inspection and insurance company as a method to help prevent this condition from occurring , and thereby reduce their insurance claims . . superheated steam boiler . thumb when water is boiled the result is saturated steam , also referred to as '' wet steam . '' saturated steam , while mostly consisting of water vapor , carries some unevaporated water in the form of droplets . saturated steam is useful for many purposes , such as cooking , heating and sanitation , but is not desirable when steam is expected to convey energy to machinery , such as a ship 's propulsion system or the '' motion '' of a steam locomotive . this is because unavoidable temperature and/or pressure loss that occurs as steam travels from the boiler to the machinery will cause some condensation , resulting in liquid water being carried into the machinery . the water entrained in the steam may damage turbine blades or in the case of a steam engine , may cause serious mechanical damage due to hydrostatic lock . superheated steam boilers evaporate the water and then further heat the steam in a superheater , causing the discharged steam temperature to be substantially above the boiling temperature at the boiler 's operating pressure . as the resulting '' dry steam '' is much hotter than needed to stay in the vaporous state it will not contain any significant unevaporated water . also , higher steam pressure will be possible than with saturated steam , enabling the steam to carry more energy . although superheating adds more energy to the steam in the form of heat there is no effect on pressure , which is determined by the rate at which steam is drawn from the boiler and the pressure settings of the safety valves . the fuel consumption required to generate superheated steam is greater than that required to generate an equivalent volume of saturated steam . however , the overall energy efficiency of the steam plant ( the combination of boiler , superheater , piping and machinery ) generally will be improved enough to more than offset the increased fuel consumption . superheater operation is similar to that of the coils on an air conditioning unit , although for a different purpose . the steam piping is directed through the flue gas path in the boiler furnace , an area in which the temperature is typically between . some superheaters are radiant type , which as the name suggests , they absorb heat by radiation . others are convection type , absorbing heat from a fluid . some are a combination of the two types . through either method , the extreme heat in the flue gas path will also heat the superheater steam piping and the steam within . the design of any superheated steam plant presents several engineering challenges due to the high working temperatures and pressures . one consideration is the introduction of feedwater to the boiler . the pump used to charge the boiler must be able to overcome the boiler 's operating pressure , else water will not flow . as a superheated boiler is usually operated at high pressure , the corresponding feedwater pressure must be even higher , demanding a more robust pump design . another consideration is safety . high pressure , superheated steam can be extremely dangerous if it unintentionally escapes . to give the reader some perspective , the steam plants used in many u.s . navy destroyers built during world war ii operated at pressure and superheat . in the event of a major rupture of the system , an ever-present hazard in a warship during combat , the enormous energy release of escaping superheated steam , expanding to more than 1600 times its confined volume , would be equivalent to a cataclysmic explosion , whose effects would be exacerbated by the steam release occurring in a confined space , such as a ship 's engine room . also , small leaks that are not visible at the point of leakage could be lethal if an individual were to step into the escaping steam 's path . hence designers endeavor to give the steam-handling components of the system as much strength as possible to maintain integrity . special methods of coupling steam pipes together are used to prevent leaks , with very high pressure systems employing welded joints to avoided leakage problems with threaded or gasketed connections . supercritical steam generator . right supercritical steam generators are frequently used for the production of electric power . they operate at supercritical pressure . in contrast to a '' subcritical boiler '' , a supercritical steam generator operates at such a high pressure ( over that the physical turbulence that characterizes boiling ceases to occur ; the fluid is neither liquid nor gas but a super-critical fluid . there is no generation of steam bubbles within the water , because the pressure is above the critical pressure point at which steam bubbles can form . as the fluid expands through the turbine stages , its thermodynamic state drops below the critical point as it does work turning the turbine which turns the electrical generator from which power is ultimately extracted . the fluid at that point may be a mix of steam and liquid droplets as it passes into the condenser . this results in slightly less fuel use and therefore less greenhouse gas production . the term '' boiler '' should not be used for a supercritical pressure steam generator , as no '' boiling '' occurs in this device . accessories . boiler fittings and accessories . pressuretrols to control the steam pressure in the boiler . boilers generally have 2 or 3 pressuretrols : a manual-reset pressuretrol , which functions as a safety by setting the upper limit of steam pressure , the operating pressuretrol , which controls when the boiler fires to maintain pressure , and for boilers equipped with a modulating burner , a modulating pressuretrol which controls the amount of fire . relief valve : it is used to relieve pressure and prevent possible boiler explosion . water level indicators : they show the operator the level of fluid in the boiler , also known as a sight glass , water gauge or water column . bottom blowdown valves : they provide a means for removing solid particulates that condense and lie on the bottom of a boiler . as the name implies , this valve is usually located directly on the bottom of the boiler , and is occasionally opened to use the pressure in the boiler to push these particulates out . continuous blowdown valve : this allows a small quantity of water to escape continuously . its purpose is to prevent the water in the boiler becoming saturated with dissolved salts . saturation would lead to foaming and cause water droplets to be carried over with the steam – a condition known as priming . blowdown is also often used to monitor the chemistry of the boiler water . trycock : a type of valve that is often use to manually check a liquid level in a tank . most commonly found on a water boiler . flash tank : high-pressure blowdown enters this vessel where the steam can 'flash ' safely and be used in a low-pressure system or be vented to atmosphere while the ambient pressure blowdown flows to drain . automatic blowdown/continuous heat recovery system : this system allows the boiler to blowdown only when makeup water is flowing to the boiler , thereby transferring the maximum amount of heat possible from the blowdown to the makeup water . no flash tank is generally needed as the blowdown discharged is close to the temperature of the makeup water . hand holes : they are steel plates installed in openings in '' header '' to allow for inspections & installation of tubes and inspection of internal surfaces . steam drum internals , a series of screen , scrubber & cans ( cyclone separators ) . low-water cutoff : it is a mechanical means ( usually a float switch ) or an electrode with a safety switch that is used to turn off the burner or shut off fuel to the boiler to prevent it from running once the water goes below a certain point . if a boiler is '' dry-fired '' ( burned without water in it ) it can cause rupture or catastrophic failure . surface blowdown line : it provides a means for removing foam or other lightweight non-condensible substances that tend to float on top of the water inside the boiler . circulating pump : it is designed to circulate water back to the boiler after it has expelled some of its heat . feedwater check valve or clack valve : a non-return stop valve in the feedwater line . this may be fitted to the side of the boiler , just below the water level , or to the top of the boiler . top feed : in this design for feedwater injection , the water is fed to the top of the boiler . this can reduce boiler fatigue caused by thermal stress . by spraying the feedwater over a series of trays the water is quickly heated and this can reduce limescale . desuperheater tubes or bundles : a series of tubes or bundles of tubes in the water drum or the steam drum designed to cool superheated steam , in order to supply auxiliary equipment that does not need , or may be damaged by , dry steam . chemical injection line : a connection to add chemicals for controlling feedwater ph . steam accessories . main steam stop valve : steam traps : main steam stop/check valve : it is used on multiple boiler installations . combustion accessories . fuel oil system : fuel oil heaters gas system : coal system : . other essential items . pressure gauges : feed pumps : fusible plug : insulation and lagging ; inspectors test pressure gauge attachment : name plate : registration plate : . draught . a fuel-heated boiler must provide air to oxidize its fuel . early boilers provided this stream of air , or draught , through the natural action of convection in a chimney connected to the exhaust of the combustion chamber . since the heated flue gas is less dense than the ambient air surrounding the boiler , the flue gas rises in the chimney , pulling denser , fresh air into the combustion chamber . most modern boilers depend on mechanical draught rather than natural draught . this is because natural draught is subject to outside air conditions and temperature of flue gases leaving the furnace , as well as the chimney height . all these factors make proper draught hard to attain and therefore make mechanical draught equipment much more reliable and economical . types of draught can also be divided into induced draught , where exhaust gases are pulled out of the boiler ; forced draught , where fresh air is pushed into the boiler ; and balanced draught , where both effects are employed . natural draught through the use of a chimney is a type of induced draught ; mechanical draught can be induced , forced or balanced . there are two types of mechanical induced draught . the first is through use of a steam jet . the steam jet oriented in the direction of flue gas flow induces flue gases into the stack and allows for a greater flue gas velocity increasing the overall draught in the furnace . this method was common on steam driven locomotives which could not have tall chimneys . the second method is by simply using an induced draught fan ( id fan ) which removes flue gases from the furnace and forces the exhaust gas up the stack . almost all induced draught furnaces operate with a slightly negative pressure . mechanical forced draught is provided by means of a fan forcing air into the combustion chamber . air is often passed through an air heater ; which , as the name suggests , heats the air going into the furnace in order to increase the overall efficiency of the boiler . dampers are used to control the quantity of air admitted to the furnace . forced draught furnaces usually have a positive pressure . balanced draught is obtained through use of both induced and forced draught . this is more common with larger boilers where the flue gases have to travel a long distance through many boiler passes . the induced draught fan works in conjunction with the forced draught fan allowing the furnace pressure to be maintained slightly below atmospheric . see also . babcock & wilcox , boiler manufacturer combustion engineering , boiler manufacturer deaerator dealkalization of water electric water boiler ( for drinking water ) heat-only boiler station hot water reset internally rifled boiler tubes ( also known as serve tubes ) lancashire boiler list of boiler types natural circulation boiler outdoor wood-fired boiler tube tool