Tata Group

1991–present . in 1991 , ratan tata became chairman of tata group . this was also the year of economic liberalisation in india , opening up the market to foreign competitors . during this time , tata group began to acquire a number of companies , including tetley ( 2000 ) , corus group ( 2007 ) , and jaguar and land rover ( 2008 ) . in 2017 , natarajan chandrasekaran was appointed chairman . chairman . the chairman of tata sons is usually the chairman of the tata group . as of 2020 , there have been seven chairmen of tata group . jamsetji tata ( 1868–1904 ) sir dorab tata ( 1904–1932 ) nowroji saklatwala ( 1932–1938 ) jrd tata ( 1938–1991 ) ratan tata ( 1991–2012 ) cyrus mistry ( 2012–2016 ) ratan tata ( 2016–2017 ) natarajan chandrasekaran ( 2017–present ) . affiliates . tata group of companies has many affiliates . these affiliates function in almost all sectors . this section lists the tata companies and details their business : . chemicals . tata chemicals tata swach tata chemicals europe magadi soda company advinus therapeutics rallis india tata pigments limited . fmcg . casa décor tata ceramics trl krosaki refractories limited tata consumer products , second-largest global manufacturer of tea . tata salt tata sampann himalayan , mineral water brand i-shakti tata tea tetley tata coffee eight o'clock coffee tata starbucks , a 50:50 joint venture company , owned by starbucks corporation and tata consumer products tata zoya titan industries fastrack , youth fashion brand titan eye plus ( titan eye+ ) , titan industries optical stores tanishq voltas , consumer electronics company . retail and e-commerce . infiniti retail ( cromā ) trent ( westside ) landmark bookstores star bazaar tata cliq as an e-commerce platform tata cliq luxury as a shopping of luxury brands starquik as an online grocery store by tata enterprise . energy . hooghly met coke and power company jamshedpur utilities and services company powerlinks transmission tata power , one of the largest private sector power companies and known for its name in indian industries tata power delhi distribution ltd ( formerly known as north delhi power ltd ) tata power solar , started as a joint venture between tata power and bp solar , now a wholly owned company tata power trading . engineering . tal manufacturing solutions tata advanced systems limited tata advanced materials tata autocomp systems limited ( taco ) tata cummins tata motors , india 's largest manufacturer of commercial vehicles and automobile ; parent company of : hispano carrocera jaguar land rover ( manufacturing cars under the jaguar and land rover marques ) tata daewoo commercial vehicle tata marcopolo tata motors european technical centre tata hitachi construction machinery tata technologies limited incat tata precision industries tata projects trf voltas global engineering centre titanx . information systems and communications . nelco ltd . ( national radio and electronics company ) nelito systems - started as an it jv of nelco and itochu , dts of japan bought the company tata communications vsnl international canada tata consultancy services ltd . ( tcs ) , one of world 's largest it services companies cmc limited computational research laboratories tata business support services elxsi tata teleservices tata sky tata docomo tatanet , managed connectivity and vsat service provider . services . drive india enterprise solutions mjunction services limited tata nyk . airlines . air asia india joint venture with air asia vistara joint venture with singapore airlines . catering . bombay brasserie golden dragon wassabi thai pavilion house of ming . hotels . the indian hotels company amã stays & trails seleqtions roots corporation ginger hotels taj hotels vivanta by taj tajair taj holidays the gateway hotels & resorts . financial services . indicash atm ( india 's first and largest white-label atm network ) e-nxt financials ltd . tata aia life insurance tata aig general insurance tata asset management tata capital tata communications payment solutions ( banking and financial services ) tata financial services . holding companies . tata africa holdings tata international ag tata investment corp tata limited . realty . tata housing development company ltd . ( thdc ) tata realty and infrastructure limited . organisational services . tata industrial services tata quality management services tata services tata strategic management group . logistics . tkm global , logistics and supply chain . iron and steel . jamipol natsteel holdings tata bearings tata steel tata bluescope steel tata metaliks tayo rolls tata sponge iron tata steel europe tata steel kzn tata steel bsl tata steel processing and distribution the tinplate company of india tm international logistics . acquisitions . february 2000 – tetley tea company , 407 & nbsp ; million march 2004 – daewoo commercial vehicle company , 102 & nbsp ; million august 2004 – natsteel 's steel business , 292 & nbsp ; million november 2004 – tyco global network , 130 & nbsp ; million july 2005 – vsnl international canada , 239 & nbsp ; million october 2005 – good earth corporation december 2005 – millennium steel , thailand , 165 & nbsp ; million december 2005 – brunner mond chemicals , 10 & nbsp ; million june 2006 – eight o'clock coffee , 220 & nbsp ; million november 2006 – ritz carlton boston , 170 & nbsp ; million january 2007 – corus group , 12 & nbsp ; billion march 2007 – pt kaltim prima coal ( kpc ) ( bumi resources ) , 1.1 & nbsp ; billion april 2007 – campton place hotel , san francisco , 60 & nbsp ; million january 2008 – imacid chemical company , morocco february 2008 – general chemical industrial products , 1 & nbsp ; billion march 2008 – jaguar cars and land rover , 2.3 & nbsp ; billion march 2008 – serviplem sa , spain april 2008 – comoplesa lebrero sa , spain may 2008 – piaggio aero industries june 2008 – china enterprise communications , china october 2008 – miljo grenland / innovasjon , norway april 2010 – hewitt robins international , united kingdom july 2013 – alti sa , france december 2014 – energy products limited , india june 2016 – welspun renewables energy , india may 2018 – bhushan steel limited , india . former companies . tata interactive systems tata petrodyne . philanthropy . tata group has helped establish and finance numerous research , educational and cultural institutes in india , and received the carnegie medal of philanthropy . some of the institutes established by the tata group are : tata institute of fundamental research the energy and resources institute ( formerly known as tata energy and research institute ) , a non-governmental research institute the jrd tata ecotechnology centre national centre for performing arts tata center for technology & design at massachusetts institute of technology tata centre for technology & design at iit bombay tata cricket academy tata football academy tata institute of social sciences tata management training centre tata medical center , inaugurated on 16 may 2011 by ratan tata tata memorial hospital tata cancer hospital tata trusts , a group of philanthropic organizations run by the head of the business conglomerate tata sons in 2008 , tata group donated us 50 million to cornell university for '' agricultural and nutrition programs in india and for the education of indian students at cornell . '' in 2010 , tata group donated 2.20 & nbsp ; billion ( us 50 & nbsp ; million ) to the harvard business school to build an academic and a residential building for executive education programmes on the institute 's campus in boston , massachusetts . the building , now known as tata hall , is the largest endowment received by harvard business school from an international donor . in 2017 , tata trusts gifted us 70 million to university of california , san diego and also partnered with them in setting up tata institute for genetics and society ( tigs ) to address some of the world 's most pressing issues , ranging from public health to agriculture . in recognition of the donation , the building which houses tigs has been named tata hall . it is also the largest international donation made to university of california , san diego . in 2017 , tata consultancy services ( tcs ) donated an unprecedented 35 million grant to carnegie mellon university , the largest ever industry donation to the university , to collaborate on promoting next-generation technologies that will drive the fourth industrial revolution , including cognitive systems and autonomous vehicles . in 2017 , the tata football academy won the bid to form the jamshedpur fc , a football club based on jamshedpur of jharkhand in the 4th edition of the indian super league . in 2020 , tata group has donated 1500 crores to pm cares fund to fight against covid-19 pandemic in india . . controversies and criticisms . the tata group has also attracted some controversy during its more than 150 years in operation , notably : . munnar , kerala . the kerala government filed an affidavit in the high court alleging that tata tea had '' grabbed '' forest land of at munnar . the tatas provided that they possessed of land , which they are allowed to retain under the kannan devan hill ( resumption of lands ) act , 1971 , and there was a shortage of in that . the chief minister of kerala v.s . achuthanandan , who vowed to evict all on government land in munnar , formed a special squad for the munnar land takeover mission and started acquiring back properties . however , the mission was aborted due to both influential land-holders and opposition from achuthanandan 's own party . . kalinganagar , orissa . on 2 january 2006 , kalinganagar , tribal orissa villagers protested the construction of a new steel plant for tata steel on land historically owned by them . some of the villagers had been evicted without adequate relocation . police retribution was brutal : 37 protesters were injured and 13 killed , including 3 women and a 13-year-old boy . one policeman was hacked to death by a mob , after police had opened fire on protestors with tear gas and rubber bullets . family members of the deceased villagers later claimed that the bodies had been mutilated during post-mortem examination . . supplies to burma 's military regime . in december 2006 , myanmar 's chief of general staff , general thura shwe mann , visited the tata motors plant in pune . '' myanmar ties . '' 8 december 2006 . the telegraph , calcutta , india . in 2009 , tata motors announced that it would manufacture trucks in myanmar . tata motors reported that these contracts to supply hardware and automobiles to burma 's military were subsequently criticised by human rights activists . . singur land acquisition . the singur controversy in west bengal was a series of protests by locals and political parties over the forced acquisition , eviction , and inadequate compensation to those farmers displaced for the tata nano plant , during which mamata banerjee 's party was widely criticised as acting for political gain . despite the support of the communist party of india ( marxist ) state government , tata eventually pulled the project out of west bengal , citing safety concerns . narendra modi , then chief minister of gujarat , made land available for the nano project . on aug 31 , 2016 , in a historic judgement , the honorable supreme court of india set aside the land acquisition by the west bengal government in 2006 that had facilitated tata motors ' nano plant , stating that the west bengal government had not taken possession of the land legally , and were now required to repossess and return it to local farmers within 12 weeks without compensation . . dhamra port , odisha . the port of dhamara has received significant coverage , sparking controversy in india , and in tata 's emerging global markets . the dhamra port , an equal joint venture between tata steel and larsen & toubro , has been criticised for its proximity to the gahirmatha sanctuary and bhitarkanika national park by indian and international organisations , including greenpeace ; gahirmatha beach is one of the world 's largest mass nesting sites for the olive ridley turtle , and india 's second largest mangrove forest , bhitarkanika , is a designated ramsar site , and critics claimed that the port could disrupt mass nesting at gahirmtha beaches as well as the ecology of the bitharkanika mangrove forest . tata steel employed mitigation measures set by the project 's official advisor , the international union for conservation of nature ( iucn ) , and the company pledging to '' adopt all its recommendations without exception '' when conservation organisations asserted that a thorough environmental impact analysis had not been done for the project , which had undergone changes in size and specifications since it was first proposed . tata steel '' corporate citizenship report 2010/2011 '' , tatasteel.com , 2011 , page 20 . retrieved october 24 , 2018 . . proposed soda extraction plant in tanzania . in 2007 , tata group joined forces with a tanzanian company to build a soda ash extraction plant in tanzania . environmental activists oppose the plant because it would be near lake natron , and it has a very high chance of affecting the lake 's ecosystem and its neighbouring dwellers , jeopardising endangered lesser flamingo birds . lake natron is where two-thirds of lesser flamingos reproduce . producing soda ash involves drawing out salt water from the lake , and then disposing the water back to the lake . this process could interrupt the chemical makeup of the lake . 22 african nations signed a petition to stop its construction . . epic systems trade-secret case judgement . in april 2016 , a u.s . federal grand jury awarded epic systems a 940 million judgement against tata consultancy services and tata america international corp . filed 31 october 2014 ; the suit charged that '' 6,477 unauthorized downloads could be used to enhance tata 's competing product , med mantra . '' in 2017 , u.s . district court judge william conley reduced the award to 420 million ; the company states that the judgement is also being appealed , as '' not supported by evidence presented during the trial and a strong appeal can be made to superior court to fully set aside the jury verdict . ” wahlberg , david '' award to epic in trade secrets case reduced from 940 million to 420 million '' , wisconsin state journal , october 4 , 2017 . retrieved july 12 , 2018 . . 2018 nclt verdict . in july 2018 , the national company law tribunal ( nclt ) , which '' adjudicates issues relating to indian companies , '' issued a verdict in the company 's favor on charges of mismanagement leveled in 2016 by ousted chairman , cyrus mistry . . see also . list of companies of india list of largest companies by revenue list of corporations by market capitalization make in india forbes global 2000 fortune india 500 pallonji mistry noel tata sir dorabji tata and allied trusts . references . external links . tata group collected news and commentary at bloombergquint