Billy Liar

characters . ; william '' billy '' fisher : billy is 19 , and living with parents alice and geoffrey , and his grandmother , florence boothroyd . billy lies compulsively to everyone he comes across , whether it is by claiming that his father is a retired naval captain/cobbler , or telling his parents that arthur 's mother has broken her leg . billy works as a clerk for undertakers shadrack & duxbury . he is engaged to two girls and in love with a third , and he constantly refers to a vague job offer writing scripts in london for comedian '' danny boon '' . ; alice fisher : billy 's mother . she rarely sits down in the play , constantly working hard to keep the house tidy and look after her husband , her mother , and billy . ; geoffrey fisher : billy 's father . geoffrey uses the word '' bloody '' in his sentences so often it has lost all meaning . geoffrey has been a successful garage owner who also works in the removal business so his family live middle-class lives despite his working-class background . geoffrey has a short temper , but otherwise rarely shows emotion . relations between geoffrey and billy have broken down , providing the story 's main source of conflict . ; florence boothroyd : billy 's grandmother , alice 's mother . she is ignored by her family and never seen as a loved character until the end . florence talks to the sideboard more than her own family , and is always drinking tea out of a pint pot . she keeps pots of condensed milk upstairs . florence falls ill in act 2 and is taken upstairs . by act 3 , she has died . she likely has a form of dementia because of her strange behaviour throughout the book . her age is either 80 or 81 years old , and she was born in august . ; arthur crabtree : billy 's best friend . arthur works at shadrack & duxbury with billy . when we first see arthur and billy together in act 1 , they adopt thick northern accents and engage in buffoonery , imitating their elders . despite this tomfoolery , arthur 's mood towards billy changes in act 3 . arthur does not appear in act 2 . ; barbara : one of billy 's fiancees . barbara is prudish , always eating oranges , and harbours dreams of living with billy in a cottage in devon , with '' little billy and little barbara '' . she finds out about other girlfriends later in the play . ; rita : rita is 17 , is short , but comes across as a '' hard lass '' . she is engaged to billy , and has a habit of mimicking billy every time he offers an excuse for her missing engagement ring . unbeknown to her , it is on barbara 's finger . rita appears in acts 2 and 3 . ; liz : liz is described as a scruffy girl in need of a new skirt , but she 's the one who truly understands billy and the only one in which he 's genuinely interested . before her appearance in the play , billy pretends he does not have much interest in her , but it is clear when she appears that he is still smitten with her . incarnations . play . in 1960 , the novel 's author , keith waterhouse , co-wrote a three-act structure with willis hall . the action took place on a single set combining the living-room , hallway , and porch of the fisher household . the first production opened in the west end of london with albert finney in the title role . it has since been produced all over the world , and has become a favourite with amateur groups . the play was adapted for the irish stage as liam liar by hugh leonard in 1976 . the play is set in one saturday : act 1 in the morning , act 2 in the early evening , and act 3 at night . film . the 1963 film was directed by john schlesinger and featured tom courtenay , who played the part when albert finney left the cast in the west end play , as billy and julie christie as liz , one of his three girlfriends . mona washbourne played mrs . fisher , and wilfred pickles played mr . fisher . rodney bewes , finlay currie , and leonard rossiter also had roles . tv series . the novel was also used as the basis for a sitcom made by london weekend television in 1973–1974 , starring jeff rawle as billy . it has never been rerun , although the first series was released on region 2 dvd in august 2006 . the second series was released in march 2007 . the complete series was released on 07/05/2018 . the series was shown on the seven network in australia during the non-ratings season of 1975–1976 . the series was shown on cbc television in canada in 1975–1976 . the series was shown on rté 2 in ireland in 1982 . the series was scripted by the play 's writers , waterhouse and hall , and the action was updated to the 1970s . george a . cooper reprised his west end role as billy 's father . other regular cast members included pamela vezey as alice , colin jeavons as shadrack , may warden as billy 's grandmother , and sally watts as barbara . several new girlfriends were also introduced . an american adaptation entitled billy and starring steve guttenberg , peggy pope , and james gallery aired briefly on cbs in 1979 . musical . a successful west end musical ( entitled simply billy ) starred michael crawford and , in her west end debut , elaine paige . the cast also included gay soper , avis bunnage , bryan pringle and lockwood west . the book was by well-known british sitcom writers dick clement and ian la frenais , and the music and lyrics were by film scores john barry and don black respectively . others . waterhouse later wrote a sequel called billy liar on the moon . there is also an acoustic folk/punk singer from scotland called billy liar . '' billy liar '' is the title of the second track of her majesty the decemberists by the decemberists . saint etienne sampled some lines from the movie in their song '' you 're in a bad way '' . the music video for the song '' the importance of being idle '' by oasis contains scenes based on scenes from billy liar , although most of it is based on the video for the kinks ' dead end street . the band north of cornwallis has a song entitled '' billy liar '' . the title of the song '' twisterella '' is also the title of a song that billy co-writes in the novel . the kids in the hall '' billy dreamer '' character is based loosely on billy liar . yo la tengo make several references to the movie in particular in their song '' tom courtenay '' , which is the name of the actor who plays billy . the song '' william , it was really nothing '' by the smiths took inspiration from the book . one of the characters in billy liar , arthur crabtree , was actually a real person . he was a british cinematographer and film director in the 20th century . it has been suggested that a local newspaper columnist parodied in both the book and the film bears a remarkable resemblance to the late-life keith waterhouse himself , when he was ensconced at the daily mail . uncut magazine article by nick johnstone , 2000 . . references . external links . billy ! the musical ( broadway.com article )