Machairodus

discovery . image : machairodus.png thumb upright left early restoration by lancelot speed from 1905 depicting machairodus with tiger-like markings machairodus was first named in 1832 , by german naturalist johann jakob kaup . though its remains were known since 1824 , it was believed by georges cuvier that the fossils had come from a species of bear , which he called ursus cultridens ( known today as megantereon ) based on composite sample of teeth from different countries , species and geologic ages , leading to what would become a long series of complications . kaup however , recognized the teeth as those of felids and promptly reclassified the existing specimens as machairodus , including m . cultridens in it . the name quickly gained acceptance and by the end of the 19th century , many species of felid or related feliform ( such as nimravids ) were lumped into the genus machairodus , including but not limited to sansanosmilus , megantereon , paramachairodus , amphimachairodus , nimravides , and homotherium among others . this would eventually turn machairodus into something of a wastebasket taxon , which would be rectified with the discoveries of more complete skeletons of other machairodonts . description . in general machairodus was similar in size to a modern lion or tiger , at long and standing about at the shoulder . m . aphanistus from the mediterranean late miocene is known to be rather tiger-like in size and skeletal proportions , with a mass of to . it was similar to the related nimravides of north america . the skeleton also indicates that this species would have possessed good jumping abilities . m . alberdiae was contemporary with m . aphanistus in cerro de los batallones fossil deposits and was smaller and more primitive in anatomical features and would not have exceeded . m . horribilis of china is the largest known species of the genus and is comparable in size to the much later smilodon populator , weighing around . its skull , measuring upwards of in length , is one of the largest known skulls for any machairodont , with only a recently described s . populator skull rivaling it in size , with the latter cat outweighing m . horribilis at . overall , the skull of machairodus was noticeably narrow compared with the skulls of extant panthera cats , and the orbits were relatively small . the canines were long , thin and flattened from side to side but broad from front to back like the blade of a knife , as in homotherium . the front and back edges of the canines were serrated when they first grew , but these serrations were worn down in the first few years of the animal 's life . however , a skull of m . horribilis was shown to be similar to extant pantherines in some cranial characters , suggesting new evidence for the diversity of killing bites even within in the largest saber-toothed carnivorans , offering an additional mechanism for the mosaic evolution leading to functional and morphological diversity in sabertooth cats . machairodus probably hunted as an ambush predator . its legs were too short to sustain a long chase , so it most likely was a good jumper , and used its canines to cut open the throat of its prey . its teeth were rooted to its mouth and were as delicate as those in some related genera , unlike most saber-toothed cats and nimravids of the time , which often had extremely long canines which hung out of their mouths . the fangs of machairodus , however , were able to more easily fit in its mouth comfortably while being long and effective for hunting . despite its great size , the largest example of machairodus , m . horribilis was better equipped to hunt relatively smaller prey than smilodon , as evidenced by its moderate jaw gape of 70 degrees , similar to the gape of a modern lion . . classification . the fossil species assigned to the genus machairodus were divided by turner into two grades of evolutionary development , with m . aphanistus and the north american '' nimravides '' catacopis representing the more primitive grade and m . coloradensis and m . giganteus representing the more derived grade . the characteristics of the more advanced grade include a relative elongation of the forearm and a shortening of the lumbar region of the spine to resemble that in living pantherine cats . subsequently , the more derived forms were assigned a new genus , amphimachairodus , which includes m . coloradensis , m . kurteni , m . kabir and m . giganteus . in addition , m . catacopsis was reclassified as n . catacopsis . . paleobiology . studies of machairodus indicate that the cat relied predominantly on its neck muscles to make the killing bite applied to its victims . the cervical vertebrae show clear adaptations to making vertical motions in the neck and skull . there are also clear adaptations for precise movements , strength , and flexibility in the neck that show compatibility with the canine-shearing bite technique that machairodontine cats are believed to have performed . these adaptations are believed to have also been partial compensation in this primitive machairodont against the high percentage of canine breakages seen in the genus . . paleoecology . machairodus seemed to prefer open woodland habitat , as evidenced by finds at cerro de los batallones , which is of vallesian age . as a top predator at batallones , it would have hunted large herbivores of the time . such herbivores would have included horses like hipparion , the hornless rhinoceros aceratherium , the giraffes deccanatherium and birgerbohlinia , the deer euprox and lucentia , the antelopes paleoreas , tragoportax , miotragocerus and dorcatherium , the gomphotherid mastodon tetralophodon , the porcupine hystrix , and the suid microstonyx , . machairodus would have competed for such prey with the amphicyonid magericyon , fellow machairodonts promegantereon and paramachairodus , bears such as agriotherium and indarctos , and the small hyaenid protictitherium . while agriotherium and magericyon would likely have been strongly competitive with machairodus for food , promegantereon , paramachairodus and protictitherium likely were less potential rivals . evidence also exists indicating that machairodus may have been prone to niche partitioning with magericyon , possibly living in slightly different habitats , with the machairodont preferring more heavily vegetated habitats while the bear-dog hunted in the more open areas . dietary preferences may also have played a role in the coexistence between these two large predators at batallones . based on its jaw gape , the largest species , m . horribilis was probably a hunter of relatively slow-moving horses . . pathology . machairodus aphanistus fossils recovered from batallones reveal a high percentage of tooth breakages , indicating that unlike later machairodonts , due to a lack of protruding incisors machairodus often used its sabers to subdue prey in a manner similar to modern cats ; this was a more risky strategy that virtually ensured that damage to their saber teeth often occurred . references .