Inge Morath

biography . early years ( 1923–1945 ) . morath was born in graz , austria , to mathilde ( wiesler ) and edgar morath , scientists whose work took them to different laboratories and universities in europe during her childhood . her parents had converted from catholicism to protestantism . first educated in french-speaking schools , morath relocated in the 1930s with her family to darmstadt , a german intellectual center , and then to berlin , where morath 's father directed a laboratory specializing in wood chemistry . morath was registered at the luisenschule near bahnhof friedrichstraße . morath , inge . '' i trust my eyes '' ( manuscript for berlin lecture ) , page 4 . unpublished : date unknown . inge morath foundation . morath 's first encounter with avant-garde art was the entartete kunst ( degenerate art ) exhibition organized by the nazi party in 1937 , which sought to inflame public opinion against modern art . '' i found a number of these paintings exciting and fell in love with franz marc 's blue horse '' , morath later wrote . '' only negative comments were allowed , and thus began a long period of keeping silent and concealing thoughts . '' morath ( n.d . ) i trust my eyes , p . 5 after finishing high school , morath passed the abitur and was obliged to complete six months of service for the reichsarbeitsdienst ( reich labour service ) before entering berlin university . at university , morath studied languages . she became fluent in french , english and romanian in addition to her native german ( to these she later added spanish , russian and chinese ) . '' i studied where i could find a quiet space , in the university and the underground stations that served as air-raid shelters . i did not join the studentenschaft ( student body ) . '' morath ( n.d . ) i trust my eyes , p . 9 . toward the end of world war ii , morath was drafted for factory service in tempelhof , a neighbourhood of berlin , alongside ukrainian prisoners of war . during an attack on the factory by russian bombers , she fled on foot to austria . in later years , morath refused to photograph war , preferring to work on stories that showed its consequences . middle years ( 1945–1962 ) . left after the war , morath worked as a translator and journalist . in 1948 , she was hired by warren trabant , first as vienna correspondent and later as the austrian editor , for heute , an illustrated magazine published by the office of war information in munich . morath encountered photographer ernst haas in post-war vienna , and brought his work to trabant 's attention . trabant , warren . letter to alex haas . unpublished : august 1987 . ernst haas archive . working together for heute , morath wrote articles to accompany haas ' pictures . in 1949 , morath and haas were invited by robert capa to join the newly founded magnum photos in paris , where she started as an editor . working with contact sheets sent into the magnum office by founding member henri cartier-bresson fascinated morath . '' i think that in studying his way of photographing i learned how to photograph myself , before i ever took a camera into my hand . '' morath , inge . i trust my eyes ( manuscript for berlin lecture ) , page 15 . unpublished : date unknown . inge morath foundation . morath was briefly married to the british journalist lionel birch and relocated to london in 1951 . that same year , she began to photograph during a visit to venice . '' it was instantly clear to me that from now on i would be a photographer '' , she wrote . '' as i continued to photograph i became quite joyous . i knew that i could express the things i wanted to say by giving them form through my eyes . '' morath , inge . i trust my eyes ( manuscript for berlin lecture ) , page 17 . unpublished : date unknown . inge morath foundation . morath applied for an apprenticeship with simon guttman , who was then an editor for picture post and running the picture-agency report . when guttman asked what morath wanted to photograph , and why , she answered that '' after the isolation of nazism i felt i had found my language in photography . '' morath , inge . i trust my eyes ( manuscript for berlin lecture ) , page 18 . unpublished : date unknown . inge morath foundation . after morath had spent several months working as guttman 's secretary , she had an opportunity to take photographs . she sold her first photographs - of opening nights , exhibitions , inaugurations , etc . - under the pseudonym '' egni tharom '' , her name spelled backwards . morath , inge . '' about myself '' , in inge morath : life as a photographer , page 15 . munich : gina keyahoff verlag , 1999 . morath divorced birch and returned to paris to pursue a career in photography . in 1953 , after morath presented her first large picture story , on the worker priests of paris , to capa , he invited her to join magnum as a photographer . her first assignments were stories that did not interest '' the big boys . '' she went to london on an early assignment to photography the residents of soho and mayfair . morath 's portrait of mrs . eveleigh nash , from that assignment , is among her best-known works . at capa 's suggestion , in 1953–54 , morath worked with cartier-bresson as a researcher and assistant . in 1955 she was invited to become a full member of magnum photos . during the late 1950s , morath traveled widely , covering stories in europe , the middle east , africa , the united states , and south america , for such publications as holiday , paris match , and vogue . in 1955 she published guerre à la tristesse , photographs of spain , with robert delpire , followed by de la perse à l'iran , photographs of iran , in 1958 . morath published more than thirty monographs during her lifetime . like many magnum members , morath worked as a still photographer on numerous motion picture sets . having met director john huston while she was living in london , morath worked on several of his films . huston 's moulin rouge ( 1952 ) was one of morath 's earliest assignments , and her first time working in a film studio . when morath confessed to huston that she had only one roll of color film to work with and asked for his help , huston bought three more rolls for her , and occasionally waved to her to indicate the right moments to step in with her camera . morath , inge . i trust my eyes ( manuscript for berlin lecture ) , page 22 . unpublished : date unknown . inge morath foundation . huston later wrote of morath that she '' is a high priestess of photography . she has the rare ability to penetrate beyond surfaces and reveal what makes her subject tick . '' morath , inge . portraits , new york : aperture foundation , 1986 . in 1959 , while photographing the making of the unforgiven , starring audrey hepburn , burt lancaster , and audie murphy , morath accompanied huston and his friends duck hunting on a mountain lake outside durango , mexico . photographing the excursion , morath saw through her telephoto lens that murphy and his companion had capsized their boat 350 feet from shore . she could see that murphy , stunned , was nearly drowning . a skilled swimmer , morath stripped to her underwear and hauled the two men ashore by her bra strap while the hunt continued uninterrupted . image : im misfits.jpg thumb right marilyn monroe , dancing with eli wallach , and clark gable , rehearsing a scene during the filming of the misfits , 1960 . morath worked again with huston in 1960 on the set of the misfits , a film featuring marilyn monroe , clark gable and montgomery clift , with a screenplay by arthur miller . magnum photos had been given exclusive rights to photograph the making of the movie , and morath and cartier-bresson were the first of nine photographers to work on location outside reno , nevada during the process . inge morath , the road to reno . göttingen , steidl , 2006 morath met miller while working on the misfits . marriage and family . morath married arthur miller on february 17 , 1962 and relocated permanently to the united states . miller and morath 's first child , rebecca , was born in september 1962 . the couple 's second child daniel was born in 1966 with down syndrome and was institutionalized shortly after his birth . rebecca miller is a film director , actress , and writer who is married to the actor daniel day-lewis . first decade . morath 's achievements during her first decade of work as a photographer are significant . along with eve arnold , she was among the first women members of magnum photos , which remains to this day a predominantly male organization . many critics have written of the playful surrealism that characterizes morath 's work from this period . for example , lahs-gonzales , olivia . '' to unseal the deeper nature , '' in inge morath : life as a photographer , munich : gina keyahoff verlag , 1999 , pp . & nbsp ; 61–74 morath attributed this to the long conversations she had with cartier-bresson during their travels in europe and the united states . morath 's work was motivated by a fundamental humanism , shaped as much by her experience of war as by its lingering shadow over post-war europe . in morath 's mature work , she documents the endurance of the human spirit under situations of extreme duress , as well as its manifestations of ecstasy and joy . later years ( 1962–2002 ) . after re-locating to the united states , during the 1960s and 1970s morath worked closer to home , raising a family with miller and working with him on several projects . their first collaboration was the book in russia ( 1969 ) , which , together with chinese encounters ( 1979 ) , described their travels and meetings in the soviet union and the people 's republic of china . in the country , published in 1977 , was an intimate look at their immediate surroundings . for both miller , who had lived much of his life in new york city , and morath , who had come to the us from europe , the connecticut countryside offered a fresh encounter with america . reflecting on the importance of morath 's linguistic gifts , miller wrote that '' travel with her was a privilege because alone i would never been able to penetrate that way . '' morath , inge . the road to reno . göttingen , steidl , 2006 . page 111 . in their travels morath translated for miller , while his literary work was the entrée for morath to encounter an international artistic elite . the austrian photographer kurt kaindl , her long-time colleague , noted that '' their cooperation developed without outward pressure and is solely motivated by their common interest in the people and the respective cultural sphere , a situation that corresponds to inge morath 's working style , since she generally feels inhibited by assignments . '' kurt kaindl , '' inge morath : a photographer 's biography , '' in inge morath : fotografien 1952–1992 . salzburg : edition fotohof , p . 27 morath sought out , befriended , and photographed artists and writers . during the 1950s she photographed artists for robert delpire 's magazine l'oeil , including jean arp and alberto giacometti . she met the artist saul steinberg in 1958 . when she went to his home to make a portrait , steinberg came to the door wearing a mask which he had fashioned from a paper bag . over a period of several years , they collaborated on a series of portraits , inviting individuals and groups of people to pose for morath wearing steinberg 's masks . another long-term project was morath 's documentation of many of the most important productions of arthur miller 's plays . image : im bourgeois.jpg thumb right louise bourgeois with her sculpture to fall on deaf ears , 1991 . some of morath 's signal achievements are in portraiture , including posed images of celebrities as well as fleeting images of anonymous passersby . her pictures of boris pasternak 's home , pushkin 's library , chekhov 's house , mao zedong 's bedroom , as well as artists ' studios and cemetery memorials , are permeated with the spirit of invisible people still present . the writer philip roth , whom morath photographed in 1965 , described her as '' the most engaging , sprightly , seemingly harmless voyeur i know . if you 're one of her subjects , you hardly know your guard is down and your secret recorded until it 's too late . she is a tender intruder with an invisible camera . '' image : im cobbhoffman.jpg thumb left actor dustin hoffman with lee j . cobb , who originated the role of willy loman in arthur miller 's death of a salesman , 1965 . as the scope of her projects grew , morath prepared extensively by studying the language , art , and literature of a country to encounter its culture fully . although photography was the primary means through which morath found expression , it was but one of her skills . in addition to the many languages in which she was fluent , morath was also a prolific diary and letter-writer ; her dual gift for words and pictures made her unusual among her colleagues . morath wrote extensively , and often amusingly , about her photographic subjects . although she rarely published these texts during her lifetime , posthumous publications have focused upon this aspect of her work . they have brought together her photographs with journal writings , caption notes , and other archival materials relating to her various projects . during the 1980s and 1990s , morath continued to pursue both assignments and independent projects . the film copyright by inge morath was made by german filmmaker sabine eckhard in 1992 , and was one of several films selected for a presentation of magnum films at the berlin international film festival in 2007 . eckhard filmed morath at home and in her studio , and in new york and paris with her colleagues , including cartier-bresson , elliott erwitt and others . in 2002 , working with film director regina strassegger , morath fulfilled a long-held wish to revisit the lands of her ancestors , along the borderlands of styria and slovenia . this mountainous region , once part of the austro-hungarian empire , had become the faultline between two conflicting ideologies after world war ii and until 1991 , when attempts at rapprochement led to conflict on both sides of the border . the book last journey ( 2002 ) , and strasseger 's film grenz räume ( border space , 2002 ) , document morath 's visits to her homeland during the final years of her life . death . morath miller died of cancer in 2002 , at the age of 78 . . honors and legacy . 2003 , her family established the inge morath foundation to preserve and share her legacy . 2002 , members of magnum photos established the inge morath award in honor of their colleague as an annual award . it is administered by the inge morath foundation , and is given to a woman photographer under the age of 30 , to support her work towards the completion of a long-term project . 1992 great austrian state prize for photography . 1984 doctor honoris causa fine arts , university of connecticut , hartford , us . 1983 state of michigan senate resolution no 295 ; tribute to inge morath . since 2012 salzburg , austria has an '' inge-morath-platz '' in tribute to the photographer . it is also the location of the fotohof , a photographic institution which has collaborated with her since the beginning of the 1980s . quotations . '' photography is a strange phenomenon & nbsp ; . you trust your eye and can not help but bare your soul . morath , inge . camera austria : 1985/86 , no . 19/20 . p . 80 '' inge morath was , above all , a traveller & nbsp ; . her approach to a story was 'to let it grow ' , without any apparent concern for narrative structure , trusting in her experience and interests to shape her work rather than in an editorial formula & nbsp ; . she unsentimentally made pictures that were guided by her relationship to a place . these relationships were invariably intimate and long-lasting ; she regularly revisited the places she chose to photograph and learned the relevant language & nbsp ; . similarly , her photographs of people are born of intimacy without sentimentality . it is as if the presentation of relationships takes the place of story structure , and her work is best understood as an ongoing series of observations of the life she made for herself . '' boot , chris , ed . magnum stories . new york : phaidon , p . 338 . . solo exhibitions . 2008 well disposed and trying to see : inge morath and arthur miller in china , university of michigan museum of art , ann arbor , us . 2004 inge morath : the road to reno , chicago cultural center , illinois , us . 2004 inge morath : chinese encounters , pingyao international photography festival , pingyao , china . 2003 exposition , henri cartier-bresson foundation , paris , france . 2002 inge morath : danube , city gallery of russe , russe , bulgaria . 2002 inge morath : new york , galerie fotohof , salzburg , austria ; stadt passau , europäische ; wochen , germany eswe forum , wiesbaden ; esther woerdehoff galerie , paris , france ; amerikahaus tübingen , germany . 1999 retrospective , kunsthalle wien , austria ; fnac etoile , paris , france ; fnac , barcelona , spain . 1999 spain in the fifties , museo del cabilde , montevideo , uruguay . 1998 inge morath : danube , festival of central european culture , london , uk ; museen d . stadt regensburg , regensburg , germany . 1998 retrospective , edinburgh festival , edinburgh , uk ; museum of photography in charleroi , belgium ; municipal gallery , pamplona , spain . 1998 celebrating 75 years leica gallery , new york , us . 1997 retrospective kunsthal , rotterdam , netherlands . 1997 inge morath : danube , keczkemet museum , esztergom museum , hungary 1997 photographs 1950s to 1990s , tokyo museum of photography , tokyo , japan 1996 women to women , takashimaya gallery , tokyo , japan 1996 inge morath : danube , neues schauspielhaus , berlin , germany ; leica gallery , new york , us ; galeria fotoforum , bolzano , italy . 1995 spain in the fifties , museo de arte contemporaneo , madrid , spain ; museo de navarra , pamplona , spain . 1994 spain in the fifties , spanish institute , new york , us 1992/94 retrospective , neue galerie linz , austria ; america house , frankfurt , germany ; hardenberg gallery , velbert , germany ; galerie fotogramma , milano , italy ; royal photographic society , bath , uk ; smith gallery and museum , stirling , uk ; america house , berlin , germany ; hradcin gallery , prague , czech republic . 1991 portraits , kolbe museum berlin , germany ; rupertinum museum salzburg , austria 1989 portraits , burden gallery , aperture foundation , new york , new york , us ; norwich cathedral , norwich , uk ; american cultural center , brussels , belgium . 1988 retrospective , union of photojournalists , moscow , russia ; sala del canal museum , madrid , spain ; rupertinum museum , salzburg , austria . 1984 salesman in beijing , hong kong theatre festival . 1979 inge morath : photographs of china , grand rapids art museum , michigan , us . 1964 inge morath : photographs , gallery 104 , art institute of chicago , illinois , us . monographs . 1955 guerre à la tristesse . delpire , france . 1956 fiesta in pamplona . universe books , us . 1956 venice observed . reynal & co . , us . 1958 de la perse à l'iran . robert delpire , france . 1960 bring forth the children : a journey to the forgotten people of europe and the middle east . mcgraw-hill , us . 1967 le masque ( drawings by saul steinberg ) . maeght editeur , france . 1969 in russia . viking press , us . 1972 in russia penguin . 1973 east west exercises . simon walker & co . , us . 1975 grosse photographen unserer zeit : inge morath . c.j . bucher verlag , switzerland . 1977 in the country . viking press , us . 1979 inge morath : photographs of china . grand rapids art museum , us . 1979 chinese encounters . with arthur miller . straus & giroux , us . 1981 bilder aus wien : der liebe augustin . reich verlag , switzerland . 1984 salesman in beijing . with arthur miller . viking press , us . 1986 portraits . aperture , us . 1991 russian journal . aperture foundation , us . 1992 inge morath : photographs 1952 to 1992 . otto müller/verlag , austria . 1994 inge morath : spain in the fifties . arte con texto , spain . 1995 donau . verlag , austria . 1996 woman to woman . magnum photos , japan . 1999 inge morath : portraits . verlag , austria . 1999 arthur miller : photographed by inge morath . fnac , spain . 1999 inge morath : life as a photographer . kehayoff books , germany . 2000 saul steinberg masquerade . viking studio , us . 2002 new york . otto müller/verlag , austria . 2003 inge morath : last journey prestel . 2006 the road to reno . steidl , germany . 2009 inge morath : iran . steidl , germany . 2009 inge morath : first color . steidl , germany . 2015 history travels badly . london : fishbar . 2016 inge morath : on style . abrams , us . 2018 inge morath : magnum legacy . prestel , us . see also . list of austrian artists and architects list of austrians list of street photographers . references . external links . hdl:10079/fa/beinecke.morath . general collection , beinecke rare book and manuscript library , yale university .