Coquette (film)

plot . norma besant , daughter of a southern doctor , is an incorrigible flirt and has many suitors . her father dr . besant ( john st . polis ) favors stanley ( matt moore ) , who is taken with norma . however norma has met a simple man named michael jeffrey ( johnny mack brown ) who she has fallen madly in love with . dr . besant disapproves of michael and orders norma to never see him again . norma gives him their word , then promptly plans to marry michael in 6 months , when he 's made 'good in the hills ' so he can buy her a home in the valley . a few months pass and michael sneaks down from the hills to see norma at a country club dance . wanting more time alone they sneak off to michael 's mother 's cabin . according to norma they made coffee and talked all night about the future . she returns home the next day at 4am . however someone has spotted the couple and begun to spread rumors around town destroying norma 's reputation . michael is furious and vows he will ask her father for her hand in marriage immediately . dr . besant is furious and a heated verbal exchange takes place with michael leaving , vowing to run away with norma as soon as possible . dr . besant orders norma to her room and leaves , pistol in hand . as norma 's brother tries to distract her stanley arrives , telling norma that michael was fatally wounded by her father . norma runs to michael 's cabin where he dies in her arms . dr . besant 's lawyer friend arrives begging norma to lie to the police to save her father 's life . norma refuses , but later as the trial wears on she changes her mind . she takes the stand and lies about michael , trying to save her father . norma breaks down under cross examination and her father comes to comfort her on the witness stand . as he tells her she does not have to lie anymore , he spots the gun on the evidence table . after comforting norma , dr . besant approaches the bench and confesses his guilt , saying he has done wrong and is willing to pay the price . he then takes the gun and kills himself in front of the court . later we see stanley waiting for norma , who has been in the judge 's chambers . he offers to walk her home , but norma refuses , saying she would like to walk home alone . cast . mary pickford as norma besant johnny mack brown as michael jeffery matt moore as stanley wentworth john st . polis as dr . john besant william janney as jimmy besant henry kolker as jasper carter george irving as robert wentworth louise beavers as julia . production background . the film stars silent film star mary pickford in her first talkie , johnny mack brown in one of his earliest roles , john st . polis , matt moore ( pickford 's ex brother in law ) , and louise beavers . the film was adapted for the screen by john grey , allen mcneil , and sam taylor from the play by george abbott and ann preston bridgers , and was directed by sam taylor . the play was based on real events in south carolina and some dialog was used verbatim from court testimony . the play originally opened in new york city on november 8 , 1927 with helen hayes in the title role . though a product of pre-code hollywood , the film was severely censored during scripting . in the play , the leading lady is pregnant and the story hinges on the fact that she carries the child of the man killed by her father . her father murdered the man because he asked to marry the girl . but to save her father from disgrace when her pregnancy becomes apparent , she preemptively kills herself . wrote ernst and lorentz , '' the censor conscious producer would not allow the movie to show the girl enceinte , thus destroying the whole plot . '' william cameron menzies provided set decorator , or production design , with the film crediting him for '' settings '' . cinematography was by karl struss . the song '' coquette '' , written by johnny green and carmen lombardo , has since become a jazz standard . place in pickford 's career . pickford had been one of the most popular stars in silent film . her popularity had been steady since her debut in 1909 . in 1916 , she founded her own production company , taking control of every detail of her films . in 1919 along with charlie chaplin , her husband douglas fairbanks , and d.w . griffith she founded united artists , giving her complete control over her films . known for little-girl type roles such as pollyanna ( one of her highest-grossing films ever ) pickford had been trying to escape typecasting since 1923 with roles such as rosita . however these films did not do as well as her child roles ( though they were still successful at the box office ) , and pickford had reverted to making films like little annie rooney in 1925 and sparrows in 1926 . she tried an older role with her final silent film , my best girl in 1927 and , following the death of her mother in 1928 , cut off her world-famous curls . with the arrival of talkies pickford immediately took to the new medium , being one of the first major stars to do so . at her pickfair studios she installed a sound stage in 1928 , and began preparing for her first talkie . she bought the rights to coquette , a play that helen hayes had made popular on the stage . coquette is the story of a flirtatious southern girl who chooses to stand behind her father after he kills the man that she loves . much like my best girl the role was adult , with pickford portraying a flapper type for the first time . sound technology was extremely touchy at the time , with footsteps or rattling jewelry ruining takes . cameras could barely move , and were hidden behind glass so as to not interfere with the sound recording . pickford employed the best technology possible , resulting in a film that had more natural movement and acting than other early talkies . despite pickford 's embrace of the new medium it seems she was as concerned as everyone else about how her voice would record , despite the fact she had a stage career before entering film . after reviewing her first sound test she reportedly remarked , '' why that sounds like a little pipsqueak voice ! '' she immediately began intensive vocal lessons , hoping to accomplish a realistic southern accent for the role . pickford became nervous during preparation , firing her sound man when a take was n't ready for her review on time . on set during an emotional scene , she notoriously fired her longtime cameraman and friend , charles rosher , when he yelled '' cut ! '' in the middle of one of her lines . she did n't know at the time that a shadow had fallen across her face , as she was simply annoyed at being interrupted . slightly embarrassed by her behavior and realizing she had been wrong , she wrote him a letter saying , '' tragedy is an ugly mask . i do n't want to look like something on a candy box or a valentine . '' . release . the film premiered in new york april 12 , 1929 at the rialto theatre . a fuse blew rendering the film silent . it was rewound and shown again , this time with intermittent , bad sound . finally technicians were able to fix the problem and the film began again for a third time . contemporary reviews were polite and warm . it was a box office success grossing 1.4 million . coquette launched pickford as a competent talkie star . complete prints of the film still exist . in the 1990s it was restored by the library of congress and the mary pickford institute . pickford 's estate no longer owns the rights as mgm ( ironically parent company of ua ) bought the film for a never-made remake . coquette was released on home video by mgm/ua home video in the 1990s . at the time , it was owned by turner entertainment as part of mgm 's pre-1986 library . today it remains owned by turner ( under current parent company warner bros . ) , and has now been released on dvd via warner archive collection . academy awards . pickford was a founding member of the academy of motion picture arts and sciences , of which her husband would be the first president . she was one of only three female founding members . the first academy awards were held in 1929 , without any nominations for pickford . she was nominated for best actress in 1930 for the 2nd academy awards . many have accused pickford of unfairly winning , using her clout and standing in the industry for an award of which she was unworthy . pickford did lobby hard for the oscar , inviting the judges over for tea at her home pickfair . however her performance was critically and publicly acclaimed . pickford would win another oscar in 1976 , an honorary lifetime achievement award . in 2008 , a legal battle ensued between the academy and buddy rogers 's heirs over the sale of the coquette oscar . the heirs were trying to sell the award for charity , as stipulated in rogers 's second wife 's will . the academy insisted that the award must be offered back to them for 1 , to comply with a rule made long after pickford won her oscar . they claimed that when she won her honorary oscar in the 1970s she signed a contract covering the coquette statuette as well . the heirs argued that it might not have even been her signature , as pickford was frail at the end of her life . the academy won the legal battle , but announced they were willing to pursue a private agreement with the heirs . the outcome of this agreement is unknown .