Wedding ring

history . the western traditions of wedding rings can be traced to ancient rome and greece , and were first associated with the marital dowry and later with a promise of fidelity . the modern exchange of rings derived from the customs of europe in the middle ages as part of christendom . in both the united states and canada , wedding rings were initially only worn by wife , but became customary for both spouses during the 20th century . . historical styles . . gimmel rings . during the 16th and 17th centuries , european husbands bestowed a gimmel ring upon their wives . similar to the puzzle ring , the gimmel ring consisted of two interlocking bands . the bride and groom both wore one of these bands after their engagement , and the two bands were reunited during the wedding ceremony . subsequently , the wife wore the combined ring . . poesy rings . the poesy ring was a style of ring that was popular during the renaissance era . it was a band of sterling silver inscribed with a poem or '' poesy '' . . other styles . different cultures used many other historical styles of wedding ring . for example , see the image below of the byzantine ring depicting christ uniting bride and groom . also , in the middle east the puzzle ring was a historical custom : this ring consisted of several pieces that joined together into a cohesive band when worn properly . the object of this style of ring was to render it very difficult to put on the finger properly such that , if the wife removed it , her husband would know . the fede ring , being a band consisting of two hands clasped in betrothal , is another historical custom of europe that ostensibly dates from antiquity . limited gold content in the united kingdom . in 1942 during the second world war , british wartime restrictions on the manufacture of jewelry resulted in '' utility '' wedding rings that were limited to a maximum mass of two pennyweights , being slightly heavier than 3 grams , and were forged of 9 carat gold rather than the traditional 22 carat . the regional assayer office hallmarked these rings , which guaranteed their gold content and compliance with the wartime regulations with a special utility mark adjacent to the mark for the year on the inside of the band ; the hallmark resembled a capital '' u '' with the bottom curve absent or two parentheses enclosing a space , i . e . , '' ( ) '' . double-ring ceremony . the double-ring ceremony describes the exchange of wedding rings by and for both spouses . in several european nations such as the nordic countries , it is common to exchange plain engagement rings of the same form for both sexes , and typically , an additional , more precious , and bejeweled wedding ring is given to the bride . in the nuptials , the groom 's ring becomes a wedding ring also , and can be bestowed anew by the bride as a part of the wedding ceremony . the engagement is commonly a matter of agreement between the two , and the wedding rings are chosen together . both engagement and wedding rings are worn on the left hand , the bride having both rings together . occasionally , the groom receives a separate wedding ring . in germany and austria , both parties use engagement rings worn on the left hand . at the nuptials , a wedding ring is placed on the right hand , as in several east european nations , including bulgaria , poland , and russia . this can be a new ring for the bride or both , or reusing the engagement rings . any engagement rings can then remain on the left hand or be transferred to the right hand . in germany , it has been customary for both the bride and the groom to wear a wedding ring since at least the 1870s and mentions of couples exchanging rings during the wedding ceremony in the netherlands can be found at least as far back as 1815 . in brazil , mexico , and spain both sexes also wear engagement rings , and the groom 's ring often becomes a wedding ring in the nuptial exchange ceremony . in the netherlands plain bands can be worn on either hand , left for catholics and right for protestants . when engaged , both bride and groom wear what will be the wedding band on the opposite hand and switch hands after the wedding . compositions and styles . in western nations , wedding rings are often forged of gold , palladium , platinum , argentium silver , titanium , tungsten , or more recently , silicone . the perpetuity of noble metals symbolizes the permanence of the marriage . common engravings on the inside of the ring include the name of one 's spouse , the names of both spouses , the date of the wedding or a phrase of significance to the spouses . in many nations the engagement rings are plain while the bride 's wedding ring commonly is bejeweled . some customs include the wedding ring as the final of a series of gifts , which also may include the engagement ring , traditionally given as a betrothal present . this custom was practiced in ancient rome . . religion . wedding ceremony customs . left in several traditions , the best man or maid of honor has the duty of keeping track of a couple 's wedding rings and to produce them at the symbolic moment of the giving and receiving of the rings during the traditional marriage ceremony . in more elaborate weddings , a ringbearer ( who is often part of the family of the bride or groom ) may assist in the ceremonial parading of the rings into the ceremony , sometimes on a special cushion . among eastern orthodox and eastern catholic christians , the exchange of rings is not technically part of the wedding service , but rather are exchanged at the betrothal . it is always a two-ring set given to her by the priest or by the best man . the orthodox christian church of greece has recently stopped performing betrothal blessings separately , as these were often non-committing , and now a betrothal ceremony is the initial part of the wedding service . in many families an informal blessing is now performed by the betrothed ones ' parents in a family dinner that formalizes the betrothal . the ceremony of betrothal is now possibly performed immediately before the wedding ( or '' crowning '' as it is more properly called ) , and the actual symbolic act of marriage is not the exchange of rings , but the crowning . historically , the wedding ring was connected to the exchange of valuables at the moment of the wedding rather than a symbol of eternal love and devotion , a sign of '' earnest money '' . according to the 1549 edition of the book of common prayer : after the words 'with this ring i thee wed ' follow the words 'this gold and silver i give thee ' , at which point the groom was supposed to hand a leather purse filled with gold and silver coins to the bride . it is a relic of the times when marriage was a contract between families , not individual lovers . both families were then eager to ensure the economic safety of the young couple . sometimes it went as far as being a conditional exchange as this old ( and today outdated ) german formula shows : ' i give you this ring as a sign of the marriage which has been promised between us , provided your father gives with you a marriage portion of 1000 reichsthalers ' ( approximately 20 & nbsp ; kg of silver ) . . post-wedding customs . image : diamond , 14kg , wed eng anv ring.jpg thumb a gold banded engagement ring combination welded together image : wedding ring louvre ac924.jpg thumb byzantine wedding ring , depicting christ uniting the bride and groom , 7th century , nielloed gold ( louvre ) after marriage the wedding ring is worn on the hand on which it had been placed during the ceremony . by wearing rings on their fourth fingers , married spouses symbolically declare their life-long love for and fidelity to each other . this symbol has public utility , and is presently expected as a matter of tradition and etiquette , so much so that its absence is often interpreted as meaning that the person is single . many spouses wear their wedding rings day and night . it is not uncommon for either marriage partner who have professions that the wearing of jewelry may be dangerous such as , actors , police , electrical workers , not to wear rings . so it is not uncommon for one to wear it on a chain around their neck . since the 19th century in the west , it has been considered unlucky to remove a wedding ring once it has been placed on the finger in church . some cultures exchange additional rings . in some parts of india , hindu women may wear a toe ring or bichiya instead of a finger ring , but the bichiya is increasingly worn in addition to a finger ring . in eastern india , primarily in west bengal , women wear an iron bangle , which may be gold- or silver-plated , called a loha . in romania , spouses celebrate their silver wedding anniversary , i . e . , twenty-fifth anniversary , by exchanging silver rings , which are worn on the fourth finger of the left hands along with their original , and usually gold , wedding rings . . wedding ceremonies that use rings . . christian . anglican ( book of common prayer ) : '' bless , o lord , this ring to be a sign of the vows by which this man and this woman have bound themselves to each other ; through jesus christ our lord . amen . i give you this ring as a symbol of my vow , and with all that i am , and all that i have , i honor you , in the name of the father , and of the son , and of the holy spirit '' eastern orthodoxy : in the eastern orthodox service of betrothal , the priest makes the sign of the cross with rings over the bride 's head while declaring three times '' the servant of god ( groom ) is betrothed to the handmaid of god ( bride ) , in the name of the father , and of the son , and of the holy spirit . amen '' . next , it is declared three times again over the bride 's head with the names reversed , after which the rings are exchanged three times , either by the priest or best man . the priest asks god '' to bless this putting on of rings with a heavenly blessing and that an angel of the lord will go before these your servants , all the days of their life . '' in the eastern orthodox church , wedding rings are traditionally worn on the right hand . lutheran : '' i give you this ring as a sign of my love and faithfulness . '' roman catholic church : '' name , take this ring as a sign of my love and fidelity . in the name of the father , and of the son , and of the holy spirit . '' because the equality of the spouses is emphasized in the roman catholic sacrament of marriage , generally the bride and groom each give to the other a wedding ring and recite the above formula in turn . mixed usage and non-use in other christian churches . while most christian churches ( such as the catholic , lutheran , and anglican ) have the exchange of rings within their wedding liturgies , some christian denominations eschew the use of wedding rings . the wearing of plain dress has historically been practiced by many methodist churches , in keeping with the teaching of john wesley , who stated that people should not be '' adorned with gold , or pearls , or costly apparel '' ( this clause is contained in the general rules of the methodist church ) . the first methodist liturgical text , the sunday service of the methodists , omitted the ring ceremony . as such , members of some methodist churches , such as the allegheny wesleyan methodist connection and bible methodist connection of churches , do not wear wedding rings . on the other hand , other methodist churches contain the exchange of wedding rings within their services for holy matrimony . in the wedding liturgy for the free methodist church , for example , the groom and bride say the following when exchanging rings : '' this ring i give you in token and pledge of our constant faith and steadfast love '' . '' a service of christian marriage , rite i '' contained in the united methodist book of worship states that the exchange of rings is optional but when it is done , they are blessed and pronounced as '' the outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace , signifying to us the union between jesus christ and his church '' . following this , the bride and groom state the following as they exchange rings : '' name , i give you this ring as a sign of my vow , and with all that i am , and all that i have , i honor you ; in the name of the father , and of the son , and of the holy spirit . '' some conservative mennonite groups do not wear jewelry , including wedding rings , as part of their practice of plain dress . the amish do not wear wedding rings but the men are clean shaven before marriage and grow a full beard after marriage . among quaker christians , especially conservative friends and holiness friends , the wedding ring is traditionally not worn as a part of their testimony of simplicity . among quaker groups that do wear wedding rings , the following wording is used by the bride and groom as they are exchanged : '' with this ring , i thee wed . '' the friends general conference , for example , teaches that '' although wedding rings are not necessary in a quaker wedding , the couple may exchange them if they wish . this is often done after they speak their vows . '' traditionally , adherents of the seventh-day adventist church do not wear wedding rings . the usage of wedding rings among seventh-day adventists , however , has increased . . jewish . judaism : '' you are consecrated to me with this ring according to the law of moses and israel . '' in orthodox judaism , only the groom declares this in hebrew ; but in reform judaism , both the bride and groom declare it . many orthodox jewish men do not wear wedding rings . . see also . claddagh ring courtship engagement ring eternity ring use of a wedding ring as a symbol : la bottega dell'orefice , a 1989 film based on the jeweler 's shop , a play written by karol józef wojtyła love marriage in the eastern orthodox church pre-engagement ring ring finger thali necklace trilogy ring visual markers of marital status wedding ring cushion . references . external links .