Queensboro Bridge

description . the queensboro bridge is a two-level double cantilever bridge , with separate cantilevered spans over channels on each side of roosevelt island joined by a fixed central truss . in all it has five spans , including approaches between the cantilevered sections and each terminus . their lengths are as follows : queensborough ( 59th street ) bridge , nycroads.com manhattan to roosevelt island span length ( cantilever ) : roosevelt island span length : roosevelt island to queens span length ( cantilever ) : manhattan approach span brooklyn approach span total length between anchorages : total length including approaches : until it was surpassed by the quebec bridge in 1917 , the span between manhattan and roosevelt island was the longest cantilever in north america . . levels . the upper level of the bridge has four lanes of automobile traffic , consisting of two roadways with two lanes in each directions . it provides a view of the bridge 's cantilever truss structure and the new york skyline . although the two upper level roadways both end at thomson avenue on the queens side , they diverge in opposite directions on the manhattan side . the lanes used by westbound traffic , located on the northern side of the bridge , lead north to 62nd and 63rd streets . on the other hand , the lanes normally used by eastbound traffic are located on the southern side of the bridge lead south to 57th and 58th streets . the roadway to 57th and 58th streets is used as a westbound high-occupancy vehicle lane during rush hours . the lower level has five vehicular lanes , the inner four for automobile traffic and the southern outer lane for automobile traffic as well , used exclusively for queens-bound traffic . the north outer roadway was converted into a permanent pedestrian walk and bicycle path in september 2000 . . manhattan approach . the manhattan approach to the bridge is supported on a series of guastavino tile vaults which formed the elegant ceiling of the former food emporium bridge market and the restaurant guastavino 's , located under the bridge . originally , this open air promenade was known as bridgemarket and was part of hornbostel 's attempt to make the bridge more hospitable in the city . in february 2020 , it was announced that trader joe 's is planning to open a supermarket in this space . . history . construction . serious proposals for a bridge linking manhattan to long island city were first made as early as 1838 , and attempts to finance such a bridge were made by a private company beginning in 1867 . its efforts never came to fruition and the company went bankrupt in the 1890s . queensboro bridge ( historic overview ) successful plans finally came about in 1903 – after the creation in 1898 of greater new york city through the amalgamation of manhattan ( new york city ) , brooklyn , queens , the bronx and staten island eldredge & horenstein ( 2014 ) , p.125 – under the new city 's department of bridges , led by gustav lindenthal , who was appointed to the new position of commissioner of bridges in 1902 , in collaboration with leffert l . buck and henry hornbostel , designers of the williamsburg bridge . construction soon began , but it would take until 1909 for the bridge to be completed due to delays from the collapse of an incomplete span during a windstorm , and from labor unrest , which included an attempt to dynamite one span . the bridge opened for public use on march 30 , 1909 , having cost about 18 million and 50 lives . there was a ten-cent toll to drive over the bridge . staff ( april 4 , 1909 ) '' white maps new bridge ; issues bulletin of instructions for reaching structure '' the new york times p.s4 the bridge 's ceremonial grand opening was held on june 12 , 1909 . at the time , it was the fourth longest bridge in the world . the grand opening included a fireworks display . the bridge was then known as the blackwell 's island bridge , from an earlier name for roosevelt island . . early days . the bridge 's upper level originally contained two pedestrian walkways and two elevated railway tracks ( which connected a spur of the irt second avenue line in manhattan to the queensboro plaza station in queens ) . three lanes of roadway were installed on the south side of the upper level in 1931 , replacing the former upper-level walkway . all service on the second avenue elevated was discontinued in 1942 . from 1955 to 1958 , two additional lanes were built on the upper level . the upper-level ramps on the queens end of the bridge were built during the same time . the lower deck originally hosted four motor traffic lanes , and what is now the '' outer roadway '' and pedestrian walk were two trolley lanes . a trolley connected passengers from queens and manhattan to a stop in the middle of the bridge , where passengers could take an elevator or the stairs down to roosevelt island . the trolley operated from the bridge 's opening until april 7 , 1957 . the trolley lanes and mid-bridge station , as well as the stairs , were removed in the 1950s following the trolley 's discontinuation , and for the next few decades the bridge carried 11 lanes of automobile traffic . in 1930 , an elevator was built on the bridge to transport cars and passengers to what was then called welfare island , now roosevelt island . then , in 1955 , the welfare island bridge from queens opened , allowing automobile and truck access to the island and the only non-aquatic means in and out of the island ; the vehicular elevator to queensboro bridge then closed , but was n't demolished until 1970 . however , as late as august 1973 , a separate passenger elevator ran during the work week from near the queens end of the bridge to welfare island via the welfare island elevator storehouse , which was described at the time as '' clean but gloomy '' . there was also at one time what was known as the '' upside-down '' building on the north side of the bridge , because its main entrance was on the bridge . this provided access to the hospitals on the island . this building , which was located about where the current tram station is , has now been demolished . eldredge & horenstein ( 2014 ) , p.126 . since the 1980s . after years of decay and corrosion , an extensive renovation of the bridge began in 1987 and completed in 2012 , having cost over 300 million . for a brief period in 1997 , the traffic directions of the upper-level roadways were reversed during rush hours so that the upper level used a left-hand traffic pattern . manhattan-bound traffic used the southern roadway while queens-bound traffic used the northern roadway . after residents of the upper east side voiced concerns about severe rush-hour congestion , this traffic pattern was discontinued , and the south-side walkway on the lower level was converted to a queens-bound vehicular lane during the evening rush hour . the outer roadway was later opened to vehicles at all times , but after a series of fatal crashes in 2013 , officials decided to close the ramp during the nighttime . in march 2009 , the new york city bridge centennial commission sponsored events marking the centennial of the bridge 's opening . the bridge was also designated as a list of historic civil engineering landmarks by the american society of civil engineers during the year of its centennial anniversary . in december 2010 , the city announced that the bridge would be renamed in honor of former mayor ed koch from the queensboro bridge to the ed koch queensboro bridge . the new name became official in march 2011 . the renaming decision was unpopular among queens residents and business leaders , and many local residents continue to refer to the bridge by its older name . new york city council member peter vallone , jr . from queens vowed to remove koch 's name from the bridge . vallone said , '' never in a million years would they think to rename the brooklyn or manhattan bridges , but for some reason , it was ok to slap queens around . '' in january 2021 , the city decided to install a two-way protected bike path on the northern outer roadway of the lower level , to be completed by 2022 . the southern outer roadway , which at the time was used by vehicular traffic , would be used exclusively by pedestrians . . public transportation . rail tracks . in addition to the two rapid transit tracks , the bridge also had four streetcar tracks . the following queens lines operated over the bridge : queensboro bridge local , 1909–1957 ( last streetcar line in the city ) astoria line ( queens surface ) , 1910–1939 steinway line , 1910–1939 college point line , 1910–1925 corona line ( surface ) , 1910–1922 queens boulevard line ( surface ) , 1913–1937 one manhattan line operated over the bridge , the third avenue railway 's 42nd street crosstown line from 1910 to 1950 . buses . the bridge carries the q32 local bus route operated by mta new york city transit and the q60 and q101 local bus routes operated by the mta bus company . the bridge also carries 20 express bus routes in the eastbound direction only : the mta bus company 's , and new york city transit 's x63 , x64 , and x68 . ( these bus routes use the queens-midtown tunnel for westbound travel . ) . in popular culture . literature in f . scott fitzgerald 's novel the great gatsby , jay gatsby and nick carraway traverse the bridge on their way from long island to manhattan . '' the city seen from the queensboro bridge , '' nick says , '' is always the city seen for the first time , in its first wild promise of all the mystery and the beauty in the world '' . in e.b . white 's novel charlotte 's web , charlotte tells wilbur that the bridge took eight years to build , while she could have built a web in a night . in the climax of truman capote 's novel summer crossing , the main character commits suicide and murders three passengers by crashing her car into the queensboro bridge . music the title of the simon & garfunkel song '' the 59th street bridge song ( feelin ' groovy ) '' refers to the queensboro bridge . harpers bizarre covered the song in 1967 , with the record rising to no . 13 on the us billboard hot 100 chart , making it the musical group 's best-selling hit . it is also cited in the jack 's mannequin song , '' diane , the skyscraper , '' on the dear jack ep . it is also mentioned by rapper and queensbridge native mc shan in his song '' the bridge '' . it is the title of a track from the album indiana by singer-songwriter david mead . the queensbridge houses hip hop group mobb deep filmed the music video for '' shook ones ( part ii ) '' on the bridge . music videos billy joel 's video for his 1985 single '' you 're only human ( second wind ) '' was primarily filmed on the bridge . pink floyd 's original video for '' us and them '' prominently features footage of the bridge . film in the 1932 paramount pictures light comedy film no man of her own , starring clark gable and carole lombard , lombard 's character looks out of her hotel window to a view across the east river and the queensboro bridge , and refers to '' blackwell 's island '' , now known as roosevelt island . in the 1936 screwball comedy my man godfrey , the bridge is seen several times as the location of the city dump where the '' forgotten men '' live . in the 1948 film sorry , wrong number , leona stevenson ( barbara stanwyck ) is an invalid . through her open bedroom window we see the bridge with frequent trains crossing , and on the telephone she overhears a murder plot in which the killer tells someone that he will wait till the train is crossing the bridge '' in case her window is open and she should scream . '' in the 1958 warner brothers ' film , auntie mame , the bridge serves as a backdrop for mame dennis ' beekman place apartment . the bridge appears prominently in several scenes of the 1966 comedy film any wednesday which starred jane fonda , jason robards , and dean jones . in woody allen 's 1979 film manhattan , the characters played by allen and diane keaton relax on a bench in front of the bridge at dawn . the shot became the film 's poster image . the final chase in the 1981 film escape from new york takes place on the bridge . the climax of the 1985 film turk 182 ! takes place on and around the queensboro bridge . in the 1991 film new jack city , nino brown and the duh duh man hang a man over the side of the bridge because of a drug debt he owes . eventually they throw him off it to his death . in the 1992 family comedy film home alone 2 , the protagonist kevin is seen taking a taxi over the bridge upon his entrance into nyc . in the 1993 romantic comedy film for love or money , the main protagonists doug ireland ( michael j . fox ) and andy hart ( gabrielle anwar ) reunite on opposite sides of the queensboro bridge and call out to each other on what they found out about unscrupulous billionaire christian hanover ( anthony higgins ) . in the 1997 american action thriller film conspiracy theory , directed by richard donner , the bridge is crossed many times throughout the film . in the 2002 superhero film spider-man , the climax of the film where spider-man battles against his archenemy , the green goblin takes place around the bridge . in the 2003 slapstick comedy film anger management , dave buznik ( adam sandler ) and dr . buddy rydell ( played by jack nicholson ) , stop their car in the middle of the bridge to sing '' i feel pretty '' . in the 2003 american comedy film elf , when buddy is ostracised by his father , he goes to the queensboro bridge to brood . it is from there that he sees santa 's sleigh out of control , on its way to central park . the 2010 movie salt has a scene that takes place on , and was filmed on , the queensboro bridge . the queensboro bridge was featured in 2012 as one of the few remaining bridges in the dark knight rises after bane took control of the city . in the 2013 movie now you see me , a car chase across the bridge leads to a crash in which the death of a character is faked . the bridge was featured in the 2014 film , a most violent year , in which there is an attempted hijacking of a fuel truck on it , followed by a short shootout and foot chase that leads down one of the bridge 's service staircases . the bridge is referred to as the '' 59th street bridge '' in the film . in the 2018 film avengers : infinity war , peter parker is on a school bus driving over the queensboro bridge . when he sees an alien spaceship over manhattan , he changes into spider-man and exits the bus , swinging towards the spaceship . television the queensboro bridge has been shown in the credits of the television series archie bunker 's place , the jeffersons , the king of queens , taxi , rescue me and alphas . it is referred to in the opening theme of the king of queens , in the line '' . sitting here in traffic , on the queensboro bridge tonight . '' the bridge is also referred to in the simpsons episode '' you only move twice '' , when hank scorpio destroys it to show that he 's not bluffing ( though there is a possibility that the bridge collapsed on its own ) . an illustration of the bridge by aurore giscard d'estaing is used in the main title of the a & e tv series a nero wolfe mystery . the bridge is referenced often on the internet television program and podcast norm macdonald live , when host norm macdonald tells his guest about how he discovered his cohost adam eget ; the story goes that eget would '' handjob punks for 15 bucks a man '' under the bridge . the opening sequence of the television series taxi depicts a checker taxi cab driving out of manhattan on the upper deck of the bridge . george and louise jefferson are shown riding in a taxi on the bridge 's lower deck in the opening sequence of the television series the jeffersons . video games the bridge was destroyed in the video game crysis 2 when a facility on roosevelt island exploded , causing the bridge to violently collapse . the bridge appears in the game driver : parallel lines and is able to be traveled on foot or by car . during the mission '' kidnap '' the player must blow up a billboard on the manhattan side to block traffic . the bridge is part of the nintendo ds game c.o.p . : the recruit . the bridge appears in the crew and the crew 2 .