1940 in literature

events . january – the english literary magazine horizon first appears in london , with cyril connolly , peter watson and stephen spender contributing . february – the canadian writer robertson davies leaves the old vic repertory company in the u.k . march 11 – ed ricketts , john steinbeck and six others leave monterey for the gulf of california on a marine invertebrate collecting expedition . april – máirtín ó cadhain is interned by the irish government at curragh camp , as a member of the irish republican army . may 14 – the battle of the netherlands ends with the surrender of the main dutch forces to nazi german invaders . this evening , the gay dutch jewish writer jacob hiegentlich takes poison , dying four days later aged 33 . june 5 – the english novelist j . b . priestley broadcasts his first sunday evening radio postscript , '' an excursion to hell '' , on the bbc home service in the u.k . , marking the role of pleasure steamers in the dunkirk evacuation , which ended the day before . july jean-paul sartre is taken prisoner by the germans . léopold sédar senghor also becomes a prisoner of war this year . p . g . wodehouse is interned by the germans as an enemy alien . american science fiction and fantasy pulp magazine fantastic novels begins its first run . july 26 – a movie adaptation of jane austen 's pride and prejudice is released , with aldous huxley as a screenwriter . september – in uriage-les-bains , vichy france , emmanuel mounier and the esprit circle establish a school of government and philosophy attuned to catholic social teaching . initially endorsing the révolution nationale , uriage is put off by vichy 's collaboration with germany , and blends into the christian left . september 10 – virginia woolf 's london house at 37 mecklenburgh square is destroyed by bombing . on october 18 she sees the ruins of her previous home , 52 tavistock square , bloomsbury , similarly destroyed . chronology in oxford world 's classics editions of her works . october grahame greene 's london house on clapham common northside is destroyed by bombing , an event reflected in his novels the ministry of fear ( 1943 ) and the end of the affair ( 1951 ) . philip larkin enters st john 's college , oxford . october 4 – brian o'nolan 's first '' cruiskeen lawn '' humorous column is published in the irish times ( dublin ) . in the second column he assumes the pseudonym myles na gcopaleen . the original columns are composed in irish . he continues the column until the year of his death in 1966 . december – penguin books launches its puffin books children 's imprint in the united kingdom with war on land by james holland . december 21 – f . scott fitzgerald dies of a heart attack aged 44 in the apartment of hollywood gossip columnist sheilah graham , leaving his novel the last tycoon unfinished . the following day , his friend and fellow novelist and screenwriter , nathanael west , is killed aged 37 in an automobile accident in california . december 29 – heavy bombing causes a second great fire of london , destroying the premises of simpkin , marshall , the u.k . 's largest book wholesaler , and of many publishers also in the paternoster row area , including longman , together with some 25,000 volumes in the guildhall library 's stores and a copy of the rubaiyat of omar khayyam in a jewelled binding by sangorski & sutcliffe ( 1939 ) . on dawn patrol as a fighter pilot , douglas blackwood sees his family 's publishing business , william blackwood , burning . unknown dates the russian poet anna akhmatova 's collection from six books appears in the soviet union , but distribution is soon suspended , copies pulped and remaining issues prohibited . wills & hepworth of loughborough begins publishing ladybird books in the united kingdom in a new format , with bunnykin 's picnic party : a story in verse for children with illustrations in colour . . new books . fiction . thomas armstrong – the crowthers of bankdam frank baker – miss hargreaves pridi banomyong – the king of the white elephant giorgio bassani – una città di pianura henry bellamann – kings row pierre benoit – the environs of aden karin boye – kallocain douglas brown and christopher serpell – loss of eden : a cautionary tale heðin brú – feðgar á ferð ( the old man and his sons ) edgar rice burroughs – synthetic men of mars dino buzzati – the tartar steppe ( il deserto dei tartari ) erskine caldwell – trouble in july taylor caldwell – the earth is the lord's joyce carey – charley is my darling john dickson carr the department of queer complaints the man who could not shudder and so to murder ( as carter dickson ) murder in the submarine zone ( as carter dickson ) adolfo bioy casares – the invention of morel ( la invención de morel ) willa cather – sapphira and the slave raymond chandler – farewell , my lovely agatha christie sad cypress one , two , buckle my shoe walter clark – the ox-bow incident james daugherty – daniel boone georges duhamel – les maîtres mircea eliade – the secret of dr . honigberger ( secretul doctorului honigberger ; published with nights at serampore ) graham greene – the power and the glory ernest hemingway – for whom the bell tolls georgette heyer – the corinthian dorothy b . hughes – the so blue marble hammond innes the trojan horse wreckers must breathe anna kavan – asylum piece ( short stories ) arthur koestler – darkness at noon marie belloc lowndes – the christine diamond carson mccullers – the heart is a lonely hunter w . somerset maugham – the mixture as before ( short stories ) nancy mitford – pigeon pie john o'hara – pal joey raymond postgate – verdict of twelve john cowper powys – owen glendower clayton rawson -- the headless lady michael sadleir – fanny by gaslight mikhail sholokov – the don flows home to the sea ( english translation of part 2 of тихий дон – tikhii don , the quiet don ) c . p . snow – george passant ( first in the strangers and brothers series ) christina stead – the man who loved children rex stout over my dead body where there 's a will phoebe atwood taylor the criminal c . o . d . the deadly sunshade the left leg ( as alice tilton ) dylan thomas – portrait of the artist as a young dog ( short stories ) luis trenker – captain ladurner sachchidananda vatsyayan – shekhar : ek jivani richard wright – native son francis brett young – mr . lucton 's freedom xiao hong ( 蕭紅 ) – ma bole ( 马伯乐 ) . children and young people . enid blyton – the naughtiest girl in the school godfried bomans – eric in the land of the insects ( erik of het klein insectenboek ) ingri and edgar parin d'aulaire – abraham lincoln doris gates – blue willow dorothy kunhardt – pat the bunny phyllis matthewman – chloe takes control ( first in the danewood series of seven books ) arthur ransome – the big six marjorie kinnan rawlings – when the whippoorwill dr . seuss – horton hatches the egg armstrong sperry – call it courage jakob streit – beatuslegenden geoffrey trease – cue for treason john r . tunis – the kid from tomkinsville laura ingalls wilder – the long winter . drama . jean anouilh – léocadia ugo betti – il cacciatore di anitre ( the duck hunter ) bertolt brecht – mr puntila and his man matti ( herr puntila und sein knecht matti , written ) agatha christie – peril at end house jean cocteau – le bel indifférent artturi järviluoma – pohjalaisia terence rattigan and anthony goldsmith – follow my leader ( first performed ) lawrence riley – return engagement george shiels – the rugged path vernon sylvaine – nap hand john van druten – leave her to heaven old acquaintance emlyn williams the corn is green the light of heart . non-fiction . mortimer j . adler – how to read a book '' cato '' ( michael foot , frank owen , and peter howard ) – guilty men george gamow – the birth and death of the sun g . h . hardy – a mathematician 's apology bernard leach – a potter 's book c . s . lewis – the problem of pain karl mannheim – man and society in the age of reconstruction arthur marder – the anatomy of british sea power : a history of british naval policy in the pre-dreadnought era , 1880–1905 a . a . milne – war with honour malcolm muggeridge – the thirties hugh trevor-roper – archbishop laud , 1573–1645 edmund wilson – to the finland station . births . january 4 – gao xingjian ( 高行健 ) , chinese novelist january 15 – ted lewis , english novelist ( died 1982 ) january 23 – mario levrero , uruguayan novelist ( died 2004 ) february 9 – j . m . coetzee , south african novelist march 16 – bernardo bertolucci , italian writer and film director march 23 – ama ata aidoo , ghanaian playwright march 28 – russell banks , american novelist april 6 - homero aridjis , mexican poet , novelist and environmentalist april 13 – j . m . g . le clézio , french novelist april 15 – jeffrey archer , english novelist , politician and perjurer april 24 – sue grafton , american detective novelist ( died 2017 ) may 1 – bobbie ann mason , american novelist , short story writer , essayist and literary critic may 7 – angela carter , english novelist ( died 1992 ) may 8 – peter benchley , american novelist ( died 2006 ) may 13 – bruce chatwin , english novelist and travel writer ( died 1989 ) may 24 – joseph brodsky , russian-born american poet and essayist ( died 1996 ) may 28 – maeve binchy , irish novelist ( died 2012 ) july 17 – tim brooke-taylor , english comedy writer and performer july 31 – fleur jaeggy , swiss-italian fiction writer september 3 – eduardo galeano , uruguayan journalist , writer and novelist ( died 2015 ) october 15 – fanny howe , american poet , novelist and short story writer october 20 – robert pinsky , american poet november 15 – rené avilés fabila , mexican writer ( died 2016 ) november 20 – wendy doniger o'flaherty , american indologist and translator december 5 – peter pohl , swedish novelist december 29 – brigitte kronauer , german novelist ( died 2019 ) stan grant , wiradjuri australian writer . deaths . january 1 – panuganti lakshminarasimha rao , indian writer ( born 1865 ) january 5 – humbert wolfe , british poet and epigrammist ( born 1885 ) january 27 – isaak babel , russian journalist and dramatist ( executed , born 1894 ) february 11 – john buchan , scottish novelist ( born 1875 ) february 29 – e . f . benson , english novelist , biographer , memoirist and short-story writer ( born 1867 ) march 7 – edwin markham , american poet ( born 1852 ) march 10 – mikhail bulgakov , russian novelist and playwright ( born 1891 ) march 12 – florence white , english food writer ( born 1863 ) march 16 sir thomas little heath , english classicist and translator ( born 1861 ) selma lagerlöf , swedish children 's writer and nobel laureate ( born 1858 ) april 13 – mary bathurst deane , english novelist ( born 1843 ) june 10 – marcus garvey , jamaican journalist and publisher ( born 1887 ) june 20 – charley chase , american screenwriter ( born 1893 ) june 21 – hendrik marsman , dutch poet ( born 1899 ) august 4 – ze'ev jabotinsky , russian-born zionist leader , novelist and poet ( heart attack , born 1880 ) august 7 – t . o'conor sloane , american editor ( born 1851 ) september 8 – constantin banu , romanian politician , journalist , cultural promoter and aphorist ( born 1873 ) september 26 – w . h . davies , welsh poet ( born 1871 ) november 27 – nicolae iorga , romanian historian , politician , culture critic , poet and playwright ( assassinated , born 1871 ) december 21 – f . scott fitzgerald , american novelist ( born 1896 ) december 22 – nathanael west , american screenwriter and satirist ( born 1903 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : kitty barne , visitors from london james tait black memorial prize for fiction : charles morgan , the voyage james tait black memorial prize for biography : hilda f . m . prescott , spanish tudor : mary i of england newbery medal for children 's literature : james daugherty , daniel boone nobel prize in literature : not awarded prix goncourt : francis ambrière , the long holiday ( awarded in retrospect ) pulitzer prize for drama : william saroyan , the time of your life pulitzer prize for poetry : mark van doren , collected poems pulitzer prize for the novel : john steinbeck , the grapes of wrath king 's gold medal for poetry : michael thwaites . references .