Change ringing

technique and physics . image : bells.devon.750pix.jpg thumb bell ringing at stoke gabriel parish church , devon , england . this is in the '' ringing chamber '' . today , some towers have as many as sixteen bells that can be rung together , though six or eight bells are more common . the highest pitch bell is known as the treble , and the lowest is the tenor . for convenience , the bells are referred to by number , with the treble being number 1 and the other bells numbered by their pitch & mdash ; 2,3,4 , etc . & mdash ; sequentially down the scale . ( this system often seems counter-intuitive to musicians , who are used to a numbering that ascends with pitch . ) the bells are usually tuned to a diatonic major scale , with the tenor bell being the tonic ( or key ) note of the scale . some towers contain additional bells so that different subsets of the full number can be rung , still to a diatonic scale . for instance , many 12-bell towers have a flat sixth , this again may seem counter-intuitive to musicians . a flat sixth in a 12-bell ring is in fact the flattened 7th of the scale . a sharp second bell is a sharpened 11th ( or 4th in the upper , incomplete octave ) of the scale . for example , assume the bells are tuned to c-g ' . a flat sixth is b allowing f-f ' to be a scale . the sharp second is f ' , giving g-g ' as the scale . which if rung instead of the normal number 6 bell allows 2 to 9 to be rung as light diatonic octave ; other variations are also possible . dove entry for worcester cathedral , a twelve bell tower with 3 semi-tone bells . search on dove 's guide for towers with 13 or more bells , note that christ church cathedral , dublin is listed as having 16 bells , with additional sharp 6 , 9 and 13 ; swan bells , perth , western australia , is again a 16 but with additional flat 3 and 10 . retrieved 28 may 2008 . the bells in a tower reside in the bell chamber or belfry usually with louver to enable the sound to escape . the bells are mounted within a bellframe of steel or wood . each bell is suspended from a headstock fitted on trunnions ( plain or non-friction bearings ) mounted to the belfry framework so that the bell assembly can rotate . when stationary in the down position , the centre of mass of the bell and clapper is appreciably below the centreline of the trunnion supports , giving a pendulum effect to the assembly , and this dynamic is controlled by the ringer 's rope . the headstock is fitted with a wooden stay , which , in conjunction with a slider , limits maximum rotational movement to a little less than 370 degrees . to the headstock a large wooden wheel is fitted and to which a rope is attached . the rope wraps and unwraps as the bell rotates backwards and forwards . this is full circle ringing and quite different from fixed or limited motion bells , which chime . within the bell the clapper is constrained to swing in the direction that the bell swings . the clapper is a rigid steel or wrought iron bar with a large ball to strike the bell . the thickest part of the mouth of bell is called the soundbow and it is against this that the ball strikes . beyond the ball is a flight , which controls the speed of the clapper . in very small bells this can be nearly as long as the rest of the clapper . below the bell chamber there may be one or more sound chambers , ( one of which is likely to house the clock mechanism if the church has one ) and through which the rope passes before it drops into the ringing chamber or room . typically , the rope 's length is such that it falls close to or on to the floor of the ringing chamber . about from the floor , the rope has a woolen grip called the sally ( usually around long ) while the lower end of the rope is doubled over to form an easily held tail-end . unattended bells are normally left hanging in the normal ( '' down '' ) position , but prior to being rung , the bells are rung up . in the down position , the bells are safe if a person touches them or pulls a rope . a bell that is up is dangerous to be near , and only expert ringers should ever contemplate entering a bell chamber or touching a rope when the bells are up . the ringer pulls on the rope and starts the bell swinging . each time the bell swings the ringer adds a little more energy to the system , similar to pushing a child 's swing . eventually there is enough energy for the bell to swing right up and be left over-centre just beyond the balance point with the stay resting against the slider . bellringers typically stand in a circle around the ringing chamber , each managing one rope . bells and their attendant ropes are so mounted that the ropes are pulled in a circular sequence , usually clockwise , starting with the lightest ( treble ) bell and descending to the heaviest ( tenor ) . to ring the bell , the ringer first pulls the sally towards the floor , upsetting the bell 's balance and swinging it on its bearings . as the bell swings downwards the rope unwinds from the wheel and the ringer adds enough pull to counteract friction and air resistance . the bell winds the rope back onto the other side of the wheel as it rises and the ringer can slow ( or check ) the rise of the bell if required . the rope is attached to one side of the wheel so that a different amount of rope is wound on and off as it swings to and fro . the first stroke is the handstroke with a small amount of rope on the wheel . the ringer pulls on the sally and when the bell swings up it draws up more rope onto the wheel and the sally rises to , or beyond , the ceiling . the ringer keeps hold of the tail-end of the rope to control the bell . after a controlled pause with the bell , on or close to its balancing point , the ringer rings the backstroke by pulling the tail-end , causing the bell to swing back towards its starting position . as the sally rises , the ringer catches it to pause the bell at its balance position . in english-style ringing the bell is rung up such that the clapper is resting on the lower edge of the bell when the bell is on the stay . during each swing , the clapper travels faster than the bell , eventually striking the soundbow and making the bell sound . the bell speaks roughly when horizontal as it rises , thus projecting the sound outwards . the clapper rebounds very slightly , allowing the bell to ring . at the balance point , the clapper passes over the top and rests against the soundbow . in change ringing where the order the bells are struck in is constantly altered , it is necessary to time the swing so that this strike occurs with precise positioning within the overall pattern . precision of striking is important at all times . to ring quickly , the bell must not complete the full 360 degrees before swinging back in the opposite direction ; while ringing slowly , the ringer waits with the bell held at the balance , before allowing it to swing back . to achieve this , the ringer must work with the bell 's momentum , applying just the right amount of effort during the pull that the bell swings as far as required and no further . this allows two adjacent bells to reverse positions , the quicker bell passing the slower bell to establish a new pattern . although ringing up certainly involves some physical exertion , actual ringing should rely more on practised skill than mere brute force . even the smallest bell in a tower is much heavier than the person ringing it . the heaviest bell hung for full-circle ringing is in liverpool cathedral and weighs . despite this colossal weight , it can be safely rung by one ( experienced ) ringer . ( whilst heavier bells exist—for example big ben—they are generally only chimed , either by swinging the bell slightly or having the bell hung dead and using a mechanical hammer . ) . changes . the simplest way to sound a ring of bells is by ringing rounds . this is a repeated sequence of bells descending from the highest to lowest note , which is from the lightest to the heaviest bell . this was the original sequence used before change ringing was developed , and change ringing always starts and ends with this sequence . two forms of ringing changes have developed ; call changes : where the conductor of the ringing commands each change . method ringing : where after a word of command to start , the changes are rung from memory by the ringers . call change ringing . most ringers begin their ringing career with call change ringing ; they can thus concentrate on learning the physical skills needed to handle their bells without needing to worry about '' methods '' . there are also many towers where experienced ringers practise call change ringing as an art in its own right ( and even exclusively ) , particularly in the english county of devon . the technique was probably developed in the early 17th century in the early days of change ringing . change ringing – the history of an english art . vol 3 , w t cook & cyril a wratten . pub central council of church bell ringers , 1994 . p90-93 “ a recent examination of a number of call change ‘ peals ’ still practised at totnes in the south hams …including the ubiquitous ‘ sixty on thirds ’ discloses a remarkable affinity with the seventeenth century plain changes described by duckworth and stedman . the avoidance , where possible , of repetition and the use of hunts , half-hunt and extreme changes are all features of their construction , and together suggest a basically uninterrupted descent from the earlier system , unbroken by the intrusion of change ringing . '' call change ringing requires one ringer to give commands to change the order of the bells , as distinct from method ringing , where the ringers memorise the course of bells as part of a continuous pattern . bell ringing- the english art of change ringing . ron johnson . pub viking 1986 p 89 . . call change instructions . in call change ringing each different sequence of the bells , known as a '' row '' , is specifically called out by one ringer , the '' conductor '' , who instructs the other ringers how to change their bells ' places from row to row . this command is known as a '' call '' . the change is made at the next '' handstroke '' ( when the sally on the bell rope is pulled ) , after the call . in calling , the conductor usually has a strategy or plan to achieve the desired progression of rows , rather than remembering each call , and an example of these is shown in the example on eight bells . conductors can space out the calls at will , but each row is normally struck twice at least because of the difficulty of calling continuous changes . calls are usually of the form '' x to ( or after ) y '' or '' x and y '' ; in which x and y refer to two of the bells by their physical numbers in the tower ( not by their positions in the row ) . all cause two bells to swap . the first form is used for calling up and calling down , and the second form swaps the two bells mentioned . as an example of calling up and down , consider the following sequence of rows , and the calls a conductor would use to call them : such names are often humorous ; for example , the sequence 14235 on five bells is called weasels because it is the tune of the refrain to the children 's song pop goes the weasel . this is particularly effective at the end of ringing down . the bells are in order , and so if not chimed leave a pause , the sequence becomes : 1.4.23.5 where a dot indicates a pause . called changes are listed at maw call change collection . striking . although neither call change nor method ringing produces conventional tunes , it is still the aim of the ringers to produce a pleasant sound . one of the most important aspects of this is good striking — not only should the bells never clash by sounding at the same moment , the bells should sound to a perfect rhythm , tapping out a steady beat . it is the custom to leave a pause of one beat after every alternate row , i.e . , after the ringing of each ‘ backstroke ’ row . this is called 'open handstroke ' ringing ( or open handstroke leading ) . in devon , cornwall and parts of yorkshire , this custom is not followed when call-change ringing ; instead the bells strike steadily without the pause . this latter custom is known as the closed-hand or cartwheel arrangement . however for method ringing the universal practice is to ring with open handstrokes , even in the south west of england . striking competitions are held where various bands of ringers attempt to ring with their best striking . they are judged on their number of faults ( striking errors ) ; the band with the fewest faults wins . these competitions are organized on regional and national levels , being particularly popular among the call-change ringers of devon where it is customary to include the quality of the rise and lower of the bells as part of the judging criteria . competitions for method ringers usually start '' off the stay '' —i.e . , the bells are rung up before the competition begins . at the annual national 12 bell striking contest the bands are ringing methods and producing a different change approximately every 2.5 seconds , with a gap between bells of 0.21 seconds . to an expert ringer 's ear at this level of competition a variation of a tenth of this would be discernible as a striking fault . sport . in 2016 readers of the ringing world magazine wrote to insist that bell ringing was '' an art and a sport '' , as demonstrated by regular '' striking competitions . '' it was suggested that classification of change ringing as a sport by sport england could save it from becoming obsolete . but the central council of church bell ringers opposed the move , suggesting that it would jeopardise its relationship with church bodies , since bell ringing should be seen as part of christian worship , not exercise . the council 's president , chris mew , said : '' where is the glamour of the sports field and where are the david beckhams of the belfry ? '' . in literature and television . the mystery novel the nine tailors by dorothy l . sayers ( 1934 ) contains a great deal of information on change-ringing . her fictional detective , lord peter wimsey , demonstrates his skill at ringing , and the solution to the central puzzle of the book rests in part upon his knowledge of the patterns of change ringing . connie willis , who frequently and overtly references sayers in to say nothing of the dog ( 1997 ) , features bell ringers in her earlier novel doomsday book ( 1992 ) ; a group of american women led by a mrs . taylor frequently appears practising for or ringing both handbells and changes . the british television series midsomer murders aired an episode in the fifth season on a series of murders within a bell-ringing team , in '' ring out your dead '' . in the science-fiction novel anathem by neal stephenson ( 2008 ) changes are rung in a cloistered monastery for mathematicians to signal different ceremonies . english bell-ringing terms . thumb back – at or near last place in a change . back bells – the heavier bells ( so tend to limit the speed ) . backstroke ( or backstroke home ) – the part of a bell 's cycle started by pulling on the tail end ( rope end ) in the tower , or with the bells raised in hand ; also : the position at which the back bells come into rounds order at backstroke . baldrick – the leather lined metal strap from which the clappers used to be hung . band – a group of ringers for a given set of bells ( or for a special purpose , e.g . , a '' peal band '' ) bearings – the load-bearing assembly on which the headstock ( and so the whole bell ) turns about its gudgeon pins . modern hanging means the bell is hung on ball bearings , but were traditionally plain bearings . bob – the commonest type of call in most methods or a class of plainmethod ( in which either dodging takes place or some bells are not just hunting or place making ) ; also can mean ( usually called the '' bob place '' ) the appropriate point in the method ( e.g . a lead end ) to modify the sequence of changes . bob caller – someone who calls a touch , but does not check the ringing as a conductor would . bristol start – starting to raise in peal by adding an extra bell each time . bump the stay – allow the bell to swing over the balance , out of control , so the stay pushes the slider to its limit , stopping the bell . cambridge – the right place surprise method , one of the standard eight , that is often the first learned . canons – loops cast onto older bells ' crowns . cinques – ( pronounced '' sinks '' ) methods for working eleven bells ( possibly with a twelfth covering ) the name deriving from the practice of swapping five pairs of bells . clapper – the metal ( usually cast iron ) rod/hammer hung from a pivot below the crown of the bell , that strikes the soundbow of the bell when the bell stops moving . clocking – causing a bell to sound while down by pulling a hammer against it ( as a clock would ) or by pulling the clapper against the side of the bell . closed leads ( also called cartwheeling ) – handstroke changes follow backstroke changes with no handstroke gap ( unlike open leads ) come round – return to rounds to end a touch ( e.g . '' come round at handstroke ) , or produce rounds prematurely . cover – a bell ( e.g . tenor ) ringing at the end of every row , while the other bells ring a method . delight – a treble bob method in which an internal place is made sometimes , but not every time , the treble is going from one dodge to another ( '' cross sections '' ) . dodge – changing direction for one stroke in bell ringing ( although strictly a dodge is taking a retrograde step in the middle of a portion of hunting ) . dodging practice is an exercise where two bells exchange places on every stroke , sometimes taught to aid learners change from call changes to plain hunt . double method – a method where the structure is the same if reversed . doubles – a method with five working bells , possibly with a sixth covering . down – either : when the bells are hanging with the mouth lowermost position , or : moving towards the front ( as in '' hunting down '' ) . extent – a touch where all possible changes are rung exactly once each ; the number of such different rows is n factorial , where n is the number of bells . handstroke – the stroke when the sally is gripped . hunt – move one place at a time up or down ( see plain hunt , treble bob hunt , etc . ) . firing- from rounds all the bells are rung at once for a few strokes before returning to rounds . done at special occasions such as weddings or new year . fire out – to ring haphazardly , either because ringers accidentally try to ring at once , or deliberately for wedding ringing . front – at or near the start of a row . front bells – the smaller bells which are rung first in rounds . garter hole – the hole in the wheel where the rope passes through . lead end – the change on which the treble is leading ( ringing first ) at its backstroke . little bob – a method in which the treble plain hunts between lead and fourths place . line – the sequence of places a bell rings in a method , or the diagram describing the method ( the convention being that the treble line is shown in red while the others are blue ) . method – an agreed/named sequence of changes that forms a round block , see plain course . muffling for commemorative services such as funerals , memorial services and remembrance sunday , the bells are rung half-muffled with a leather pad on one side of the clapper . very rarely fully muffled with pads both sides . sally – the woollen bulge woven into the rope . it is both an indicator and a help with gripping . slider – a device which allows the bell to go over the balance at each end of its swing , but not to over-rotate . stay – a device that is attached to the headstock and works in conjunction with the slider . tenor – the lowest pitched bell in the tower . treble – the highest-pitched bell in the tower . up – either : when the bells are raised to the mouth uppermost position , or : moving towards the back ( as in '' hunting up '' ) . see also . the australian and new zealand association of bellringers braid theory change ringing software grandsire john taylor & co steinhaus–johnson–trotter algorithm veronese bellringing art whitechapel bell foundry . notes . references . bells and bellringing , a presentation prepared by the publications committee of the central council of church bell ringers . external links . the craft of bellringing , a dvd documentary about change ringing discover bell ringing – introduction for non-ringers call changes explained ringing.info , a wide-ranging and well-organized compendium of ringing links the central council of church bell ringers central council decisions & mdash ; scroll down the page to see the council 's definition of a peal ringing world , the council 's weekly journal dove 's guide , a directory of towers worldwide with bells hung for change ringing some recordings of change ringing change ringing wiki - info for ringers - video of plain hunt ringing animation of english full-circle ringing change-ringing resources , an online compendium of almost everything you need to know