Aalst, Belgium

history . the first historical records on aalst date from the 9th century , when it was described as the villa alost , a dependency of the abbey of lobbes . during the middle ages , a town and port grew at this strategic point , where the road from bruges to cologne crossed the dender . while it was within the holy roman empire it was considered the capital of the province of flanders . in 1046 , aalst was transferred to the county of flanders , and absorbed a portion of brabant , and in 1173 it was united with the remainder of the flanders province . its frontier position on the border of the holy roman empire allowed the town to keep a certain degree of independence . its relation with brabant has been preserved in the city 's white and red coat of arms , the colours of lotharingia . construction of the town hall began in the middle of the 12th century , making it the oldest surviving town hall in belgium . several manuscripts from this period still survive in the town archives . during the hundred years war the town of aalst allied themselves with louis de male against philip van artevelde and sent troops in the victorious battle of roosebeke . the town hall , and the city itself , were almost entirely destroyed by fire in 1360 . the town was soon rebuilt and a new belfry in gothic style was built in the 15th century . this was a time of great prosperity for the city , dominated by the powerful weaving guild . it is also at that time that dirk martens , a local citizen , became the southern netherlands ’ first printer , founding a printing shop in 1473 that published books by various authors including christopher columbus ; martens would later become a professor at the old university of leuven , and he was laid to rest in the church of st . marten . aalst suffered considerably under the eighty years ' war ( 1568–1648 ) . it was later taken by the french marshal turenne in the war of devolution of 1667 , then occupied by france until 1706 , when it became independent once more following the battle of ramillies , along with southern flanders in general . the textile-based economy flourished under the french . in the 18th century , the austrians controlled the region . 1830 saw belgium gain independence and aalst became part of the country , this ended a long period , starting in 1056 , of foreign control , by such as the spanish , german , french , and the dutch . the 19th century was marked by social crises engendered by the industrial revolution , with father adolf daens and his christene volkspartij emerging as the local defender of workers ' rights . this was in response to rerum novarum , which established worker rights . however daens felt this did not do enough . eventually , he was made to pay for his '' splinter movement '' . in the pre-world war ii years , the fascist movement in the low countries gained momentum , with the collaborationist vlaamsch nationaal verbond ( flemish national union ) putting down roots in the region . aalst , along with brussels and antwerp were the strongest subscribers to this line of thought . the 20th century was marked by bombardment and occupation by the germans during both world wars . . economy . the textile industry is still vibrant in aalst , in part because of the french occupation . aalst produces not only the textiles themselves , clothing and footwear , but manufactures many of the needed machines . the more rural regions are noted for their production of hops , which are sold to the old breweries there . they also have a large active cut flower business in the region . . carnival . aalst is known for its carnival festivities , celebrated every year before lent . during this celebration , the former town hall belfry is the site of the traditional '' throwing of the onions '' . a prince carnival is elected , who is allowed to '' rule '' the city for three days . a big parade crosses the city on sunday , with about 70 groups of costumed volunteers and parade cars . carnival tuesday or shrove tuesday ( by tradition , the day before ash wednesday ) , is known as the day of the 'voil jeannetten ' ( literally : '' the dirty jennies '' ) , i.e . , men dressed as women . the festivities traditionally end with the '' burning of the doll '' , happening on tuesday evening . in recent years the carnival has been accused of anti-semitism due to the repeated us of derogatory imagery of jews . . controversy . in december 2019 , anticipating unesco 's response to the decision of the carnival organizers to double down on the widely reported use of anti-semitic stereotypes , the mayor of aalst pre-emptively applied to have his city 's carnival removed from the representative list of the intangible cultural heritage of humanity . this is the only time such a request has been made . in 2020 the aalst parade included more anti-semitic costumes as well as participants in nazi ss uniforms . israel asked that the carnival parade in aalst be canceled because of anti-semitism . . in the media . the belgian tv police drama , 13 geboden ( 13 commandments ) was filmed in aalst . the belgian historical drama thieves of the wood is set in and around aalst . . sites of interest . the 15th-century belfry of aalst next to the town hall contains a 52-bell carillon , the oldest in belgium . together with the adjacent aldermen 's house , it was classified by unesco as a world heritage site in 1999 ( part of belfries of belgium and france ) . the famous '' unfinished '' st . martin 's collegiate church , in gothic style , dates back to 1480 . it contains a painting by rubens , saint roch beseeching christ to terminate the plague at aalst , and it also has a tabernacle ( dated 1605 ) , which features sculptures made by hiëronymus duquesnoy the elder , whose most famous creation is manneken pis . this church was damaged in 1914 . the statue of dirk martens ( 1450–1534 ) , first printer in the netherlands . the old breweries that grow their own hops . the town square has a gallery with a second statue of martens along with charles v . aalst belfry.jpg belfry of aalst sint-martinuskerk ( aalst ) - buitenaanzicht 03.jpg saint martin 's church kasteel terlinden , aalst ( dscf0381 ) . jpg terlinden castle . notable inhabitants . dirk martens 1534 ) , the first book printer in the southern netherlands pieter coecke van aelst ( 1502–1550 ) , painter , sculptor and architect adolf daens ( 1839–1907 ) , priest and politician valerius de saedeleer ( 1867–1941 ) , painter pieter de bruyne ( 1931-1987 ) , designer and interior architect franz cumont ( 1868–1947 ) , archeologist , historian , and philologist louis d'haeseleer ( 1911–1988 ) , politician louis paul boon ( 1912–1979 ) , writer and journalist herman le compte ( 1929–2008 ) , physician , gerontologist mark de bie ( born 1939 ) , television writer luc van den bossche ( born 1947 ) , socialist politician wilfried wesemael ( born 1950 ) , cyclist luc luycx ( born 1958 ) , designer of the common side of the euro coins gonda van steen ( born 1964 ) , classical scholar bert kruismans , ( born 1966 ) , stand-up comedian patrick van goethem ( born 1969 ) , countertenor geert de vlieger ( born 1971 ) , football goalkeeper sabine appelmans ( born 1972 ) , tennis player dimitri verhulst ( born 1972 ) , writer and poet peter van der heyden ( born 1976 ) , belgian and international footballer remco evenepoel ( born 2000 ) , professional cyclist . transport . aalst railway station erembodegem railway station . symbols . flag . description : a rectangle of proportions 2:3 , with three vertical bands of red , white and yellow , with a red sword in the middle band pointing upwards . in dutch : '' drie even lange banen van rood , van wit en van geel , met op het wit een rood zwaard paalsgewijze geplaatst . '' heraldic blazon : terciated by pale gules , argent and or , a sword of the first pointing upwards . coat of arms . those arms were granted in 1819 and confirmed on 6 february 1841 . the oldest known seals of aalst ( 13th–14th centuries ) show a knight holding a sword in one hand and the flemish banner in the other , but there is a seal dated 1237 showing the banner with the sword , and even an older seal , dated 1174 , with the same features . a later version of the seal ( 1339–1559 ) shows a local banner with the sword . a seal from 1407 adds a small shield with the flemish arms . the arms of aalst were first shown in the roll of arms of gaillard ( 1557 ) . the sword is probably taken from the old seal with the knight . the two shields show the imperial eagle and the flemish lion , recalling the odd status of the country of aalst . description : the municipal arms of aalst show on the chief of a white shield two smaller shields separated by a red sword pointing upwards and dividing the whole shield ; on dexter , the shield is yellow with a black double-headed eagle with red tongues and claws ( holy roman empire ) ; on sinister , the shield is yellow with a black lion with a red tongue and claws ( flanders ) . heraldic blazon : a modern french shield argent ensigned by a crown or and divided in half by a sword palewise pointing upwards gules between two smaller shields or ; on the dexter shield , a double-headed eagle displayed ; on the sinister shield a lion rampant ; both sable armed and langued gules . sport . aalst has several professional teams : the basketball club okapi aalstar the football club eendracht aalst who play in the second division . the volleyball club vk aalst , which was founded in the 1960s , playing in the first division . the motogp team repsol honda are based in aalst , belgium . twin city . worcester , south africa oss , netherlands gabrovo , bulgaria . footnotes . references . . external links . official website - only available in dutch