1897 in literature

events . january–march – oscar wilde , imprisoned in reading gaol in england , writes a letter to his lover , lord alfred douglas , de profundis . january 2 – newspapers in london erroneously report the death of mark twain . it is believed the rumors began when twain 's cousin had become ill . twain makes his famous statement , '' the report of my death was an exaggeration . '' quoted on june 2 by the new york journal . april–december – h . g . wells ' science fiction novel the war of the worlds is serialized in pearson 's magazine ( london ) . april 13 – the grand guignol is opened in paris by oscar méténier . may 19 – oscar wilde is released early this morning from pentonville prison in london , to which he has been transferred from reading via twyford the previous night . this afternoon he visits hatchards bookshop briefly before catching an evening train to newhaven , on his way to exile on the continent under the pseudonym '' sebastian melmoth '' . may 26 – the theatrical manager bram stoker 's contemporary gothic horror novel dracula is published in london by constable with a late change of title from the un-dead . it will influence vampire literature for the following century . on may 18 he had staged a reading of a dramatised version for copyright purposes before an audience of two at the lyceum theatre , london . june 22 – moscow art theatre is formed by constantin stanislavski and vladimir nemirovich-danchenko . july 2 – the yorkshire dialect society is founded , the oldest such society in england . july 25 – the writer jack london sails to join the klondike gold rush , where he will write his first successful stories . october – the first issue of albina , a romanian literary and agriculturalist magazine aimed at a peasant readership , is published in bucharest by ioan kalinderu , george coșbuc and petre dulfu . november 1 – the thomas jefferson building in washington , d.c . , is opened . december 28 – edmond rostand 's play cyrano de bergerac opens at the théâtre de la porte saint-martin in paris with the theater 's director , coquelin aîné , in the title role . the applause lasts for more than an hour . december 30 – the comedy the white horse inn ( im weißen rößl ) , by oscar blumenthal and gustav kadelburg , opens in berlin . decades later it will be turned into a successful musical play . unknown dates hall caine 's novel the christian : a story is published and becomes the first in britain to sell a million copies . the author also writes a dramatization . anna katharine green 's that affair next door introduces the first female fictional detective character in a novel , amelia butterworth , an inquisitive new york society spinster . benito pérez galdós is elected to the real academia española . the publisher doubleday is founded as the doubleday & mcclure company by frank nelson doubleday in partnership with magazine publisher samuel mcclure in new york city . the publisher commercial press is founded as the first modern publishing organisation in china , by 26-year-old xia ruifang and three friends in shanghai . new books . fiction . john kendrick bangs – the pursuit of the house-boat léon bloy – the woman who was poor ( la femme pauvre ) hall caine – the christian kate chopin a night in acadie ( short stories ) '' a pair of silk stockings '' ( published in vogue , september ) joseph conrad – the nigger of the 'narcissus' miguel de unamuno – paz en la guerra ( peace in war ) mary e . wilkins freeman – jerome john galsworthy ( as john sinjohn ) – from the four winds ( short stories ) george gissing – the whirlpool ellen glasgow – the descendant sarah grand – the beth book thomas hardy – the well-beloved ( book publication ) victor ido – don juan henry james the spoils of poynton what maisie knew fred t . jane – to venus in five seconds hans e . kinck – den nye kapellanen camille lemonnier – l'homme en amour pierre loti – ramuntcho richard marsh – the beetle w . somerset maugham – liza of lambeth silas weir mitchell – hugh wynne , free quaker arthur morrison – the dorrington deed box bolesław prus – pharaoh ( faraon ; book publication ) władysław reymont – the promised land ( ziemia obiecana ; serialization begins ) amanda mckittrick ros – irene iddesleigh robert louis stevenson ( completed posthumously by arthur quiller-couch ) – st . ives bram stoker – dracula august strindberg – inferno jules verne – an antarctic mystery ( le sphinx des glaces ) ethel lilian voynich – the gadfly lew wallace – the wooing of malkatoon h . g . wells – the invisible man . children and young people . l . frank baum – mother goose in prose elsa beskow – sagan om den lilla , lilla gumman ( tale of the little little old woman ) ellen thorneycroft fowler – the professor 's children rudyard kipling captains courageous the third jungle book e . nesbit – the children 's shakespeare . drama . gabriele d'annunzio – il sogno di un mattino di primavera anton chekhov – uncle vanya ( published ) octave mirbeau – les mauvais bergers ( the bad shepherds ) edmond rostand – cyrano de bergerac arthur schnitzler – la ronde ( reigen ; first performed 1921 ) . poetry . þorsteinn erlingsson – þyrnar ( thorns ) see also 1897 in poetry . non-fiction . adolphe appia – musique et mise en scéne ( music and staging ) annie besant – the ancient wisdom alice diehl – musical memories émile durkheim – le suicide gustav jaeger ( translated by h . g . schlichter ) – problems of nature : researches and discoveries stéphane mallarmé – divagations nouveau larousse illustré ralph waldo trine – in tune with the infinite : fullness of peace , power and plenty edith wharton and ogden codman – the decoration of houses . births . january 8 – dennis wheatley , english thriller writer ( died 1977 ) january 11 – bernard devoto , american historian ( died 1955 ) january 14 – wasif jawhariyyeh , palestinian arab diarist , poet and composer ( died 1972 ) january 19 – natacha rambova ( winifred shaughnessy ) , american dramatist ( died 1966 ) january 27 – iris tree , english poet ( died 1968 ) march 8 – josep pla , catalan journalist and writer ( died 1981 ) march 18 – barbu solacolu , romanian poet , translator and economist ( died 1976 ) march 23 – béla hamvas , hungarian philosopher ( died 1968 ) may 11 – carola oman , english historical novelist , biographer and children 's writer ( died 1978 ) june 20 – elisabeth hauptmann , german writer ( died 1973 ) july 1 – edward wyndham tennant , english poet ( killed in action 1916 ) july 15 – r . j . yeatman , english humorous author ( died 1968 ) july 25 – basil willey , english academic literary critic ( died 1978 ) august 11 enid blyton – english children 's author ( died 1968 ) louise bogan – american poet ( died 1970 ) september 25 – william faulkner , american novelist ( died 1962 ) september 26 – michael joseph , english publisher ( died 1958 ) october 3 – james hanley , english novelist and dramatist of irish descent ( died 1985 ) october 4 – jirō osaragi ( 大佛 次郎 , haruhiku nojiri ) , japanese novelist ( died 1973 ) october 17 – ștefana velisar teodoreanu , romanian novelist , memoirist and poet ( died 1995 ) october 21 – alexander lernet-holenia , austrian poet , dramatist and fiction writer ( died 1976 ) october 22 – marjorie flack , american children 's author ( died 1958 ) november 1 – naomi mitchison , scottish novelist and poet ( died 1999 ) november 7 – herman j . mankiewicz , american screenwriter ( died 1953 ) november 8 – dorothy day , american journalist ( died 1980 ) november 28 – marcus goodrich , american screenwriter and novelist ( died 1991 ) december 3 – kate o'brien , irish novelist and dramatist ( died 1974 ) october 23 – arab shamilov , kurdish novelist ( died 1978 ) . deaths . january 24 – margaret wolfe hungerford , irish novelist ( born 1855 ) february 4 – walter gregor , scottish folklorist , linguist and pastor ( born 1825 ) march 2 – guillermo prieto , mexican novelist , short-story writer and poet ( born 1818 ) march 6 – e . cobham brewer , english lexicographer ( born 1810 ) march 7 – harriet jacobs , african-american writer ( born 1813 ) july 6 – henri meilhac , french dramatist and opera librettist ( born 1831 ) july 20 – jean ingelow , english novelist and poet ( born 1820 ) july 28 – étienne vacherot , french philosophical writer ( born 1809 ) august 2 – adam asnyk , polish poet and dramatist ( born 1838 ) august 5 – james hammond trumbull , american philologist ( born 1821 ) august 8 – jacob burckhardt , swiss historian ( born 1818 ) august 25 – léon gautier , french historian ( born 1832 ) september 9 richard holt hutton , english critic and journalist ( born 1826 ) ferenc pulszky , hungarian political writer ( born 1814 ) october 23 – jessie catherine couvreur , australian novelist ( born 1848 ) october 24 – francis turner palgrave , english anthologist ( born 1824 ) november 29 – james legge , scottish sinologist , missionary and translator ( born 1815 ) december 17 – alphonse daudet , french novelist ( born 1840 ) . awards . stanhope essay prize – john buchan . references .