Watercolor painting

history . watercolor painting is extremely old , dating perhaps to the cave paintings of paleolithic europe , and has been used for illustrated manuscript since at least ancient egypt but especially in the middle ages . however , its continuous history as an art medium begins with the renaissance . the german northern renaissance artist albrecht dürer ( 1471–1528 ) , who painted several fine botanical , wildlife , and landscape watercolors , is generally considered among the earliest exponents of watercolor . an important school of watercolor painting in germany was led by hans bol ( 1534–1593 ) as part of the dürer renaissance . despite this early start , watercolors were generally used by baroque easel painters only for sketches , copies or modello ( full-scale design drawings ) . notable early practitioners of watercolor painting were van dyck ( during his stay in england ) , claude lorrain , giovanni benedetto castiglione , and many dutch and flemish artists . however , botanical illustration and wildlife illustration perhaps form the oldest and most important traditions in watercolor painting . botanical illustrations became popular during the renaissance , both as hand-tinted woodcut illustrations in books or broadsheets and as tinted ink drawings on vellum or paper . botanical artists have traditionally been some of the most exacting and accomplished watercolor painters , and even today , watercolors—with their unique ability to summarize , clarify , and idealize in full color—are used to illustrate scientific and museum publications . wildlife illustration reached its peak in the 19th century with artists such as john james audubon , and today many naturalist field guides are still illustrated with watercolor paintings . english school . several factors contributed to the spread of watercolor painting during the 18th century , particularly in england . among the elite and aristocratic classes , watercolor painting was one of the incidental adornments of a good education ; mapmakers , military officers , and engineers used it for its usefulness in depicting properties , terrain , fortifications , field geology , and for illustrating public works or commissioned projects . watercolor artists were commonly brought with the geological or archaeological expeditions , funded by the society of dilettanti ( founded in 1733 ) , to document discoveries in the mediterranean , asia , and the new world . these expeditions stimulated the demand for topographical painters , who churned out memento paintings of famous sites ( and sights ) along the grand tour that was undertaken by every fashionable young man of the time . in the late 18th century , the english cleric william gilpin wrote a series of hugely popular books describing his picturesque journeys throughout rural england , and illustrated them with self-made sentimentalized monochrome watercolors of river valleys , ancient castles , and abandoned churches . this example popularized watercolors as a form of personal tourist journal . the confluence of these cultural , engineering , scientific , tourist , and amateur interests culminated in the celebration and promotion of watercolor as a distinctly english '' national art '' . william blake published several books of hand-tinted engraved poetry , provided illustrations to dante 's inferno , and he also experimented with large monotype works in watercolor . among the many other significant watercolorists of this period were thomas gainsborough , john robert cozens , francis towne , michael angelo rooker , william pars , thomas hearne , and john warwick smith . from the late 18th century through the 19th century , the market for printed books and domestic art contributed substantially to the growth of the medium . watercolors were used as the basic document from which collectible landscape or tourist engravings were developed , and hand-painted watercolor originals or copies of famous paintings contributed to many upper class art portfolios . satirical broadsides by thomas rowlandson , many published by rudolph ackermann , were also extremely popular . the three english artists credited with establishing watercolor as an independent , mature painting medium are paul sandby ( 1730–1809 ) , often called the '' father of the english watercolor '' ; thomas girtin ( 1775–1802 ) , who pioneered its use for large format , romantic or picturesque landscape painting ; and joseph mallord william turner ( 1775–1851 ) , who brought watercolor painting to the highest pitch of power and refinement , and created hundreds of superb historical , topographical , architectural , and mythological watercolor paintings . his method of developing the watercolor painting in stages , starting with large , vague color areas established on wet paper , then refining the image through a sequence of washes and glazes , permitted him to produce large numbers of paintings with '' workshop efficiency '' and made him a multimillionaire , partly by sales from his personal art gallery , the first of its kind . among the important and highly talented contemporaries of turner and girtin were john varley , john sell cotman , copley fielding , samuel palmer , william havell , and samuel prout . the swiss painter abraham-louis-rodolphe ducros was also widely known for his large format , romantic paintings in watercolor . the confluence of amateur activity , publishing markets , middle class art collecting , and 19th-century technique led to the formation of english watercolor painting societies : the society of painters in water colours ( 1804 , now known as the royal watercolour society ) and the new water colour society ( 1832 , now known as the royal institute of painters in water colours ) . ( a scottish society of painters in water colour was founded in 1878 , now known as the royal scottish society of painters in watercolour . ) these societies provided annual exhibitions and buyer referrals for many artists . they also engaged in petty status rivalries and aesthetic debates , particularly between advocates of traditional ( '' transparent '' ) watercolor and the early adopters of the denser color possible with gouache ( '' opaque '' watercolor ) . the late georgian and victorian periods produced the zenith of the british watercolor , among the most impressive 19th-century works on paper , due to artists turner , varley , cotman , david cox , peter de wint , william henry hunt , john frederick lewis , myles birket foster , frederick walker , thomas collier , arthur melville and many others . in particular , the graceful , lapidary , and atmospheric watercolors ( '' genre paintings '' ) by richard parkes bonington created an international fad for watercolor painting , especially in england and france in the 1820s . the popularity of watercolors stimulated many innovations , including heavier and more sized wove papers , and brushes ( called '' pencils '' ) manufactured expressly for watercolor . watercolor tutorials were first published in this period by varley , cox , and others , establishing the step-by-step painting instructions that still characterize the genre today ; the elements of drawing , a watercolor tutorial by english art critic john ruskin , has been out of print only once since it was first published in 1857 . commercial brands of watercolor were marketed and paints were packaged in metal tubes or as dry cakes that could be '' rubbed out '' ( dissolved ) in studio porcelain or used in portable metal paint boxes in the field . breakthroughs in chemistry made many new pigments available , including synthetic ultramarine blue , cobalt blue , viridian , cobalt violet , cadmium yellow , aureolin ( potassium cobaltinitrite ) , zinc white , and a wide range of carmine and madder lakes . these pigments , in turn , stimulated a greater use of color with all painting media , but in english watercolors , particularly by the pre-raphaelite brotherhood . united states . watercolor painting also became popular in the united states during the 19th century ; outstanding early practitioners included john james audubon , as well as early hudson river school painters such as william h . bartlett and george harvey . by mid-century , the influence of john ruskin led to increasing interest in watercolors , particularly the use of a detailed '' ruskinian '' style by such artists as john w . hill henry , william trost richards , roderick newman , and fidelia bridges . the american society of painters in watercolor ( now the american watercolor society ) was founded in 1866 . late-19th-century american exponents of the medium included thomas moran , thomas eakins , john lafarge , john singer sargent , childe hassam , and , preeminently , winslow homer . europe . watercolor was less popular in continental europe . in the 18th century , gouache was an important medium for the italian artists marco ricci and francesco zuccarelli , whose landscape paintings were widely collected . brown , david blayney . '' watercolour . '' grove art online . oxford art online . oxford university press . retrieved april 26 , 2014 . gouache was used by a number of artists in france as well . in the 19th century , the influence of the english school helped popularize '' transparent '' watercolor in france , and it became an important medium for eugène delacroix , françois marius granet , henri-joseph harpignies , and the satirist honoré daumier . other european painters who worked frequently in watercolor were adolph menzel in germany and stanisław masłowski in poland . unfortunately , the careless and excessive adoption of brightly colored , petroleum-derived aniline dyes ( and pigments compounded from them ) , which all fade rapidly on exposure to light , and the efforts to properly conserve the twenty thousand j . m . w . turner paintings inherited by the british museum in 1857 , led to an examination and negative reevaluation of the permanence of pigments in watercolor . this caused a sharp decline in their status and market value . nevertheless , isolated practitioners continued to prefer and develop the medium into the 20th century . gorgeous landscape and maritime watercolors were done by paul signac , and paul cézanne developed a watercolor painting style consisting entirely of overlapping small glazes of pure color . 20th and 21st centuries . among the many 20th-century artists who produced important works in watercolor , wassily kandinsky , emil nolde , paul klee , egon schiele , and raoul dufy must be mentioned . in america , the major exponents included charles burchfield , edward hopper , georgia o'keeffe , charles demuth , and john marin ( 80 % of his total work is watercolor ) . in this period , american watercolor painting often imitated european impressionism and post-impressionism , but significant individualism flourished in '' regional '' styles of watercolor painting from the 1920s to 1940s . in particular , the '' cleveland school '' or '' ohio school '' of painters centered around the cleveland museum of art , and the california scene painters were often associated with hollywood animation studios or the chouinard art institute ( now california institute of the arts ) . the california painters exploited their state 's varied geography , mediterranean climate , and '' car culture '' to reinvigorate the outdoor or '' plein air '' tradition . the most influential among them were phil dike , millard sheets , rex brandt , dong kingman , and milford zornes . the california water color society , founded in 1921 and later renamed the national watercolor society , sponsored important exhibitions of their work . the largest watercolor in the world at the moment ( at tall and wide ) is building 6 portrait : interior . produced by american artist barbara prey on commission for mass moca , the work can be seen at mass moca 's robert w . wilson building . although the rise of abstract expressionism , and the trivializing influence of amateur painters and advertising- or workshop-influenced painting styles , led to a temporary decline in the popularity of watercolor painting after c . 1950 , watercolors continue to be utilized by artists like martha burchfield , joseph raffael , andrew wyeth , philip pearlstein , eric fischl , gerhard richter , anselm kiefer , and francesco clemente . in spain , ceferí olivé created an innovative style followed by his students , such as rafael alonso lópez-montero and francesc torné gavaldà . in mexico , the major exponents are ignacio barrios , edgardo coghlan , ángel mauro , vicente mendiola , and pastor velázquez . in the canary islands , where this pictorial technique has many followers , there are stand-out artists such as francisco bonnín guerín , josé comas quesada , and alberto manrique . watercolor paint . watercolor paint consists of four principal ingredients : a pigment ; gum arabic as a binder to hold the pigment in suspension ; additives like glycerin , ox gall , honey , and preservatives to alter the viscosity , hiding , durability or color of the pigment and vehicle mixture ; and evaporating water , as a solvent used to thin or dilute the paint for application . the more general term watermedia refers to any painting medium that uses water as a solvent and that can be applied with a brush , pen , or sprayer . this includes most inks , watercolors , temperas , caseins , gouaches , and modern acrylic paints . the term '' watercolor '' refers to paints that use water-soluble , complex carbohydrates as a binder . originally ( in the 16th to 18th centuries ) , watercolor binders were sugars and/or hide glues , but since the 19th century , the preferred binder is natural gum arabic , with glycerin and/or honey as additives to improve plasticity and solubility of the binder , and with other chemicals added to improve product shelf life . the term '' bodycolor '' refers to paint that is opaque rather than transparent . it usually refers to opaque watercolor , known as gouache . the oxford dictionary of art and artists , ian chilvers , oxford university press usa , 2009 modern acrylic paints use an acrylic resin dispersion as a binder . commercial watercolors . watercolor painters before the turn of the 18th century had to make paints themselves using pigments purchased from an apothecary or specialized '' colorman '' , and mixing them with gum arabic or some other binder . the earliest commercial paints were small , resinous blocks that had to be wetted and laboriously '' rubbed out '' in water to obtain a usable color intensity . william reeves started his business as a colorman around 1766 . in 1781 , he and his brother , thomas reeves , were awarded the silver palette of the society of arts , for the invention of the moist watercolor paint-cake , a time-saving convenience , introduced in the '' golden age '' of english watercolor painting . the '' cake '' was immediately soluble when touched by a wet brush . modern commercial watercolor paints are available in two forms : tubes or pans . the majority of paints sold today are in collapsible small metal tubes in standard sizes and formulated to a consistency similar to toothpaste by being already mixed with a certain water component . for use , this paste has to be further diluted with water . pan paints ( actually small dried cakes or bars of paint in an open plastic container ) are usually sold in two sizes , full pans and half pans . owing to modern industrial organic chemistry , the variety , saturation , and permanence of artists ' colors available today has been vastly improved . since 2014 , golden artist colors makes a heavily pigmented line called qor watercolors ( 'quality of results ' ) that uses aquazol as a binder . correct and non-toxic primary colors are now present through the introduction of hansa yellow , phthalo blue and quinacridone ( pv 122 ) . from such a set of three colors , in principle all others can be mixed , as in a classical technique no white is used . the modern development of pigments was not driven by artistic demand . the art materials industry is too small to exert any market leverage on global dye or pigment manufacture . with rare exceptions such as aureolin , all modern watercolor paints utilize pigments that have a wider industrial use . paint manufacturers buy , by industrial standards very small , supplies of these pigments , mill them with the vehicle , solvent , and additives , and package them . the milling process with inorganic pigments , in more expensive brands , reduces the particle size to improve the color flow when the paint is applied with water . transparency . in the partisan debates of the 19th-century english art world , gouache was emphatically contrasted to traditional watercolors and denigrated for its high hiding power or lack of '' transparency '' ; '' transparent '' watercolors were exalted . the aversion to opaque paint had its origin in the fact that well into the 19th century lead white was used to increase the covering quality . that pigment tended to soon discolor into black under the influence of sulphurous air pollution , totally ruining the artwork . d . kraaijpoel & c . herenius . ( 2007 ) het kunstschilderboek — handboek voor materialen en technieken , cantecleer , p . 187 the traditional claim that '' transparent '' watercolors gain '' luminosity '' because they function like a pane of stained glass laid on paper—the color intensified because the light passes through the pigment , reflects from the paper , and passes a second time through the pigment on its way to the viewer—is false . watercolor paints typically do not form a cohesive paint layer , as do acrylic or oil paints , but simply scatter pigment particles randomly across the paper surface ; the transparency is caused by the paper being visible between the particles . d . kraaijpoel & c . herenius . ( 2007 ) het kunstschilderboek — handboek voor materialen en technieken , cantecleer , p . 183 watercolors may appear more vivid than acrylics or oils because the pigments are laid down in a purer form , with few or no fillers ( such as kaolin ) obscuring the pigment colors . typically , most or all of the gum binder will be absorbed by the paper , preventing the binder from changing the visibility of the pigment . the absorption of the gum increases the adhesion of the pigment to the paper , and the pigment particles will penetrate the fibres more easily . in fact , an important function of the gum is to facilitate the '' lifting '' ( removal ) of color , should the artist want to create a lighter spot in a painted area . furthermore , the gum prevents flocculation of the pigment particles . . see also . acrylic painting techniques history of painting ink wash painting : category : watercolorists . notes . references . history . andrew wilton & anne lyles . the great age of british watercolours ( 1750–1880 ) . prestel , 1993 . anne lyles & robin hamlyn . british watercolours from the oppé collection . tate gallery publishing , 1997 . christopher finch . american watercolors . abbeville press , 1991 . asin b000ibdwgk christopher finch . nineteenth-century watercolors . abbeville press , 1991 . christopher finch . twentieth-century watercolors . abbeville press , 1988 . eric shanes . turner : the great watercolours . royal academy of arts , 2001 . martin hardie . water-colour painting in britain ( 3 volumes : i . the eighteenth century ; ii . the romantic period ; iii . the victorian period . ) . batsford , 1966–1968 . michael clarke . the tempting prospect : a social history of english watercolours . british museum publications , 1981 . asin b000ucv0xo moore , sean . ultimate visual dictionary . dorling kindersley , 1994 . tutorials and technique . rex brandt . the winning ways of watercolor : basic techniques and methods of transparent watercolor in twenty lessons . van nostrand reinhold , 1973 . david dewey . the watercolor book : materials and techniques for today 's artist . watson-guptill , 1995 . donna seldin janis . sargent abroad : figures and landscapes . abbeville press ; 1st edition ( october 1997 ) . charles leclair . the art of watercolor ( revised and expanded edition ) . watson-guptill , 1999 . royal watercolour society . the watercolour expert . cassell illustrated , 2004 . john ruskin . the elements of drawing 1857 . watson-guptill , 1991 . ( reprints from other publishers are also available . ) pip seymour . watercolour painting : a handbook for artists . lee press , 1997 . stan smith . watercolor : the complete course . reader 's digest , 1995 . curtis tappenden . foundation course : watercolour . cassell illustrated , 2003 . edgar a . whitney . complete guide to watercolor painting . watson-guptill , 1974 . dover edition . materials . ian sidaway . the watercolor artist 's paper directory . north light , 2000 . jacques turner . brushes : a handbook for artists and artisans . design press , 1992 . sylvie turner . the book of fine paper . thames & hudson , 1998 . michael wilcox . the wilcox guide to the best watercolor paints . school of colour publications , 2000 . external links . american watercolor society national watercolor society ( usa ) belgian watercolor institute