Sampi

alphabetic sampi . as an alphabetic letter denoting a sibilant sound , sampi ( shaped , it was used on coins , which were marked with the abbreviation of the city 's name , spelled '' '' . sampi occurs in positions where other dialects , including written ionic , normally have double sigma , i.e . a long sound . some other dialects , particularly attic greek , have ( long in the same words ( e.g . vs . 'sea ' , or vs . 'four ' ) . the sounds in question are all reflexes of the proto-greek consonant clusters or . it is therefore believed that the local letter sampi was used to denote some kind of intermediate sound during the phonetic change from the earlier plosive clusters towards the later sound , possibly an affricate , forming a triplet with the greek letters for and . c . brixhe , '' history of the alpbabet '' , in christidēs , arapopoulou , & chritē , eds . , 2007 , a history of ancient greek among the earliest known uses of sampi in this function is an abecedarium from samos dated to the mid-7th century bc . this early attestation already bears witness to its alphabetic position behind omega ( i.e . not the position of san ) , and it shows that its invention can not have been much later than that of omega itself . the first known use of alphabetic sampi in writing native greek words is an inscription found on a silver plate in ephesus , which has the words '' '' ( '' four '' ) and '' '' ( '' forty '' ) spelled with sampi ( cf . normal spelling ionic '' '' vs . attic . it can be dated between the late 7th century and mid 6th century bc . an inscription from halicarnassus british museum no . 886 , has the names '' ἁλικαρναͳέων '' ( '' of the halicarnassians '' ) and the personal names '' ὀαͳαͳιος '' and '' πανυάͳιος '' . all of these names appear to be of non-greek , local origin , i.e . carian . on a late 6th century bronze plate from miletus dedicated to the sanctuary of athena at assesos , the spelling '' '' ( '' to athena of assessos '' ) has been identified . this is currently the first known instance of alphabetic sampi in miletus itself , commonly assumed to be the birthplace of the numeral system and thus of the later numeric use of sampi . it has been suggested that there may be an isolated example of the use of alphabetic sampi in athens . in a famous painted black figure amphora from c.615 bc , known as the '' nessos painter '' , the inscribed name of the eponymous centaur nessus is rendered in the irregular spelling . the expected regular form of the name would have been either attic '' '' – with a double '' τ '' – or ionic '' '' . traces of corrections that are still visible underneath the painted '' τ '' have led to the conjecture that the painter originally wrote , with sampi for the σσ/ττ sound . . pamphylian sampi . a letter similar to ionian sampi , but of unknown historical relation with it , existed in pamphylian greek of pamphylia in southern asia minor . it was shaped like letter stood for some type of sibilant reflecting proto-greek /ktj/ . numeric sampi . in the alphabetic numeral system , which was probably invented in miletus and is therefore sometimes called the '' milesian '' system , there are 27 numeral signs : the first nine letters of the alphabet , from alpha ( a ) to theta ( θ ) stand for the digits 1–9 ; the next nine , beginning with iota ( ι ) , stand for the multiples of ten ( 10 , 20 , etc . up to 90 ) ; and the last nine , beginning with rho ( ρ ) , stand for the hundreds ( 100 – 900 ) . for this purpose , the 24 letters of the standard classical greek alphabet were used with the addition of three archaic or local letters : digamma/wau ( ϝ , /tsade ( ϻ , denoting an sound ) , was not used in this way . instead , sampi was chosen , and added at the end of the system , after omega ( 800 ) . from this , it has been concluded that the system must have been invented at a time and place when digamma and koppa were still either in use or at least still remembered as parts of the alphabetic sequence , whereas san had either already been forgotten , or at least was no longer remembered with its original alphabetic position . in the latter case , according to a much debated view , sampi itself may in fact have been regarded as being san , but with a new position in the alphabet . the dating of the emergence of this system , and with it of numeric sampi , has been the object of much discussion . at the end of the 19th century , authors such as thompson thompson , handbook , p . 114 . placed its full development only in the 3rd century bc . jeffery states that the system as a whole can be traced much further back , into the 6th century bc . an early , though isolated , instance of apparent use of alphabetic milesian numerals in athens occurs on a stone inscribed with several columns of two-digit numerals , of unknown meaning , dated from the middle of the 5th century bc . , also known as ig i² 760 . while the emergence of the system as a whole has thus been given a much earlier dating than was often assumed earlier , actual occurrences of the letter sampi in this context have as yet not been found in any early examples . according to threatte , the earliest known use of numeric sampi in a stone inscription occurs in an inscription in magnesia from the 2nd century bc , in a phrase denoting a sum of money ( '' , also known as syll³ 695.b . but the exact numeric meaning of this example is disputed . in athens , the first attestation is only from the beginning of the 2nd century ad , again in an inscription naming sums of money . earlier than the attestations in the full function as a numeral are a few instances where sampi was used in athens as a mark to enumerate sequences of things in a set , along with the 24 other letters of the alphabet , without implying a specific decimal numeral value . for instance , there is a set of 25 metal tokens , each stamped with one of the letters from alpha to sampi , which are dated to the 4th century bc and were probably used as identification marks for judges in the courts of the athenian democracy . in papyrus texts from the ptolemaic period onwards , numeric sampi occurs with some regularity . at an early stage in the papyri , the numeral sampi was used not only for 900 , but , somewhat confusingly , also as a multiplicator for 1000 , since a way of marking thousands and their multiples was not yet otherwise provided by the alphabetic system . writing an alpha over sampi ( ) , is used . this system was later simplified into one where the thousands operator was marked just as a small stroke to the left of the letter ( ͵α 1000 ) . glyph development . in early stone inscriptions , the shape of sampi , both alphabetic and numeric , is , galen says that one of them '' looks like the way some people write the sign for 900 '' , and describes this as '' the shape of the letter π with a vertical line in the middle '' ( '' '' ) . from the time of the earliest papyri , the square-topped forms of handwritten sampi alternate with variants where the top is rounded ( ) . in medieval western manuscripts describing the greek alphabet , the arrowhead form is sometimes rendered as . gardthausen , palaeographie , p.167 . . origins . throughout the 19th and 20th centuries , many authors have assumed that sampi was essentially a historical continuation of the archaic letter san , the m-shaped alternative of sigma ( σ ) that formed part of the greek alphabet when it was originally adopted from phoenician . archaic san stood in an alphabetic position between pi ( π ) and koppa ( ϙ ) . it dropped out of use in favour of sigma in most dialects by the 7th century bc , but was retained in place of the latter in a number of local alphabets until the 5th century bc . jeffery , local scripts , p . 33 . it is generally agreed to be derived from phoenician tsade . the hypothetical identification between san and sampi is based on a number of considerations . one is the similarity of the sounds represented by both . san represented either simple or some other , divergent phonetic realization of the common greek phoneme . suggestions for its original sound value have included , , and . the second reason for the assumption is the systematicity in the development of the letter inventory : there were three archaic letters that dropped out of use in alphabetic writing ( digamma , koppa , and san ) , and three extra-alphabetic letters were adopted for the milesian numeral system , two of them obviously identical with the archaic digamma and koppa ; hence , it is easy to assume that the third in the set had the same history . objections to this account have been related to the fact that sampi did not assume the same position san had had , and to the lack of any obvious relation between the shapes of the two letters and the lack of any intermediate forms linking the two uses . among older authorities , gardthausen gardthausen , griechische palaeographie , p.369 . and thompson took the identity between san and sampi for granted . foat , in a skeptical reassessment of the evidence , came to the conclusion that it was a plausible hypothesis but unprovable . the discussion has continued until the present , while a steady trickle of new archaeological discoveries regarding the relative dating of the various events involved ( i.e . the original emergence of the alphabet , the loss of archaic san , the emergence of alphabetic sampi , and the emergence of the numeral system ) have continued to affect the data base on which it is founded . a part of the discussion about the identity of san and sampi has revolved around a difficult and probably corrupted piece of philological commentary by an anonymous scholium , which has been debated ever since joseph justus scaliger drew attention to it in the mid-17th century . scaliger 's discussion also contains the first known attestation of the name '' san pi '' ( sampi ) in the western literature , and the first attempt at explaining it . the passage in question is a scholion on two rare words occurring in the comedies of aristophanes , koppatias and samphoras . both were names for certain breeds of horses , and both were evidently named after the letter used as a branding mark on each : '' koppa '' and '' san '' respectively . after explaining this , the anonymous scholiast adds a digression that appears to be meant to further explain the name and function of '' san '' , drawing some kind of link between it and the numeral sign of 900 . however , what exactly was meant here is obscure now , because the text was evidently corrupted during transmission and the actual symbols cited in it were probably exchanged . the following is the passage in the reading provided by a modern edition , with problematic words marked : . sources .