Shiga Prefecture

history . shiga was known as ōmi province or gōshū before the prefectural system was established . nussbaum , '' provinces and prefectures '' at . omi was a neighbor of nara and kyoto , at the junction of western and eastern japan . during the period 667 to 672 , emperor tenji founded a palace in otsu . in 742 , emperor shōmu founded a palace in shigaraki . in the early heian period , saichō was born in the north of otsu and founded enryaku-ji , the center of tendai and one a unesco world heritage site and monument of ancient kyoto now . in the medieval period , the sasaki clan ruled omi , and afterward the rokkaku clan , kyōgoku clan and azai clans ruled omi . in the 1570s , oda nobunaga subjugated omi and built azuchi castle on the eastern shores of lake biwa in 1579 . tōdō takatora , gamō ujisato , oichi , yodo-dono , ohatsu and oeyo were omi notables in the sengoku period . in those times , ninja were active in kōka ( see also kōga-ryū ) . in 1600 , ishida mitsunari , born in the east of nagahama and based in sawayama castle , made war against tokugawa ieyasu in sekigahara , gifu . after the battle , ieyasu made ii naomasa a new lord of sawayama . naomasa established the hikone domain , later famous for ii naosuke . ii naosuke became the tokugawa shogunate 's tairō and concluded commercial treaties with the western powers and thus ended japan 's isolation from the world in the 19th century . besides the hikone domain , many domains ruled omi such as zeze . with the abolition of the han system , eight prefectures were formed in omi . they were unified into shiga prefecture in september 1872 . '' shiga prefecture '' was named after '' shiga district '' because otsu belonged to the district until 1898 . from august 1876 to february 1881 , southern fukui prefecture had been incorporated into shiga prefecture . in 2015 , shiga governor taizō mikazuki conducted a survey asking citizens whether they felt it necessary to change the name of the prefecture , partly to raise its profile as a destination for domestic tourism . . geography . shiga borders fukui prefecture in the north , gifu prefecture in the east , mie prefecture in the southeast , and kyoto prefecture in the west . lake biwa , japan 's largest , is located at the center of this prefecture . it occupies one-sixth of its area . the seta river flows from lake biwa to osaka bay through kyoto . this is the only natural river that flows out from the lake . most other natural rivers flow into the lake . there were many lagoons around lake biwa , but most of them were reclaimed in 1940s . one of the preserved lagoons is the in omihachiman , and it was selected as the first cultural landscapes of japan in 2006 . the lake divides the prefecture into four different areas : kohoku ( 湖北 , north of lake ) centered nagahama , kosei ( 湖西 , west of lake ) centered imazu , kotō ( 湖東 , east of lake ) centered hikone and konan ( 湖南 , south of lake ) centered otsu . plains stretch to the eastern shore of lake biwa . the prefecture is enclosed by mountain ranges with the hira mountains and mount hiei in the west , the ibuki mountains in the northeast , and the suzuka mountains in the southeast . mount ibuki is the highest mountain in shiga . in yogo , a small lake is famous for the legend of , which is similar to a western swan maiden . shiga 's climate sharply varies between north and south . southern shiga is usually warm , but northern shiga is typically cold with high snowfall and hosts many skiing grounds . in nakanokawachi , the northernmost village of shiga , snow reached a depth of in 1936 . encyclopedia shiga . p436 . as of 1 april 2014 , 37 % of the total land area of the prefecture was designated as natural parks ( the highest total of any prefecture ) , namely the biwako and suzuka quasi-national parks ; and kotō , kutsuki-katsuragawa , and mikami-tanakami-shigaraki prefectural natural parks . . municipalities . cities . thumb thumb thirteen cities are located in shiga prefecture : higashiōmi hikone kōka konan kusatsu maibara moriyama nagahama ōtsu ( capital ) ōmihachiman rittō takashima yasu . towns . these are the towns in each district : echi district aishō gamō district hino ryūō inukami district kōra taga toyosato . mergers . . politics . the current governor of shiga is taizō mikazuki , a former member of the house of representatives from shiga ( dpj , 3rd district ) , who was narrowly elected in july 2014 with center-left support against ex-meti-bureaucrat takashi koyari ( supported by the center-right national-level ruling parties ) to succeed governor yukiko kada . in june 2018 , he was 2018 shiga gubernatorial election against only one , communist challenger . shiga prefectural government : governor 's office ( japanese , english machine translation available by clicking '' foreign language '' ) the japan times , july 14 , 2014 : ldp candidate flounders in shiga governor race , retrieved august 1 , 2019 . nhk senkyo web , june 24 , 2018 : 2018滋賀県知事選 , retrieved august 1 , 2019 . the prefectural assembly has 44 members from 16 electoral districts , and is still elected in unified local elections ( last round : 2019 ) . as of july 2019 , the assembly was composed by caucus as follows : ldp 20 members , team shiga ( cdp , dpp , former kada supporters etc . ) 14 , jcp 4 , sazanami club ( of independents ) 3 , kōmeitō 2 , '' independent '' /non-attached 1 . prefectural assembly : members by caucus , retrieved august 1 , 2019 . in the national diet , shiga is represented by four directly elected members of the house of representatives and two ( one per ordinary election ) of the house of councillors . for the proportional representation segment of the lower house , the prefecture forms part of the kinki block . after the national elections of 2016 , 2017 and 2019 , the directly elected delegation to the diet from shiga consists of ( as of august 1 , 2019 ) : in the house of representatives for the 1st district in the west : toshitaka ōoka , ldp , 3rd term , for the 2nd district in the northeast : ken'ichirō ueno , ldp , 4th term , for the 3rd district on the southern shores of lake biwa : nobuhide takemura , ldp , 3rd term , for the 4th district in the southeast : hiroo kotera , ldp , 1st term , in the house of councillors ( shiga at-large district ) in the class of 2016 ( term ends 2022 ) : takashi koyari , ldp , 1st term , in the class of 2019 ( term ends 2025 ) : yukiko kada , independent sitting with the hekisuikai caucus , 1st term . economy . cultivated areas occupy nearly one-sixth of the prefecture . rice is the principal crop : over 90 percent of the farmlands are rice fields . most farms are small , producing only a slight income . most farmers depend on income from other sources . eastern shiga is famous for cattle breeding and southeastern shiga is famous for green tea . on lake biwa , some people are engaged in fishery and freshwater pearl farming . since the medieval period , especially in edo period , many shiga people were active in commerce and were called , sometimes by other envious merchants . for example , nippon life , itochu , marubeni , takashimaya , wacoal and yanmar were founded by people from shiga . in their home towns such as omihachiman , hino , gokashō and toyosato , their mansions were preserved as tourist attractions . beginning in the 1960s , shiga developed industry , supporting major factories owned by companies such as ibm japan , canon , yanmar diesel , mitsubishi , and toray . according to cabinet office 's statistics in 2014 , the manufacturing sector accounted for 35.4 % of gross shiga product , the highest proportion in japan . traditional industries include textiles , shigaraki ware , butsudan in hikone and nagahama , medicines in koka , and fan ribs in adogawa . demographics . the population is concentrated along the southern shore of lake biwa in otsu city ( adjacent to kyoto ) and along the lake 's eastern shore in cities such as kusatsu and moriyama , which are greater kyoto . the lake 's western and northern shores are more rural and resort-oriented with white sand beaches . in recent years , many brazilians settled in shiga to work in nearby factories . 25,040 foreigners live in shiga and 30 % of foreigners were brazilians as of december 2016 . . culture . biwa town ( now a part of nagahama ) is a home of the tonda traditional bunraku puppet troupe . founded in the 1830s , the group is one of the most active traditional bunraku puppet theaters in japan outside the national theater in osaka . toyosato and higashiomi are known to a mecca of goshu ondo . museums include the sagawa art museum in moriyama , the lake biwa museum in kusatsu and the miho museum in kōka . in kōka , a ninja house is preserved as a visitor center . . cuisine . since ancient times , shigans have eaten fish from lake biwa . the most famous lake-food is . it retains the ancient style of sushi and has a pungent odor . shiga is also famous for high quality wagyū , ōmi beef . the hikone domain presented beef as medicinal food to shōguns . in addition , tsukemono of root crops , in northern shiga , in omihachiman , in nagahama , and lightly seasoned champon in hikone are examples of specific cuisine in shiga . fish from lake biwa for sale at a fish store in otsu , shiga , japan.jpg a fish store in ōtsu funazushi.jpg funa-zushi – fermented crucian carp sabasomen1.jpg nagahama yaki-saba sōmen hikone okabe champon.jpg hikone champon . mass media . biwako broadcasting broadcasts local tv programs . nhk has a broadcasting station in otsu . shiga is the only prefecture which has no regional newspapers . kyoto shimbun is a de facto regional newspaper of shiga . education . ten universities , two junior colleges , and a learning center of the open university of japan operate in shiga . shiga university ( hikone and otsu ) shiga university of medical science ( otsu ) university of shiga prefecture ( hikone ) seian university of art and design ( otsu ) seisen university ( hikone ) nagahama institute of bio-science and technology ( nagahama ) newton college ( japan ) ( higashiomi ) biwako seikei sport college ( otsu ) ritsumeikan university ( kyoto and kusatsu ) ryukoku university ( kyoto and otsu ) shiga junior college ( otsu ) shiga bunkyo junior college ( nagahama ) . sports . the following sports teams are based in shiga . basketball : shiga lakestars volleyball : toray arrows ( women 's volleyball team ) ( otsu ) football ( soccer ) : mio biwako kusatsu ( kusatsu ) , sagawa shiga f.c . ( moriyama ) . tennis : shrigga aka uveal . tourism . shiga has many tourism resources , but shiga is overshadowed by its much more famous neighbor kyoto . over four million foreign tourists visited japan in 2000 , but only sixty-five thousand visited shiga . the main gateways to shiga are the maibara station in northern shiga and the city of ōtsu in the south . the maibara station is about 2 hours and 20 minutes away from the tokyo station by the tokaido shinkansen . it is easy to go to ōtsu from kyoto and osaka by high-speed trains . shiga 's most prominent feature is lake biwa . the northern shore is especially scenic , such as the cherry blossoms of kaizu osaki in spring and the sacred island chikubu-shima . the western shore has white sand beaches , popular among kyotoites during the summer . the scenery of the southern shore , particularly around otsu , was selected as ōmi hakkei or eight views of ōmi , popularized by hiroshige 's ukiyo-e . most of the original eight views are now almost gone or changed from centuries ago . one remaining view is the ukimidō '' floating temple '' building at mangetsu-ji temple in katata , northern ōtsu . it was reconstructed with concrete in 1937 , but a small temple still stands on the lake near the shore , accessible by a short bridge . another scene features ishiyama-dera temple in southern otsu , which is also renowned for having a room where murasaki shikibu thought up the plan for some chapters of tale of genji . the mountains around the lake offer extensive views . mount hira is a picnic spot . mountain roads like the oku-biwako parkway road up north and the hiei-zan driveway and oku-hiei driveway overlooking the southwestern shore . in ōtsu , the ōtsu prince hotel 's top of otsu restaurant provides views of the lake and city . the michigan paddlewheel boat offers lake cruises . besides the natural environment , historical buildings and festivals persons rank among those of national importance . shiga has 807 national treasures and important cultural properties , that ranks the fourth large number in japan . shiga 's most famous historical building is hikone castle , one of four national treasure castles in the country . the castle tower is well preserved and has many cherry trees . the neighboring city of nagahama has tourism in addition to its hikiyama festival . nearby shrines include hiyoshi taisha in otsu and taga-taisha in taga , which respectively head the seventh and twentieth largest shrine networks in japan , at about 4,000 shrines and 260 shrines , respectively . festivals include the hikiyama festival ( floats parade festival ) , held in ten areas such as nagahama , otsu , maibara , hino and minakuchi . the nagahama hikiyama festival held each april is one of the three major hikiyama festivals in japan and was designated an important intangible cultural property in 1979 . during this festival ornate floats are mounted with miniature stages on which boys ( playing both male and female roles ) act in kabuki plays . higashiomi ( formerly yōkaichi ) city holds a giant kite festival every may along the riverbank . ordinary people are invited to pull the rope that sends the kites aloft . transportation . railways . west japan railway company tōkaidō main line ( biwako line ) , hokuriku main line , kusatsu line and kosei line central japan railway company tōkaidō shinkansen ( maibara station ) and tōkaidō main line keihan electric railway keishin line and ishiyama sakamoto line ohmi railway main line , yōkaichi line and taga line shigaraki kōgen railway sakamoto cable . roads . meishin expressway , shin-meishin expressway and hokuriku expressway pass through shiga . national highway route 1 , 8 , 21 , 8 , 161 , 303 , 306 , 307 , 365 , 367 , 421 , 422 and 477 connect with neighboring prefectures . two bridges span southern part of lake biwa . boats . with development of land transportation in the 20th century , waterborne transportation in lake biwa was disused except for steamer services to islands on the lake and pleasure boats . notable people from shiga prefecture . kakuzo kawamoto , business executive and politician from takashima district . gentaro kawase , president of nippon life insurance from ōmihachiman takanori nishikawa , a singer and actor from hikone and yasu . he is also active as the first cultural ambassador for shiga . hizaki , a musician and songwriter , known for work as guitarist of versailles . sōsuke uno , the 75th prime minister from moriyama . he was one of the shortest-serving prime ministers in japan , holding office for only three months ( june–august 1989 ) . kizo yasui , business executive from hikone , shiga . vice-president of mitsui bank , president of mitsui petroleum and chemical industries ( now mitsui chemicals ) , chairman of toray industries , vice-chairman of nihon keidanren ( japan business federation ) , general manager of tokyo metropolis of ise shrine revered board . sister states . shiga has cooperative agreements with three states . rio grande do sul , brazil michigan , usa hunan , china . notes . references . nussbaum , louis-frédéric and käthe roth . ( 2005 ) . japan encyclopedia . cambridge : harvard university press . ; oclc 58053128 shiga-ken hyakka jiten encyclopedia shiga ( 滋賀県百科事典 , 1984 ) . tokyo : yamato shobo . external links . shiga prefecture official page go.biwako - travel guide of shiga prefecture , japan ( biwako visitors bureau ) shiga prefecture guide - gojapango shiga-ken.com