Battle of Seneffe

background . both france and the dutch republic viewed the spanish netherlands as essential for their security and trade , making it a contested area throughout the 17th century . france occupied much of the region in the 1667-68 war of devolution , before returning nearly all of it to spain in the 1668 treaty of aix-la-chapelle , after the formation of a triple alliance against it . after this , louis xiv decided the best way to force concessions from the dutch was by defeating them first . when the franco-dutch war began in may 1672 , french troops quickly overran much of the netherlands , but by july , the dutch position had stabilised . the unexpected success of this offensive encouraged louis to make excessive demands , while concern at french gains brought the dutch support from brandenburg-prussia , the emperor leopold , and charles ii of spain . in august 1673 , an imperial army entered the rhineland ; facing war on multiple fronts , the french abandoned most of their earlier gains to focus on said theaters , retaining only grave and maastricht . in january 1674 , denmark joined the anti-french coalition , followed by the february treaty of westminster , which ended the third anglo-dutch war . in may , the french took the offensive in the franche-comté , while condé 's army in the spanish netherlands remained on the defensive . a combined dutch-spanish force under william of orange and count monterrey , governor of the spanish netherlands , spent june and july attempting to bring condé to battle . when this proved unsuccessful , william proposed taking the initiative by invading french flanders . on 23 july , william was joined near nivelles by an imperial force under the comte de souches , a french huguenot exile , increasing his numbers to about 65,000 . at the same time , the conclusion of operations in the franche-comté allowed substantial reinforcements to be sent to join condé , including his son the duc d'enghien . by early august , his army of 45,000 was entrenched along the line of the piéton which joined the sambre at charleroi . battle . concluding these positions were too strong to be attacked from the direction of nivelles , on 9 august the allied army established a line between the villages of arquennes to roux , on the french left . they hoped to tempt condé into an attack , but he simply shifted his troops ; next day , william proposed moving around seneffe , and into the french rear . this was supported by the spanish , since it would cut condé 's supply lines and isolate the french garrison in charleroi ( see map ) . at 4:00 am on 11 august , the allies set out in three columns , each marching parallel to the french positions , a formation dictated by the poor roads . the left column was commanded by de souches , the right by the marquis d'assentar , monterrey 's replacement , with the bulk of the infantry and artillery in the centre under william . a vanguard of 2,000 cavalry covered the gaps between the columns , with another 5,200 bringing up the rear led by prince vaudémont . hearing the allies were on the move , at 5:30 am condé rode out to observe their dispositions , and quickly perceived their intentions . the terrain they were crossing was marshy and broken up by numerous hedges , walls and woods , with limited exit points ; gambling these factors would negate their superior numbers , condé decided to attack . he sent 400 light cavalry under saint clar to skirmish with the allied rearguard and slow down their march , while also despatching a cavalry brigade under the marquis de rannes to seize the high ground north of seneffe . around 10:00 am , de rannes came into contact with vaudémont , who asked william for infantry support ; he was sent three battalions , which he placed near the bridge over the zenne that flowed through seneffe , with his cavalry just behind . despite gout so severe he was unable to wear riding boots , condé himself led the elite maison du roi cavalry across the zenne above seneffe , and scattered vaudémont 's cavalry . simultaneous assaults by de rannes and luxembourg overwhelmed the infantry , who were all either killed or taken prisoner . by midday , condé had inflicted significant losses on the allies and gained a clear , if minor victory . instead of halting the attack , he launched a series of frontal assaults against the advice of his subordinates , and the battle became a series of confused and costly firefights , lasting until early evening . after vaudémont was driven out of seneffe , william halted his march and formed a defensive line centred on the nearby priory of st nicolas , with the marquis d'assentar based in the hamlet of fayt-la-manage on his left . the allied horse was once again driven from the field , but the french were exhausted , the dutch infantry remained intact , and the ground in front of their position unsuitable for cavalry . condé led one attack in person , during which he was unhorsed and had to be rescued by his son , the duc d'enghien . luxembourg destroyed much of the dutch baggage train and despite heavy losses , the french finally over-ran the allied positions at st nicolas in the early evening . the two armies remained where they were until daybreak , when william withdrew to mons , and the french resumed their original positions on the piéton . aftermath . although casualties on both sides were enormous , the exact total is still debated , particularly those incurred by the allies . one reason is the relatively high numbers captured ; unlike modern prisoners of war , the vast majority were exchanged almost immediately , so were not considered losses by contemporaries . french military historian de perini puts condé 's casualties as 7,000 dead or wounded , those of the allies as 8,000 , plus 250 prisoners , although this only relates to officers . gaston bodart , whose 1908 work on military casualties was the accepted standard for many years , estimates 10,000 french , 14,000 allied , including 5,400 prisoners . in 1970 , american military analyst trevor dupuy provided figures that agreed with bodart on french losses , but doubled those for the allies . although it is not clear how this figure was generated , it has been used by others , notably spencer tucker . in referring to the latter , micheal clodfelter suggests bodart 's figure of 14,000 allied casualties is 'more likely ' , but places french losses slightly lower , at around 6,000 . in any event , they shocked the french court , one contemporary , madame de sévigné , writing to the count of bussy : '' '' we have lost so much by this victory that without the te deum and captured flags at notre dame , we would believe we had lost the battle '' . while in hindsight victory ended any threat of invasion , at the time the result seemed inconclusive , and condé thereafter sought to avoid a repeat . the imperial troops escaped relatively untouched from the carnage at seneffe , william claiming they had deliberately ignored requests for support . although his overall losses were far higher , he was quickly able to rebuild his field army by taking troops from garrisons . in addition , a large convoy arrived in the allied camp outside mons on 31 august , bringing supplies , a month 's pay in advance for the survivors and five new dutch regiments . combined with the losses suffered by condé , the allied army was now stronger relative to the french than before seneffe , and william proposed another invasion attempt . since neither de souches or monterrey would agree to this , the allies compromised by besieging oudenarde . operations began on 16 september , and three days later , condé began marching to its relief . the dutch and spanish redoubled efforts to breach the walls before his arrival , but without advising his colleagues , de souches sent the imperial artillery off to ghent . since his troops would not fight without their guns , and the dutch and spanish could not face the french on their own , this forced the allies to abandon the siege . after strong protests from the dutch states general , de souches was relieved of his command , but his removal did little to solve the reality of diverging objectives . de souches was acting under instructions from vienna , which wanted to focus on the upper rhine ; the spanish wanted to recoup their losses in the spanish netherlands , while the dutch focused on retaking grave and maastricht . on 9 october , william assumed command of the siege operations at grave , which surrendered on 28th . condé received an elaborate state reception at versailles for seneffe , but his health was failing and the casualties had diminished louis ' trust in his abilities . he temporarily assumed command of french troops in the rhineland following turenne 's death at salzbach in july 1675 , but retired before the end of the year . in the longer term , seneffe confirmed louis ' preference for positional warfare , ushering in a period where siege and manoeuvre dominated military tactics . references . sources .