C. W. Post

biography . early life . charles william post , commonly known as '' c . w . '' , was born october 26 , 1854 , in springfield , illinois . he was the son of charles rollin post and the former caroline lathrop , and grew up in the hometown of abraham lincoln , president of the united states during post 's boyhood years . '' obituary : c.w . post , '' american industries , vol . 14 , no . 11 ( june 1914 ) , pg . 43 . post graduated from the public schools of springfield and enrolled at illinois industrial university ( known today as the university of illinois at urbana–champaign ) , where he remained two years before leaving without a degree . william m . pearce , '' charles william post , '' the handbook of texas online , texas state historical society , www.tshaonline.org/ after a brief stay in independence , kansas , post returned to springfield , where he remained for over a decade working as a salesman and manufacturer of agricultural machinery . during this interval post invented and patented several farm implements , including a plow , a harrow , and a hay-stacking machine . in november 1874 , post married ella letitia merriweather ; they had one daughter . ella supported her husband throughout his career and cared for him when he was ill . as post became wealthier and began spending more time away from ella , who was often ill , he slowly drifted away from her . against her wishes , post separated from her in 1904 and married his second wife , leila young , his 27-year-old secretary , in november 1904 . post 's daughter , who remained close to her father , later said that her mother died of '' a broken heart '' after post divorced her and married his secretary . . career . post suffered a mental breakdown in november 1885 , the result of the stress and overwork which accompanied his job as a farm implement manufacturer . post made a break with his previous life , moving to texas in 1886 , where he came into association with a group of real estate developers in fort worth , who were attempting to establish a new community on the eastern outskirts of a town called riverside . in 1888 , post began a real estate development of his own in fort worth on that he had obtained , platting the land for streets and homes and constructing two mills . the stress of this work again proved too much for post 's constitution , and a second breakdown followed in 1891 . post began a period of extensive travels in search of a cure , coming to take particular interest in the chemistry of digestion . after a period traversing europe , post visited the battle creek sanitarium of battle creek , michigan , a facility operated by john harvey kellogg ( brother of kellogg 's founder will keith kellogg ) . post has been accused of stealing several of kellogg 's recipes , including kellogg 's caramel coffee cereal ( post 's postum ) , cornflakes ( toasties ) , and malted nuts ( grape-nuts ) . in 1895 , post founded post foods , with his first product , postum cereal beverage . post 's first breakfast cereal premiered in 1897 , and he named the product grape-nuts cereal because of the fruity aroma noticed during the manufacturing process and the nutty crunch of the finished product . in 1904 , he followed up the grape nuts label with a brand of corn flakes , which was first called elijah 's manna before being renamed post toasties in 1908 . the british government refused to allow post to market his cereal in the united kingdom using the name elijah 's manna , stating that it was sacrilegious . in 1906 , post invested some of his substantial earnings from his food products manufacturing into texas real estate , purchasing a massive tract in garza and lynn counties . post platted a new town , which he called post city . shade trees were planted , farm parcels laid out , and a hotel , school , churches , and a department store were constructed for the new garza county seat . in 1907 , collier 's weekly published an article questioning the claim made in advertisements for grape nuts that it could cure appendicitis . post responded with advertisements questioning the mental capacity of the article 's author , and collier 's weekly sued for libel . the case was heard in 1910 , and post was fined 50,000 . the decision was overturned on appeal , but advertisements for postum products stopped making such claims . post was a staunch opponent of the trade union movement and was remembered by the national association of manufacturers as one who '' opposed bitterly boycotts , strikes , lockouts , picketing and other forms of coercion in the relations between employer and employee . '' post was also a leading public advocate of the open shop system . . death and legacy . at the end of 1913 , the chronically ill post 's health deteriorated to the point that he canceled public appearances . in early march 1914 , post was believed to be suffering from appendicitis and was rushed via a nonstop train from california to rochester , minnesota , to be operated on by drs . william and charles mayo , regarded as the preeminent surgeons of the day . mayo brothers operated ( successfully ) sometime between march 5 and 10 , 1914 , according to the book american empress : the life and times of marjorie merriweather post . the breakfast cereal magnate returned home to santa barbara . even with surgical remedy , he was still plagued by stomach pain . on may 9 , 1914 , despondent over his ongoing stomach illness , post took his own life with a self-inflicted gunshot . he was 59 years old . his 27-year-old daughter , marjorie merriweather post , inherited his company along with most of his vast fortune , one of the largest of the early 20th century . '' c.w . post a suicide in california home ; battle creek cereal manufacturer , despondent over illness , shoots himself . '' the new york times . may 10 , 1914 . retrieved september 1 , 2019 . shurtleff , william ; aoyagi , akiko ( january 6 , 2014 ) . history of seventh-day adventist work with soyfoods , vegetarianism , meat alternatives , wheat gluten , dietary fiber and peanut butter ( 1863-2013 ) : extensively annotated bibliography and sourcebook . p . 1080 . soyinfo center , , archived at google books . retrieved september 1 , 2019 . marjorie merriweather post later married financier e . f . hutton and owned a estate on long island 's north shore called '' hillwood . '' marjorie sold the estate in 1951 for 200,000 to long island university , which founded its residential c . w . post college in 1954 , marking the 100th anniversary of c . w . post 's birth . for a while named the c.w . post center and then the c . w . post campus , what was c . w . post college has now become mainly a commuter campus called liu/post , and it has about 8,500 full- and part-time students and over 100,000 alumni . the world war ii liberty ship was named in his honor . see also . close city , texas post foods garza county historical museum general foods c . w . post memorial camp . references . further reading . charles dudley eaves and cecil allen hutchinson , post city , texas : c.w . post 's colonizing activities in west texas . austin : texas state historical association , 1952 . nettie letich major , c.w . post : the hour and the man : a biography with genealogical supplement . washington : judd and detweiler , 1963 . jan reid , '' c.w . post , '' texas monthly , march 1987 . . external links . history of c.w . post ( company site ) another biography of c.w . ( charles william ) post records of post land colonization company in the southwest collection/special collections library at texas tech university see also other double u ranch records . blueprints of structures at post , texas , 1908–1915 , in the southwest collection/special collections library at texas tech university finding aid for the post family papers , 1882-1973 , bentley historical library , university of michigan >