Ron Paul

social issues . citing the ninth and tenth amendments , paul advocates states ' rights to decide how to regulate social matters not cited directly by the constitution . he opposes federal regulation of such matters as the death penalty ( although he opposes capital punishment ) , of education , of drugs , and of marriage . regarding same-sex marriage , he stated in 2011 that '' my personal opinion is government should n't be involved . the whole country would be better off if individuals made those decisions and it was a private matter . '' he endorsed revising the military 's '' do n't ask , do n't tell '' policy to concern mainly disruptive sexual behavior ( whether heterosexual or homosexual ) . his abortion-related legislation , such as the sanctity of life act in 2005 , is intended to negate roe v . wade and to get '' the federal government completely out of the business of regulating state matters . '' paul says his years as an obstetrician led him to believe that life begins at conception . paul opposes the federal war on drugs , and advocates that states should decide whether to regulate or deregulate drugs such as medical and recreational marijuana , and other substances . in 2001 , he joined with democratic congressman barney frank in helping pass the states ' rights to medical marijuana act ( h.r . 2592 ) , an attempt to stop the federal government from preempting states ' medical marijuana laws . paul again partnered with frank in support of online gambling rights . in 2006 , both strongly opposed h.r . 4777 , the internet gambling prohibition and enforcement act , and h.r . 4411 , the goodlatte-leach internet gambling prohibition act . paul was critical of the civil rights act of 1964 , arguing that it sanctioned federal interference in the labor market and did not improve race relations . he once remarked : '' the civil rights act of 1964 not only violated the constitution and reduced individual liberty ; it also failed to achieve its stated goals of promoting racial harmony and a color-blind society '' . paul opposes affirmative action . . post-congressional career . in april 2013 , paul founded the ron paul institute for peace and prosperity , a foreign policy think tank that seeks to promote his non-interventionist views . the institute is part of his larger foundation foundation for rational economics and education . in the same month , he began to offer the ron paul curriculum , a homeschool online curriculum developed by gary north and taught from a '' free market and christian '' perspective ; it is free from grades kindergarten to five and available to paid members from six to twelve . in june 2013 , paul criticized the nsa surveillance program and praised edward snowden for having performed a '' great service to the american people by exposing the truth about what our government is doing in secret '' . in april 2015 , paul began appearing in infomercials for stansberry & associates investment research , warning about an upcoming financial meltdown as a result of the imminent crash of the world 's currencies . he urges listeners to read america 2020 : the survival blueprint , a book written by porter stansberry . on march 28 , 2017 , paul predicted the markets would lower during the year and said president trump had taken a risk with crediting himself for the postelection market surge , reasoning washington was still predominantly unchanged . paul has been a critic of donald trump 's plans to increase the number of military personnel in afghanistan . in august 2017 , he said that americans do n't see afghanistan as a threat to their personal security and being aggressive in foreign policy only loses trump some of his support base . paul has also called for trump to bring american troops back from syria in april 2018 , on the grounds that the threat from isis has been eliminated . he continues to voice his disagreements regarding foreign policy , and more recently , regarding the events involving america and iran . in 2013 , paul established the ron paul channel , an internet broadcast . its slogan was '' turn off your tv . turn on the truth . '' ron paul channel speaking about the channel , paul said , '' i was at a debate one time a couple years ago , where i did n't think i got a fair shake . in a two-hour debate , i had 89 seconds . i thought , maybe there 's something wrong with the media . maybe they 're not covering us fairly . i 'm just using it as a pun , but there 's a bit of truth to this . we do n't get a fair shake . the people who believe in liberty and limited government do n't expect it from the ordinary media . '' speaking about his youth appeal , he noted , '' they do n't sit and watch tv and turn the programs on at seven o'clock to watch us like that—so i thought the technology was there . the country is ripe for the continuation of this revolution . '' in may 2015 , ron paul ended all relationships with voices of liberty and the ron paul channel in order to start a new internet program called the ron paul liberty report . according to paul himself , the liberty report is much cheaper to produce than the previous ron paul channel . in the announcement of the ended relationship , paul said , '' but the message i have always tried to deliver over the years has always been the same , and that is spreading the message of liberty . right now i am very much engaged in doing that through the internet . but , i believe we can do better . right now , the program has changed to the ron paul liberty report , and that is what we do , we report on liberty in context of what is going on in daily activity and what is going on in the news . '' paul went on to say that it will be more locally controlled , unlike the previous ron paul channel . paul continued to say it will be produced out of texas , instead of california . as of april 2019 , the ron paul liberty report channel has received more than 17 million views on youtube . . 2016 presidential election . paul endorsed his son , senator rand paul , in the 2016 republican primary and campaigned for him in iowa . after his son dropped out , paul had said that no republican or democratic candidate even came close to holding libertarian views . paul expressed disappointment in former new mexico governor gary johnson 's libertarian party nomination for president ( despite johnson 's past public support of paul 's 2008 and 2012 presidential bids ) , and told independent voters that green party nominee jill stein was a better candidate for those who '' lean towards progressivism and liberalism '' , while emphasizing that he was not endorsing her . paul received one electoral vote from a texas faithless elector , south texas college political science professor william greene ( who had been pledged to donald trump ) , in the 2016 presidential election , making paul the oldest person ever to receive an electoral vote , and the second libertarian party member to receive an electoral vote , after john hospers in 1972 . 2020 presidential election . in the 2020 democratic primary , paul described hawaii representative tulsi gabbard as '' the most intelligent '' and '' the very , very best '' option of the democratic candidates , primarily for her views on foreign policy , adding that '' we probably would n't agree with too much on economics . '' . controversies . newsletters controversy . beginning in 1978 , for more than two decades paul and his associates published a number of political and investment-oriented newsletters bearing his name ( dr . ron paul 's freedom report , the ron paul survival report , the ron paul investment letter , and the ron paul political report ) . a number of the newsletters , particularly in the period between 1988 and 1994 when paul was no longer in congress , contained material that later proved controversial . topics included conspiracy theories , anti-government militia movements , and race wars . during paul 's 1996 congressional election campaign , and his 2008 and 2012 presidential primary campaigns , critics charged that some of the passages reflected racism , anti-semitism , and homophobia . in a 1996 interview , paul did not deny writing the newsletters and defended some of their contents , but specified that he opposes racism . in march 2001 , paul said he did not write the commentaries , but stopped short of denying authorship in 1996 because his campaign advisers had thought it would be too confusing and that he had to live with the material published under his name . half a dozen libertarian activists , including some still closely associated with paul , pointed to lew rockwell as the primary ghostwriter of the newsletters . rockwell denied responsibility for the content . in 2011 , paul 's spokesperson jesse benton said paul had '' taken moral responsibility because they appeared under his name and slipped through under his watch . '' . criticism of u.s . support of orange revolution and ngos . following the orange revolution in 2004 , which overthrew viktor yanukovych 's government in favor of viktor yushchenko 's government , ron paul—through statements in congress in december 2004 and later his institute for peace and prosperity—was very critical of the national endowment for democracy and its national democratic institute and international republican institute , calling them prominent supporters of the removal of yanukovich from power . . statements about responses to covid-19 . on march 16 , 2020 , ron paul criticized the government , media , and public responses to the nascent coronavirus pandemic in a column for his website . he dismissed claims of a death rate higher than the flu as '' a claim without any scientific basis '' and said that the '' chief fearmonger of the trump administration is without a doubt anthony fauci , head of the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases at the national institutes of health , '' who paul claimed was '' serving up outright falsehoods to stir up even more panic . '' he stated , '' people should ask themselves whether this coronavirus 'pandemic ' could be a big hoax.that is not to say the disease is harmless . without question people will die from coronavirus . those in vulnerable categories should take precautions to limit their risk of exposure . but we have seen this movie before . government over-hypes a threat as an excuse to grab more of our freedoms . when the 'threat ' is over , however , they never give us our freedoms back . '' six days after paul wrote his article '' the coronavirus hoax '' , his son , kentucky senator rand paul , tested positive for covid-19 . . personal life . , a collection of recipes she and her friends contributed , and which was sold in part to support ron paul 's political campaigns . . for earlier versions see : and his life and career is the subject of the 2012 film ron paul uprising . paul and his wife currently reside in lake jackson , texas . on september 25 , 2020 , paul was hospitalized after appearing to slur his words while speaking during a livestream event . paul later posted a photo of himself in a hospital bed to his twitter page , along with the statement '' i am doing fine . thank you for your concern '' . . media relating to ron paul . books . ron paul 's revolution : the man and the movement he inspired , by brian doherty , 2012 scribd ron paul 's revolution : the man and the movement he inspired by brian doherty . films . america : freedom to fascism , 2006 film featuring an interview from paul . american drug war : the last white hope , 2007 documentary in which paul has a cameo appearance . i.o.u.s.a . , 2008 documentary featuring paul among the cast . brüno , 2009 film by sacha baron cohen in which paul has a cameo appearance . an inconvenient tax , 2010 documentary featuring paul among the cast . ron paul uprising , 2012 film by wiliam lewis . atlas shrugged part iii : who is john galt ? , 2014 adaptation of atlas shrugged in which paul has a cameo appearance . bibliography . . other contributions .