1953 in music

specific locations . 1953 in british music 1953 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1953 in country music 1953 in jazz . events . february 6 – contralto kathleen ferrier , already terminally ill with cancer , leaves covent garden opera house in london on a stretcher after being taken ill on the second night of her run-in gluck 's orfeo ed euridice . march 12 – heinrich sutermeister 's opera romeo and juliet receives its first uk performance at sadler 's wells theatre in london , conducted by james robertson . may 26 – werner meyer-eppler , fritz enkel , herbert eimert and robert beyer open a pioneering electronic music studio at the cologne studios of the nwdr . july 16–29 – the darmstädter ferienkurse are held at darmstadt . july 18 – elvis presley 's sun recordings : elvis presley makes his first recordings ( a copy of which is owned by jack white when he wins an auction on ebay in january 2015 ) . september 27 – helen traubel ends her long association with the metropolitan opera in new york city after having appeared in chicago as a night-club singer . october – sir arthur bliss replaces sir arnold bax as master of the queen 's music in the united kingdom . october 5 – wilhelm furtwängler and the soloist 's in the vienna state opera 's production of don giovanni publicly protest the suspension of egon hilbert as administrator of the burg theater and state opera . october 19 – opening of the covent garden opera season in london , with a production of wagner 's die walküre . october 30 – ernst marboe is announced as the new administrator of the vienna state opera and burg theater , replacing egon hilbert . november 2 – the metropolitan opera announces that a new two-year contract has been agreed with the musicians ' union , averting a threatened strike by the orchestra . november 17 – carl ebert is announced as the new intendant of the städtische oper , ( west ) berlin . december 7 – the la scala opera season opens with a production of alfredo catalani 's la wally , to mark the hundredth anniversary of the composer 's birth . alfred schnittke becomes a student of evgeny golubev . frank sinatra begins recording at capitol . '' crazy man , crazy '' , recorded by bill haley & his comets , becomes the first rock and roll single to make the billboard national american musical charts . american singer frankie laine sets the all-time united kingdom record for weeks at number one in a given year on the uk singles chart , when his hit singles '' answer me , '' '' hey joe ! '' and '' i believe '' hold the top slot for 27 weeks : a little over half a year . '' i believe '' , number one for 18 weeks , also holds the all-time record for a single . over 50 years later , both records will still hold . eddie fisher becomes '' the coca-cola kid '' on the television show , coke time at a salary of one million dollars a year . the platters form in los angeles . the erato records label is founded to promote french classical music . albums released . anita o'day collates – anita o'day the astaire story – fred astaire broadway 's best – jo stafford by the light of the silvery moon – doris day calamity jane – doris day country girl – bing crosby dean martin sings – dean martin dinah shore sings the blues – dinah shore georgia gibbs sings oldies – georgia gibbs jazz at massey hall – the quintet kay starr style – kay starr let there be love & nbsp ; – joni james may i sing to you – eddie fisher new concepts of artistry in rhythm – stan kenton portrait of new orleans – jo stafford and frankie laine requested by you – frank sinatra sinatra sings his greatest hits – frank sinatra songs by tom lehrer – tom lehrer songs of open spaces – guy mitchell starring jo stafford – jo stafford . biggest hit singles . the following singles achieved the highest chart positions in the limited set of charts available for 1953 . compositions . malcolm arnold symphony no . 2 carlos chávez symphony no . 5 ( chávez ) george crumb sonata , for viola and piano ernő dohnányi american rhapsody karel goeyvaerts nummer 5 cristóbal halffter piano concerto ernesto halffter fantasia española for cello and piano rodolfo halffter hojas de album ( 3 ) for piano , op . 22 karl amadeus hartmann concerto for piano , winds and percussion arthur honegger a christmas cantata karel husa string quartet no . 2 andrew imbrie string quartet no . 2 györgy ligeti sonata for solo cello bohuslav martinů concerto for violin , piano , and orchestra overture symphony no . 6 ( martinů ) peter racine fricker viola concerto giacinto scelsi five incantations for piano dmitri shostakovich ballet suite no . 4 symphony no . 10 karlheinz stockhausen klavierstücke i–iv ( revised version ) kontra-punkte studie i eugen suchoň – metamorphosis for orchestra ralph vaughan williams – the old hundredth psalm tune heitor villa-lobos alvorada na floresta tropical for orchestra cello concerto no . 2 fantaisie concertante for piano , clarinet and bassoon harp concerto odisseia de uma raça , symphonic poem string quartet no . 14 symphony no . 10 , sumé pater patrium ( sinfonia ameríndia ) ( sumé , father of fathers amerindian symphony ) . opera . the decembrists ( yuri shaporin ) first staged 23 june 1953 at the bolshoi theatre , moscow . the dumb wife ( joseph horovitz ) , premiered 21 november 1953 at the guildhall school , london , by the intimate opera company . gloriana ( benjamin britten ) composed 1953 , first performed on 8 july 1953 at the royal opera house , covent garden in the presence of elizabeth ii . irmelin ( frederick delius ) composed 1890–92 ; first produced oxford , 4 may 1953 . lenora 40/50 ( rolf liebermann ) first produced in berlin on 12 february 1953 at the state opera house in the british sector . man of enterprise ( denis bloodworth ) first produced on 8 december 1953 at tiffin school , kingston , surrey , by the school operatic society . menna ( arwel hughes ) premiered by the welsh national opera at the pavilion in cardiff on 9 november , with the composer conducting . nelson ( lennox berkeley ) , premiered in a concert performance 14 february 1953 by the english opera group at wigmore hall , london . sevil ( fikrat amirov ) three 's company ( antony hopkins ) , premiered 21 november 1953 at the guildhall school , london , by the intimate opera company . the tinners of cornwall ( inglis gundry ) , premiered 30 september 1953 at rudolf steiner hall , conducted by geoffrey corbett . jazz . musical theater . airs on a shoestring & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; london revue opened at the royal court theatre on april 22 and ran for 772 performances at the lyric & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; london production the boy friend ( sandy wilson ) commenced at london 's players club on april 14 and reopened in an expanded version on october 13 before moving to the west end proper in 1954 . braziliana & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; london production the buccaneer & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; london production can-can ( cole porter ) – broadway production opened at the shubert theatre on may 7 and ran for 892 performances hazel flagg broadway production opened at the mark hellinger theatre on february 11 and ran for 190 performances john murray anderson 's almanac broadway revue opened at the imperial theatre on december 10 and ran for 227 performances the king and i ( richard rodgers and oscar hammerstein ii ) london production opened at the drury lane theatre on october 8 and ran for 926 performances kismet broadway production opened at the ziegfeld theatre on december 3 and ran for 583 performances maggie broadway production opened at the royal national theatre on february 18 and ran for 5 performances me and juliet & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; broadway production opened at the majestic theatre on may 28 and ran for 358 performances paint your wagon ( alan jay lerner and frederick loewe ) – london production opened at her majesty 's theatre on february 11 and ran for 477 performances the wayward way wonderful town ( leonard bernstein , betty comden and adolph green ) – broadway production opened at the winter garden theatre on february 25 and ran for 559 performances . musical films . the affairs of dobie gillis starring debbie reynolds , bobby van , barbara ruick and bob fosse the band wagon by the light of the silvery moon calamity jane starring doris day and howard keel the desert song the farmer takes a wife starring betty grable , dale robertson , john carroll , thelma ritter and eddie foy , jr . gentlemen prefer blondes i love melvin starring debbie reynolds and donald o'connor the jazz singer kiss me kate starring howard keel , kathryn grayson , ann miller , keenan wynn and james whitmore lili peter pan animated feature singin ' in the rain starring gene kelly , donald o'connor and debbie reynolds small town girl starring jane powell , ann miller , farley granger , s . z . sakall , bobby van , billie burke , fay wray and featuring nat '' king '' cole . directed by lászló kardos . so this is love released july 15 starring kathryn grayson as grace moore . the stooge released february 4 starring martin and lewis . three sailors and a girl starring jane powell , gordon macrae and gene nelson torch song released october 23 starring joan crawford and michael wilding . births . january 6 – malcolm young , rock musician ( ac/dc ) ( d . 2017 ) january 10 – pat benatar , singer ( '' hit me with your best shot '' etc . ) january 21 – glenn kaiser , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( resurrection band ) january 23 – robin zander , rock musician ( cheap trick ) january 26 – lucinda williams , singer january 29 louie perez ( los lobos ) teresa teng , singer february 3 – joëlle , singer ( d . 1982 ) february 18 – robin bachman , drummer ( bachman–turner overdrive and brave belt ) february 20 – riccardo chailly , conductor february 26 – michael bolton , american singer ( blackjack ) march 3 – robyn hitchcock , singer-songwriter and guitarist march 12 – ryan paris , singer march 19 – ricky wilson ( the b-52s ) march 23 – chaka khan , singer march 31 sean hopper ( huey lewis and the news ) greg martin ( the kentucky headhunters ) april 4 – chen yi , chinese classical composer and violinist april 21 – todd phillips , american bassist and composer ( david grisman quintet ) april 28 pat donohue , guitarist for the guys all-star shoe band on a prairie home companion ) kim gordon , american musician , songwriter and visual artist may 4 – oleta adams , american soul and jazz singer may 8 billy burnette ( fleetwood mac ) alex van halen ( van halen ) may 9 connie kaldor , canadian singer-songwriter kojo , singer may 15 – mike oldfield , composer & musician may 16 – richard page ( mr . mister ) may 17 – george johnson ( the brothers johnson ) june 6 – june yamagishi , japanese-american guitarist ( papa grows funk and the wild magnolias ) june 7 – johnny clegg , mbaqanga and afro-pop musician and musical anthropologist ( d . 2019 ) june 12 – rocky burnette , rock singer june 19 – larry dunn ( earth wind & fire ) june 20 alan longmuir , pop guitarist ( the bay city rollers ) dušan rapoš , composer june 22 – cyndi lauper , singer-songwriter june 29 – colin hay ( men at work ) july 2 – mark hart , american guitarist and keyboard player ( crowded house and supertramp ) july 6 – nanci griffith , singer ( blue moon orchestra ) july 18 – warren wiebe , american singer ( d . 1998 ) july 21 – eric bazilian ( the hooters ) july 22 jimmy bruno , american guitarist sylvia chang , taiwanese actress , singer , director and screenwriter july 29 – geddy lee ( rush ) july 31 – hugh macdowell ( electric light orchestra ) august 1 – robert cray , blues guitarist and singer august 2 – marjo , canadian singer-songwriter ( corbeau ) august 12 – peter ostroushko , mandolinist , fiddler august 16 – james '' j.t . '' taylor ( kool & the gang ) august 17 – kevin rowland , vocalist ( dexys midnight runners ) august 24 – ron holloway , tenor saxophonist august 27 – alex lifeson ( rush ) august 29 – rick downey ( blue öyster cult ) september 2 – john zorn , composer september 7 – benmont tench , keyboardist for tom petty & the heartbreakers and others september 11 – tommy shaw ( styx ) september 27 – greg ham ( men at work ) september 28 – jim diamond , pop singer-songwriter ( ph.d . ) ( d . 2015 ) october 7 – tico torres , bon jovi october 10 – midge ure , singer-songwriter october 14 – kazumi watanabe , jazz performer october 15 – tito jackson ( the jackson 5 ) october 16- tony carey ( rainbow ) october 21 – charlotte caffey ( the go-go 's ) october 21 – eric faulkner , guitarist and singer-songwriter ( bay city rollers ) october 26 – keith strickland ( the b-52s ) october 28 – desmond child , american songwriter and producer october 31 – johnny clegg , singer and instrumentalist november 11 – andy partridge ( xtc ) november 13 keith green , gospel singer-songwriter ( d . 1982 ) andrew ranken , celtic punk drummer ( the pogues ) november 18 – jan kuehnemund , american guitarist ( vixen ) ( d . 2013 ) november 22 – urmas alender , singer ( ruja , propeller ) november 23 – francis cabrel , folk singer/songwriter december 12 bruce kulick , american guitarist and songwriter ( kiss , grand funk railroad , blackjack , union and eric singer project ) dave meniketti , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( y & t ) december 26 – harry christophers , english choral conductor undated – david owen norris , english classical pianist , composer , academic and broadcaster . deaths . january 1 – hank williams , country musician , 29 january 18 – arthur wood , composer , 78 february 2 – gustav strube , conductor and composer , 75 march 5 e . t . cook , organist and composer , 72 sergei prokofiev , composer , 61 march 19 – irène bordoni , singer and actress , 68 march 29 – arthur fields , singer-songwriter , 64 april 23 – peter derose , tin pan alley composer , 53 april 29 – kiki , '' the queen of montparnasse '' , 51 ( drug- and alcohol-related ) april 30 – lily brayton , musical theatre star , 76 may 15 – mabel love , dancer , 78 may 16 – django reinhardt , jazz guitarist , 43 ( brain hemorrhage ) may 19 – frank mullings , tenor , 72 may 22 – frederick jackson , librettist and screenwriter ( 66 ) may 30 – dooley wilson , actor , singer and pianist , 67 june 3 – florence price , composer , 66 june 10 – grzegorz fitelberg , conductor , violinist and composer , 73 june 21 – ford dabney , composer and vaudevillian , 75 june 25 – jules van nuffel , musicologist and composer , 70 july 5 – titta ruffo , operatic baritone , 76 july 17 – bernhard van den sigtenhorst meyer , dutch composer , 65 august 14 – friedrich schorr , operatic bass-baritone , 64 august 29 – darrell fancourt , bass-baritone , 67 september 1 – jacques thibaud , violinist , 72 september 21 – roger quilter , composer , 75 october 3 – sir arnold bax , composer , 69 october 8 – kathleen ferrier , english contralto , 41 ( cancer ) october 18 – marguerite d'alvarez , operatic contralto , exact age unknown october 27 – eduard künneke , composer , 68 october 29 – william kapell , pianist , 31 october 30 – emmerich kálmán , composer , 71 november 10 – theodora morse , lyricist , 70 november 18 – ruth crawford seeger , composer , 52 november 21 – larry shields , jazz musician , 60 november 26 – ivor atkins , organist and choirmaster , 83 december 5 noel mewton-wood , pianist , 31 ( suicide by poisoning ) jorge negrete , singer and actor , 42 ( hepatitis ) december 9 – issay dobrowen , pianist , conductor and composer , 62 december 11 – albert coates , conductor and composer , 71 december 29 – violet macmillan , broadway star , 66 . references .