The Great Game

derivation of the term . the term '' the great game '' was used well before the 19th century and was associated with games of risk , such as cards and dice . the french equivalent le grand jeu dates back to at least 1585 and is associated with meanings of risk , chance and deception . in the historical sense the term dated from the mid-19th century . '' the great game '' is attributed to british captain arthur conolly ( 1807–42 ) who had been appointed as a political officer . in july 1840 , in correspondence to major henry rawlinson who had been recently appointed as the new political agent in kandahar , conolly wrote , '' you 've a great game , a noble game , before you . '' conolly believed that rawlinson 's new post gave him the opportunity to advance humanitarianism in afghanistan , and summed up his hopes : if the british government would only play the grand game – help russia cordially to all that she has a right to expect – shake hands with persia – get her all possible amends from uzbeks – force the bukhara amir to be just to us , the afghans , and other oosbeg states , and his own kingdom – but why go on ; you know my , at any rate in one sense , enlarged views . inshallah ! the expediency , nay the necessity of them will be seen , and we shall play the noble part that the first christian nation of the world ought to fill . it was introduced into mainstream by the british novelist rudyard kipling in his novel kim ( 1901 ) . it was first used academically by professor h.w.c . davis in a presentation titled the great game in asia ( 1800–1844 ) on 10 november 1926 . the use of the term '' the great game '' to describe anglo-russian rivalry in central asia became common only after the second world war . india invasion fears . at the start of the 19th century , the indian subcontinent was ruled in part by independent princely states and in part by the company rule of the british east india company . during the 19th century a political and diplomatic confrontation developed between britain and russia over afghanistan which later became known as '' the great game '' . russia was fearful of british commercial and military inroads into central asia , and britain was fearful of russia adding the '' jewel in the crown '' , india , to the vast empire that russia was building in asia . this resulted in an atmosphere of distrust and the constant threat of war between the two empires . if russia were to gain control of the emirate of afghanistan , it might then be used as a staging post for a russian invasion of india . napoleon had proposed a joint franco-russian invasion of india to his imperial majesty paul i of russia . in 1801 paul , fearing a future action by the british against russia and her allies in europe , decided to make the first move towards where he believed the british empire was weakest . he wrote to the ataman of the don cossacks troops , cavalry general vasily petrovich orlov , directing him to march to orenburg , conquer the central asian khanates , and from there invade india . paul was assassinated in the same year and the invasion was terminated . napoleon tried to persuade paul 's son , tsar alexander i of russia , to invade india ; however alexander resisted . in 1807 , napoleon dispatched general claude matthieu , count gardane on a french military mission to persia , with the intention of persuading russia to invade india . in response , britain sent its own diplomatic missions in 1808 , with military advisers , to persia and afghanistan under the capable mountstuart elphinstone , averting the french and possible russian threat . however , britain was left with concerns about being able to defend india . in 1810 , lieutenant henry pottinger and captain charles christie undertook an expedition from nushki ( balochistan ) to isfahan ( central persia ) disguised as muslims . the expedition was funded by the east india company and was to map and research the regions of '' beloochistan '' ( balochistan ) and persia because of concerns about india being invaded by french forces from that direction . after the disastrous french invasion of russia in 1812 and the collapse of the french army , the threat of a french invasion through persia was removed . beginnings . britain 's view . the great game is said to have begun on 12 january 1830 when lord ellenborough , the president of the board of control for india tasked lord william bentinck , the governor-general of india , to establish a new trade route to bukhara . following the treaty of turkmenchay 1828 and the treaty of adrianople ( 1829 ) , britain feared that persia and the ottoman empire ( now turkey , etc . ) would become protectorates of russia . this would change britain 's perception of the world , and its response was the great game . britain had no intention of getting involved in the middle east , but it did envision a series of buffer states between the british and russian empires that included turkey , persia , plus the khanate of khiva and the khanate of bukhara that would grow from future trade . behind these buffer states would be their protected states stretching from the persian gulf to india and up into the emirate of afghanistan , with british sea-power protecting trade sea-lanes . access to afghanistan was to be through developing trade routes along the indus and sutlej rivers using steam-powered boats , and therefore access through the sind and punjab regions would be required . persia would have to give up its claim on herat in afghanistan . afghanistan would need to be transformed from a group of warring principalities into one state ruled by an ally whose foreign relations would be conducted on his behalf by the governor-general and the foreign office . the great game meant closer ties between britain and the states along her northwest frontier . britain believed that it was the world 's first free society and the most industrially advanced country , and therefore that it had a duty to use its iron , steam power , and cotton goods to take over central asia and develop it . british goods were to be followed by british values and the respect for private property . with pay for work and security in place , nomads would settle and become tribal herdsman surrounding oasis cities . these were to develop into modern states with agreed borders , as in the european model . therefore , lines needed to be agreed and drawn on maps . morgan says that two proud and expanding empires approached each other , without any agreed frontier , from opposite directions over a '' backward , uncivilized and undeveloped region . '' here we are , just as we were , snarling at each other , hating each other , but neither wishing for war . – lord palmerston ( 1835 ) . russia 's view . in 1557 , bokhara and khiva sent ambassadors to ivan iv seeking permission to trade in russia . russia had an interest in establishing a trade route from moscow to india . from then until the mid-19th century , russian ambassadors to the region spent much of their time trying to free russians who had been taken as slaves by the khanates . russia would later expand across siberia to the far east , where it reached the pacific port that would become known as vladivostok by 1859 . this eastward expansion was of no concern to the british foreign office because this area did not lie across any british trade routes or destinations , and therefore was of no interest to britain . beginning in the 1820s , russian troops would begin to advance southward from siberia in search of secure boundaries and reliable neighbors . this advance would not cease until russia 's frontiers and her sphere of influence were firm in the central asia , and this would include bokhara and khiva . between 1824 and 1854 , russia occupied the entire kazakh khanate ( modern-day kazakhstan ) . this raised russo-khivan tensions in addition to khiva 's legal discrimination of russian merchants who were just beginning to penetrate central asia , and the ongoing issue of russian slaves . russia launched an attack in 1839–40 but it failed to reach khiva because of the tough terrain and weather . however , the khan of khiva feared a further russian assault and released a number of russian slaves . during the 1840s and 1850s , russia 's aims in central asia were for bukhara and khiva to refrain from hostile actions against russia , cease possession of russian slaves and the granting of asylum to kazakhs fleeing from russian justice . khiva must cease her attacks on caravans along the syr darya . russian merchants must be allowed to trade on the same terms as native merchants in bukhara and khiva . the khanates must guarantee the safety of the persons and property of russian merchants , levy no excessive duties , permit unhampered transit of goods and caravans across central asia into neighboring states and allow russian commercial agents to reside in bukhara and khiva , and free navigation on the amu darya river for russian ships . none of these aims was realised . russia 's borders remained insecure and in addition there was growing british influence in the region . in 1869 , when clarendon proposed the amu darya river as the basis for a neutral zone between british and russian spheres of influence , alexander gorchakov proposed afghanistan as the neutral zone . russia feared the influence that a muslim power with british support might have on the other khanates in the region . anglo–russian rivalry in central asia . under the east india company . . early explorations and accounts . in 1782 george forster , a civil servant of the east india company , undertook a journey that began in calcutta , bengal and passed through kashmir , afghanistan , herat , khorassan , mazanderan , crossed the caspian sea by ship , and then travelled to baku , astrakhan , moscow , st petersburg and then by ship to london . his detailed description of the journey was published in 1798 . william moorcroft was an explorer , doctor , veterinary surgeon , and superintendent of the east india company 's horse stud . he had an interest in expanding trade in central asia , where he thought the russian traders were already active . in 1820 , moorcroft , george trebeck and george guthrie left india for bukhara to buy turkoman horses and reached bukhara in 1825 . however , all three died of fever on the return journey . his travels were published in 1841 . charles masson , formerly of the east india company , resided in baluchistan , afghanistan and the punjab between 1826 and 1838 and published his travels . in september 1829 , lieutenant arthur conolly of the east india company travelled from st . petersburg , russia to the caspian desert , to kir ( northern iran ) , was detained in astrabad ( northern iran ) as a russian spy , then travelled with a caravan of pilgrims to meshed , marched with the afghan army from there to herat , then traveled to kandahar , to quetta , then across the thar desert to the british frontier in january 1831 . he published his travels in 1834 . however , after 1830 , britain 's commercial and diplomatic interest to the north-west would eventually become formidable . in 1831 , captain alexander burnes and colonel henry pottinger 's surveys of the indus river would prepare the way for a future assault on the sind to clear a path towards central asia . burnes embarked on a dangerous 12-month journey beginning in 1831 into afghanistan and through the hindu kush to bukhara , returning in 1832 . burnes , a christian travelling through a muslim country was one of the first to study afghanistan for british intelligence and upon his return , he published his book , travels to bukhara , which became an overnight success in 1834 . between 1832 and 1834 , britain attempted to negotiate trade agreements with ranjit singh , ruler of the sikh empire , and the amirs of sindh . however , these attempts were unsuccessful . . afghanistan and central asia . in 1835 , lord auckland was appointed governor-general , and replaced bentinck who had pursued a non-intervention policy . the india board instructed auckland : to watch more closely than has hitherto been attempted the progress of events in afghanistan , and to counteract the progress of russian influence.the mode of dealing with this very important question , whether by dispatching a confidential agent to dost mohammed of kabul merely to watch the progress of events , or to enter into relations with this chief , either of a political or merely in the first instance of a commercial character , we confide in your discretion as well as the adoption of any other measures that may appear to you desirable to counteract russian influence in that quarter , should you be satisfied.that the time has arrived at which it would be right for you to interfere decidedly in the affairs of afghanistan . such an interference would doubtless be requisite , either to prevent the extension of persian dominion in that quarter or to raise a timely barrier against the impending encroachments of russian influence . in that year , lieutenant john wood of the indian navy commanded the first steamboat to paddle up the indus river and surveyed the river as he went . in 1838 , he led an expedition that found one of the river oxus ' sources in central asia . he published his travels in 1872 . in 1837 , the russian envoy jan prosper witkiewicz visited kabul , and the british believed that it was to facilitate some form of diplomatic or military presence in afghanistan . while in kabul , he dined with the british envoy , captain alexander burnes , who reported negatively on russia 's intentions . russia feared british inroads on their commerce in central asia , as well as the influence that a muslim power with british support might have on the other khanates . in 1838 , colonel charles stoddart of the east india company arrived in the khanate of bukhara to arrange an alliance with nasrullah khan . nasrullah khan had stoddart imprisoned in a vermin-infested dungeon because he had not bowed nor brought gifts . in 1841 , captain arthur conolly arrived to try to secure stoddart 's release . he was also imprisoned and on 17 june 1842 both men were beheaded . on hearing of the execution of the two british officers , emperor nicholas i of russia would no longer receive bukhara 's gifts or emissaries , and its ambassador was turned back at orenburg with a message that the emperor would no longer have anything to do with the emir of bukhara . after its two representatives were executed in bukhara , britain actively discouraged officers from traveling in turkestan . during 1838 , there were rumors in london of a coming russian move towards khiva . additionally , persia intended to annex herat to make up for territory it had lost in the russo-persian war ( 1826–28 ) , however the allegiance of herat to afghanistan was crucial to the british strategy . the siege of herat began in november 1837 when the new shah of persia , mohammed mirza , arrived before herat . his intention was to take herat then move on to kandahar . with him was the russian envoy count simonich , seconded russian officers and a regiment of russian deserters under the polish general berowski . eldred pottinger , an officer of the bengal artillery , who had earlier entered herat in disguise , stiffened the defences and despite the presence of russian advisers the siege lasted eight months . britain threatened to take military action and persia withdrew in september . in october 1838 auckland issued the simla manifesto , a piece of propaganda designed to blacken the reputation of dost mohammad khan ( emir of afghanistan ) and which claimed that dost mohammad : openly threatened.to call in every foreign aid that he could command.we could never hope that the tranquility of our neighborhood could be secured.the governor-general confidently hopes that the shah will speedily be replaced on his throne.the independence and integrity of afghanistan restored , the british army will be withdrawn . . first anglo-afghan war . british influence was to be extended into afghanistan and it was to become a buffer state . the intention to invade was clear , and when a copy of the manifesto reached london there was no objection . in december , the british marched into afghanistan and arrested dost mohammad , sent him into exile in india and replaced him with the previous ruler , shah shuja , who shared their more progressive vision for the people of the region . shah shuja ul-mulk had ascended the throne in 1803 and had signed a mutual defence agreement with the british in 1809 against a possible franco-russian invasion of india via afghanistan . in the same year he was deposed and imprisoned by his half-brother . there were a number of amirs of afghanistan until dost mohammad khan gained power in 1836 . shah shuja was not popular with the afghans and tensions grew , leading to the killing of the british envoy , captain alexander burnes , in 1841 . by january 1842 , the afghans were in full revolt . with a weakening of military discipline , the british decided to withdraw from kabul . the kabul garrison of 4,500 troops and 12,000 camp followers left kabul for jalalabad that was 80 miles and 5 days march away . they were attacked by 30,000 afghans . six british officers escaped on horseback but only one , the wounded dr william brydon riding on a wounded horse , made it to jalalabad . over one hundred of the british and 2,000 sepoys and camp followers were taken hostage and the rest killed . so perished the '' army of the indus '' . in april , a punitive expedition was dispatched and recaptured kabul and freed the captives in september . the new governor-general , lord ellenborough , decided to withdraw all british garrisons from afghanistan and dost mohammad khan was freed in india to return to the throne . dost mohammad is reported to have said : i have been struck by the magnitude of your resources , your ships , your arsenals , but what i can not understand is why the rulers of so vast and flourishing an empire should have gone across the indus to deprive me of my poor and barren country . . mission to khiva . in 1839 , acting captain james abbott of the bengal artillery undertook a mission to the khanate of khiva in an attempt to negotiate the release of russian slaves that would deny the russians a pretext for invading khiva . if war had already broken out , abbot was instructed to attempt to negotiate a settlement . the attempted russian assault on khiva may have been in response to britain 's '' forward policy '' on afghanistan , however it failed to reach khiva due to the severe winter conditions . of the 5,000 men who had left orenburg , only 4,000 returned . abbott was hampered by a lack of understanding of khivan language and culture , and the attempt to release russian slaves was unsuccessful . he did agree with the khivan ruler , allah quli khan , to establishing a british agent to khiva and to mediate between khiva and russia . abbott set off from khiva in 1840 towards russia to commence negotiations , which he did on his own initiative and it was not authorised by his superiors . his caravan was attacked by khazakhs and he was wounded in the hand and taken hostage , however he and his party were released because they feared retribution . he reached saint petersburg but the attempt at mediation failed . his bravery was recognized through promotion to full captain . in the same year , lieutenant richmond shakespear of the bengal artillery was successful in negotiating the release of 416 russian captives , whom he escorted into russia . he was knighted for this undertaking . . anglo-sikh wars . in 1843 , britain annexed the sind . the first anglo-sikh war was fought between the sikh empire and the east india company in 1845–1846 , resulting in the partial subjugation of the sikh kingdom . the second anglo-sikh war was fought in 1848–1849 , resulting in subjugation of the remainder of the sikh empire , and the annexation of the punjab province and what subsequently became the north-west frontier province . anglo-persian war . in 1856 , persia commenced an assault on herat and the british home government declared war on persia . the anglo-persian war was conducted under major general sir james outram until 1857 , when persia and britain both withdrew and persia signed a treaty renouncing its claim on herat . . under the british crown . following the indian rebellion of 1857 , the east india company 's remaining powers were transferred to the british crown in the person of queen victoria ( who in 1876 was proclaimed emperor of india ) . as a state , the british raj functioned as the guardian of a system of connected markets maintained by military power , business legislation and monetary management . the government of india act 1858 saw the india office of the british government assume the administration of british india through a viceroy appointed by the crown . in 1863 sultan jan of herat , who was placed into power by persia and issued coinage on behalf of the shah , attacked the disputed town of farrah . farrah had been under dost mohammad khan 's control since 1856 , and he responded by sending his army to defeat herat and reunited it with afghanistan . the crimean war had ended in 1856 with russia 's defeat by an alliance of britain , france , and the ottoman empire . the new and wary alexander ii of russia waited some years so as not to antagonize the british , then russia expanded into central asia in two campaigns . in 1864 , a circular was sent to the consular officers abroad by gorchakov , the russian chancellor , patiently explaining the reasons for expansion centering on the doctrines of necessity , power and spread of civilisation . gorchakov went to great lengths to explain that russia 's intentions were meant not to antagonize the british but to bring civilised behavior and protect the traditional trade routes through the region . the first campaign started from orenburg and proceeded in the direction of kabul in afghanistan . russia occupied chimkent in 1864 , tashkent in 1865 , khokhand and bukhara in 1866 , and samarkand in 1868 . russia 's influence now extended to outlying regions of afghan turkestan . the second campaign started from the caspian sea and was in the direction of herat , near the persian frontier . khiva was occupied in 1873 . notable russian generals included konstantin kaufman , mikhail skobelev , and mikhail chernyayev . from 1869 to 1872 , mir mahmud shar was able to gain control of the khanate of badakhshan with the help of afghanistan 's new ruler , amir sher ali khan , and by 1873 afghanistan governed badakhshan . . anglo-russian agreements . agreement between great britain and russia 1873 . on 21 january 1873 , great britain and russia signed an agreement that stipulated that the eastern badakhshan area as well as the wakhan corridor to zorkul were afghan territory , the northern afghan boundary was the amu darya ( oxus river ) as far west as khwaja salar ( near khamyab ) , and a joint russian-british commission would define the boundary from the amu darya to the persian border on the hari ( afghanistan ) . however , no boundary west of the amu darya was defined until 1885 . the agreement was regarded as having defined the british and russian spheres of influence in afghanistan and central asia , gave the two sides the legitimacy to advance within their designated zones , created cordial relations between the two rival european powers , and raised the new problem of defining what were the frontiers of afghanistan , russia and china in the upper oxus region in the pamir mountains . the agreement was negotiated by russian diplomat prince alexander gorchakov , the lands of badakhshan and wakhan were accepted by russia as part of afghanistan , russia accepted all of britain 's proposals on afghanistan 's northern borders and expected that britain would keep afghanistan from committing any aggression . however , this set in motion russia 's annexation of the khanate of khiva in the same year . badakhshan would later be divided between afghanistan and russian-controlled bukhara by the pamir boundary commission in 1895 . in 1878 , russia sent an uninvited diplomatic mission to kabul . sher ali khan , the amir of afghanistan , tried unsuccessfully to keep them from entering afghanistan . the russian envoys arrived in kabul on 22 july 1878 and on 14 august the british demanded that sher ali also accept a british mission . the amir not only refused to receive a british mission under neville bowles chamberlain but also threatened to stop it if it attempted to enter his country . lord lytton , the viceroy of british india , ordered a diplomatic mission to set out for kabul in september 1878 but the mission was turned back as it approached the eastern entrance of the khyber pass , triggering the second anglo–afghan war . the treaty of gandamak of 1879 required that amir abdur rahman khan had to accept british control of afghanistan 's foreign relations and to cede to the british a number of its southern frontier areas , including the districts of pishin , sibi , harnai , and thal chotiali . in the following years , other tribal areas would be annexed by the british . in 1881 , russian forces took geok tepe and in 1884 they occupied merv . as the russian forces were close to herat , the british and russian governments formed a joint anglo-russian afghan boundary commission in the same year to define the borders between the russian empire and northern afghanistan . in 1885 , a russian force annexed the panjdeh district north of herat province and its fort in what has been called the panjdeh incident . the afghans claimed that the people of the district had always paid tribute to afghanistan , and the russians argued that this district was part of the khanates of khiva and merv which they had annexed earlier . the afghan boundary commission was supposed to have settled the dispute , however the battle occurred before its arrival . the afghan force of 500 was completely overwhelmed by the superior russian numbers . britain did not aid afghanistan as was required by the treaty of gandamak , leading the amir to believe that he could not rely on the british in the face of russian aggression . german chancellor otto von bismarck saw how important the great game had become for russia and britain . germany had no direct stakes , however its dominance of europe was enhanced when russian troops were based as far away from germany as possible . over two decades , 1871–1890 , he maneuvered to help the british , hoping to force the russians to commit more soldiers to asia . james stone , '' bismarck and the great game : germany and anglo-russian rivalry in central asia , 1871–1890 . '' central european history 48.2 ( 2015 ) : 151-175 . . protocol between great britain and russia 1885 . . further reading . becker , seymour . '' the ‘ great game ’ : the history of an evocative phrase . '' asian affairs 43.1 ( 2012 ) : 61–80 . fremont-barnes , gregory . the anglo-afghan wars 1839–1919 ( bloomsbury publishing , 2014 ) . hopkirk , peter . the great game : the struggle for empire in central asia . ny : kodansha , 1990 . illus . 564p . maps . original title , uk : the great game : on secret service in high asia ingram , edward . commitment to empire : prophecies of the great game in asia , 1797–1800 ( 1981 ) 431pp . ingram , edward . beginning of the great game in asia , 1828–1834 ( 1979 ) khodarkovsky , michael . '' the great game in the north caucasus . '' canadian-american slavic studies 49.2-3 ( 2015 ) : 384–390 . klein , ira . “ the anglo-russian convention and the problem of central asia , 1907-1914 . ” journal of british studies 11 1 1971 , pp . 126–147 . online mohl , raymond a . '' confrontation in central asia , 1885 '' history today ( march 1969 ) , vol . 19 issue 3 , pp 176-183 online . morrison , alexander . '' introduction : killing the cotton canard and getting rid of the great game : rewriting the russian conquest of central asia , 1814–1895 . '' ( 2014 ) : 131–142 . online schimmelpenninck van der oye , david . '' paul 's great game : russia 's plan to invade british india . '' central asian survey 33.2 ( 2014 ) : 143–152 . on russia 's failed plan to invade india in 1801 . sergeev , evgeniĭ . the great game , 1856–1907 : russo-british relations in central and east asia ( woodrow wilson center press , 2013 ) . salisbury , robert ( 2020 ) . william simpson and the crisis in central asia , 1884-5 . stone , james . '' bismarck and the great game : germany and anglo-russian rivalry in central asia , 1871-1890 . '' central european history ( 2015 ) : 151-175 online . thornton , a . p . '' afghanistan in anglo-russian diplomacy , 1869-1873 . '' cambridge historical journal 11 2 ( 1954 ) : 204-18 . online . tripodi , christian . '' grand strategy and the graveyard of assumptions : britain and afghanistan , 1839–1919 . '' journal of strategic studies 33.5 ( 2010 ) : 701–725 . online . external links . the franco-russian expedition to india central asia : afghanistan and her relation to british and russian territories from 1885 . the timeline of the great game