Battle of Champaubert

prelude . allied pursuit . on 1 february 1814 , prussian field marshal gebhard leberecht von blücher with 80,000 allied troops from his own army of silesia and austrian field marshal karl philipp , prince of schwarzenberg 's army of bohemia defeated napoleon and 45,000 french soldiers in the battle of la rothière . this setback seriously shook the french army 's morale . each side suffered about 6,000 casualties but the allied captured 50–60 artillery pieces . the allies were delighted by their victory , though it might have been more complete if all their reserves had been committed to the battle . at this time , the allied generals made the questionable decision to separate their armies . blücher 's army would advance from châlons-sur-marne toward meaux while schwarzenberg 's army operated on a more southerly route from troyes toward paris . on 3 february , napoleon 's army reached troyes after completely breaking contact with the allies the previous day . on 4 february , schwarzenberg wrote his colleague blücher that he was moving farther south in order to turn napoleon 's right flank . the next day , russian general michael andreas barclay de tolly ordered alexander nikitich seslavin 's scouting force from schwarzenberg 's right flank to the left flank without notifying blücher . since the prussian field marshal did not have a liaison officer with seslavin 's force he did not realize that no one was watching for french forces in the space on his left flank . also on 5 february , napoleon decided to abandon troyes and fall back to nogent-sur-seine . he planned to contain schwarzenberg with part of his army while attacking blücher . having prepared for a grand assault on troyes , schwarzenberg found the place empty of french troops on 7 february . he decided to let his troops rest for the next two days . meanwhile , napoleon reorganized his cavalry into the i cavalry corps under étienne tardif de pommeroux de bordesoulle , ii cavalry corps led by antoine-louis decrest de saint-germain , v cavalry corps commanded by édouard jean baptiste milhaud , vi cavalry corps directed by françois etienne de kellermann and an independent division under jean-marie defrance . the french emperor created a new vii corps from two divisions transferred from the spanish front and put marshal nicolas oudinot in charge . at the end of january a 10,000–11,000-man french corps under marshal jacques macdonald approached from the north . supposing that schwarzenberg 's maneuvers would draw napoleon away from his army of silesia , blücher focused on destroying macdonald 's corps . during the first week of february , the prussian field marshal ordered ludwig yorck von wartenburg 's corps to pursue macdonald along the main highway in the marne river valley . hoping to trap the french corps , blücher sent fabian gottlieb von osten-sacken 's corps along the more direct road through montmirail and la ferté-sous-jouarre . trying to accomplish two strategic goals at once , the prussian army commander hung back to allow the newly arrived corps of peter mikhailovich kaptzevich and friedrich von kleist to catch up with him . blücher utilized zakhar dmitrievich olsufiev 's small corps to link the two parts of his army . on 8 february , sacken 's cavalry reached viels-maisons while his infantry was to the east at montmirail . olsufiev 's corps was farther east at étoges while blücher established his headquarters another east at vertus . kaptzevich and kleist were east of their army commander in châlons-sur-marne . yorck 's corps was in the marne valley at least to the north , separated by bad roads . the army of silesia was now spread across a front of . blucher assumed that seslavin would report any danger coming from the south . that night , when his cossacks were driven out of sézanne , sacken did not bother to report the incident to blücher . in fact , it was napoleon 's leading corps under marshal auguste de marmont . french offensive . napoleon left 39,000 troops to contain schwarzenberg 's army of bohemia . the formations were oudinot 's vii corps , marshal claude perrin victor 's ii corps , étienne maurice gérard 's reserve of paris , henri rottembourg 's young guard infantry division , milhaud 's v cavalry corps and smaller units . napoleon 's striking force numbered about 20,000 foot soldiers and 10,000 horsemen . another authority agreed that the french army numbered 30,000 men and added that it was supported by 120 guns . the army was formed by marshal michel ney 's two young guard infantry divisions , marmont 's vi corps , part of the imperial guard cavalry , i cavalry corps and defrance 's cavalry division . bringing up the rear at nogent was marshal édouard mortier , duc de trévise with two old guard infantry divisions . on 9 february , macdonald slipped across the marne at la ferté-sous-jouarre , just ahead of sacken . that day , kaptzevich and kleist rendezvoused with blücher at vertus , olsufiev marched west to champaubert , sacken reached la ferté-sous-jouarre and yorck was at château-thierry . according to karl freiherr von müffling of blücher 's staff , the army of silesia counted 57,000 men , including sacken 's 20,000 , yorck 's 18,000 and kaptzevich , olsufiev and kleist with a combined 19,000 . marmont 's cavalry advance guard appeared at talus-saint-prix on the petit morin river . because the horsemen soon withdrew , blücher 's chief of staff august neidhardt von gneisenau believed they represented no danger . when schwarzenberg asked the prussian field marshal to support his right flank corps under peter wittgenstein , blücher ordered kaptzevich and kleist to march southwest to sézanne the next day . olsufiev was ordered to march south from champaubert . that night , blücher finally received news that napoleon was at sézanne . nevertheless , gneisenau authorized sacken to continue the pursuit of macdonald to the west . napoleon 's soldiers plodded along roads deep in mud from days of rain . the men had to suffer hunger pangs when the provision wagons failed to turn up . the bogged artillery was only brought forward when the rural inhabitants in large numbers helped haul the guns through the mud . at first the french population had resigned itself to the allied invasion , but after suffering at the hands of the russians and prussians , the people were eager to assist the army . on 10 february , as blücher accompanied the column of kaptzevich and kleist while it marched toward sézanne , the sound of artillery began to rumble ominously to the right near champaubert . battle . forces . . action . on 10 february napoleon moved against blücher 's over-extended army in the hope of smashing it . he caught olsufiev 's ix corps of 5,000 russians near the village of baye just south of champaubert . the battle was one of the few times during the war that france was able to take the field with a large numerical advantage , in this case six-to-one . planning to march south to sézanne that day , olsufiev left the saint-prix bridge over the petit morin intact . he also left the span unguarded , so that napoleon 's cavalry seized it early in the morning . marmont 's two vi corps divisions led the french column . joseph lagrange 's 3rd division filed across the saint-prix bridge followed by étienne pierre sylvestre ricard 's 8th division . following napoleon 's instructions , 100 guard dragoons rode ahead into bannay where they surprised and captured a group of russian soldiers . olsufiev 's pickets were overrun by 10:00 am and although badly outnumbered , the russian decided to fight rather than retreat . his decision was based partly on the mistaken hope that he would get reinforcements from blücher in time to prevent a disaster . the correct decision would have been to retreat east to étoges , but the russian general had been criticized for the loss of the château during the battle of brienne on 29 january . he was also blamed for mishandling his troops at la rothière and sacken wanted him hauled before a court-martial . in the circumstances , olsufiev chose to battle it out in order to clear his name . he did , however , send messengers to the prussian army commander telling his superior what was occurring . in the event , blücher brushed aside olsufiev 's couriers , insisting that napoleon was not on the scene and that the attackers were no more than 2,000 french partisans . lagrange 's division angled to the left toward bannay , led by the 2nd light infantry regiment and a marine battalion , while ricard 's division marched straight toward baye . olsufiev sent evstafi evstafievich udom with two jäger infantry battalions to clear the french skirmishers out of baye . as the french pressure increased , udom was reinforced so that he had the 10th , 12th , 22nd and 38th jäger regiments and six guns . around 11:00 am ricard pressed udom 's troops back into baye and the nearby woods . olsufiev sent a brigade and six guns to hold the right flank while the bulk of his corps deployed between baye and bannay . the french brought 12 guns into action as more and more of their soldiers passed the bridge and arrived on the field . pierre pelleport 's brigade led lagrange 's division as it assaulted bannay . at 1:00 pm olsufiev was still holding out on his forward position . at that hour , the russian commander held a council of war in which his generals voted for a retreat to étoges . olsufiev refused , saying that he had specific orders to hold champaubert . seeing that a small wood was the key to the position , marmont organized a general attack . he sent the 113th line infantry forward deployed in skirmish order . assisted by a horse artillery battery from i cavalry corps and a lancer squadron under cyrille-simon picquet , ricard 's division captured baye . lagrange attacked between baye and bannay . ney 's divisions began to arrive and his guns pounded bannay . bordesoulle 's cavalry on the right and jean-pierre doumerc 's on the left began edging around the russian flanks . the 7th battalion of the 4th light infantry were the first french troops to occupy baye while pelleport 's brigade took bannay . olsufiev pulled back and established a new line at the andecy farm . as french cavalry began to envelop both flanks , the russian withdrew again toward champaubert . since the terrain favored the french on the west flank , lagrange launched an attack on that side . without proper artillery support , the french infantry were stopped and thrown back by the concentrated fire of 24 russian guns . numerous french guard field pieces , slowed by the mud , soon appeared and provided a rallying point for lagrange 's men . after taking a detour , doumerc 's horsemen appeared at fromentières on the highway west of champaubert . when olsufiev received reports that the road east to châlons was also blocked , he resolved to cut his way out in that direction . the russian commander directed prince konstantin poltoratsky with the apsheron and nacheburg infantry regiments and nine guns to hold champaubert , while he attacked east toward étoges with the bulk of his troops . olsufiev 's breakout attempt failed . with his artillery posted at the champaubert crossroads , poltoratsky 's brigade drove off several cavalry charges . in fierce fighting with the bayonet , ricard 's soldiers captured the village , lost it to a counterattack , then clawed their way back into a few houses . after failing to cut his way out to the east , about 3:00 pm poltoratsky began a fighting withdrawal to the north with his men in square formation . heading for the village of la caure , his soldiers kept the french back with regular volleys . about north of champaubert they began to run out of ammunition and their ranks began to show unsteadiness . the french demanded that poltoratsky capitulate and when he refused , they brought up a horse artillery battery and began blasting his troops with canister shot . instead of being a possible refuge , the nearby woods turned out to be filled with french skirmishers . with his men being mown down by canister and riddled by musketry , poltoratsky finally agreed to surrender his two regiments and cannons . after failing to force its way to étoges , olsufiev 's main body veered to the north in an attempt to escape . near la caure , while maneuvering to enter a swampy forest , he exposed one of his flanks . spotting the tactical error , marmont ordered a brigade of bordesoulle 's cuirassiers to charge . the heavy cavalrymen crashed into the russian formation , cutting it in two parts . the russian foot soldiers were completely routed , some of them throwing away their muskets and packs as they scattered into the woods . marmont ordered the exits blocked and many russians were captured . udom and his fellow division commander peter yakovlevich kornilov managed to get away with 1,500–2,000 men . that night they reached port-à-binson on the marne after going cross-country . a 19-year old french conscript with fewer than six months of service made olsufiev a prisoner . aftermath . according to digby smith the french lost 600 killed and wounded out of the 13,300 infantry and 1,700 cavalry that were engaged in the action . the russians lost 2,400 men and nine guns out of the 3,700 soldiers and 24 guns that were present . captured were general-leutnant olsufiev and general-major prince konstantin poltoratsky . francis loraine petre credited olsufiev with 4,000 infantry and 24 guns of which 1,600–1,700 men and 15 guns escaped . george nafziger cited several sources including one that listed russian losses as 1,400 dead and 1,894 captured including three generals and 21 guns , with 1,900 troops getting away . french losses were estimated at 200–600 . david g . chandler stated that french losses were only about 200 men and that only 1,000 out of 5,000 russians escaped death or capture . kornilov assumed command of the remnant of ix corps . its approximately 1,500 survivors were grouped into three or four temporary battalions . this unlucky outfit suffered 600 more casualties and lost all their cannons at the battle of vauchamps on 14 february . when blücher heard about olsufiev 's disaster , he ordered kaptzevich and kleist to turn around and make a night march back to vertus . sacken , who had marched west to trilport , was ordered to return to montmirail . yorck was requested to meet sacken near montmirail while holding open an escape route over the marne at château-thierry . after the battle , napoleon found himself squarely in the middle of the overextended army of silesia . if he advanced to the east , he would merely push the corps of kaptzevich and kleist back . a move to the west held the possibility of trapping and destroying the forces under sacken and yorck , so he turned west . napoleon ordered marmont with lagrange 's division and the i cavalry corps to hold étoges and keep blücher under observation . at 7:00 pm the emperor directed étienne marie antoine champion de nansouty with two cavalry divisions to occupy montmirail . they were to be joined there in the morning by ricard 's division and the divisions under ney and mortier . the battle of montmirail was fought the next day against sacken and yorck . footnotes . references . . further reading .