Battle of Almonacid

background . after the mutiny of aranjuez , general venegas was encouraged by the small advantage he had gained . assuming that the french did not have more than 14,000 men , he led the la mancha army towards toledo , combining all the forces on 10 august at almonacid . the army consisted of 22,000 infantry , more than 3,000 horses and 29 pieces of artillery , and was organized in five divisions commanded respectively by luis lacy , gaspar de vigodet , pedro agustín girón , francisco gonzález de castejón and tomás de zeraín . miguel de los ríos and the marquess of gelo served as majors general of the cavalry and the infantry , while brigadiers antonio de la cruz and juan bouligni were commanders-in-chief of artillery and engineers . they were so confident of victory that they disregarded all the established rules for camping out during times of military conflict , especially being so close to the enemy , who , the previous day , had crossed the tagus river at toledo and the añover de tajo fords , settling that same day , 10 august , in the nearby town of nambroca , a league away from almonacid . prelude . the spanish commander , after hearing the opinion of the other generals , who agreed with him despite being aware of the retreat of the allied army from talavera de la reina towards extremadura , had decided to attack the french on 12 august in order to rest his troops . the french army anticipated this and appeared in front of the spanish positions at half past five in the morning of 11 august , with 14,000 gates , p.190 . troops of the iv corps commanded by sebastiani , who attacked the spanish immediately without waiting for the reserve under the command of dessolles and king joseph bonaparte in person to come up . the la mancha army hastily positioned itself in front of almonacid and on both sides in the following formation : vigodet 's division , a little behind , on the far right , with much of the cavalry ; continuing to the left , castejón 's division was established on the utrera hill , zerain 's division beside it covering the santo hill , and lacy 's division closer at the guazalate stream ; the 3rd division , girón 's , acting as reserve , was spread between the heights of cerrojones , on the extreme left and the key to the entire line of battle , and the cerro de la cruz or castillo hill , named for the castle ruins on its summit . battle . first attacks . after intense artillery fire , returned in kind by the spaniards , jean françois leval with polish and german-dutch divisions attacked the spanish left wing . the bailén and jaén battalions of the 3rd division twice repelled the poles , but received no reinforcement from the reserve . with the polish division encouraged by the germans coming up to their left , the french army was able to storm the vital position of the cerrojones , even though at great cost ( the three polish regiments making up the division lost 47 officers ) . the french right was supported by a large body of troops advancing over the level ground at the foot of that hill , carrying out an envelopment on the extreme left , not stopped by a cavalry charge by the horsemen of fernando vii and granada , led by colonel antonio zea and commander nicolás chacón ( captain francisco soto died in this charge ) . the 1st division , in order to confront the germans , had to withdraw somewhat and to reposition itself diagonally to the rearguard . however , as the centre and right were now retreating as well , under attack by the remaining enemy forces supported by the reserve which had just arrived under dessolles and joseph bonaparte , this division was itself forced to take refuge on the castillo hill . start of the battle . the 4th division was heavily attacked by numerous enemy artillery and could only respond with one horsedrawn battery . their chief lieutenant-colonel , captain of the artillery , jose chacón , soon fell mortally wounded and died from these injuries on 13 august in tembleque . lieutenant-colonel alvaro chacón from this same corps also died on the battlefield . the regiments of jerez de la frontera , córdoba and the spanish guards distinguished themselves through their calmness and courage , the second under the command of its colonel brigadier francisco carvajal . the cavalry on the right did not pursue the charge launched to contain the french , and thus the french were able to press their attack with continued vigour . the 5th division also yielded the field in a similar manner and it was not long before the enemy also occupied the town and the castillo hill . there , the spanish troops were unable to resist the terrible rain of projectiles that the french artillery aimed at them from all sides . vigodet 's division intervened in time to prevent an immediate and disastrous defeat , speedily and skilfully carrying out a change of front , protected by lively fire from the spanish guns . this manoeuvre contained the pursuit of the disorganised forces of the centre and also restored order on the left , where the polish and german divisions threatened to surround the line completely and to cut off its retreat . there the 2nd division mounted renewed resistance to the advance of the victors , who then tried everywhere to break through this unexpected obstacle that was preventing them making the most of their victory . a large mass of milhaud 's much-feared dragoons charged towards the left , and in that last period of the battle the troops of vigodet covered themselves in glory . all fought with courage and self-sacrifice : the artillery , firing during withdrawal , covering with shrapnel the heads of the imperial columns ; the cavalry , formed by riders of different corps that went about reuniting the dispersed troops , its steadfastness impressing the very top ranks of the enemy ; and the infantry remaining imperturbable amidst the intense fire and the prevailing confusion and disorder . a squad of grenadiers of the provincial of ronda sent by lieutenant antonio espinosa , approaching the enemy horsemen with fixed bayonets , was able to stop them and even to pull away a cannon , which was spiked by their leader . the second lieutenant of artillery , juan montenegro , also managed to save a gun of his battery , sacrificing himself for his comrades-in-arms . only the unfortunate accident of an explosion among the ammunition carts , frightening the horses , produced some disorder of which the enemy took advantage , harassing and hounding more closely on the final ascents , to stab a few soldiers and to take some of the guns . end of the battle . the french had already taken 2,500 losses and did not continue active pursuit beyond mora . the defeated spanish army was able to take the andalusia highway and arrive in good order at manzanares . however , on arriving there , false rumours that enemy forces were in valdepeñas ( ciudad real ) caused many of the spanish to disperse , not stopping until they got to the sierra morena . spanish losses did not exceed 4,000 men , including those who were killed , wounded and imprisoned . however , among the dead was the commander of the infantry regiment of the first division , colonel vicente martínez , and among the wounded was the colonel of the granada dragoons , diego ballesteros , who remained a prisoner . legacy . to commemorate this military feat , a royal decree of 30 may 1816 created a military medal with the following inscription in the centre : '' from fernando vii '' , and around the edge : '' in almonacid , 11th august 1809 '' ) . references . bibliography . napier , william . history of the war in the peninsula and the south of france , from the year 1807 to the year 1814 ( 1873 ) new york : d . & j . sadlier . . external links . . see also . napoleonic wars