1940 Summer Olympics

1940 tokyo olympics . the campaign to choose a city for 1940 began in 1932 , with barcelona , rome , helsinki , and tokyo participating . tokyo city officials suggested a campaign as a means of international diplomacy following japan 's alienation from the league of nations due to the mukden incident , in which japan occupied manchuria and created the puppet state of manchukuo . while both tokyo officials and international olympic committee ( ioc ) representatives were behind the campaign , the national government , which was ever more interested in military matters , did not have any strong supporters for such a diplomatic gesture . sandra collins . the 1940 tokyo games : the missing olympics : japan , the asian olympics and the olympic movement . p . 51 in 1936 , tokyo was chosen in a surprise move , making it the first non-western city to win an olympic bid . 1930s japan and international sports . during the 1930 far eastern games in tokyo , indian participants were spotted flying the flag of their independence movement rather than the swaraj flag . this caused a complaint from the british olympic association . in 1934 japan attempted to invite european colonies to the far eastern games . historical significance of the far eastern championship games . tsukuba university . planning . the main stadium was initially to be the meiji jingu gaien stadium — later used at the 1964 summer olympics — reconstructed to accommodate 100,000 spectators ; however the shrines bureau of home ministry , which had jusrisdiction over the meiji jingu precinct , strongly opposed the reconstruction . subsequesntly a new stadium was planned at the komazawa olympic park , away from the city center . the olympic village was to be built on the present sites of kinuta park or todoroki gorge . a schedule was drawn up , and guidelines were printed in four languages . monthly magazines and posters were printed and distributed internationally . construction began on some buildings , and arrangements were made with hotels , travel agents , and airlines for easy access . . forfeiture of games . when the second sino-japanese war broke out on july 7 , 1937 , kono ichiro , a member of the diet ( legislature ) , immediately requested that the olympics be forfeited . sandra collins . the 1940 tokyo games : the missing olympics : japan , the asian olympics and the olympic movement . p . 144 the 1938 far eastern games were also canceled , but japan 's ioc delegates persisted under a belief that the war would soon be over . sandra collins . the 1940 tokyo games : the missing olympics : japan , the asian olympics and the olympic movement . p . 146 amid the intensification of the war , the feasibility of both the summer olympics and the 1940 winter olympics grew increasingly questionable to other countries , who suggested a different site be chosen and spoke of the possibility of boycotting the games were they to proceed in japan . sandra collins . the 1940 tokyo games : the missing olympics : japan , the asian olympics and the olympic movement . p . 149 in march 1938 , the japanese provided reassurances to the ioc at the organization 's cairo conference that tokyo would still be able to serve as the host city . however , many diet members in japan had already openly questioned hosting the olympics in wartime , and the military was unreasonably demanding that the organizers build the venues from wood because they needed metals for the war front . 橋本一夫『幻の東京オリンピック』（日本放送出版協会、1994年） in july , a legislative session was held to decide the matters of the summer and winter olympics and the planned 1940 world 's fair all at once . the world 's fair was only '' postponed '' , under a belief that japan would be able to wrap up the war , but the olympics could not be moved and was canceled . sandra collins . the 1940 tokyo games : the missing olympics : japan , the asian olympics and the olympic movement . pp . 161 & ndash ; 163 kōichi kido , who would later be instrumental in the surrender of japan in 1945 , announced the forfeiture on july 16 , 1938 . he closed his speech saying , '' when peace reigns again in the far east , we can then invite the games to tokyo and take that opportunity to prove to the people of the world the true japanese spirit . '' this would come to pass in 1964 . despite the cancellation of the 1940 olympics , the tokyo organizing committee released its budget for the games . in a departure from standard practice , the budget included all capital outlays as well as direct organizing costs . the total budget was ¥20.1 million , one-third of which would have been paid by the tokyo metropolitan government . . helsinki and other competitions . the ioc then awarded the games to helsinki , finland , the city that had been the runner-up in the original bidding process . the games were then scheduled to be staged from july 20 to august 4 , 1940 . the olympic games were suspended indefinitely following the outbreak of world war ii ( winter war in particular ) and did not resume until the 1948 summer olympics . with the olympics canceled , the major international athletics event of the year turned out to be the annual finland-sweden athletics international , held at the new helsinki olympic stadium , exceptionally held as a triple international among finland , sweden and germany . gliding was due to be an olympic sport in the 1940 games after a demonstration at the berlin games in 1936 . the sport has not been featured in any games since , though the glider designed for it , the dfs olympia meise , was produced in large numbers after the war . meanwhile , japan hosted the 1940 east asian games in tokyo , with six participating nations . helsinki eventually held the 1952 summer olympics , while tokyo held the 1964 summer olympics and was scheduled to hold the 2020 summer olympics , although the event was then postponed to 2021 due to the covid-19 pandemic . during august 1940 , prisoners of war celebrated a '' special olympics '' called the international prisoner-of-war olympic games at stalag xiii-a in langwasser , near nuremberg , germany . an olympic flag , 29 by 46 & nbsp ; cm in size , was made of a polish prisoner 's shirt and , drawn in crayon , it featured the olympic rings and banners for belgium , france , great britain , norway , poland , and the netherlands . a feature film , olympics 40 , produced by the director andrzej kotkowski in 1980 tells the story of these games and of one of the prisoners of war , teodor niewiadomski . . torch run . had the 1940 summer games been held , a used method of bringing the olympic flame from nazi germany to japan was proposed — by air delivery , in the messerschmitt me 261 adolfine long-range aircraft , which was designed to have a maximum range of some 11,024 & nbsp ; km ( 6,850 & nbsp ; mi ) unrefueled . . see also . 1964 summer olympics 2020 summer olympics . notes . references . official preliminary report . in english . further reading . international journal of the history of sport , vol . 24 , 2007 , no . 8 , special issue : the missing olympics : the 1940 tokyo games , japan , asia and the olympic movement