Renée Vivien

early life . renée vivien was born pauline mary tarn in london to a wealthy british father , john tarn , and an american mother . john tarn earned his wealth from property investments . vivien attended school in paris until the death of her father in 1886 . upon his death , vivien returned to london to find that her father 's inheritance was given to her . purportedly , vivien ’ s mother attempted to declare vivien legally insane so that she could have her husband ’ s inheritance money instead . the plot failed , and vivien was taken away from her mother to live as a ward of the court until she came of age . in 1899 , after she turned 21 , vivien returned to france with the inheritance money . it is around this time that she began to be known as renée vivien . in paris , vivien 's dress and lifestyle were as notorious among the bohemian set as was her verse . she lived lavishly , as an open lesbian , and dressed in 18th century men 's clothing . . relationships . vivien harbored a romantic relationship with her closest childhood friend and neighbor , violet shillito – a relationship that remained unconsummated . shillito introduced vivien to the american heiress , natalie barney . in 1900 , vivien abandoned shillito for barney . the following year shillito died of typhoid fever , a tragedy from which vivien , guilt-ridden , never fully recovered . perhaps because of this death , but likely also in part of barney 's infidelities , vivien and barney split a year later , in 1901 . it is thought that shillito is mentioned in vivien 's poems using the word violet or purple . after the death and breakup , vivien became depressed and turned to drugs and alcohol . in 1902 vivien became romantically involved with the immensely wealthy baroness hélène van zuylen , one of the paris rothschilds . though a lesbian , zuylen was married and the mother of two sons . zuylen provided much-needed emotional support and stability . zuylen 's social position did not allow for a public relationship , but she and vivien often travelled together and continued a discreet affair for a number of years . in letters to her confidant , the french journalist and classical scholar jean charles-brun , vivien considered herself married to the baroness . while still with zuylen , vivien received a letter from a mysterious admirer in istanbul , kérimé turkhan pasha , the wife of a turkish diplomat . this launched an intensely passionate correspondence , followed by brief clandestine encounters . kérimé , who was french-educated and cultivated , nevertheless lived according to islamic tradition . isolated and veiled , she could neither travel freely nor leave her husband . meanwhile , vivien would not give up the baroness de zuylen . in 1907 zuylen abruptly left vivien for another woman , which quickly fueled gossip within the lesbian coterie of paris . deeply shocked and humiliated , vivien fled to japan and hawaii with her mother , becoming seriously ill on the voyage . another blow came in 1908 when kérimé , upon moving with her husband to saint petersburg , ended their affair . vivien was terribly affected by these losses and accelerated into a psychological downward spiral , already in motion . she turned increasingly to alcohol , drugs , and sadomasochistic fantasies . always eccentric , she began to indulge her most bizarre fetishes and neuroses . mysterious sexual escapades left her without rest for days . she entertained guests with champagne dinner parties , only to abandon them when summoned by a demanding lover . plunged into a suicidal depression , she refused to take proper nourishment , a factor that eventually contributed to her death . the great french writer colette , who was vivien 's neighbour from 1906 to 1908 , immortalized this aberrant period in the pure and the impure , a collection of portraits showing the spectrum of sexual behaviour . written in the 1920s and originally published in 1932 , its factual accuracy is questionable ; natalie barney reportedly did not concur with colette 's characterization of vivien . yet it remains a rare glimpse of the poet 's dissipated life , written by one of her contemporaries . published works . vivien only wrote in french . some of her works have been translated . she published her first collection of poetry , études et préludes , in 1901 . she would go on to publish 12 more collections of poetry in her lifetime , as well as her own translations of sappho ’ s verses from greek ( the language she learnt specifically for the purpose ) . contemporary feminists consider her as one of the first women to write openly lesbian poetry . in 1904 , vivien originally published a woman appeared to me ( in french ) , an autobiographical novel . in 1976 , it was translated to english by jeanette foster and published by naiad press . naiad also published a translation of vivien 's poetry collection , the muse of violets , in 1977 . vivien also published poetry and prose in collaboration with lover , hélène van zuylen using the pseudonym , paule riversdale . the true attribution of these works is uncertain , however ; some scholars believe they were written solely by vivien . even certain books published under zuylen 's name may be , in fact , vivien 's work . during her brief life , vivien was an extremely prolific poet who came to be known as the '' muse of the violets '' , derived from her love of the flower . her obsession with violets ( as well as with the colour violet ) was a reminder of her beloved childhood friend , violet shillito . she took to heart all the mannerisms of parnassianism and of symbolism , as one of the last poets to claim allegiance to the school . her compositions include sonnets , hendecasyllabic verse , and prose poetry . virtually all her verse is veiled autobiography written in the french language ; most of it has never been translated into english . her principal published books of verse are cendres et poussières ( 1902 ) , la vénus des aveugles ( 1903 ) , a l'heure des mains jointes ( 1906 ) , flambeaux éteints ( 1907 ) , sillages ( 1908 ) , poèmes en prose ( 1909 ) , dans un coin de violettes ( 1909 ) , and haillons ( 1910 ) . her poetry has achieved greater appeal and a wider audience due to the contemporary rediscovery of the works of the ancient greek poet sappho , also a lesbian . world travels . vivien was cultivated and very well travelled , especially for a woman of her era . she wintered in egypt , visited china , and explored much of the middle east , as well as europe and america . after the heartbreak from zuylen and pasha , vivien fled to japan and then hawaii with her mother in 1907 . vivien became ill on the voyage . '' pauline tarn '' in the honolulu , hawaii , passenger and crew lists , 1900-1959 ( national archives and records administration ( nara ) ; washington , d.c . ; passenger lists of vessels arriving at honolulu , hawaii , compiled 02/13/1900 - 12/30/1953 ; national archives microfilm publication : a3422 ; roll : 016 ; record group title : records of the immigration and naturalization service , 1787 - 2004 ; record group number : rg 85 ) her paris home was a luxurious ground-floor apartment at 23 , avenue du bois de boulogne ( now 23 , avenue foch ) that opened onto a japanese garden . she purchased antique furnishings from london and exotic work of art from the far east . fresh flowers were abundant , as were offerings of lady apples to a collection of shrines , statuettes , icons , and buddhas . a public square is named in her honor in paris : 'place renée-vivien ' , in le marais , central historic district of the french capital . illness and death . above all , vivien romanticized death . while visiting london in 1908 , deeply despondent and ruinously in debt , she tried to kill herself by drinking an excess of laudanum . she stretched out on her divan with a bouquet of violets held over her heart . the suicide failed , but while in england , she contracted pleurisy ; later , upon her return to paris , she grew considerably weaker . according to biographer jean-paul goujon , vivien suffered from chronic gastritis , due to years of chloral hydrate and alcohol abuse . she had also started to refuse to eat . by the time of her death , she weighed about 70 & nbsp ; lbs . multiple neuritis caused paralysis of her limbs . by the summer of 1909 , she walked with a cane . vivien died in paris on the morning of 18 november 1909 at the age of 32 ; the cause of death was reported at the time as '' lung congestion '' , but likely resulted from pneumonia complicated by alcoholism , drug abuse , and anorexia nervosa . she was interred at passy cemetery in the same exclusive parisian neighbourhood where she had lived . works . études et préludes ( paris : alphonse lemerre , 1901 ) ; appearing under the name r . vivien cendres et poussières ( paris : lemerre , 1902 ) évocations ( paris : lemerre , 1903 ) sapho ( paris : lemerre , 1903 ) du vert au violet ( paris : lemerre , 1903 ) ; first collection appearing under the name renée vivien une femme m ’ apparut ( paris : lemerre , first edition , 1904 ; second edition , 1905 ) la dame à la louve ( paris : lemerre , 1904 ) . les kitharèdes ( paris : lemerre , 1904 ) la vénus des aveugles ( paris ; lemerre , 1904 ) à l ’ heure des mains jointes ( first edition , 1906 ; second edition , 1909 ) flambeaux éteints ( edward sansot & c ie , 1907 ) le christ , aphrodite et m . pépin ( e . sansot , 1907 ) chansons pour mon ombre ( paris : lemerre , 1907 ) ; appearing under pauline m . tarn plusieurs proses ironiques et satiriques ( 1907 ) l ’ album de sylvestre ( sansot , 1908 ) sillages ( sansot , 1908 ) poèmes ( paris : lemerre , 1909 ) ; published posthumously anne boleyn ( 1909 ) poèmes en prose ( sansot , 1909 ) dans un coin de violettes ( sansot , 1910 ) le vent des vaisseaux ( sansot , 1910 ) hallions ( sansot , 1910 ) . references . . bibliography . renée vivien , lilith 's legacy : prose poems and short stories , translated by brian stableford ( snuggly books , 2018 ) renée vivien , a crown of violets , translated by samantha pious ( headmistress press , 2015 ) renée vivien , the muse of the violets : poems by renée vivien , translated by margaret porter and catherine kroger ( tallahassee , florida : naiad press , 1982 ) renée vivien , a woman appeared to me , translated by jeannette foster ( 1904 , reno , nevada : naiad press , 1974 ) renée vivien , at the sweet hour of hand in hand : translated from the french with an introd . by sandia belgrade ; foreword by editor and collaborator bonnie poucel , the naiad press , 1979 renée vivien , woman of the wolf and other stories . translated by karla jay and yvonne m . klien . introduction by jay . gay press of new york ; december 1983 . natalie clifford barney , adventures of the mind ( new york : new york university press , 1992 ) colette , the pure and the impure ( new york : farrar straus , 1967 ) jean-paul goujon , tes blessures sont plus douces que leurs caresses : vie de renée vivien ( paris : cres , 1986 ) andré germain , renée vivien ( paris : regine desforges , 1986 ) karla jay , the amazon and the page : natalie clifford barney and renee vivien ( bloomington : indiana university press , 1988 ) paul lorenz , sapho , 1900 : renée vivien ( paris : julliard , 1977 ) renée vivien , irina ionesco , femmes sans tain ( paris : bernard et tu et secile , 1975 ) . collection of gothic poetry and portraits , introduction by renée vivien , all text in french . external links . poems by renée vivien ( in french ) : renée vivien ou le drame de l'absolu ( in french ) : 11 juin 1877/naissance de renée vivien ( in french ) : renée vivien prize