The Pearl (novel)

setting . steinbeck began writing the story as a movie script in 1944 and first published it as a short story called '' the pearl of the world '' in the woman 's home companion ( december 1945 ) . the original publication is also sometimes listed as '' the pearl of la paz '' . steinbeck expanded the story to novella length and published it under the name the pearl ( 1947 ) , published by viking press . as he was writing the novella version , he was frequently travelling to mexico where the film version , co-written with jack wagner , was being filmed . the film was also released by rko in 1947 as a co-promotion with the book . in 2001 , the pearl was loosely adapted as a film directed by alfredo zacharias , starring lukas haas and richard harris , which was released directly to video in 2005 . the book takes place in la paz , baja california , mexico . unlike many of steinbeck ’ s other works , it does not take place in california . themes . family – one of the major themes in the novel is family . throughout the novel , the plot discusses how the family lives before and after the pearl . it is constantly the focus of the plot and many of the decisions are based on what would be best for the family . for example , the first thing that kino desires to do with the money from the pearl is to give his wife and coyotito a better life . this money would pay for coyotito ’ s education , better clothes , and better protection . later , kino also demonstrates devotion to his family by not selling to the pearl dealer . the second buyer was trying to get the pearl for less than it was worth , but kino , with his family in mind , declined to search for a better deal . he always has his family in mind , whether it leads to warmth and happiness or destruction . it was the reason kino got the pearl and , eventually , the reason why he threw it back into the ocean . good and evil – one of the biggest themes in this novel is the one between good and evil . this theme is displayed in other themes as well and it is shown from the beginning to the end . in the beginning , kino lives a life of simplicity and happiness but when he discovers the pearl , he believes that good will come from it . however , a sense of evil accompanies it . after that , kino and his family were in a constant battle against evil to preserve the good that they enjoyed before . paradox – the theme of paradox is displayed through kino ’ s desires . once kino discovers the pearl , he begins to dream about what could come from this fortune as greed fills his head , but as he tries to carry out this plan , the good wealth also brings destruction to his family as he treats juana poorly and is abusive . though kino desires good for his family , there is a paradox of an evil reality that he does not want . kino tries to “ avoid life ’ s inevitable tension ” between these two but he finds that he can not separate the good and the evil . in the end , the finding of the great prize causes him to lose another , his son . gladstein , mimi ( 4 december 2009 ) . '' fish stories : santiago and kino in text and film '' . wiley online library perseverance – the theme of perseverance is demonstrated by many characters , but mainly kino . before he found the pearl , he was a noble and a very determined person who sought fortune for his family . after he finds it , he is hoping to find it in a different way . because kino believes that this would save his family , he persists “ though many obstacles ” that accompany the pearl . he perseveres to keep the pearl but , in the end , it was not worth keeping . characters . kino is a hard-working pearl-diver and the protagonist of the novella . he has a wife , juana , and a son , coyotito . he is content with his lifestyle as a diver and possesses nothing of value until he discovers the pearl . after finding the pearl , kino gradually changes to become a completely different man . though his family is still the center of his actions , he is also driven by his dreams of an escape from their poverty and a desire to give his son a better future . he quickly becomes obsessed with the material things that the pearl could bring . he is no longer content with his son being uneducated , or his family not being well-dressed . instead of enjoying his family and their company , as he did in the beginning , he becomes discontent and always seeks more . meyers , michael ( 1 march 2004 ) . '' '' wavering shadows : a new jungian perspective in steinbeck 's the pearl '' . steinbeck review . 1 : 132 . he is also driven by his desire not to be cheated or slighted . kino is named for the missionary eusebio kino . schultz , jeffrey d . ; li , luchen “ critical companion to john steinbeck ” ( 2009-01-01 ) juana , kino ’ s wife , is a secondary character . she is a loving woman who cares for her husband and son . throughout the experience , she remains loyal to her family but also perceives the evil forces that the valuable pearl attracts . for example , two nights after the pearl is found , she attempts to throw it back into the ocean to bring back peace and happiness to her family . steinbeck , john , and joseì clemente orozco . the pearl . penguin books , 2017 coyotito is juana and kino ’ s infant son . he is their only child , and his parents do everything they can to protect him . despite his parents ’ love and effort , he is subject to much harm , both before and after the pearl is found . the doctor , unnamed in the novella , is a symbol of wealth , greed and exploitation . he is repulsive , fat , and also foreign-born , a native of france . before the pearl is found , he refuses to heal coyotito because the family is poor , though it would be easy for him to do so . after kino finds the pearl , he personally visits the family at home , acting much friendlier than at their first meeting and even pretending to heal coyotito 's scorpion sting with ammonia . during the doctor 's visit , he tries to determine from kino 's glances where in the house the pearl may be hidden , though kino is too suspicious to reveal anything . the doctor 's behavioral changes foreshadow the more serious troubles that begin after kino 's discovery of the pearl . juan tomas , kino ’ s brother , is wise and loyal . he is the only other character in the book to suspect the manipulation undertaken by the pearl dealers . when destruction does come , juan tomas does not turn away his brother but , instead , welcomes him in and protects him . he is one of the few characters that does not seek to gain from the pearl and shows he values the importance of family ties . apolonia is the wife of juan tomas who helps her brother in protecting and hiding kino . the pearl dealers , like the doctor , symbolize the exploitation of the native population , this time by the organized pearl-dealing cartel for which the dealers work . when kino tries to sell the pearl , the pearl dealers claim that the pearl 's size makes it worthless and offer kino a fraction of the pearl 's true worth . kino 's outrage at their barehanded lies cause him to brave the dangerous trip to the capital and seek a better price . reed , arthea j.s . '' a teacher 's guide to the penguin edition of john steinbeck 'the pearl '' . penguin : 1-5 the thieves and trackers are shadowy figures who attack kino from the first night he has the pearl . kino never recognizes who they are . they harass and then follow the family right to the end of the story . they force kino to fight and kill to defend himself and his family and keep the pearl his own . in the final scenes , in which kino is tracked by a posse , it is not clear in the text whether the group are thieves or law enforcement officers hunting kino for his killing of the man on the beach . reception and analysis . these publications praised the novel as a '' major artistic triumph '' and emphasizes how steinbeck understands '' the universal significance of life . '' this novel did not have as great a review later on . although many still believe that steinbeck 's work was a unique reflection on '' the human experience '' , there are others who disagree . now , people like warren french criticize the novel for '' lacking both insight and worth . '' 'schultz , jeffery d . ( 1 january 2009 ) . critical companion to john steinbeck . it is not only used to teach students about literature , but is also used to discuss important lessons about life . many believe the book is the easiest of steinbeck 's books to teach because the lessons are simple , yet significant , so , generally , students in middle school or early high school study this novel . meyers , michael ( 2005 ) . '' diamond in the rough : steinbeck 's multifaceted pearl '' . steinbeck review . 2 ( 2 ) : 42–56 . teachers instruct their students to delve deeper than surface level to learn about both the simplicity and complexity of the novel , and emphasize its themes to allow students to learn more than just literacy . jackson benson writes , the pearl was heavily influenced by steinbeck 's interest in the philosophy of carl jung . steinbeck wrote that he created the story of the pearl to address the themes of '' human greed , materialism , and the inherent worth of a thing . '' . influences . fleming & john 's song , '' the pearl '' , is based on this story . the american composer andrew boysen 's concerto for trombone and wind symphony ( 2004 ) was inspired by the pearl . the pearl was also the inspiration for a song by the same name by richard peterson , which was set to the tune of michael jackson 's billie jean . references . further reading .