Francis Thompson

early life and study . thompson was born in winckley street , preston , lancashire . his father , charles , was a doctor who had converted to catholic church , following his brother edward healy thompson , a friend of cardinal manning . edward along with john costall thompson , francis ' uncles , were both authors . francis had a brother who died in infancy , and three younger sisters . at the age of eleven , thompson was sent to ushaw college , a catholic seminary near durham . a frail , delicate and extremely shy boy , he was described by his school fellows in 1870 as 'mooney ' or abstracted but happy enough . he could be recognised from afar along an 'ambulacrum ' or corridor by his habit of sidling sheepishly along the wall with the collar of his coat turned up . most of his leisure time was spent in the college library where he was fond of history and poetry books . it was noticed that despite the distractions in the library of catapult fights and general mayhem , he had the ability to shut himself off and continue to be absorbed in his reading . as he advanced up the college he became more skilled at writing and his friends remembered that out of twenty examination essays he obtained first place on sixteen occasions . once he was punished with a beating for being the last boy to be ready for pe drill . he had no interest in mathematics and , in his final exam , he came last . the only sport in which he developed an interest was handball and it is said he achieved a standard above the average . he became a connoisseur of cricket though he rarely participated . in preparation for ushaw college 's centenary celebrations due to take place in 1908 , thompson , by then a celebrated poet , was approached to write a jubilee ode to mark the occasion . the poet was delighted that the assignment had been offered to him and it is said that he looked forward to seeing his 'college home ' once more . his death , however , in 1907 meant that the commission was never carried out . thompson studied medicine for nearly eight years at owens college , now the university of manchester . while excelling in essay writing , he took no interest in his medical studies ; he had a passion for poetry and for watching cricket matches . he never practised as a doctor , and to escape the reproaches of his father he tried to enlist as a soldier but was rejected for his slightness of stature . then in 1885 he fled , penniless , to london , where he tried to make a living as a writer , in the meantime taking odd jobs – working for a bootmaker ( john mcmaster of panton street ) and booksellers , selling matches . during this time , he became addicted to opium , which he had first taken as medicine for ill health , having experienced a nervous breakdown while still in manchester . he lived on the streets of charing cross and slept by the river thames , with the homeless and other addicts . he was turned down by oxford university , not because he was unqualified , but because of his addiction . thomson , john ( 1913 ) . francis thompson the preston-born poet . london : simpkin , marshall , hamilton , kent . thompson contemplated suicide in his nadir of despair , but was saved from completing the action through a vision which he believed to be that of a youthful poet thomas chatterton , who had committed suicide over a century earlier . a prostitute whose identity thompson never revealed , befriended him and gave him lodgings . thompson later described her in his poetry as his saviour . . writing career . in 1888 , after three years on the streets , he was 'discovered ' after sending his poetry to the magazine merrie england . he was sought out by the magazine 's editors , wilfrid and alice meynell , who recognised the value of his work . they took him into their home and , concerned about his opium addiction which was at its height following his years on the streets , sent him to our lady of england priory , storrington , for a couple of years . he continued to take opium but in small doses at irregular intervals , to relieve nerve pain . francis wrote most of his poetry during this period from 1888 – 1897 , after which he turned to writing prose . he struck up a good relationship with the meynells who , parents and children , furnished inspiration for some of his poetry . they arranged for publication of his first book poems in 1893 . the book attracted the attention of sympathetic critics in the st james 's gazette and other newspapers , and coventry patmore wrote a eulogistic notice in the fortnightly review of january 1894 . francis ' poem the hound of heaven was called by the bishop of london '' one of the most tremendous poems ever written , '' and by critics '' the most wonderful lyric in the language , '' while the times of london declared that people will still be learning it 200 years hence . his verse continued to elicit high praise from critics right up to his last volume in 1897 . his selected poems published in 1908 contains about 50 pieces in all . notable among his prose works are an essay on shelley , '' the life of st . ignatius '' , and '' health and holiness '' . . later life and death . thompson moved around frequently , subsequently living as an invalid at pantasaph , flintshire , in wales and at storrington . a lifetime of poverty , ill-health , and opium addiction had taken their toll on him , even though he found success in his last years . thompson attempted suicide but was saved from completing the action through a vision which he believed to be that of a youthful poet , thomas chatterton , who had committed suicide almost a century earlier . shortly afterwards , a prostitute - whose identity thompson never revealed - befriended him , gave him lodgings and shared her income with him . thompson was later to describe her in his poetry as his saviour . she soon disappeared , however , never to return . thompson died from tuberculosis at the age of 47 , in the hospital of st john and st elizabeth , and is buried in st . mary 's roman catholic cemetery in kensal green . his tomb bears the last line from a poem he wrote for his godson , a meynell : look for me in the nurseries of heaven . . style and influence . his most famous poem , the hound of heaven , describes the pursuit of the human person by god . phrases from his poetry have been lifted by others and made famous . the u.s . supreme court in brown ii used '' with all deliberate speed '' for the remedy sought in their famous decision on school desegregation . a phrase in '' the kingdom of god '' the kingdom of god at poets ' corner is the source of the title of han suyin 's novel a many-splendoured thing . in addition , thompson wrote the most famous cricket poem , the nostalgic '' at lord 's '' . he also wrote the poppy ( 1893 ) , sister songs ( 1895 ) , new poems ( 1897 ) , and a posthumously published essay , shelley ( 1909 ) . g . k . chesterton said shortly after his death that '' with francis thompson we lost the greatest poetic energy since browning . '' chesterton , g.k . ( 1909 ) . '' a dead poet . '' in : all things considered . new york : john lane company , p . 275 . among thompson 's devotees was the young j . r . r . tolkien , who purchased a volume of thompson 's works in 1913–1914 , and later said that it was an important influence on his own writing . tolkien , j.r.r . ( 1984 ) . the book of lost tales . edited by christopher tolkien . boston : houghton mifflin company , p . 29n . halliday sutherland borrowed the second line of the hound of heaven for the title of his 1933 autobiographical best-seller '' the arches of the years '' . making the list : a cultural history of the american bestseller by michael korda . barnes and noble books , 2001 . p . 67 . the american novelist madeleine l'engle used a line from the poem '' the mistress of vision '' as the title of her last vicki austin novel , troubling a star . in 2002 , katherine a . powers , literary columnist for the boston globe , called hound of heaven '' perhaps the most beloved and ubiquitously taught poem among american catholics for over half a century , '' adding that thompson 's other poetry lost its popularity amidst anti-modernism in the catholic church during most of the twentieth century . however , she agrees that the dawning century is more akin to his spirit : '' his medical training and life on the streets gave him a gritty view of reality and a social conscience , and his governing idea that god is immanent in all things and in all experience , so vexatious to both victorians and the vatican alike , no longer strikes an alien or heretical note . '' in 2012 , chris ward 's biographical filmscript , visions in the life of the victorian poet francis thompson 'hound ' was staged at the riverside studios , hammersmith and following that the stage version was taken on a tour of london 's churches including st giles-in-the fields and in st olav 's ( city of london ) in may 2014 . a film of hound based on the life of francis thompson has been made into feature film with a cast including wayne sleep , toyah willcox and hazel o'connor , and with francis thompson played by daniel hutchinson . . legacy . thompson 's birthplace , in winckley street , preston , is marked by a memorial plaque . the inscription reads : '' francis thompson poet was born in this house dec 16 1859 . ever and anon a trumpet sounds , from the hid battlements of eternity . '' the home in ashton-under-lyne where thompson lived from 1864 to 1885 was also marked with a blue plaque . in 2014 , however , the building collapsed . dramatic video shows moment dangerous building collapses in ashton town centre , by john scheerhout , in the manchester evening news ; published 27 march 2014 ; retrieved 19 april 2014 in 1999 an australian teacher added thompson 's name to the list of people ( that as of 2016 extends to more than 100 individuals ) suggested as possible suspects in the infamous jack the ripper murders , citing interpretations of his poetry and his medical background , but no physical evidence . . notes . references . . further reading . abrams , m.h . ( 1934 ) . the milk of paradise : the effect of opium visions on the works of de quincey , crabbe , francis thompson , and coleridge . cambridge , mass . : harvard university press . boardman , brigid m . ( 1988 ) . between heaven and charing cross : the life of francis thompson . new haven : yale university press . braybrooke , patrick ( 1966 ) . '' francis thompson : poet and mystic . '' in : some victorian and georgian catholics . freeport , n.y . : books for libraries press , pp . & nbsp ; 69–102 . burdett , osbert ( 1925 ) . '' essay in perspective . '' in : the beardsley period . london : john lane . butter , peter h . ( 1961 ) . francis thompson . london : longmans , green . cock , albert a . ( 1911 ) . '' francis thompson , '' the dublin review , vol . cxlix , pp . & nbsp ; 247–277 . darrell figgis ( 1918 ) . '' francis thompson . '' in : bye-ways of study . dublin : the talbot press ltd . , pp . & nbsp ; 25–43 . hutton , john alexander ( 1926 ) . guidance from francis thompson in matters of faith . london : hodder and stoughton . richard le gallienne ( 1925 ) . the romantic '90s . new york : doubleday , page & company . madeleva , mary ( 1927 ) . '' the prose of francis thompson . '' in : chaucer 's nuns , and other essays . new york : d . appleton and company , pp . & nbsp ; 43–88 . mcnabb , vincent ( 1935 ) . francis thompson & other essays . hassocks : pepler & sewell . mégroz , r.l . ( 1927 ) . francis thompson : the poet of earth in heaven . new york : scribner . meynell , everard ( 1926 ) . the life of francis thompson . london : burns , oates , & washbourne . meynell , viola ( 1952 ) . francis thompson and wilfrid meynell : a memoir . london : hollis & carter . o'conor , j.f.x . ( 1912 ) . a study of francis thompson 's hound of heaven . new york : john lane . owlett , f.c . ( 1936 ) . francis thompson . london : j . & e . bumpus , ltd . reid , j.c . ( 1959 ) . francis thompson , man and poet . london : routledge & paul . shuster , george n . ( 1922 ) . '' francis thompson the master . '' in : the catholic spirit in modern english literature . new york : the macmillan company , pp . & nbsp ; 127–146 . walsh , john evangelist ( 1967 ) . strange harp , strange symphony . new york : hawthorn books . external links . a profile by katharine tynan in the fortnightly review new series . boston college magazine . hound of heaven ( text ) francis thompson collection at boston college ( text )