Decadence

history . decadent movement . decadence was the name given to a number of late nineteenth-century writers who valued artifice over the earlier romantics ' naïve view of nature . some of them triumphantly adopted the name , referring to themselves as decadents . for the most part , they were influenced by the tradition of the gothic novel and by the poetry and fiction of edgar allan poe , and were associated with symbolism and/or aestheticism . this concept of decadence dates from the eighteenth century , especially from montesquieu , and was taken up by critics as a term of abuse after désiré nisard used it against victor hugo and romanticism in general . a later generation of romantics , such as théophile gautier and charles baudelaire took the word as a badge of pride , as a sign of their rejection of what they saw as banal '' progress . '' in the 1880s , a group of french writers referred to themselves as decadents . the classic novel from this group is joris-karl huysmans ' à rebours , often seen as the first great decadent work , though others attribute this honor to baudelaire 's works . in britain and ireland the leading figure associated with the decadent movement was irish writer , oscar wilde . other significant figures include arthur symons , aubrey beardsley and ernest dowson . the symbolist movement has frequently been confused with the decadent movement . several young writers were derisively referred to in the press as '' decadent '' in the mid-1880s . jean moréas ' manifesto was largely a response to this polemic . a few of these writers embraced the term while most avoided it . although the aesthetics of symbolism and decadence can be seen as overlapping in some areas , the two remain distinct . 1920s berlin . this '' fertile culture '' of berlin extended onwards until adolf hitler rose to power in early 1933 and stamped out any and all resistance to the nazi party . likewise , the german far-right decried berlin as a haven of vice . a new culture developed in and around berlin , including architecture and design ( bauhaus , 1919–33 ) , a variety of literature ( döblin , berlin alexanderplatz , 1929 ) , film ( lang , metropolis , 1927 , dietrich , der blaue engel , 1930 ) , painting ( grosz ) , and music ( brecht and weill , the threepenny opera , 1928 ) , criticism ( benjamin ) , philosophy/psychology ( jung ) , and fashion . this culture was often considered to be decadent , and socially , morally , destructive . kirkus uk review of laqueur , walter weimar : a cultural history , 1918-1933 film was making huge technical and artistic strides during this period of time in berlin , and gave rise to the influential movement called german expressionism . '' talkies '' , the sound films , were also becoming more popular with the general public across europe , and berlin was producing very many of them . berlin in the 1920s also proved to be a haven for english-language writers such as w . h . auden , stephen spender and christopher isherwood , who wrote a series of 'berlin novels ' , inspiring the play i am a camera , which was later adapted into a musical , cabaret , and an academy award winning cabaret ( 1972 film ) . spender 's semi-autobiographical novel the temple evokes the attitude and atmosphere of the place at the time . 21st century . the historian jacques barzun ( 1907-2012 ) gives a definition of decadence which is independent from moral judgement . in his bestseller from dawn to decadence : 500 years of western cultural life barzun , jacques : from dawn to decadence : 500 years of western cultural life . harpercollins , new york 2000 . ( published 2000 ) he describes decadent eras as times when '' the forms of art as of life seem exhausted , the stages of development have been run through . institutions function painfully . '' he emphasizes that '' decadent '' in his view is '' not a slur '' but '' a technical label '' . with reference to barzun , new york times columnist ross douthat characterises decadence as a state of '' economic stagnation , institutional decay and cultural and intellectual exhaustion at a high level of material prosperity and technological development '' . douthat sees the west in the 21st century in an '' age of decadence '' , marked by stalemate and stagnation . he is the author of the book the decadent society , published by simon & schuster in 2020 . according to the news website vox '' douthat ’ s definition of a 'decadent society ' is that we ’ re trapped in a stale system that keeps spinning in place , reproducing the same arguments and frustrations over and over again . '' . use in marxism . leninism . according to vladimir lenin , capitalism had reached its highest stage and could no longer provide for the general development of society . he expected reduced vigor in economic activity and a growth in unhealthy economic phenomena , reflecting capitalism 's gradually decreasing capacity to provide for social needs and preparing the ground for socialism revolution in the west . politically , world war i proved the decadent nature of the advanced capitalist countries to lenin , that capitalism had reached the stage where it would destroy its own prior achievements more than it would advance . decadence : the theory of decline or the decline of theory ? ( part i ) . aufheben . summer 1993 . one who directly opposed the idea of decadence as expressed by lenin was josé ortega y gasset in the revolt of the masses ( 1930 ) . he argued that the '' mass man '' had the notion of material progress and scientific advance deeply inculcated to the extent that it was an expectation . he also argued that contemporary progress was opposite the true decadence of the roman empire . mora , josé ferrater ( 1956 ) . ortega y gasset : an outline of his philosophy . bowes & bowes . p . 18 . . left communism . decadence is an important aspect of contemporary left communism theory . similar to lenin 's use of it , left communists , coming from the communist international themselves started in fact with a theory of decadence in the first place , yet the communist left sees the theory of decadence at the heart of marx 's method as well , expressed in famous works such as the communist manifesto , grundrisse , das kapital but most significantly in preface to the critique of political economy . marx , karl ( 1859 ) . a contribution to the critique of political economy . progress publishers . contemporary left communist theory defends that lenin was mistaken on his definition of imperialism ( although how grave his mistake was and how much of his work on imperialism is valid varies from groups to groups ) and rosa luxemburg to be basically correct on this question , thus accepting capitalism as a world epoch similarly to lenin , but a world epoch from which no capitalist state can oppose or avoid being a part of . on the other hand , the theoretical framework of capitalism 's decadence varies between different groups while left communist organizations like the international communist current hold a basically luxemburgist analysis that makes an emphasis on the world market and its expansion , others hold views more in line with those of vladimir lenin , nikolai bukharin and most importantly henryk grossman and paul mattick with an emphasis on monopolies and the falling rate of profit . see also . acedia anomie bread and circuses buraiha competence ( human resources ) degeneration theory kleptocracy late capitalism moral relativism societal collapse twilight of the idols . references . further reading . richard gilman , decadence : the strange life of an epithet ( 1979 ) . matei calinescu , five faces of modernity . mario praz , the romantic agony ( 1930 ) . jacques barzun , from dawn to decadence , ( 2000 ) . a . e . carter , the idea of decadence in french literature ( 1978 ) . michael murray , jacques barzun : portrait of a mind ( 2011 ) . external links . collection of the articles of the international communist current on the theory of decadence chronology of decadence decadence , symbolist , and the fin de siècle : a notebook