1957 in music

specific locations . 1957 in british music 1957 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1957 in country music 1957 in jazz . events . january 5 – renato carosone and his band start their american tour in cuba . january 6 – elvis presley makes his final appearance on the ed sullivan show . january 16 – the cavern club opens in liverpool , england , as a jazz club . february 8 – bo diddley records his songs '' hey bo diddley '' and '' mona '' ( aka '' i need you baby '' ) . march – chicago 's cardinal stritch bans all rock and roll and rhythm and blues music from catholic-run schools , saying that '' its rhythms encourage young people to behave in a hedonistic manner . '' march 1 – the everly brothers record in nashville their first single '' bye bye love '' for cadence records . march 3 – the second annual eurovision song contest is staged in frankfurt am main , west germany . the contest is won by dutch singer corry brokken with the song net als toen . march 19 – elvis presley purchases a mansion in memphis , tennessee , and calls it graceland . march 26 – ricky nelson records his first three songs . march 27 – '' que sera , sera ( whatever will be , will be ) '' from 1956 's alfred hitchcock suspense film the man who knew too much wins the academy award for best song . sung by doris day in the film , it proves to be one of her biggest hit records as well . may 14 – in paris , heitor villa-lobos records his bachiana brasileira no . 4 , with the orchestre nationale de la radiodiffusion française , for emi . through may 21 the recording sessions continue with bachiana brasileira no . 7 and bachiana brasileira no . 3 with manoel braune , piano . may 26 – paul robeson , blacklisted at this time from travelling outside the united states , performs a concert from new york city via the new transatlantic telephone line to an audience in st pancras town hall in london ; on october 5 he uses the same means to address the miners ' eisteddfod at the grand pavilion , porthcawl in wales . june 20 – toru takemitsu 's requiem for strings is first performed , by the tokyo symphony orchestra . july 6 – john lennon and paul mccartney of the beatles first meet at a garden fete at st . peter 's church , woolton , liverpool , england , at which lennon 's skiffle group , the quarrymen , is playing ( and in the graveyard of which an eleanor rigby is buried ) . august 5 – american bandstand begins its 30-year syndicated run on us network television . august 7 – the quarrymen first play at the cavern club in liverpool in an interlude spot between jazz bands ; when john lennon starts the group playing elvis presley 's '' do n't be cruel '' , the club 's owner at this time hands him a note reading '' cut out the bloody rock ' n roll '' . september 19 – dalida is the first artist to be awarded a gold record in france for 300,000 sales of '' bambino '' . this year , she is also the first female recording artist to have her own fan club . september 20 – jean sibelius dies aged 91 at ainola , his home in finland , having completed no significant compositions for thirty years ; at the time of his death , a performance of his symphony no . 5 is being given in helsinki under the baton of sir malcolm sargent . september 26 – broadway première of the musical west side story at the winter garden theatre ( following tryouts in washington , d.c . and philadelphia beginning in august ) with music by leonard bernstein ( who a week later is appointed music director of the new york philharmonic orchestra ) and lyrics by stephen sondheim , his broadway debut . this year also bernstein conducts the inaugural concert of the mann auditorium in tel aviv . november 25–27 – the first two hollywood motion pictures starring pat boone , bernadine and april love , are released . paul simon and art garfunkel name themselves tom and jerry and begin their recording career , signing with sid prosen of big records . their first single , '' hey , schoolgirl '' , backed with '' dancin ' wild '' , hits 49 on the billboard pop charts . garfunkel is tom graph ( so called because he like to write the pop charts out on graph paper ) and simon is jerry landis , a pseudonym he used during his early 1960s solo recordings . they tour for eighteen months before retiring to become college students and then reforming in 1963 as simon & garfunkel . the casals festival is founded in puerto rico . when nat king cole 's television show is unable to get a sponsor , frankie laine becomes the first artist to cross tv 's color line , becoming the first white artist to appear as a guest , foregoing his usual salary of 10,000 . other top performers follow suit , including mel tormé and tony bennett , but , despite an increase in ratings , the show still fails to pick up a national sponsor . gorni kramer makes his first appearance on italian television , in il musichiere . maria callas is introduced to greek shipping magnate aristotle onassis . '' suíte do pescador '' is composed by dorival caymmi . actress debbie reynolds earns a gold record for her song tammy , which is the best-selling single by a female vocalist in 1957 in the united states . this song from the motion picture tammy and the bachelor is also nominated for an academy award . bands formed . u.s . navy steel band . albums released . about the blues – julie london after glow – carmen mcrae after midnight – nat king cole after school session – chuck berry almendra – aldemaro romero anita sings the most – anita o'day april in paris – count basie art pepper meets the rhythm section – art pepper at mister kelly 's – sarah vaughan at the gate of horn – odetta award winner : stan getz – stan getz bags ' groove – miles davis the beat of my heart – tony bennett belafonte sings of the caribbean – harry belafonte bing with a beat – bing crosby the big beat – johnnie ray birth of the cool – miles davis blossom dearie – blossom dearie a blowin ' session – johnny griffin blue starr – kay starr blue train – john coltrane blue trombone – j . j . johnson boy meets girl – sammy davis , jr . and carmen mcrae brilliant corners – thelonious monk chet atkins at home – chet atkins the '' chirping '' crickets – buddy holly & the crickets ( debut ) a christmas story – bing crosby close to you – frank sinatra a closer walk with thee – pat boone the clown – charles mingus coltrane – john coltrane cookin ' – paul gonsalves cookin ' with the miles davis quintet – miles davis count basie at newport – count basie criollísima – aldemaro romero day by night – doris day dedicated to you – the '' 5 '' royales double play ! – russ freeman & andré previn dream street – peggy lee drum suite – art blakey ella and louis again – ella fitzgerald & louis armstrong ella fitzgerald sings the duke ellington song book – ella fitzgerald & duke ellington elvis ' christmas album – elvis presley an evening with belafonte – harry belafonte exotica – martin denny gene vincent and his blue caps – gene vincent grand ole opry 's new star – george jones the great ray charles – ray charles hard bop – art blakey the helen morgan story – gogi grant her nibs – georgia gibbs here 's little richard – little richard hi-fi in focus – chet atkins hymns we love – pat boone i love john frigo.he swings – johnny frigo ( debut ) in las vegas – johnnie ray interplay for 2 trumpets and 2 tenors – john coltrane it 's all over but the swingin ' – sammy davis , jr . jackie 's pal – jackie mclean jazz by sun ra – sun ra jim edward , maxine , and bonnie brown – the browns ( debut ) a jolly christmas from frank sinatra – frank sinatra the jones boys – thad jones julie – julie london just one of those things – nat king cole jutta hipp with zoot sims – jutta hipp like someone in love – ella fitzgerald losers , weepers – kay starr louis and the angels – louis armstrong louis armstrong meets oscar peterson – louis armstrong & oscar peterson love is the thing – nat king cole love serenade – the ames brothers loving you ( ost ) – elvis presley mad thad – thad jones make love to me – julie london mal/2 – mal waldron the man i love – peggy lee the many sides of toshiko – toshiko akiyoshi mating call & nbsp ; – tadd dameron mel tormé 's california suite – mel tormé mel tormé at the crescendo – mel tormé miguel – dalida miles ahead – miles davis a midnight session with the jazz messengers – art blakey moanin ' the blues – hank williams monk 's music – thelonious monk moondreams – dick haymes mozart : clarinet concerto , quintet for clarinet and strings . benny goodman , clarinet , boston symphony orchestra , conducted by charles munch ; boston symphony string quartet . 12-inch lp . rca victor lm 2073 . new tricks – bing crosby now hear this – the hi-lo's once over lightly – jo stafford one dozen roses – the mills brothers one o'clock jump – count basie orchestra , ella fitzgerald & joe williams orgy in rhythm – art blakey the pajama game – doris day pal joey with frank sinatra pat – pat boone pat boone sings irving berlin – pat boone patsy cline – patsy cline please , please , please – james brown the poll winners – barney kessel porgy and bess – ella fitzgerald & louis armstrong the prestige jazz quartet – teddy charles pretty baby – dean martin quand on n ' a que l'amour – jacques brel ray charles – ray charles ricky – ricky nelson ( debut ) ring around rosie – the hi-lo's rockin ' – frankie laine rockin ' the oldies – bill haley & his comets 'round about midnight – miles davis sammy swings – sammy davis , jr . saxophone colossus – sonny rollins sea shells – peggy lee sing a song of basie – lambert , hendricks & ross sometimes i 'm happy , sometimes i 'm blue – jill corey son nom est dalida – dalida songs for any taste – mel tormé songs for inspiration & meditation – jo stafford songs of scotland – jo stafford sophisticated swing – cannonball adderley soulville – ben webster the sounds of christmas harmony – the ames brothers strange blues – jackie mclean ( recorded , released 1967 ) strictly powell – bud powell such sweet thunder – duke ellington suddenly it 's the hi-lo 's – the hi-lo's suddenly there 's gogi grant – gogi grant sweet seventeen – the ames brothers a swingin ' affair ! – frank sinatra swingin ' easy – sarah vaughan tenor conclave – john coltrane thelonious monk with john coltrane – thelonious monk & john coltrane there 'll always be a christmas – the ames brothers tony – tony bennett tormé meets the british – mel tormé toshiko and leon sash at newport – toshiko akiyoshi & leon sash trane 's blues – john coltrane walkin ' – miles davis way out west – sonny rollins we get letters – perry como the weavers at carnegie hall – the weavers west side story – original broadway cast where are you ? – frank sinatra winner 's circle – oscar pettiford with his hot and blue guitar – johnny cash ( debut ) . biggest hit singles . the following songs achieved the highest chart positions in the charts of 1957 . 1 posthumous premiere . 2 recording . the sonata was performed publicly for the first time in concert on april 1967 by elisabeth klein in copenhagen . 3 revision of a cantata composed in 1938 and premiered in 1948 . until then miserae had been hartmann 's symphony no . 1 . 4 concert premiere . the symphony had been previously recorded by the bbc symphony conducted by adrian boult in march 1950 for a radio broadcast . 5 in two versions . unofficial premiere , given at the time without permission , but now acknowledged by the publisher . originally , the official premiere was given as 28 july 1957 , the last day of the darmstädter ferienkurse , in the orangerie at darmstadt , in two versions played by paul jacobs . this is now regarded as the european premiere . compositions . malcolm arnold – symphony no . 3 aaron copland – orchestral variations pierre gabaye – boutade henryk górecki – sonata for two violins , op . 10 concerto for five instruments and string quartet , op . 11 jørgen jersild – 3 madrigali wojciech kilar – lullabies , solo cantatas for soprano and seven instruments giselher klebe – concerto for cello and orchestra jan klusák – concerto grosso lászló lajtha – symphony no . 7 , revolution ( a tribute to the hungarian revolution in 1956 against the soviet suppression ) ennio morricone – concerto , for orchestra walter piston – viola concerto hilding rosenberg – string quartets nos . 8 – 12 edmund rubbra – seventh symphony john serry sr . – reeds in a rush roger sessions – symphony no . 3 alfred schnittke – symphony no . 0 dmitri shostakovich – symphony no . 11 ( shostakovich ) elie siegmeister – symphony no . 3 karlheinz stockhausen – gruppen for three orchestras ( 1955–57 ) toru takemitsu – requiem for strings vladimir ussachevsky – metamorphosis ralph vaughan williams – symphony no . 9 heitor villa-lobos piano concerto no . 3 string quartet no . 17 symphony no . 12 william walton – partita for orchestra mieczysław weinberg – symphony no . 4 malcolm williamson a vision of beasts and gods , song-cycle for high voice & piano santiago de espada , overture for orchestra symphony no . 1 – elevamini , for orchestra bernd alois zimmermann canto di speranza die fromme helene omnia tempus habent . opera . john eaton – ma barker bohuslav martinů – the greek passion douglas moore – gallantry ildebrando pizzetti – assassinio nella cattedrale francis poulenc – dialogues of the carmelites ( dialogues des carmelites ) heitor villa-lobos – daughter of the clouds . jazz . musical theater . bells are ringing & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; london production brigadoon ( alan jay lerner and frederick loewe ) — broadway revival damn yankees ( richard adler and jerry ross ) — london production harmony close london production opened at the lyric , hammersmith on april 17 . katharina knie opened at the staatstheater am gärtnerplatz in munich on january 20 the music man ( meredith willson ) opened at the majestic theatre on broadway on december 19 , 1957 , and ran for 1375 performances . new girl in town ( george abbott and bob merrill ) broadway production , opened at the 46th st . theatre and ran for 431 performances west side story ( leonard bernstein ) — broadway production , opened at the winter garden theatre and ran for 732 performances zuleika — london production , saville theatre . musical films . funny face starring fred astaire and audrey hepburn les girls starring gene kelly , mitzi gaynor and kay kendall loving you released july 9 starring elvis presley . mayabazar starring savithri the pajama game starring doris day and john raitt pal joey starring frank sinatra , rita hayworth and kim novak pardesi , with music by anil biswas silk stockings , featuring fred astaire and cyd charisse . births . january 3 – dave dobbyn , new zealand singer-songwriter , guitarist , and producer january 4 brian roy goble , canadian singer-songwriter ( subhumans and the skulls ) ( d . 2014 ) patty loveless , country singer january 23 – earl falconer , reggae bass guitarist and singer ( ub40 ) january 27 – janick gers , heavy metal guitarist ( iron maiden ) february 2 – tony butler , rock bass guitarist ( big country ) february 19 – falco , classical and rock musician ( d . 1998 ) february 27 – adrian smith , musician ( iron maiden and urchin ) february 28 phil gould , drummer ( level 42 ) cindy wilson , new wave singer ( the b-52 's ) march 5 – mark e . smith , post-punk singer-songwriter ( the fall ) ( d . 2018 ) march 12 – marlon jackson , vocalist ( the jackson 5 ) march 21 – john whitfield , conductor march 26 – paul morley , music journalist april 2 – mark alburger , composer , conductor , music journalist april 12 – vince gill may 2 – markus stockhausen , trumpeter and composer may 10 – sid vicious , punk musician ( sex pistos ) ( d . 1979 ) may 18 – michael cretu , musician may 27 – siouxsie sioux , singer ( siouxsie and the banshees ) june 11 – jamaaladeen tacuma , free jazz bass guitarist june 15 – brad gillis , american guitarist june 17 phil chevron , irish singer-songwriter and guitarist ( the pogues ) martin dillon , american tenor and educator ( d . 2005 ) june 22 – gary beers ( inxs ) june 26 – patty smyth , american singer-songwriter ( scandal ) july 3 peter breiner , composer poly styrene , punk musician july 30 – christopher miller , known as rat scabies , drummer august 2 mojo nixon , american singer-songwriter butch vig , american drummer , songwriter , and producer ( garbage and spooner ) august 18 – ron strykert , men at work august 21 – budgie , drummer ( siouxsie and the banshees ) august 22 – holly dunn , country singer/songwriter ( d . 2016 ) august 31 gina schock , the go-go's glenn tilbrook , vocalist ( squeeze ) september 1 gloria estefan , singer miami sound machine jon moss , drummer ( culture club ) september 22 nick cave , singer-songwriter johnette napolitano , concrete blonde october 3 – tim westwood , dj october 5 – lee jay thompson ( madness ) october 7 – michael w . smith , contemporary christian singer october 19 – karl wallinger ( world party ) october 20 – anouar brahem , oud player and composer october 21 julian cope , post-punk singer-songwriter and antiquarian steve lukather , rock guitarist ( toto ) october 16 – kelly marie , disco singer october 28 – stephen morris ( new order ) november 1 – lyle lovett , country musician november 5 – mike score ( a flock of seagulls ) november 8 – porl thompson ( the cure ) november 20 – hendrik hofmeyr , composer november 24 – chris hayes , pop rock musician ( huey lewis and the news ) december 6 – adrian borland , post-punk musician the sound ( d . 1999 ) december 6 bob drake , avant-garde musician jack lee , bagpiper december 9 donny osmond , singer ( osmonds ) steve taylor , singer , record producer december 10 – paul hardcastle , composer and musician december 12 – sheila e . , singer-songwriter and percussionist december 20 anita baker , r & b singer-songwriter billy bragg , singer-songwriter anna vissi , singer december 22 – tsai chin , singer december 25 – shane macgowan , celtic punk singer ( the pogues ) december 27 – jerry gaskill , american drummer date unknown annette a . aguilar , latin jazz percussionist charles roland berry , composer kartik seshadri , sitarist and composer . deaths . january – gertie gitana , music hall entertainer , 69 january 16 – arturo toscanini , conductor , 89 january 18 – george girard , jazz trumpeter , 26 ( cancer ) february 7 – rudolph réti , pianist , composer and musicologist , 71 february 16 – josef hofmann , pianist and composer , 81 february 21 '' klondike '' kate rockwell , vaudeville performer , 83 marguerite sylva , operatic mezzo-soprano , 81 march 8 – othmar schoeck , composer , 70 march 13 – lena ashwell , forces entertainer , 84 march 24 – carson robison , country music singer and songwriter , 66 april 15 – pedro infante , actor and singer , 39 ( air crash ) may 2 – tadeusz kassern , composer , 53 ( cancer ) may 9 – ezio pinza , italian singer and actor , 64 may 12 – marie rappold , operatic soprano , 83 june 5 – frances densmore , ethnomusicologist , 90 june 6 – kulyash baiseitova , opera singer , 52 june 12 – jimmy dorsey , jazz musician and big band leader , 53 ( cancer ) july 7 – hiski salomaa , folk singer and songwriter , 66 july 9 – alexander goedicke , pianist and composer , 80 july 16 – serge chaloff , saxophonist , 33 ( cancer ) august 4 – ivan zorman , poet and composer , 72 august 28 – erik tuxen , conductor , composer and arranger , 55 september 1 – dennis brain , horn virtuoso , 36 ( car accident ) september 11 – petar stojanović , violinist and composer , 80 september 20 – jean sibelius , composer , 91 october 14 – natanael berg , composer , 78 october 20 – jack buchanan , scottish singer , dancer , actor and director , 66 october 23 – abe lyman , us bandleader , composer and drummer , 60 november 4 – joseph canteloube , composer , 78 november 29 – erich wolfgang korngold , composer , 60 november 30 – beniamino gigli , operatic tenor , 67 december 19 – abolhasan saba , instrumentalist , 55 december 20 – walter page , jazz musician , 57 december 21 – eric coates , composer , 71 undated – ustad qasim , musician , 78–79 . awards . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1957 . references .