Aurora, Ontario

history . lieutenant-governor john graves simcoe gave the order for yonge street to be extended to holland landing in 1793 , the first step toward the establishment of a community where aurora now stands . yonge street opened between 1794 and 1796 . in 1795 , the first house in aurora was built at yonge st and catherine av . the government began granting deeds to land in 1797 . by 1801 there were fourteen homes . aurora is twinned with leksand , sweden . . establishing a village . in 1804 , richard machell became the first merchant at the crossroads of yonge and wellington and the hamlet soon became known as machell 's corners . charles doan was another early businessman at machell 's corners and became the first postmaster and later the first reeve . the post office was originally known as '' whitchurch '' . as postmaster , he was influential in renaming the village aurora , after the goddess aurora from roman mythology . machell proposed to rename the town '' match-ville '' , ostensibly for the match factory in the town , but the name aurora was more popular and ultimately chosen as the town 's name . flour and grist mills were built around 1827 . with the coming of the railway in 1853 , aurora emerged as an important centre north of toronto . the fleury plough works foundry opened in 1859 , making agricultural implements . the community was first known as machell 's corners and had only 100 residents in 1851 . the population of aurora in 1863 was 700 , and by 1869 it had grown to 1200 . . becoming a town . the settlement was incorporated as a village in 1863 with charles doan as the first reeve . records from 1885 describe aurora as the '' largest village in the county '' an '' enterprising and stirring business community '' with several factories and mills , five churches , a school house with 210 students , and two weekly newspapers . the population in 1881 was 1540 . the population reached 2,107 by 1888 . by the turn of the century , many industries moved out of aurora and as a result , the town suffered a downturn and reverted to its agricultural roots . from then on the town experienced slow growth until the rise of suburbia after the end of the second world war , when aurora was rejuvenated and experienced a boom in development due to its proximity to toronto . aurora was the childhood home of lester b . pearson , prime minister of canada from 1963 to 1968 , when his father , rev . edwin pearson , was the methodist minister . . recent developments . for most of the 20th century development in aurora centred primarily around its historic downtown core at yonge and wellington streets , bounded on the east by industrial parkway . starting in the early 21st-century , the town has expanded eastward beyond industrial parkway to highway 404 . since then aurora has grown considerably , with new developments stretching the built boundary of the town to be contiguous with newmarket in the north , and highway 404 in the east . new developments have pulled the economic focal point within the town increasingly eastward towards highway 404 . aurora 's downtown has suffered economically over the years as a result of recent developments . aurora is noted for preserving its historical built form in the older parts of town and in 2008 was awarded the prince of wales prize for municipal heritage leadership . town of aurora in 2009 the town received the lieutenant governor 's ontario heritage award for community leadership in heritage conservation and promotion . ontario heritage trust media release northeast old aurora was designated in 2006 as a provincial heritage conservation district . on april 8 , 2010 , the town re-opened the historic and fully renovated church street school as the aurora cultural centre . geography . aurora is situated just north of the oak ridges moraine and borders newmarket in the north , richmond hill in the south , king city in the west and whitchurch–stouffville in the east . demographics . according to the 2016 census , the town had a population of 55,445 . the town 's growth rate from 2011 to 2016 was 4.2 per cent . based upon current population figures and total area , the town 's population density is 1,112.3 residents per square kilometre . the population is estimated to be approximately 62,000 as of 2020 . in 2010 , average household income in aurora was 155,463 , making it one of canada 's most affluent towns . demographics and income , town of aurora , retrieved april 27 , 2012 . english is the mother tongue of 68 % of aurora residents . other languages with over 1,000 speakers include mandarin ( 4.2 % ) , cantonese ( 3.2 % ) , russian ( 2.8 % ) , farsi ( 2.8 % ) , and italian ( 2.4 % ) . aurora is predominately white with 73 % of the population . visible minorities with over 1,000 individuals include : chinese ( 10 % ) , south asian ( 3 % ) , west asian ( 3 % ) , and black ( 2 % ) . according to the 2016 census the most common ethnicities in aurora are english ( 23.6 % ) , canadian ( 19.8 % ) , scottish ( 16.9 % ) , irish ( 16.7 % ) , italian ( 12.5 % ) , chinese ( 11.1 % ) , german ( 8.6 % ) , french ( 6.8 % ) , russian ( 4.3 % ) , and polish ( 4.0 % ) . . government . the town of aurora municipal government is composed of a mayor and six councillors elected on an '' at large '' basis . the councillor with the highest votes becomes the deputy mayor and may proxy for the mayor . the mayor is a member of york regional council . in the municipal elections of 2018 , tom mrakas was elected mayor . the town is part of the federal riding of aurora-oak ridges-richmond hill . the riding is represented in the house of commons of canada by leona alleslev , a member of the conservative party of canada , who was first elected in the 2019 federal election . aurora is also part of the provincial riding of newmarket—aurora . the member of provincial parliament is christine elliott , who was elected in the 2018 ontario general election . elliot belongs to the progressive conservative party of ontario . emergency services . local police services are provided by the york regional police , who are currently headquartered within the town and serve all of the municipalities of the region . fire protection services are provided by central york fire services , a shared arrangement with the town of newmarket . public health services are managed by york region . there is currently no hospital within aurora 's boundaries ; the nearest is southlake regional health centre in newmarket . education . aurora is served by schools from three publicly funded school boards : the york region district school board ( the english public board ) , the york catholic district school board ( the english catholic board ) , and conseil scolaire de district catholique centre-sud ( the french-language catholic board ) . the conseil scolaire viamonde ( the secular french-language board ) also has aurora in its territory . both publicly funded english boards maintain head offices in aurora . the york region district school board is located at 60 wellington street west , just west of the historical downtown area , and the york catholic district school board is located at 320 bloomington road west . both boards operate a number of elementary schools in aurora . conseil scolaire de district catholique centre-sud operates only one elementary school in aurora : école st . jean . the york region district school board operates two high schools in aurora : dr . g.w . williams secondary school aurora high school the york catholic district school board operates two high schools in aurora : cardinal carter catholic high school st . maximillian kolbe catholic high school conseil scolaire de district catholique centre-sud operates one high school in aurora : école secondaire catholique renaissance ( formerly ésc cardinal-carter ) . st . andrew 's college , a private , independent school for boys , also operates in aurora . aurora residents have access to a wide range of other educational facilities including daycares and nurseries . the aurora public library is a public library funded and operated by the town . growth and urban planning . a large area in the southeastern part of aurora are subject to the ontario government 's greenbelt legislation which enforces limits on growth in designated green belt locations . the majority of future growth will occur in undeveloped portions of the 2c lands located in the northeastern part of aurora along leslie street and st john 's sideroad , and intensification along the yonge street and wellington corridors with the stretch of yonge street within aurora being designated as a '' regional corridor '' by york region with upgrades of the viva system anticipated to occur in the future . the portion of the 2c lands between highway 404 and leslie street has been designated as a significant employment zone by the region and the town . at full build-out the currently vacant lands are expected to provide approximately 6,000 jobs . the town 's official plan includes for major office growth to occur in the area . residential growth is restricted to the west side of leslie street , which has seen several new developments of detached homes , townhouses , and condominium apartments in the late 2010s . the regional municipality of york has proposed the area surrounding aurora go station to be designated as a major transit station area ( mtsa ) . under this designation , the area would undergo intensification and experience increased density of jobs and residents . as of 2020 the town of aurora is conducting a review of its official plan . the aurora promenade . as part of the town 's official plan review , a sub-committee of council developed a plan in 2010 , called the aurora promenade , that sets out new and redevelopment for the coming years . more than 30 public meetings , open-houses and workshops were held to create the plan . it is anticipated that 2,930 additional residents will live along the yonge and wellington street corridors , close to new major transportation systems being implemented by viva . the study was expected to stimulate new and redevelopment along both corridors in the coming years and to reinvigorate the downtown core . '' library square '' . in 2020 , the aurora town council approved and commenced the construction of the '' library square '' , the working name of a new town square to be located directly between the aurora public library building and the aurora cultural centre ( previously the church street school ) . the project will include the construction of a new performing arts centre directly adjacent to the aurora cultural centre and a covered pedestrian footbridge to connect the new performing arts building with the library building . the project is estimated to cost 53 million and is being implemented as part of a long-term strategy to transform and revitalize aurora 's ailing downtown core . library . the aurora public library is located in the northeast corner of the intersection of yonge street and church street . a library was first established in aurora in 1855 , and was moved to the current location in 2001 . the library is open all days of the week , but closed on sundays between may 17 and september 11 , and between december 20 and january 2 . transportation . roads . major roads running through aurora include bathurst street at its western border , yonge street , bayview avenue , leslie street , bloomington road at the southern border with richmond hill , ontario , wellington street , and st . johns sideroad located approximately 100 metres south of the border with newmarket , ontario . wellington street is the town 's major east-west road , with the yonge-wellington area having the busiest traffic volume in aurora . the town is serviced by highway 404 , located at its eastern border with the town of whitchurch stouffville . it is serviced by two interchanges at bloomington rd e . ( shared with richmond hill ) and wellington rd e . there is also a currently unfunded proposal for a future interchange to be built at st . john 's sideroad . public transit . the town of aurora is serviced by york region transit ( yrt ) , including several local routes as well as its viva blue bus rapid transit service . there are also plans to link the newmarket and richmond hill yonge street rapidway segments through portions of aurora , though funding has not yet been allocated for the proposal . the aurora go station is a stop on barrie line . trains depart approximately every 15–30 minutes southbound towards toronto during weekday morning peak periods , and northbound towards barrie approximately every 30 minutes during the afternoon peak . on evenings , weekends , holidays , as well as during the weekday midday period , trains operate approximately every hour between aurora and toronto with go bus connections at aurora to and from barrie . under the go transit regional express rail plan , by a target date of 2024 service will be increased to run every 15 minutes during peak , midday , evenings , and weekends between aurora and toronto using electric trains rather than the current diesel trains , and every along the full route between barrie and toronto every 30 minutes during peak and every 60 minutes off-peak . this will include upgrades to aurora go station as well as a second track and a grade-separation project at wellington street . media . local media include metroland-owned the banner ( formerly the era banner ) and the auroran ( a member of the simcoe york group of newspapers ) newspapers and aurora programming provided by rogers cable ( formerly aurora cable internet ) . radio . media in toronto radio are typically available , as in the nearby towns of newmarket , south into richmond hill and bradford . on march 24 , 2016 , the crtc approved voice of aurora community radio 's application to operate a new english-language community fm radio station . broadcasting decision crtc 2016-114 , low-power community radio station in aurora , crtc , march 24 , 2016 . theatre . aurora has a long history of theatre , with its own community theatre group , theatre aurora . founded in 1958 as the aurora drama workshop , the group joined with the aurora musical society in 1973 to form theatre aurora . the next year the group moved into its current home at the factory theatre on henderson drive . the group has performed a wide variety of shows , and currently produces five shows each year , along with two youth shows . a new performing-arts facility is to be built as part of the '' library square '' project . it is not currently determined if theatre aurora will relocate to the new facility or not once it is complete . economy . the auto parts giant magna international , founded by frank stronach , is based in aurora tc transcontinental has a printing plant for magazines in aurora , formerly operated by quebecor world and quad/graphics . architecture . the aurora armoury is a recognized federal heritage building , listed in 1991 on the register of the government of canada heritage buildings . aurora is also home to hillary house and koffler museum of medicine . hillary house is recognized by the national historic sites and monuments board as one of canada 's best examples of gothic revival architecture . . sports . aurora fc is a semi-professional soccer team that plays in league1 ontario in both the men 's and women 's divisions . it is also a youth soccer club . . people . john w . bowser , project construction superintendent of the empire state building the travelling historian : new york lloyd chadburn , world war ii pilot , recipient of the croix de guerre 1939–1945 norm dennis , retired nhl player tie domi , retired nhl player darren dutchyshen , sportscaster - tsn james duthie , sportscaster morgan frost , ohl player , drafted by the philadelphia flyers ( 2017 ) barclay goodrow , nhl player hap holmes , goaltender , won the stanley cup four times mike hough , retired nhl player kris king , retired nhl player mike kitchen , former toronto maple leafs assistant coach and st louis blues head coach frank klees , retired progressive conservative mpp derek livingston , olympic snowboarder gord macfarlane , minor-league hockey player ryan murphy , nhl player with carolina hurricanes andrew nembhard , basketball player lester b . pearson , the prime minister of canada from 1963 to 1968 , lived in aurora in his childhood mark rowswell , recipient of the order of canada , is known as dashan in china , where he is a tv personality . brian stemmle , champion olympic alpine skier karl stewart , nhl player , tampa bay lightning belinda stronach , businesswoman and politician frank stronach , cm , founder of magna international robert thomas , nhl player , stanley cup winner ( 2019 ) , st . louis blues james tuck , canadian football player . sister cities . leksand , sweden . see also . list of municipalities in ontario aurora tigers . notes . references . external links . town of aurora