Investment banking

history . early history . the dutch east india company was the first company to issue bonds and shares of stock to the general public . it was also the first publicly traded company , being the first company to be listed on an official stock exchange . the dutch also helped lay the foundations of the modern practice of investment banking . . further developments . investment banking has changed over the years , beginning as a partnership firm focused on underwriting security issuance , i.e . initial public offerings ( ipos ) and secondary market offerings , brokerage , and mergers and acquisitions , and evolving into a '' full-service '' range including securities research , proprietary trading , and investment management . in the 21st century , the sec filings of the major independent investment banks such as goldman sachs and morgan stanley reflect three product segments : investment banking ( mergers and acquisitions , advisory services , and securities underwriting ) , asset management ( sponsored investment funds ) , and trading and principal investments ( broker-dealer activities , including proprietary trading ( '' dealer '' transactions ) and brokerage trading ( '' broker '' transactions ) ) . in the united states , commercial banking and investment banking were separated by the glass–steagall act , which was repealed in 1999 . the repeal led to more '' universal banks '' offering an even greater range of services . many large commercial banks have therefore developed investment banking divisions through acquisitions and hiring . notable large banks with significant investment banks include jpmorgan chase , bank of america , citigroup , credit suisse , deutsche bank , ubs , and barclays . after the financial crisis of 2007–08 and the subsequent passage of the dodd-frank act of 2010 , regulations have limited certain investment banking operations , notably with the volcker rule 's restrictions on proprietary trading . the traditional service of underwriting security issues has declined as a percentage of revenue . as far back as 1960 , 70 % of merrill lynch 's revenue was derived from transaction commissions while '' traditional investment banking '' services accounted for 5 % . however , merrill lynch was a relatively '' retail-focused '' firm with a large brokerage network . . organizational structure . core investment banking activities . investment banking is split into front office , middle office , and back office activities . while large service investment banks offer all lines of business , both '' sell side '' and '' buy side '' , smaller sell-side investment firms such as boutique investment banks and small broker-dealers focus on investment banking and sales/trading/research , respectively . investment banks offer services to both corporations issuing securities and investors buying securities . for corporations , investment bankers offer information on when and how to place their securities on the open market , an activity very important to an investment bank 's reputation . therefore , investment bankers play a very important role in issuing new security offerings . . front office . front office is generally described as a revenue-generating role . there are two main areas within front office : investment banking and markets . investment banking involves advising organizations on mergers and acquisitions , as well as a wide array of capital raising strategies . ibca to lead , to follow or to respond- an investment banking strategist ’ s playbook retrieved 24 january 2020 markets is divided into '' sales and trading '' ( including '' structuring '' ) , and '' research '' . corporate finance . corporate finance is the aspect of investment banks which involves helping customers raise funds in capital markets and giving advice on mergers and acquisitions ( m & a ) ; this may involve subscribing investors to a security issuance , coordinating with bidders , or negotiating with a merger target . a pitch book of financial information is generated to market the bank to a potential m & a client ; if the pitch is successful , the bank arranges the deal for the client . see financial analyst investment banking . the investment banking division ( ibd ) is generally divided into industry coverage and product coverage groups . industry coverage groups focus on a specific industry — such as healthcare , public finance ( governments ) , fig ( financial institutions group ) , industrials , tmt ( technology , media , and telecommunications ) , p & e ( power & energy ) , consumer/retail , food & beverage , corporate defense and governance — and maintain relationships with corporations within the industry to bring in business for the bank . product coverage groups focus on financial products — such as mergers and acquisitions , leveraged buyout , public finance , asset finance and leasing , structured finance , restructuring , equity , and debt issuance . sales and trading . on behalf of the bank and its clients , a large investment bank 's primary function is sales and trading products . in market maker , traders will buy and sell financial products with the goal of making money on each trade . sales is the term for the investment bank 's sales force , whose primary job is to call on institutional and high-net-worth investors to suggest trading ideas ( on a caveat emptor basis ) and take orders . sales desks then communicate their clients ' orders to the appropriate trading rooms , which can price and execute trades , or structure new products that fit a specific need . structuring has been a relatively recent activity as derivatives have come into play , with highly technical and numerate employees working on creating complex structured products which typically offer much greater margins and returns than underlying cash securities . in 2010 , investment banks came under pressure as a result of selling complex derivatives contracts to local municipalities in europe and the us . strategists advise external as well as internal clients on the strategies that can be adopted in various markets . ranging from derivatives to specific industries , strategists place companies and industries in a quantitative framework with full consideration of the macroeconomic scene . this strategy often affects the way the firm will operate in the market , the direction it would like to take in terms of its proprietary and flow positions , the suggestions salespersons give to clients , as well as the way structurers create new products . banks also undertake risk through proprietary trading , performed by a special set of traders who do not interface with clients and through '' principal risk '' — risk undertaken by a trader after he buys or sells a product to a client and does not hedge his total exposure . banks seek to maximize profitability for a given amount of risk on their balance sheet . note here that the frtb framework has underscored the distinction between the '' trading book '' and the '' banking book '' , i.e . assets intended for active trading — as opposed to assets expected to be held to maturity — and market risk capital requirements will differ accordingly . the necessity for numerical ability in sales and trading has created jobs for physics , computer science , mathematics , and engineering ph.d.s who act as quantitative analysts . research . : see also : financial analyst ; quantitative analyst . the securities research division reviews companies and writes reports about their prospects , often with '' buy '' , '' hold '' , or '' sell '' ratings . investment banks typically have sell-side analysts which cover various industries . their sponsored funds or proprietary trading offices will also have buy-side research . research also covers credit risk , fixed income , macroeconomics , and quantitative analysis , all of which are used internally and externally to advise clients ; alongside '' equity '' , these may be separate '' groups '' . the research group ( s ) typically provide a key service in terms of advisory and strategy . while the research division may or may not generate revenue ( based on policies at different banks ) , its resources are used to assist traders in trading , the sales force in suggesting ideas to customers , and investment bankers by covering their clients . research also serves outside clients with investment advice ( such as institutional investors and high-net-worth individuals ) in the hopes that these clients will execute suggested trade ideas through the sales and trading division of the bank , and thereby generate revenue for the firm . with mifid ii requiring sell-side research teams in banks to charge for research , the business model for research is increasingly becoming revenue-generating . external rankings of researchers are becoming increasingly important , and banks have started the process of monetizing research publications , client interaction times , meetings with clients etc . there is a potential conflict of interest between the investment bank and its analysis , in that published analysis can impact the performance of a security ( in the secondary markets or an initial public offering ) or influence the relationship between the banker and its corporate clients , thereby affecting the bank 's profitability . see chinese wall finance . middle office . this area of the bank includes treasury management , internal controls ( such as risk ) , and internal corporate strategy . corporate treasury is responsible for an investment bank 's funding , capital structure management , and liquidity risk monitoring ; it is ( co ) responsible for the bank 's funds transfer pricing ( ftp ) framework . internal control tracks and analyzes the capital flows of the firm , the finance division is the principal adviser to senior management on essential areas such as controlling the firm 's global risk exposure and the profitability and structure of the firm 's various businesses via dedicated trading desk product control teams . in the united states and united kingdom , a comptroller ( or financial controller ) is a senior position , often reporting to the chief financial officer . risk management . risk management involves analyzing the market and credit risk that an investment bank or its clients take onto their balance sheet during transactions or trades . middle office '' credit risk '' focuses around capital markets activities , such as syndicated loans , bond issuance , restructuring , and leveraged finance . these are not considered '' front office '' as they tend not to be client-facing and rather 'control ' banking functions from taking too much risk . '' market risk '' is the control function for the markets ' business and conducts review of sales and trading activities utilizing the var model . other middle office risk groups include country risk , operational risk , and counterparty risks which may or may not exist on a bank to bank basis . front office risk teams , on the other hand , engage in revenue-generating activities involving debt structuring , restructuring , syndicated loans , and securitization for clients such as corporates , governments , and hedge funds . here '' credit risk solutions '' , are a key part of capital market transactions , involving debt structuring , exit financing , loan amendment , project finance , leveraged buy-outs , and sometimes portfolio hedging . the '' market risk team '' provides services to investors via derivative solutions , portfolio manager , portfolio consulting , and risk advisory . well-known '' risk groups '' are at jpmorgan chase , morgan stanley , goldman sachs and barclays j.p . morgan ib risk works with investment banking to execute transactions and advise investors , although its finance & operation risk groups focus on middle office functions involving internal , non-revenue generating , operational risk controls . risk management consulting j.p . morgan the credit default swap , for instance , is a famous credit risk hedging solution for clients invented by j.p . morgan 's blythe masters during the 1990s . the loan risk solutions group barclays risk loan within barclays ' investment banking division and risk management and financing group . financial crisis of 2007–2008 . the financial crisis of 2007–2008 led to the collapse of several notable investment banks , such as the bankruptcy of lehman brothers ( one of the largest investment banks in the world ) and the hurried sale of merrill lynch and the much smaller bear stearns to much larger banks , which effectively rescued them from bankruptcy . the entire financial services industry , including numerous investment banks , was bailed out by government taxpayer funded loans through the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) . surviving u.s . investment banks such as goldman sachs and morgan stanley converted to traditional bank holding companies to accept tarp relief . the end of wall street . wall street journal . similar situations occurred across the globe with countries rescuing their banking industry . initially , banks received part of a 700 billion tarp intended to stabilize the economy and thaw the frozen credit markets . erin nothwehrm '' emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 '' university of iowa ( december 2008 ) . retrieved 1 june 2012 eventually , taxpayer assistance to banks reached nearly 13 trillion — most without much scrutiny — '' the true cost of the bank bailout '' pbs/wnet '' need to know '' ( 3 september 2010 ) . retrieved 7 march 2011 lending did not increase , samuel sherraden , '' banks use tarp funds to boost lending – not ! '' the washington note ( 20 july 2009 ) . retrieved 7 march 2011 and credit markets remained frozen . '' fed may keep rates low as tight credit impedes small businesses '' bloomberg businessweek ( 26 april 2010 ) . retrieved 7 march 2011 the crisis led to questioning of the business model of the investment bank without the regulation imposed on it by glass–steagall . once robert rubin , a former co-chairman of goldman sachs , became part of the clinton administration and deregulated banks , the previous conservatism of underwriting established companies and seeking long-term gains was replaced by lower standards and short-term profit . matt taibbi , '' the great american bubble machine '' rolling stone magazine ( 5 april 2010 ) . retrieved 7 march 2011 formerly , the guidelines said that in order to take a company public , it had to be in business for a minimum of five years and it had to show profitability for three consecutive years . after deregulation , those standards were gone , but small investors did not grasp the full impact of the change . a number of former goldman sachs top executives , such as henry paulson and ed liddy were in high-level positions in government and oversaw the controversial taxpayer-funded bank bailout . the tarp oversight report released by the congressional oversight panel found that the bailout tended to encourage risky behavior and '' corrupted the fundamental tenets of a market economy '' . edward niedermeyer , '' tarp oversight report : bailout goals conflict , moral hazard alive and well '' ( 13 january 2011 ) . retrieved 7 march 2011 under threat of a subpoena , goldman sachs revealed that it received 12.9 billion in taxpayer aid , 4.3 billion of which was then paid out to 32 entities , including many overseas banks , hedge funds , and pensions . karen mracek and thomas beaumont , '' goldman reveals where bailout cash went '' the des moines register ( 26 july 2010 ) . retrieved 7 march 2011 the same year it received 10 billion in aid from the government , it also paid out multimillion-dollar bonuses ; the total paid in bonuses was 4.82 billion . stephen grocer , '' wall street compensation– ’ no clear rhyme or reason ’ '' the wall street journal blogs ( 30 july 2009 ) . retrieved 7 march 2011 '' goldman sachs : the cuomo report ’ s bonus breakdown '' the wall street journal blogs ( 30 july 2009 ) . retrieved 7 march 2011 similarly , morgan stanley received 10 billion in tarp funds and paid out 4.475 billion in bonuses . '' morgan stanley : the cuomo report ’ s bonus breakdown '' the wall street journal blogs ( 30 july 2009 ) . retrieved 7 march 2011 . criticisms . the investment banking industry , and many individual investment banks , have come under criticism for a variety of reasons , including perceived conflicts of interest , overly large pay packages , cartel-like or oligopolistic behavior , taking both sides in transactions , and more . investment banking has also been criticised for its opacity . william d . cohan , author of house of cards : how wall st . bankers broke capitalism , speaking on bbc radio 5 live , up all night , 13 april 2011 . conflicts of interest . conflicts of interest may arise between different parts of a bank , creating the potential for market manipulation , according to critics . authorities that regulate investment banking , such as the financial conduct authority ( fca ) in the united kingdom and the sec in the united states , require that banks impose a '' chinese wall '' to prevent communication between investment banking on one side and equity research and trading on the other . however , critics say such a barrier does not always exist in practice . independent advisory firms that exclusively provide corporate finance advice argue that their advice is not conflicted , unlike bulge bracket banks . conflicts of interest often arise in relation to investment banks ' equity research units , which have long been part of the industry . a common practice is for equity analysts to initiate coverage of a company in order to develop relationships that lead to highly profitable investment banking business . in the 1990s , many equity researchers allegedly traded positive stock ratings for investment banking business . alternatively , companies may threaten to divert investment banking business to competitors unless their stock was rated favorably . laws were passed to criminalize such acts , and increased pressure from regulators and a series of lawsuits , settlements , and prosecutions curbed this business to a large extent following the 2001 stock market tumble after the dot-com bubble . philip augar , author of the greed merchants , said in an interview that , '' you can not simultaneously serve the interest of issuer clients and investing clients . and it ’ s not just underwriting and sales ; investment banks run proprietary trading operations that are also making a profit out of these securities . '' many investment banks also own retail brokerages . during the 1990s , some retail brokerages sold consumers securities which did not meet their stated risk profile . this behavior may have led to investment banking business or even sales of surplus shares during a public offering to keep public perception of the stock favorable . since investment banks engage heavily in trading for their own account , there is always the temptation for them to engage in some form of front running – the illegal practice whereby a broker executes orders for their own account before filling orders previously submitted by their customers , thereby benefiting from any changes in prices induced by those orders . documents under seal in a decade-long lawsuit concerning etoys.com 's ipo but obtained by new york times wall street business columnist joe nocera alleged that ipos managed by goldman sachs and other investment bankers involved asking for kickbacks from their institutional clients who made large profits flipping ipos which goldman had intentionally undervalued . depositions in the lawsuit alleged that clients willingly complied with these demands because they understood it was necessary in order to participate in future hot issues . reuters wall street correspondent felix salmon retracted his earlier , more conciliatory statements on the subject and said he believed that the depositions show that companies going public and their initial consumer stockholders are both defrauded by this practice , which may be widespread throughout the ipo finance industry . the case is ongoing , and the allegations remain unproven . compensation . investment banking is often criticized for the enormous pay packages awarded to those who work in the industry . according to bloomberg wall street 's five biggest firms paid over 3 billion to their executives from 2003 to 2008 , '' while they presided over the packaging and sale of loans that helped bring down the investment-banking system '' . tom randall and jamie mcgee , '' wall street executives made 3 billion before crisis ( update1 ) '' , bloomberg , 26 september 2008 . the highly generous pay packages include 172 million for merrill lynch ceo stanley o'neal from 2003 to 2007 , before it was bought by bank of america in 2008 , and 161 million for bear stearns ' james cayne before the bank collapsed and was sold to jpmorgan chase in june 2008 . such pay arrangements have attracted the ire of democrats and republicans in the united states congress , who demanded limits on executive pay in 2008 when the u.s . government was bailing out the industry with a 700 billion financial rescue package . writing in the global association of risk professionals journal , aaron brown , a vice president at morgan stanley , says '' by any standard of human fairness , of course , investment bankers make obscene amounts of money . '' . see also . list of investment banks traditional investments alternative investment bulge bracket independent advisory firm investment banking exam . references . further reading . fleuriet michel investment banking explained : an insider 's guide to the industry mcgraw-hill new york ny 2008