Harz National Park

geography . the 24,700 hectares of the harz national park cover about 10 & nbsp ; per cent of the total area of the harz . the park lies in the western part of the harz ( see upper harz ) and stretches from wernigerode and ilsenburg in the north to herzberg and bad lauterberg in the south . near its perimeter the park terrain is about in the north and in the south and climbs to at the summit of the brocken . nationalpark harz : wir über uns several rivers have their sources in the national park , including the bode , the oder and the ilse , a tributary of the oker . the waters of the oder , flowing southwards , are collected in the historic oderteich reservoir , finished in 1722 to supply the mines in sankt andreasberg , and feed the oder dam on the southeastern edge of the park . other dams and lakes within or bordering on the national park include the ecker dam and the silberteich . the highest elevations are the brocken , the bruchberg and the achtermann . history . the present , pan-state nationalpark harz was formed on 1 & nbsp ; january 2006 from the merger of the old park of the same name in lower saxony and the high harz national park ( nationalpark hochharz ) in saxony-anhalt . since the merger the head of this major nature conservation area has been andreas pusch . the upper harz national park was established as part of gdr 's national park programme on 1 & nbsp ; october 1990 , two days before the reunification of germany , on the basis of a ministerial decision by the east german government . the park included large parts of the eastern harz , roughly from the ecker dam and the national park municipality of ilsenburg in the north and schierke in the south as well as the brocken . the region is characterised by a relatively undisturbed plant and animal environment , which is mainly due to its location immediately next to the old inner german border . in the german democratic republic era , the brocken was accessible until 1961 with an easily obtained pass . from 13 august 1961 it became an out-of-bounds area , which meant that tourists could no longer visit it . in the mid-1980s the first problems appeared in the harz , such as bark beetle and fungal infestation . in the wake of the spirit of optimism during the time around reunification it was exactly this that gave impetus for the establishment of the national park . on 1 january 1991 a national park headquarters in wernigerode was set up under the leadership of hubertus hlawatsch . hlawatsch 's successor was peter gaffert , who ran the eastern park from 1995 until its merger with the harz national park in the western harz on 1 & nbsp ; january 2006 . the lower saxon part of the park was opened on 1 & nbsp ; january 1994 after four years of preparation . its founding father was dr . wolf-eberhard barth . although a combined national park project was discussed soon after reunification by both states it was another twelve years before the parks were merged . the harz national park belongs to the european umbrella organisation europarc federation , a federation of national parks , biosphere reserves and nature parks . it concerns itself inter alia with the exchange of information , ustausch , advanced education and public relations . the german section , europarc deutschland , of this umbrella organisation has also organised the merger of many large conservation areas in germany . europarc deutschland : verbandsphilosophie , accessed on 31 march 2008 in 2005 the national park was included in the european charter for sustainable tourism in protected areas . currently the national park employs 188 staff , of which 59 work in the national park head office in wernigerode or its outpost in sankt andreasberg ot oderhaus . the 40 employees of the national park warden service , who are also known as rangers , conduct guided tours and look after tasks in connexion with environmental training , include the maintenance of information posts and national park buildings . ( as at : 31 december 2007 ) auskunft der nationalparkverwaltung fachbereich 1 in march 2008 . . ecology . flora . the natural forests of the high harz consist mainly of norway spruce ( picea abies ) and rowan ( sorbus aucuparia ) ; deciduous trees only dominate below . since the harz was partly deforested in the 19th century by ore mining , the count 's head forester , hans dietrich von zanthier , developed the concept of reforestation with fast-growing spruce trees . this led to the now widespread spruce monocultures . unlike '' harz pine '' , the pines introduced from other regions cope less well with snow and ice conditions in the harz and are thus more prone to bark beetle infestation . currently 82 percent of the forest consists of spruce stands . only 12 percent of the trees are beeches . the remaining 6 percent are species such as oak , rowan or birch ( as at december 2007 ) . there are various vegetation zones in the harz national park . in the sub-alpine area above 1050 metres is the '' tree line '' of the spruce tree . here it is not uncommon to find trees over 250 years old and bent into bizarre shapes by the wind . but predominant here are the dwarf shrub heaths and raised bogs ( hochmoore ) . the altimontane vegetation zone is found between and , dominated by spruce . these areas can be found in the vicinity of schierke and torfhaus . not until the montane zone between and and the submontane zone is the vegetation dominated by beech forests . today 's beech stands grow primarily on acidic soil . the most commonly encountered forest type is the hainsimsen beech forest . at heights above 700 m it is usually adjacent to spruce-beech mixed woodland . but in the national park this area has shrunk to just a few residual stands and has been largely replaced by spruce . in the region of ilsenburg spruce monoculture occurs even down to . in these zones the spruce is not native and , as a result of climate change , it has suffered increasingly from bark beetle infestation . currently the national park service is having these areas reforested to encourage the original beech and maple , that used to dominate them , to resettle . auskunft vom fachbereich 2 forschung und wissenschaft der nationalparkverwaltung im märz 2008 nationalpark harz : waldentwicklung nationalpark harz : wälder the harz is home to the brocken anemone ( pulsatilla alpina subsp . alba ) , which grows in germany only on the plateau of the brocken . its survival has however been especially endangered since german reunification by the onset of tourism . the brocken garden , a botanical garden on the summit of the brocken , deals mainly with the protection of plant species and restoration of the summit area . vgl . gunter karste ( 2006 ) : der brockengarten im nationalpark harz . in : sachsen-anhalt 16 ( 2006 ) , h . 4 , p . 2–4 . especially valuable for nature conservation , are the raised bogs formed by the restoration of former marshland . the conditions are favorable for this , as the bogs in the park are less impacted by human use than the bogs of the lower saxony plain . when wood became scarce in the harz , the locals tried to take advantage of the peat bogs . this proved unprofitable due to the low calorific value of peat and the weather conditions in the high harz . the bogs in the harz are of international significance by virtue of their distinctiveness and flora . vgl . sabine bernsdorf , nadine böhlmann , ralph meissner , wolfgang merbach ( 2003 ) : moorforschung im harz ; entwicklung und schutz der moore im nationalpark hochharz . in : scientia halensis 11 ( 2003 ) , h . 4 , p . 21–22 , pdf . nationalpark harz : moore . fauna . the lynx now lives wild again in the harz , having been eradicated from the mountains since the early 19th century . the last report of a successful lynx hunt in the harz dates to 1818 . in an eleven-day hunt , in which almost 200 people took part , a male lynx was brought down at lautenthal . the so-called lynx stone recalls the success of that particular hunt . in 1999 it was decided to reintroduce the lynx . between 2000 and 2004 alone , 19 were released from zoo breeding programmes . before their release the animals are prepared in a large enclosure in order to acclimatized them to freedom . in addition there is a viewing enclosure near the national park forest restaurant on the rabenklippe where the shy cats can also be observed by visitors to the park . since 2002 , there have been several instances of kittens born in the wild . in march , a male lynx was fitted with a gps transmitter , so precise details can now be obtained about the range of an animal . the project team receives information via sms from the transmitter . another reintroduction project was the capercaillie , which died out in the harz in 1920-1930 . its reintroduction began in 1978 . over the years about 1,000 birds have been reared and set free . in spite of the number of birds the population was not assessed as stable . due to the lack of success , the project was closed in 2003 . vgl . ralf siano ( 2006 ) : überlebensdauer , todesursachen und raumnutzung gezüchteter auerhühner ( tetrao urogalluns l . ) , ausgewildert im nationalpark harz . in : vogelwarte 44 ( 2006 ) , h . 3 , p . 145–158 . the harz is now one of germany 's most important habitats for the wild cat . it is classified in the federal republic of germany as seriously endangered . it is assumed that the wild cat in the harz has a stable population . it is widespread throughout the region , preferring those areas which are warmer , richer , more varied and better supplied with nutrients ( lower lying deciduous forest with greater food availability ) . in addition to lynx and wild cat , red deer and roe deer are also important species in the harz national park . the most common invasive species is the raccoon , but occasionally the raccoon dog also occurs . the mouflon , which was in the 1930s located in different districts of the harz for hunting reasons , is also found in the park . ecological problems . recently , the harz national park has suffered from bark beetle outbreaks as well as acid rain and other environmental problems . the bark beetle is on the rise here due to climate change and global warming . since 2006 , there has been increased bark beetle gradation . hurricane kyrill also caused severe damage in the region . stands of trees , especially spruce , were torn down over wide areas . the national park management came under fire from the local communities as a result of the bark beetle measures that were subsequently needed . in particular , the national park community at ilsenburg criticized the use of technology ( e.g . harvesters ) . because of the inaccessibility of the terrain there was really no other way to haul the wind blown tree trunks from the affected areas . gemeinsames faltblatt von nationalpark harz und nabu sachsen-anhalt zur borkenkäferfrage im nationalpark harz : in the so-called natural development zone of the harz national park , which surrounds the core area , bark beetle measures are taken where necessary , and plantations are established where in order to encourage the natural development of the forest . to protect these beech and oak groves , national park wildlife management is required . accusations that private or state hunts had taken place in the park turned out to be unfounded . pressemeldung des nationalparks harz : keine „ ddr-staatsjagd unter dem brocken “ . zoning . the harz national park is recognised by the iucn ( world conservation union ) as a national park ( a category ii protected area in the iucn system ) . to achieve that , according to the rules , at least 75 & nbsp ; per cent of the area must be set aside as a natural biodiversity zone ( core zone ) . in this zone nature must be left completely to itself . if this proportion is not achieved the region can be classified as a so-called developing national park , if it is assessed as fulfilling these conditions within 30 years . the harz national park counts as a developing national park . currently 60,3 & nbsp ; per cent of the area of the park is designated as a natural biodiversity or core zone . the aim is to cross the 75 & nbsp ; per cent threshold by 2020 . 38,5 & nbsp ; per cent of the park area is currently still a nature development zone . here measures in lines with the forest development concept are carried out . the aim is to transfer the largest possible area of this natural development zone into the natural biodiversity zone . a proportion of the park counts as a utilisation zone . this covers areas that are important for tourism or are historico-culturally significant , such as the brocken summit or mountain meadows . here conservation measures will also be applied in future . nationalpark harz : gebietsgliederung furthermore , within a 500 metre wide strip on the edge of the national park , measures are being put into effect that will protect the adjacent areas .