Payphone

countries . brazil . . canada . most payphones in canada are owned and operated by large telecom providers such as bell , telus , and sasktel . in the last 20 years , customer-owned coin-operated telephones ( cocot ) have also appeared in the market , but their numbers are smaller due to the emergence of mobile phones . the cost of most local payphone calls is 50 cents cad , having increased from 25 cents since 2007 . pay phones in alberta were 35 cents for a time , but in most jurisdictions the price simply doubled . newer phones allow users to use calling cards and credit cards . for coin-paid long distance , cocots are less expensive for short calls ( typically 1 for three minutes ) than incumbent providers ( whose rates start near 5 for the first minute ) . dialing 0 for the operator and 9-1-1 are still free . the toronto transit commission deploys payphones on all subway platforms as a safety precaution ; a blue '' crisis link '' button on 141 payphones connects directly with distress centres of canada as a free suicide prevention measure . as of 2013 , there were about 70,000 payphones across the country . in 2013 , the crtc issued a temporary moratorium on the removal of payphones in small communities . in september 2015 , the crtc remarked that '' 32 percent of canadians used a payphone at least once in the past year , '' and that they are used '' as a last resort in times of inconvenience and emergency . '' rob : '' canadians aren ’ t ready to cut cords with payphones just yet '' , 26 february 2015 . germany . the payphone model 23 , introduced at deutsche bundespost telekom in 1992 , is an electronic software-controlled payphone for analog connections . it is equipped with coin , , and integrated test program setting . it has a remote maintenance – the independent reports of a background system by means of an integrated modem error ( for example , defects in components , lack of listeners ) , operating states ( for example , full coin box ) , or departures ( for example standing open the cartridge mounting door , missing coin ) . the payphone 23 consists of two basic units , the equipment part including all the necessary for the operation modules ( bg ) and the secured below the growing payphone cassettes with the coin box . india . . italy . in italy , public payphones have been installed and maintained over the years by telecom italia ( formerly sip ) . file : ui-u.gif payphone model u+i from 1964 to 1982 . file : gettonemoneta.jpg payphone model g+m from 1982 to 1987 . file : tp rotor.jpg payphone model rotor from 1987 to 2002 . file : telecom italia pay phone digito 01.jpg payphone model digito since 2002 . . japan . the majority of payphones on the street and in buildings in japan are installed and maintained by nippon telegraph and telephone ( ntt ) . russia . in the soviet period , different types of payphones were produced . there were also long-distance call payphones costing 15 kopeks , and also provided services of paid media such as listening to an anecdote , obtaining legal advice , or finding the address of the subscriber by phone number . after the collapse of the soviet union and the monetary reform of 1991 , this form of payment became irrelevant . some payphones were altered to accept tokens , while others have been designed to use telephone cards . for example , in st petersburg , payment for payphones can be made with metro tokens . in some regions , calls from public phones are free of charge . spain . telephones were a monopoly of the national government in spain . pay phones took a slug or ficha , a piece of metal with two troughs in it , making it hard to counterfeit . payphones were typically found in bars , restaurants , and stores , never freestanding . phones would accept some 5 fichas at a time ( the exact number varied depending on phone model ) , showing through a plastic window the number remaining , and return unused ones to the customer . an older and simpler system was to use a mechanical counter , which automatically counted units of time , called pasos , a '' pass '' in the sense of '' passage of time '' . the counter was the marcador de pasos . the length of each paso varied depending on the cost ( distance ) of the call . at the conclusion of a call the number of pasos was multiplied by a fixed amount , which could vary by time of day , creating a sum total that the customer would pay to a human attendant . these survived in small hotels at least until the 1970s . spain also had an institution with no equivalent in the united states , the locutorio , literally '' place where one talks '' . they were a type of store , in the main square of a town or close to it , where one booked a phone call by going to a counter , filling out a paper slip , and handing it to a person ( almost always a female ) . sometimes advance payment was required ( unused minutes refunded ) . the recipient of the slip would either directly or indirectly , depending on the equipment , make the call and send the customer to a phone booth with a dialless instrument on which to speak . in communities too small to support a locutorio this service might be offered by businesses with telephones , such as pharmacies . locutorios disappeared in the last quarter of the 20th century , as the whole country moved to direct distance dialing and cell phones ( in spanish '' mobile phones '' ) grew . united kingdom . in the uk , payphones have been deregulated . the great majority of them are still operated by british telecom ( bt ) but other providers exist , mostly in urban areas . hull , manchester , london , cardiff and glasgow , at the turn of the 21st century , have a greater concentration of non-bt payphones , since bt has been removing payphones which are unprofitable in terms of having few or no calls made in a financial year . ; kiosk adoption bt allows local communities to adopt the iconic red k6 kiosks due to strong opposition to their removal from the communities that the kiosks reside in . this will mean the removal of the phone , leaving the empty kiosk in-situ . ; sponsored kiosk another option bt has provided is the sponsored kiosk , that will retain the phone service , and retain the kiosk for an annual fee of around £300 excluding vat , whether it is the red k6 or the newer aluminium and glass kiosks that can not be adopted . payphone types due to disability discrimination law , specifically the disability discrimination act 1995 , in the past payphone providers were required to provide a certain number of textphone payphones as part of their network , as this was deemed a '' reasonable adjustment '' for deaf customers . these phones can also make voice calls , as well as send sms and email messages , and although this requirement is no longer in force due to minimal use of the textphone feature in these phones , many of the these devices remain in service , generally in populated areas . in addition , in the early 2000s bt installed a large number of 'multiphones ' that provided internet access , on top of voice , sms , and e-mail functionality . in 1960 , the bell system installed its one millionth telephone booth . booths , which were expensive , gradually faded away not much later . the bell system pay phone took nickels ( 5¢ ) , dimes ( 10¢ ) , and quarters ( 25¢ ) ; a strip of metal along the top had holes the size of each coin . this made possible a mechanism causing each coin to make a different series of sounds as it fell into the cash box ; thus an operator listening could tell how much had been inserted . on average , pay phone calls generally cost 5¢ into the 1950s and 10¢ until the mid 1980s . rates standardized at 25¢ during the mid 1980s to early 1990s . the bell system was required to apply for increases through state public service commissions . therefore , the actual increases took effect at different times in different locations . after the breakup of the bell system in 1984 , it was not long before independent stores selling telephones opened up . after that , privately owned payphones hit the market . sources differ as to whether the peak number of payphones in the united states was 2.6 million in 1995 or 2.2 million in 2000 . since 2007 , the number of payphones in the united states in operation has declined by 48 % . in july 2009 , at & t officially stopped supporting the public payphone service . over 139,000 locations were sold in 2009 . at the end of 2012 , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) reported the number of payphones at 243,487 generating 362 million – falling to 286 million by 2015 . the major carriers , at & t and verizon , have both exited the business , leaving the market to be served by independent payphone companies . an estimated 100,000 payphones in the u.s . remain as of 2018 , with roughly a fifth of them located in new york . there are still more than 100,000 pay phones operating in the us retrieved 19 march 2018 in recent years , deregulation in the united states has allowed payphone service provided by a variety of companies . such telephones are called '' customer-owned coin-operated telephones '' ( cocot ) , and are mostly kept in as good condition as compared with a payphone owned and operated by the local telephone company . cocot contracts are usually more generous to the landlord than telecom ones , hence telecom payphones on private premises have been more often replaced than street phones . one common implementation is operated by vending machine companies and contains a hard-wired list of non-toll telephone exchanges to which it will complete calls . in the united states , a payphone operator collects an fcc-mandated fee of 49.4¢ from the owner of a toll-free number for each call successfully placed to that number from the payphone . this results in many toll-free numbers rejecting calls from payphones in an attempt to avoid this surcharge ; calling cards , which require the caller to dial through a toll-free number , will often pass this surcharge back to the caller , either as a separate itemized charge , a 50¢ to 90¢ increase in the price of the call , or ( in the case of many prepaid calling cards ) the deduction of an extra number of minutes from the balance of the prepaid card . '' dead-heads '' may have influenced the development of the payphone . dead-heads were non-subscriber users that made a call at a place of business and did not pay for the call . the wisconsin telephone company in 1893 , for example , attempted to put an end to this practice by implementing ten cent coin slots so that users had to pay for the call . the idea behind this was to reduce the financial stress a smaller business may face from having dead-heads . . devices . intellicall astratel 2 smart payphone ( 2011–present ) intellicall ultratel smart payphone ( 1980s–present ) intellicall tidel 3 ( 1990s–present ) gte automatic electric 120-type . in popular culture . in the superman comic books and live action films , clark kent routinely uses a phone booth to change into his superman costume . similarly , underdog also changes into his costume from a shoe-shine vendor using a phone booth , however , with total demolition of the booth and phone set . in the harry potter books – and the films – there is a red telephone box outside the ministry of magic that wizards use to access the ministry . from the phone box , one must dial ‘ 62442 ’ and the phone booth acts as a lift , taking visitors down underneath the ground to the ministry . a pay phone booth was used as a time machine in the 1989 film bill and ted 's excellent adventure . the 2002 film phone booth takes place in a phone booth . the main character is held hostage in it for a whole day . he has been using the payphone to call his mistress so that his wife will not see the telephone number on their cellular telephone bill . a mojave phone booth in an isolated area of the mojave national preserve miles from the paved road was the subject of an internet meme and a 2006 independent film , mojave phone booth . the original pacific bell booth was removed in 2000 ; for nostalgia , lucky225 assigned its number ( 1-760-733-9969 ) to an open conference bridge in 2013 . popular pop song '' payphone '' by the band maroon 5 , featuring wiz khalifa , released on their fourth studio album overexposed . the small town of beggs , oklahoma attracted national attention in the late 1970s when public pay phones offering calls for only five cents had been essentially phased out across the country , but beggs still had one . as of 2020 , beggs still has a nickel pay phone , maintained in front of the beggs telephone company office . . gallery of payphones . file : payphone in shanghai , china.jpg payphone in china with built-in web browser file : old time dime payphone.jpg old-time dime payphone ( united states ) file : public ic tel.jpg ic payphone in japan . this type of payphone was removed from town due to ic card discontinued and continued to use magnetic telephone cards . file : mc-3pnc.jpg mc-3p style magnetic telephone card accepted payphone in japan . file:1c payphone - bell system , made by western electric , july 1979.png 1c payphone - bell system , made by western electric , manufactured in july 1979 . used in u.s.a . file : kiwanja uganda bike.jpg bicycle payphone in uganda file : snmnca019.jpg gte automatic electric 120-type single-slot coin phone in santa monica , california , united states file : hk mtr shatin city one station 信京電訊 shinetown telecom payphone jan-2012.jpg hong kong payphone file : at & tphone.jpg at & t payphone ( united states ) file : nm toronto pay phones and newspaper boxes toronto.jpg toronto payphones covered with graffiti and notices . telephone books are contained in weatherproof holders hanging from the bottom of each phone . file : payphone in turkmenistan.jpg payphone in ashgabat file : payphone in india.jpg a payphone in india . file : old finnish payphone.jpg this finnish payphone has a sticker saying '' ei toimi '' ( '' does not work '' ) on it . see also . red telephone box telephone booth . references . external links . pay phones : is that still a thing ? in the san diego union-tribune . payphonebox index of payphone numbers and photographs of payphones in unusual or famous places around the world . world payphone images 2600 : payphones of the world payphone tones including coin tones for the us and the uk for north america : mcpayphone directory : project to collect america 's 1.3 million payphone numbers and numbers abroad . payphone project payphone directory movies and television ( tv ) shows that portray the use of a payphone