Challenger 2

upgrades . clip . the challenger lethality improvement programme ( clip ) was a programme to replace the current l30a1 rifled gun with the smoothbore rheinmetall 120 mm gun currently used in the leopard 2a6 . the use of a smoothbore weapon would have allowed challenger 2 to use nato standard ammunition developed in germany and the us . this includes tungsten-based kinetic energy penetrators , which do not have the same political and environmental objections as depleted uranium rounds . the production lines for rifled 120 & nbsp ; mm ammunition in the uk have been closed for some years , so existing stocks of ammunition for the l30a1 are finite . in 2009 , a new hesh round manufactured in belgium by mecar has been trialled . this means that the challenger 2 now has available new tungsten '' fin '' ( apfsds ) and hesh rounds , if and when required , which secures a line of ammunition for its 55 calibre rifled main gun , the l30 , when required in the future . a single challenger 2 was fitted with the l55 and underwent trials in january 2006 . the smoothbore gun is the same length as the l30a1 , and is fitted with the rifled gun 's cradle , thermal sleeve , bore evacuator and muzzle reference system . early trials apparently revealed that the german tungsten dm53 round was more effective than the depleted-uranium charm 3 . the ammunition storage and handling arrangements will need to be changed to cater for the single-piece smoothbore rounds , instead of the separate-loading rifled rounds . in 2006 , a figure of £386 million was estimated to fit all challengers in the british army with the rheinmetall 120 mm gun . . csp . other improvements have also been considered , including a regenerative nbc protection system . in addition , several challenger 2s had the pintle-mounted gpmg on the loader 's crew hatch replaced with a remote controlled turret , allowing the loader to operate the weaponry without having to expose himself to enemy fire . in may 2007 , the ministry of defence 's future systems group invited baes to tender for the challenger 2 capability sustainment program ( c2 csp ) , which combined all upgrades into one programme . however , by mid-2008 , the programme was in danger of slipping , or even being cancelled , as a result of defence budget shortfalls . . clep . the challenger 2 life extension programme ( lep ) is designed to replace obsolete equipment , enhance protection , increase range and provide improved lethality of the tank until an out of service date of 2035 - extending its life from 2025 . the lep forms the major component of the '' armour mbt ( 2025 ) programme '' . in june 2014 , it was stated that not all of the 227 challenger 2s may be modified to clep standard and the smoothbore cannon had been dropped . a royal tank regiment ( rtr ) newsletter dated december 2015 stated that the lep includes managing to curb obsolescence in several turret systems – including ti sights , the fire control computer ( fcc ) and electronic architecture in turret . improved technology will be integrated as a new system on the platform , which will deliver more accurate engagements at range and improved fcc power , meaning that cr2 will remain a '' battle winning '' asset out to the extended out of service date . parallel work strands will provide extensions to virtual training systems , deliver improved live fire monitoring equipment ( lfme ) and work is ongoing to develop improved 120 & nbsp ; mm ammunition . the full scope of the lep is indicated as being broken down into four areas : surveillance and target acquisition : updated commanders primary sight , updated gunners primary sight , replacement thermal observation and gunnery sights ( togs ) and , 3rd generation thermal imaging ( ti ) . weapon control system : fire control computer ( fcc ) , fire control panel ( fcp ) and , gun processing unit ( gpu ) mobility ( through in-service efficiencies ) : 3rd generation ( horstman ) hydrogas suspension , improved air filtration , cv-12 common rail fuel injection , transmission and , cooling . electronic architecture ( modernised electronics ) : gunners control handles , video distribution architecture , generic vehicle architecture ( gva ) compliant interfaces , increased on-board processing and , improved human machine interface ( hmi ) . a 2016 ministry of defence document also identified a '' soft kill defensive aid system '' , the german muss , for the challenger 2 . active protection systems ( aps ) for armoured vehicles in the uk armed forces ( including the challenger 2 ) are being assessed by the uk defence science and technical laboratory ( dstl ) as part of the medusa technical assessment programme , this includes the muss system . in 2017 a challenger 2 was also fitted with a rheinmetall rosy rapid obscurant system including parts from the israeli military industries ( imi ) iron fist hard-kill aps for development and assessment by the dstl . in january 2016 it was reported by ihs jane 's that the uk 's defence equipment and support ( de & s ) organisation had received a number of replies to its pre-qualification questionnaire ( pqq ) for the projected challenger 2 lep . in addition to bae systems combat vehicles ( uk ) , which is the original manufacturer , contenders were stated to include rheinmetall and krauss-maffei wegmann of germany , general dynamics uk , lockheed martin uk , cmi defence of belgium , and ruag defence of switzerland . around this time a separate two-year contract was awarded to bae systems and krauss maffei wegmann to develop an update to the bridging variant in part to address the increase in weight of the challenger 2 from 64t to 75t arising from upgrades made during the iraq campaign . final bids for the upgrade programme were submitted in august 2016 . the lep will see the replacement of most of the tanks electronics , including its sighting systems but does not envisage a major upgrade of the vehicle 's drive systems or replacement of the 120 & nbsp ; mm l30a1 rifled gun . teams led by rheinmetall landsystem and bae systems were chosen for the assessment phase of the lep which would cost £53 million - £23 million for each team and £7 million to cover additional , unspecified work . the rheinmetall consortium includes bmt , pearson engineering , supacat , and thales uk and includes an option to retrofit rheinmetall 's 120 & nbsp ; mm l55 smooth bore gun should additional funds be made available . the bae team includes general dynamics uk , qinetiq , leonardo , moog and safran . it is expected the lep modernization program could be worth around £650 million ( 802 million ) to the eventual winner . on 22 december 2016 , the assessment phase award to bae systems and rheinmetall land systeme gmbh to progress the challenger 2 life extension project was announced . in order to maintain the effectiveness of the thermal imaging system prior to the award and implementation of the cr2 lep , an interim £15.4 million '' challenger 2 thermal imaging sustainment project '' was awarded to bae systems on 15 december 2017 to '' demonstrate and manufacture '' a suitable interim solution separate to that incorporated in the lep . in october 2019 it was announced that thales would be supplying their catherine megapixel ( mp ) thermal imaging camera which forms part of the thermal imaging sub-system on the tank . in october 2018 , bae systems unveiled its proposed challenger 2 lep technology demonstrator , the “ black night ” . the new improvements include a safran paseo commander ’ s independent sight , leonardo thermal imager for the gunner , and leonardo night sight dnvs 4 . the black night challenger 2 turret has been modified to improve the speed of traverse and provides greater space as well as regenerative braking to generate and store power . other enhancements include a laser warning system and an active protection system . in january 2019 rheinmetall unveiled details of its proposal for the challenger 2 lep . the company ’ s solution has been to develop a completely new turret which has a fully digital electronic architecture , new day and night sights for the commander and gunner , and a rheinmetall l55 smoothbore 120 & nbsp ; mm gun . the turret was developed on rheinmetall ’ s own initiative and was not funded by the uk mod for the lep assessment phase . the smoothbore gun was not part of the mod ’ s lep requirement , with the request for proposals focusing on mission system obsolescence . the rheinmetall proposal is ambitious and is likely to be significantly more expensive than the bae systems ’ offering unveiled in 2018 . however , the new turret is necessary if a smoothbore gun is selected . if rheinmetall ’ s planned purchase of a 55 % stake in bae systems ’ uk operations is approved the lep competition between the companies will continue , an agreement with rheinmetall ensuring that the solution will be delivered from telford regardless of the contract winner . in october 2020 , the mod argued that the challenger 2 lep was a better course of action than purchasing similar tanks in nato armies , and that the upgraded challenger 2 would be '' comparable – and in certain areas superior '' to the leopard 2 and abrams . an oral evidence on 20 october 2020 stated at challenger 2 lep contract would still be subjected to the integrated review and the current fleet is 227 . . haaip . options for updating the automotive components of challenger 2 , and its associated variants , are being analysed separately from clep as part of the heavy armour automotive improvement programme ( haaip ) . haaip has already led to upgrades to the air filtration system , through the use of cleanable air filters with increased operating life , which were tested in exercise saif sareea 3 in october 2018 . the haaip programme , awarded to bae systems will also apply a common engine ( cv12-8a ) and suspension standard ( 3rd generation hydrogas ) to challenger 2 , crarrv , titan and trojan improving reliability . with regard to the powertrain , bae systems are evaluating whether to uprate the existing cv12 engine or swap this for alternative designs . the cv12 upgrade by caterpillar defense would fit electronically controlled common rail fuel injection and introduce engine health monitoring ( hums ) . this would increase the maximum power output to 1,500 & nbsp ; bhp , reduce battlefield smoke emissions , and improve fleet reliability and availability . / the engines and transmission units have themselves also been remanufactured in recent years . . variants . titan . the titan armoured bridge layer is based on aspects of the challenger 2 running gear and replaced the chieftain armoured vehicle launched bridge ( chavlb ) . the titan came into service in 2006 with the royal engineers , with 33 in service . titan can carry a single 26-metre-long bridge or two 12-metre-long bridges . it can also be fitted with a bulldozer blade . trojan . the trojan armoured vehicle royal engineers is a combat engineering vehicle designed as a replacement for the chieftain avre ( chavre ) . it uses the challenger 2 chassis , and carries an articulated excavator arm , a dozer blade , and attachment rails for fascines . entering service in 2007 , 33 were produced . challenger 2e . the challenger 2e is an export version of the tank . it has a new integrated weapon control and battlefield management system , which includes a gyrostabilised panoramic sagem mvs 580-day/thermal sight for the commander and sagem savan 15 gyrostabilised day/thermal sight for the gunner , both with eyesafe laser rangefinder . this allows hunter/killer operations with a common engagement sequence . an optional servo-controlled overhead weapons platform can be slaved to the commander 's sight to allow operation independent from the turret . the power pack has been replaced by a new europowerpack with a transversely mounted mtu mt883 diesel engine coupled to renk hswl 295tm automatic transmission . the increase in both vehicle performance and durability is significant . the smaller volume but more powerful europowerpack power pack additionally incorporates as standard a cooling system and air-intake filtration system proved in desert use . the free space in the hull is available for ammunition stowage or for fuel , increasing the vehicle 's range to . this powerpack was previously installed on the french leclerc tanks delivered to the uae as well as the recovery tank version of the leclerc in service with the french army . further developed versions of the europowerpack have more recently been installed in the latest serial produced korean k2 black panther tank as well as the new turkish altay tank . baes announced in 2005 that development and export marketing of 2e would stop . this has been linked by the media to the failure of the 2e to be selected for the hellenic army in 2002 , a competition won by the leopard 2 . . crarrv . the challenger armoured repair and recovery vehicle ( crarrv ) is an armoured recovery vehicle based on the challenger 1 hull ( with the updated challenger 2 powertrain ) and designed to repair and recover damaged tanks on the battlefield . it has five seats but usually carries a crew of three soldiers from the royal electrical and mechanical engineers ( reme ) , of the recovery mechanic and vehicle mechanic/technician trades . there is room in the cabin for two further passengers ( e.g . crew members of the casualty vehicle ) on a temporary basis . the size and performance are similar to the mbt , but instead of armament it is fitted with : a main winch with 50 tonnes-force pull in a 1:1 configuration or 98 tonnes-force pull using an included pulley in a 2:1 configuration and anchor point on the vehicle , plus a small auxiliary winch to aid in deploying the main winch rope . atlas crane capable of lifting at a distance of ( this is sufficient to lift a challenger 2 power pack ) . in order to improve flexibility and supplement the transportation of power packs around the battlefield , the british army procured a quantity of dedicated crarrv high mobility trailers ( crarrv hmt ) . each crarrv hmt enables a crarrv to transport a single ( challenger , titan or trojan ) power pack or two warrior power packs , by altering the configuration of dedicated fixtures and attachment of fittings . dozer blade to use as an earth anchor/stabiliser , or in obstacle clearance and fire position preparation . large set of recovery and heavy repair tools including a man-portable ultrathermic cutting system with an underwater cutting capability and a man-portable welder . the design prototype is on display at the reme museum at mod lyneham , wiltshire . operators . : british army – 408 delivered ( 227 in service as of 2016 , 59 used for training and remainder held in storage ) the household cavalry & royal armoured corps : royal army of oman – 38 delivered . accidents . on 14 june 2017 , a challenger 2 from the royal tank regiment suffered an ammunition explosion during live firing exercises at the castlemartin range in pembrokeshire . the tank was firing 120 & nbsp ; mm practice shells with a standard propellant charge . the explosion critically injured the four-man crew , with two later dying of their wounds in hospital . the incident resulted in all british army tank firing exercises being suspended for 48 hours while the cause of the explosion was investigated . the extent of the damage to the tank , if any , is unknown . it was later determined that a bolt vent axial ( bva ) seal assembly had been removed during an earlier exercise and had yet to be replaced at the time of the incident , thus allowing explosive gases to enter the turret space ; the lack of a written process for removal and replacement of the seal assembly meant that the crew at the time of the incident was unaware of its absence , and it was also noted that inadequate consideration had been given during the production of the l30 gun as to whether it could be fired without the seal assembly . a second explosion that occurred during the incident was attributed to the detonation of bag charges that had been stowed outside of the internal ammunition bins ( rather than inside the bins as per correct procedure ) .