Gay Games

federation of gay games . the federation of gay games ( fgg ) is the sanctioning body of the gay games which was founded in 1982 by tom waddell , after he dealt first-hand with the prejudice towards gay athletes and their inability to openly participate in sporting events . the federation of gay games hosts the world 's biggest cultural and sporting event for the lgbt community every four years . the federation of gay games is founded on the principles of '' participation , inclusion , and personal best '' and continues to support the lgbt community not only through the gay games but through scholarships for underprivileged members . the federation of gay games continues to expand throughout the world and accepts members of any sexual orientation and nationality to participate in the games or contribute . the fgg is planning on hosting the next gay games in 2022 in hong kong . from its statement of concept and purpose : . controversies . lawsuit over 'gay olympics ' name . tom waddell , the former olympian who helped found the games , intended them to be called the '' gay olympics '' , but a lawsuit filed less than three weeks before 1982 's inaugural gay olympics forced the name change . this forced volunteers to suspend the sales of buttons and t-shirts in order to remove the terms '' olympic '' and '' olympiad '' from medals , souvenirs , t-shirts , signs , and programs , which would cost the organization an estimated loss between 15,000 and 30,000 . event organizers were sued by the international olympic committee ( ioc ) under the u.s . amateur sports act of 1978 , which gave the usoc exclusive rights to the word olympic in the united states . defendants of the lawsuit contended that the law was capriciously applied and that if the special olympics were not similarly prohibited , the gay olympics should not be either . others , like daniel bell , cite the ioc 's long history of protecting the olympics brand as evidence that the lawsuit against the '' gay olympics '' was not motivated by discrimination against gays . since 1910 the ioc has taken action , including lawsuits and expulsion from the ioc , to stop certain organizations from using the word '' olympics . '' annual '' california police olympics '' were held for 22 years , from 1967 through 1989 , after which , the word olympics was no longer used for the event . the supreme court ruled for the usoc in san francisco arts & athletics , inc . v . united states olympic committee . a 2009 documentary film , claiming the title : gay olympics on trial , was created in the united states and was previewed at several film festivals . the subject was also included in a 2005 film by david sector , take the flame ! gay games : grace grit & glory . in the years since the lawsuit , the olympics and the gay games have set aside their initial hostilities and worked cooperatively together , successfully lobbying to have hiv travel restrictions waived for the 1994 gay games in new york and the 1996 summer olympics in atlanta . roger brigham , '' invading the comfort zone '' , bay area reporter ( 17 june 2009 ) : . plans to launch gay winter games in fall 1986 . plans to launch a complementary gay winter games , scheduled for february 1986 in minneapolis–saint paul , collapsed , due to a lack of sufficient funding and logistical problems . there have been no subsequent attempts to launch a gay winter games since , although whistler , british columbia , canada , hosts an annual gay winter-sports festival . . schism in lgbt sports communities over gay games & nbsp ; vii . in 2001 , the bidding organization from montreal , quebec , canada , won the right to negotiate with the fgg for a licensing agreement to host the 2006 gay games , but after two years of failed negotiations montreal broke off talks at the 2003 fgg annual meeting in chicago . there were three main points of contention , over which neither party could agree : the size of the event the size of the budget especially the planned break-even participation point financial transparency in a weakening global economy following international terrorist attacks , including the september 11 attacks , the fgg wanted montreal to be able to plan for a successful gay games even if participation did not meet montreal 's optimistic projection of 24,000 participants , twice the level of participation of the previous gay games in 2002 . due to financial problems in previous events , the fgg also asked for transparency into montreal 2006 's financial activities . after montreal refused to continue talks , the fgg held a second round of bidding in which chicago and los angeles bidders , who had put forth well-received bids to host the 2006 games in the first round along with montreal and atlanta , chose to bid . ultimately , the fgg awarded gay games vii to chicago games , inc . the montreal organizing committee nevertheless decided to proceed to hold an athletic and cultural event without the sanction of the fgg ; this plan developed into the first edition of the world outgames , and the creation of its licensing body , the gay and lesbian international sport association . due to limited personal and organizational resources , many individual and team participants were forced to choose between gay games vii and 2006 world outgames , a situation exacerbated by the two events being a week apart . the closing ceremony of gay games chicago on july 22 , 2006 , was only seven days before the opening ceremony of world outgames montreal on july 29 , 2006 . this meant that those who competed or performed in chicago would have little recovery time before montreal . the split resulted in a lower quality of athletic competition at both events because neither could claim the whole field of competitors . team and individual sports were hurt alike . few teams were able to field complete squads for both events . in wrestling , 100 wrestlers competed in chicago ( comparable to previous gay games ) , but only 22 competed in montreal , by far the lowest number for any major international tournament . there were some advantages to the games being so close together time wise and location wise . for some overseas participants who had to travel far , the convenience of the two events being only a week apart and not far from each other enabled them to attend both . many did not attend at all . after chicago drew 9,112 sport and cultural participants , of which 7,929 were from the usa . montreal drew 10,248 athletes , 1,516 conference attendees and 835 people to the cultural component of the games reflecting more than 111 countries more 60 % of the organization 's original projections . '' since 2006 , the need for a secondary global multisport event has been the subject of much debate , especially after the final financial figures for 2006 were released . in 2012 , a round of negotiations between the fgg and glisa ended after a mutually agreed deadline . the board of glisa unanimously agree to the proposal set forth by the negotiation teams , however the fgg board did not reciprocate . the chicago gay games vii ended with no debt and all bills paid . in contrast , the montreal world outgames ended with 5.3 million ( canadian ) of debt . in addition , the lack of attendees and participants at both events resulted in glisa ( the organization which heads the outgames ) changing the years of the event to precede the years of the gay games , meaning that the world outgames were held in 2009 in copenhagen and the gay games held in cologne in 2010 , while the world outgames were held in 2013 in antwerp and gay games were held in 2014 in cleveland , ohio . media impact of aids on the gay games . before and during the time of the 1986 gay games there was mass media about acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( aids ) and how it was affecting the gay community . with the number of lgbt members at the gay games the founder waddell took this time try and break the stereotype of the aids with a show of athleticism the gay games had to offer . this also was a time that volunteers would provide safe sex materials along with condoms to educate the public .