Russian Germans in North America

areas of immigration . unlike many other immigrants to the americas during the late 19th and early 20th centuries , germans from russia wanted to continue farming and settled in agricultural areas rather than industrial cities . primary areas were the plains states of illinois , nebraska , kansas , north and south dakota , with some movement to specific areas of washington and california ( fresno and lodi for instance ) in the united states ; saskatchewan and manitoba of canada ; and brazil and argentina . these areas tended to resemble the flat plains of the russian steppes . in addition , the upper great plains still had arable land available for free settlement under the homestead act . in the 2000 census , north dakota reported 43.9 % of the population identified as having german ancestry . in 1910 , 5 % of the population of north dakota had been born in russia ; it is likely most were ethnic germans . large-scale immigration to the americas started in the 1870s and continued until the 1917 revolution , when travel and emigration were stopped . since the reunification of germany after the fall of the berlin wall and declining conditions in russia , many ethnic germans still living in the lands of the former soviet union sought german repatriation . united states : volga germans . germans from russia were the most traditional of german-speaking arrivals . about 100,000 volga germans immigrated by 1900 , settling primarily in the dakotas , kansas and nebraska . the south-central part of north dakota was known as '' the german-russian triangle '' . a smaller number moved farther west , finding employment as ranchers and cowboys . the largest groups settled mainly in the great plains : north dakota , south dakota , kansas and nearby areas in the us . outside that area , they also settled in iowa , michigan , minnesota , new york , oregon , washington , wisconsin , and fresno county in california 's central valley . they often succeeded in dryland farming , which they had practiced in russia . many of the immigrants who arrived between 1870 and 1912 spent a period doing farm labor , especially in northeastern colorado and in montana along the lower yellowstone river in sugar beet fields . their family and community lifestyle , and contribution to the sugar beet industry on the plains of colorado is well-documented in '' work renders life sweet : germans from russia in fort collins , 1900 - 2000 '' . they were often sugar beet farmers most everywhere they settled - nebraska , southern michigan , colorado , and fresno , california . cities . other volga germans made new lives in the industrializing american cities , especially chicago , which had an immense upsurge in immigration from eastern europe during this time . today chicago has the largest number of ethnic volga germans in north america . the largest area of concentrated settlement was in jefferson park on the city 's northwest side , mostly between the years 1907-1920 . by 1930 , 450 families of the evangelical faith were living in this area , most of whom originated from wiesenseite . '' german russians in chicagoland '' , newsletter , march 1995 , american historical society of germans from russia later during the period of suburbanization , many of their descendants moved out to outlying areas such as maywood and melrose park . a number of families living in the jefferson park central business district along lawrence and milwaukee avenue have volga german immigrant ancestors . image : gateway theatre ( chicago ) . jpg thumb right during the first two decades of the 20th century , the chicago neighborhood of jefferson park was the point of initial settlement for many volga german immigrants . wheat . warkentin house was born in a small russian village in 1847 , and travelled to america in his early twenties . interested in flour mills , he was especially impressed with the wheat-growing possibilities in the united states . after visiting kansas , warkentin found the great plains much like those he had left behind . settling in harvey county , he built a water mill on the banks of the little arkansas river – the halstead milling and elevator company . warkentin 's greatest contribution to kansas was the introduction of hard turkey wheat into kansas , which replaced the soft variety grown exclusively in the state . culture . negatively influenced by the violation of their rights and cultural persecution by the tsar , the germans from russia who settled in the northern midwest saw themselves a downtrodden ethnic group separate from russian americans and having an entirely different experience from the german americans who had immigrated from german lands ; they settled in tight-knit communities that retained their german language and culture . they raised large families , built german-style churches , buried their dead in distinctive cemeteries using cast iron grave markers , and created choir groups that sang german church hymns . many farmers specialized in sugar beets—still a major crop in the upper great plains . during world war i their identity was challenged by anti-german sentiment . by the end of the world war ii , the german language , which had always been used with english for public and official matters , was in serious decline . today german is preserved mainly through singing groups and recipes , with the germans from russia in the northern great plains states speaking predominantly english . german remains the second most spoken language in north and south dakota , and germans from russia sometimes use loanwords , such as kuchen for cake , although the word is primarily used for the sweet bread dessert made in a pie plate with topping like fruits or cottage cheese . this latter kind of kuchen has been the state dessert of south dakota since 2013 . kuchen despite the loss of their language , the ethnic group remains distinct and has left a lasting impression on the american west . elwyn b . robinson , history of north dakota ( 1966 ) pp . 285-87 , 557 ; gordon l . iseminger , '' are we germans , or russians , or americans ? the mcintosh county german-russians during world war i '' , north dakota history 1992 59 ( 2 ) : 2-16 . . memory . during the 1970s , dr . kenneth rock , a professor of history at colorado state university , collected sixty oral histories of german russian immigrants and their descendants as part of the '' germans from russia in colorado '' study project . it documented life in the ethnic german communities in russia , the immigration experience , work and social life in the united states , and interaction between the german-russian communities and the wider society in both russia and the united states . they were often described as looking like russians , but sounding like germans . approximately one million descendants of germans from russia live in the united states . chronology : the germans in america ( european reading room , library of congress ) modern descendants in canada and the united states refer to their heritage as germans from russia , russian germans , volgadeutsch or black sea germans . in many parts of the united states , they tend to have blended to a large degree with the '' regular '' german americans who are much more numerous in the northern half of the united states . canada . background . in addition to the large population of volga germans that settled on the american prairie , many also settled in the canadian west . beginning in the early 1870s , the canadian government had created promotional programs in europe to entice settlers to the largely unsettled western areas , in what would become alberta , saskatchewan , manitoba , and british columbia . heier , edmund . “ the immigration of the russo-german catholics and lutherans into canada . ” canadian slavonic papers / revue canadienne des slavistes 4 ( january 1 , 1959 ) : 160–175 . doi:10.2307/40866073 . public policy also served to attract immigration following the passage of the land act of 1872 , which provided free grants of homesteads to those who settled on the western prairie . in the early twentieth century , many immigrants moved from the united states to canada in search of inexpensive land , and still greater social autonomy . peters , victor . “ rußlanddeutsche in der kanadischen präire . ” globus spezial ( n.d . ) : 191–192 . these german-american immigrants brought not only their experience working on the american plains , but had also accrued wealth , giving a much needed boost to the economy of the western provinces . . 1875-1918 . the volga germans that flocked to canada in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries came from different religious backgrounds including lutheran , catholic , and mennonite . it was this last group , named after leader menno simons , that constituted the largest portion of the immigrant population . in russia they had proven the best organized , preparing scouting parties to investigate the prospect of immigration to canada and the united states . these scouts had been reliant on the assistance of established mennonite groups such as those found in pennsylvania dutch , and ontario . in the period 1873-1879 , mennonites formed blocked settlements in manitoba with a total of close to 7000 members . most settled in southern manitoba in the richest part of the red river valley . haslam , j . h . “ the canadianization of the immigrant settler . ” annals of the american academy of political and social science 107 ( may 1 , 1923 ) : 45–49 . doi:10.2307/1014693 . these communities were centered around religious homogeneity , and insistence on the tenets of adult baptism , and the refusal to bear arms or swear an oath . moelleken , wolfgang w . “ diaphonic correspondences in the low german of mennonites from the fraser valley , british columbia . ” zeitschrift für mundartforschung 34 , no . 3/4 ( december 1 , 1967 ) : 240–253 . doi:10.2307/40500396 . many mennonites had been propelled to leave because of the introduction of extended conscription , put in place in 1874 , but set to take effect in russia in 1881 . many volga germans emigrated from the united states to the western provinces in the period 1890-1909 . they sought to escape rising land prices , and imposition of laws that began to encroach on their relative autonomy . canada was seen as a new frontier , a place of vast land , but little settlement . these immigrants settled mainly in the colonies of st . peter and st . joseph , east and west of saskatoon in central saskatchewan . in the 1890s , twelve catholic families established rastadt-dorf , and another twenty-one settled katherinetal . additional settlements were begun in davin , kronau , and speyer as well . anderson , alan b . “ st . joseph ’ s colony , katherinetal colony , kronau-rastadt , and odessa ( 1886-1904 ) . ” german settlements in saskatchewan : the origin and development of german catholic , lutheran , baptist , mennonite , and huttere communities ( n.d . ) . . between the world wars . in the period between world war i and world war ii , conditions in russia worsened , especially following the revolution and the great famine of 1921 . many volga germans sought to leave the ussr , but faced opposition from a government that did not wish to see so large a portion of its population leave . the russian government imposed a fee for obtaining a passport , which led to protests as many would-be immigrants flooded the streets of moscow . many mennonites were eventually able to leave , and between the world wars , over 20,000 left destined for canada . beginning in the second decade of the twentieth century , and continuing until several years after the second world war , the ethnic background of the volga germans made them prey to discrimination . by 1914 , germany had become canada 's enemy , and the volga germans were not immune despite many families having not set foot in germany for hundreds of years . this period saw the suppression of many german cultural customs , including the suppression of their print media , and the closure of german schools . the wartime elections act , passed in september 1917 , revoked the citizenship of any german naturalized after march , 1902 . many settlements were renamed to disguise their obvious german origin . the 1920s period also saw the movement of volga germans within western canada as well . many pushed further west , settling in british columbia . the area had the appeal of a warmer climate , an escape from the frigid prairie . other volga germans were propelled by economic factors such as the great depression , which not only impoverished many , but also coincided with a tremendous drought ushering in crop failures . the economy of the prairie provinces , and much of canada , was dependent on the success of wheat farming . wheat had been a staple crop for the volga germans in russia , and translated well to the climate of the canadian west . repeated crop failures meant a large influx of the german-russian population into larger cities and towns , a fact that would contribute to the gradual decline of their culturally homogeneous communities . the prairie lands abutting the united states border experienced dust bowl conditions , which sent swarms of families to the coastal areas of british columbia . friesen , gerald ( 1987 ) . the canadian prairies : a history ( student ed . ) . toronto and london : university of toronto press . pp . 383–417 . throughout the period following world war ii , new immigrants joined their families in british columbia , congregating in the fraser valley , and vancouver island . goerz , h . “ german russians in british columbia , canada , ” n.d . the mid-twentieth century brought immigrants from south american regions , namely argentina and brazil , as they fought to maintain their cultural autonomy in increasingly nationalist areas , dominated by nationalist leaders like juan perón . koch , fred c . the volga germans : in russia and the americas , from 1763 to the present . penn state press , 1978 . lutheran and catholic volga germans were also significant migrants to canada , but lacked the organization of their mennonite brethren . early on , these immigrants were more likely to settle in saskatchewan , especially around the city of regina . despite their location near earlier mennonite communities , settlements remained religiously homogenous . legacy . throughout their history in the canadian west , the volga germans have been able to maintain many of their cultural characteristics , including their dialect , proliferated through saturday schools and canadian policies that allowed for cultural freedom . these schools operated on saturday mornings for around three hours , and became especially vital as the german language was no longer taught in the canadian public school system after world war i . the mennonites , unlike most volga germans , were able to maintain these schools even after world war ii . the dialect of the volga germans was also maintained through the church , especially in the mennonite community . magocsi , paul robert . encyclopedia of canada ’ s peoples . university of toronto press , 1999 . before the volga germans had left for north america they had been regarded as privileged colonists in russia . when they arrived in the united states and canada they found that they were treated the same as any other eastern european migrant group . kloberdanz , timothy j . “ the volga germans in old russia and in western north america : their changing world view . ” anthropological quarterly 48 , no . 4 ( october 1 , 1975 ) : 209–222 . doi:10.2307/3316632 . the mennonites may be seen as an exception as they successfully used connections with their brethren in lancaster county , pennsylvania , and ontario . through their hard work on the north american plains , they established themselves as a productive portion of canadian and american society . language . the germans from russia originally spoke german dialects such as the palatine dialect or mennonite low german ( plautdietsch ) at home . since the villages in russia often were populated by settlers from a particular region and were isolated from germany , they maintained their regional dialects . depending on their specific dialect , germans from russia had difficulties understanding standard german , because german dialects in general differ greatly from the standard language . after emigrating from russia to the americas the germans still spoke with their german dialects . in the 1950s it was still common for the children in the dakotas to speak in english and the parents and grandparents to use german . songs in church would be sung in two languages simultaneously . probably the person best known for having a '' german from russia accent '' in english ( a result of having learned english as a second language ) was bandleader and television star lawrence welk . notable descendants of germans from russia . philip anschutz , businessman craig bohl , football coach tom daschle , former u.s . senate majority leader john denver ( henry john deutschendorf , jr . ) , singer paul revere dick , paul revere and the raiders angie dickinson , actress chris isaak , singer-songwriter bernd leno , football player randy meisner , musician and former band member of the eagles roman neustädter , football player brian schweitzer , former governor of montana true ( artist ) , filmmaker brian urlacher , former american football player lawrence welk , band leader carson wentz , football player joe exotic , felonious zookeeper johnny hopp , baseball player . see also . black sea germans bessarabia germans der staats anzeiger , their north dakota newspaper history of germans in russia and the soviet union history of saskatchewan russian mennonites hutterites . notes . see for an explanation of how to generate footnotes using the and tags , and the template below . -- > . further reading . gross , fred william . '' type and nature of german publications in north dakota , '' heritage review ( 1993 ) 23 4 pp 34–38 . iseminger , gordon l . '' are we germans , or russians , or americans ? the mcintosh county german-russians during world war i '' , north dakota history ( 1992 ) 59 2 pp : 2-16 . koch , fred c . the volga germans : in russia and the americas , from 1763 to the present ( 1977 ) . kloberdanz , timothy j . “ the volga germans in old russia and in western north america : their changing world view . ” anthropological quarterly 48 , no . 4 ( october 1 , 1975 ) : 209–222 . doi:10.2307/3316632 . rempfer , michael , and james gessele , '' der staats-anzeiger : ' salute to its centennial founding . '' heritage review ( 2006 ) 36 3 pp 37–42 sackett , s . j . '' history of the volga germans in ellis and rush counties , kansas . '' ( 1976 ) . online . external links . american historical society of germans from russia germans from russia heritage society german-russian settlement map germans from russia settlement locations on google map germans from volhynia - genealogy , culture , history jewishgen gazetteer manifesto of the empress catherine ii issued july 22 , 1763 vistula germans - history and map settlements by religion de : russlanddeutsche