Virtual particle

properties . the concept of virtual particles arises in the perturbation theory of quantum field theory , an approximation scheme in which interactions ( in essence , forces ) between actual particles are calculated in terms of exchanges of virtual particles . such calculations are often performed using schematic representations known as feynman diagrams , in which virtual particles appear as internal lines . by expressing the interaction in terms of the exchange of a virtual particle with four-momentum , where is given by the difference between the four-momenta of the particles entering and leaving the interaction vertex , both momentum and energy are conserved at the interaction vertices of the feynman diagram . a virtual particle does not precisely obey the energy–momentum relation most of these have analogous effects in solid-state physics ; indeed , one can often gain a better intuitive understanding by examining these cases . in semiconductors , the roles of electrons , positrons and photons in field theory are replaced by electrons in the conduction band , holes in the valence band , and phonons or vibrations of the crystal lattice . a virtual particle is in a virtual state where the probability amplitude is not conserved . examples of macroscopic virtual phonons , photons , and electrons in the case of the tunneling process were presented by günter nimtz and alfons a . stahlhofen . . feynman diagrams . the calculation of scattering amplitudes in theoretical particle physics requires the use of some rather large and complicated integrals over a large number of variables . these integrals do , however , have a regular structure , and may be represented as feynman diagrams . the appeal of the feynman diagrams is strong , as it allows for a simple visual presentation of what would otherwise be a rather arcane and abstract formula . in particular , part of the appeal is that the outgoing legs of a feynman diagram can be associated with actual , on-shell particles . thus , it is natural to associate the other lines in the diagram with particles as well , called the '' virtual particles '' . in mathematical terms , they correspond to the propagators appearing in the diagram . in the adjacent image , the solid lines correspond to actual particles ( of momentum p 1 and so on ) , while the dotted line corresponds to a virtual particle carrying momentum k . for example , if the solid lines were to correspond to electrons interacting by means of the electromagnetic interaction , the dotted line would correspond to the exchange of a virtual photon . in the case of interacting nucleons , the dotted line would be a virtual pion . in the case of quarks interacting by means of the strong force , the dotted line would be a virtual gluon , and so on . virtual particles may be mesons or vector bosons , as in the example above ; they may also be fermions . however , in order to preserve quantum numbers , most simple diagrams involving fermion exchange are prohibited . the image to the right shows an allowed diagram , a one-loop diagram . the solid lines correspond to a fermion propagator , the wavy lines to bosons . vacuums . in formal terms , a particle is considered to be an eigenstate of the particle number operator a † a , where a is the particle annihilation operator and a † the particle creation operator ( sometimes collectively called ladder operators ) . in many cases , the particle number operator does not commute with the hamiltonian for the system . this implies the number of particles in an area of space is not a well-defined quantity but , like other quantum observables , is represented by a probability distribution . since these particles do not have a permanent existence , they are called virtual particles or vacuum fluctuations of vacuum energy . in a certain sense , they can be understood to be a manifestation of the time-energy uncertainty principle in a vacuum . an important example of the '' presence '' of virtual particles in a vacuum is the casimir effect . here , the explanation of the effect requires that the total energy of all of the virtual particles in a vacuum can be added together . thus , although the virtual particles themselves are not directly observable in the laboratory , they do leave an observable effect : their zero-point energy results in forces acting on suitably arranged metal plates or dielectrics . on the other hand , the casimir effect can be interpreted as the relativistic van der waals force . . pair production . virtual particles are often popularly described as coming in pairs , a particle and antiparticle which can be of any kind . these pairs exist for an extremely short time , and then mutually annihilate , or in some cases , the pair may be boosted apart using external energy so that they avoid annihilation and become actual particles , as described below . this may occur in one of two ways . in an accelerating frame of reference , the virtual particles may appear to be actual to the accelerating observer ; this is known as the unruh effect . in short , the vacuum of a stationary frame appears , to the accelerated observer , to be a warm gas of actual particles in thermodynamic equilibrium . another example is pair production in very strong electric fields , sometimes called vacuum decay . if , for example , a pair of atomic nuclei are merged to very briefly form a nucleus with a charge greater than about 140 , ( that is , larger than about the inverse of the fine structure constant , which is a dimensionless quantity ) , the strength of the electric field will be such that it will be energetically favorable to create positron-electron pairs out of the vacuum or dirac sea , with the electron attracted to the nucleus to annihilate the positive charge . this pair-creation amplitude was first calculated by julian schwinger in 1951 . compared to actual particles . as a consequence of quantum mechanical uncertainty , any object or process that exists for a limited time or in a limited volume can not have a precisely defined energy or momentum . for this reason , virtual particles & ndash ; which exist only temporarily as they are exchanged between ordinary particles & ndash ; do not typically obey the mass-shell relation ; the longer a virtual particle exists , the more the energy and momentum approach the mass-shell relation . the lifetime of real particles is typically vastly longer than the lifetime of the virtual particles . electromagnetic radiation consists of real photons which may travel light years between the emitter and absorber , but ( coulombic ) electrostatic attraction and repulsion is a relatively short-range force that is a consequence of the exchange of virtual photons . see also . anomalous photovoltaic effect force carrier quasiparticle static forces and virtual-particle exchange vacuum genesis vacuum rabi oscillation virtual state virtual black hole . footnotes . references . external links . are virtual particles really constantly popping in and out of existence ? – gordon kane , director of the michigan center for theoretical physics at the university of michigan at ann arbor , proposes an answer at the scientific american website . virtual particles : what are they ? d kaiser ( 2005 ) american scientist 93 p . 156 popular article