Ælfgifu of Northampton

biography . family background . ælfgifu was born into an important noble family based in the midlands ( mercia ) . she was a daughter of ælfhelm , ealdorman of southern northumbria , and his wife wulfrun . ælfhelm was killed in 1006 , probably at the command of king æthelred the unready , and ælfgifu 's brothers , ufegeat and wulfheah , were blinded . wulfric spot , a wealthy nobleman and patron of burton abbey , was the brother of ælfhelm or wulfrune . the family again came under suspicion during the invasion of england by swein forkbeard , king of denmark , in 1013–14 , and further members were charged with treachery and killed . it is possible that ælfgifu was a kinswoman of the wife of ælfgar , earl of mercia , also called ælfgifu . . marriage to cnut . when swein invaded , northern peoples , many of them of scandinavian descent , immediately submitted to him . he then married his young son cnut to ælfgifu to seal their loyalty . swein went on to conquer the whole of england and was accepted as king , but he died in february 1014 after a reign of only five weeks . æthelred then sent an army which forced cnut to flee back to denmark , and in the opinion of historian ian howard , he left his wife and their baby son , svein , the future king of norway , behind with her family . they were anxious to make their peace with æthelred , but unwilling to hand ælfgifu and her son over to æthelred to be killed , so they sent the mother and child with king swein 's body to denmark . there she became pregnant again and in 1015 or 1016 she gave birth to harold harefoot . ian howard , harthacnut : the last danish king of england , the history press , 2008 , pp . 13–4 . pauline stafford , in her online dnb article on ælfgifu states only that the marriage took place between 1013 and 1016 , but she also states that the marriage was part of swein 's effort to establish himself first in the north midlands , and as he died in february 1014 it seems likely that the 1013 date is correct . in the period immediately following , she may have been given authority over some region of denmark , perhaps that of a danish controlled area of the baltic coastline . timothy bolton , 'ælfgifu of northampton : cnut the great 's other woman ' , nottingham medieval studies li ( 2007 ) , pp . 260–261 her two sons were to figure prominently in the empire which their father built in northern europe , though not without opposition . after his conquest of england in 1016 , cnut married emma of normandy , the widow of king æthelred . it was then regarded as acceptable to put aside one wife and take another if the first wife was acquired through the non-christian pagan ceremony of '' handfasting '' and nearly always for reasons of political advantage , a practice which might be described as '' serial monogamy '' ; this was the case with the marriage of ælfgifu to cnut . howard , op . cit . , p . 15 the status of cnut 's two 'marriages ' and their social context in england and scandinavia has been discussed recently by timothy bolton . timothy bolton , 'ælfgifu of northampton : cnut the great 's other woman ' , nottingham medieval studies li ( 2007 ) , pp . 253–258 emma 's sons , edward and ælfred by æthelred and harthacnut by cnut , were also claimants to the throne of her husband . exactly how the second marriage affected ælfgifu 's status as cnut 's first consort is unknown , but there is no evidence to suggest that she was repudiated . regent in norway ( 1030–35 ) . after the defeat and death of olaf ii of norway by forces loyal to cnut , cnut sent ælfgifu with their eldest son svein to rule norway , in 1030 . their rule was , however , so harsh that the norwegians rebelled against them . they were driven out , in 1034 or 1035 , while svein died of wounds in denmark shortly after , probably in 1036 . in norway , where she was known as álfífa in old norse , this period entered history as 'álfífa 's time ' ( álfífuǫld ) , remembered for her severe rule and heavy taxation . in the norwegian ágrip , for instance , the following verse is attributed to her contemporary , the skald sigvatr : : ælfgyfu 's time : long will the young man remember , : when they at home ate ox 's food , : and like the goats , ate rind ; m.j . driscoll ( ed . and tr . ) , ágrip af nóregskonungasǫgum , pp . 44–5 ( § 32 ) . succession crisis after the death of cnut ( 1035 ) . cnut died at shaftesbury in 1035 . symeon of durham and adam of bremen suggest that cnut had reserved the english throne for harold , while the encomium emmae reginae , written to defend harthacnut 's mother , emma , claims that he had done so for harthacnut . ælfgifu was determined that her second son harold should be the next english king . she had returned to england ( at least ) by 1036 , while emma 's son harthacnut was away in denmark , at war with the norwegian king magnus i , and the swedes under their king anund jacob . emma 's other sons , ælfred and edward , stayed in normandy . with help from her supporters , ælfgifu was able to secure the throne for her son . in the view of frank stenton , she was probably the real ruler of england for part , if not the whole , of his reign . frank stenton , anglo-saxon england , oxford university press : oxford , 1971 , p . 421 . the anglo-saxon chronicle ( versions c , d and e ) describes how harold and his men forcefully laid claim on the treasury housed in winchester , where cnut was buried and emma ( whom the anglo-saxons also referred to as '' ælfgifu '' the queen ) had taken up residence : manuscript e , which is known for its godwinist sympathies , adds a number of details , including the assembly at oxford in 1037 at which harold was elected king of england and the mustering of support north of the thames , where the power base of ælfgifu 's family was concentrated . during 1036 opinion in england moved towards harold . by august a report had reached emma 's daughter , gunnhild , at the german court that her '' unhappy and unjust step-mother '' ( i.e . ælfgifu ) was working to deprive gunnhild 's brother , harthacnut , of the kingdom by holding great feasts , and trying by argument and gifts to persuade the leading nobles to give their fealty to harold . stevenson ( 1913 ) , cited in pauline stafford , queen emma & queen edith , blackwell , 1001 , p . 238 emma 's encomiast attributes to her even more seriously dishonest methods . she makes ælfgifu an accomplice in the murder of emma 's youngest son , alfred , by suggesting that she was responsible for sending a forged letter to normandy inviting alfred to england . the encomium emmae reginae also claimed that ælfgifu 's son harold was a servant 's son . ælfgifu is not recorded after 1036 , apart from a possible reference to her as the '' lady '' , and it is not known when she died . stafford , ælfgifu . family tree . notes . primary sources . anglo-saxon chronicle , mss c , d and e , ed . d . dumville and s . keynes , the anglo-saxon chronicle . a colloborative edition . cambridge , 1983 ; tr . m.j . swanton , the anglo-saxon chronicles . 2nd ed . london , 2000 . encomium emmae reginae , ed . and tr . alistair campbell , encomium emmae reginae . cambridge , 1998 . letter of immo , chaplain at the court of worms , to bishop azeko of worms , preserved in the lorsch manuscript , codex palatinus latinus 930 ( vatican library ) , ed . w . bulst , die ältere wormser briefsammlung . mgh epistolae . die briefe der deutschen kaiserzeit 3 . weimar , 1949 . 20–2 ( no . 5 . ) . available from the digital mgh . william of malmesbury , gesta regum anglorum , ed . and tr . r.a.b . mynors , r . m . thomson and m . winterbottom , william of malmesbury . gesta regum anglorum . the history of the english kings . omt . 2 vols : vol 1 . oxford , 1998 . symeon of durham , ed . t . arnold , symeonis monachi opera omnia . 2 vols . london , 1885 . john of worcester , chronicle ( of chronicles ) , ed . benjamin thorpe , florentii wigorniensis monachi chronicon ex chronicis . 2 vols . london , 1848–9 . ágrip af nóregskonungasögum §§ 27 , 32 , 35 , ed . and tr . m.j . driscoll , ágrip af nóregskonungasǫgum . viking society for northern research text series 10 . 2nd ed . 2008 ( 1995 ) . available online from the viking society for northern research theodoric the monk , historia de antiquitate regum norwagiensium , chapter 21 , tr . david and ian mcdougall . the ancient history of the norwegian kings . viking society for northern research , 1998 . legendary saga of st . olaf ch . 71 morkinskinna , ed . finnur jónsson . morkinskinna . copenhagen : samfund til udgivelse af gammel nordisk litteratur , 1932 . adam of bremen , gesta hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum . the chronicle of hugh candidus . secondary literature . campbell , m.w . '' queen emma and ælfgifu of northampton . canute the great 's women . '' medieval scandinavia 4 ( 1971 ) : 60–79 . rognoni , l . ( 2004 ) . '' presenza e azione di ælfgifu di northampton , regina madre e reggente nell'impero del nord di canuto il grande ( 1013–1040 ) '' ( in italian ) stenton , frank . anglo-saxon england . oxford , 1971 . 397–8 . stevenson , w.h . '' an alleged son of king harold harefoot . '' english historical review 28 ( 1913 ) : 112–7 .