Bicycle brake

history . karl drais included a pivoting brake shoe that could be pressed against the rear iron tyre of his 1817 laufmaschine . this was continued on the earliest bicycles with pedals , such as the boneshaker , which were fitted with a spoon brake to press onto the rear wheel . the brake was operated by a lever or by a cord connecting to the handlebars . the rider could also slow down by resisting the pedals of the fixed wheel drive . the next development of the bicycle , the penny-farthings , were similarly braked with a spoon brake or by back pedalling . during its development from 1870 to 1878 , there were various designs for brakes , most of them operating on the rear wheel . however , as the rear wheel became smaller and smaller , with more of the rider 's weight over the front wheel , braking on the rear wheel became less effective . the front brake , introduced by john kean in 1873 , had been generally adopted by 1880 because of its greater stopping power . some penny-farthing riders used only back pedalling and got off and walked down steep hills , but most also used a brake . having a brake meant that riders could coast down hill by taking their feet off the pedals and placing the legs over the handlebars , although most riders preferred to dismount and walk down steep hills . putting the legs under the handlebars with the feet off the pedals placed on foot-rests on the forks had resulted in serious accidents caused by the feet getting caught in the spokes . an alternative to the spoon brake for penny-farthings was the caliper brake patented by browett and harrison in 1887 . this early version of caliper braking used a rubber block to contact the outside of the penny-farthing 's small rear tyre . the 1870s and 1880s saw the development of the safety bicycle which roughly resembles bicycles today , with two wheels of equal size , initially with solid rubber tyres . these were typically equipped with a front spoon brake and no rear brake mechanism , but like penny-farthings they used fixed gears , allowing rear wheel braking by resisting the motion of the pedals . the relative fragility of the wooden rims used on most bicycles still precluded the use of rim brakes . in the late 1890s came the introduction of rim brakes and the freewheel . with the introduction of mass-produced bicycle tire by the dunlop rubber , the use of spoon brakes began to decline , as they tended to quickly wear through the thin casing of the new tyres . this problem led to demands for alternative braking systems . on november 23 , 1897 , abram w . duck of duck 's cyclery in oakland , california was granted a patent for his duck roller brake ( u.s . patent 594,234 ) . duck , abram w . , united states patent office , letters patent no . 594,234 , november 23 , 1897 the duck brake used a rod operated by a lever on the handlebar to pull twin rubber rollers against the front tyre , braking the front wheel . duck , abram w . , patent no . 594,234 in 1898 , after the advent of freewheel coasting mechanisms , the first internal coaster brakes were introduced for the rear wheel . the coaster brake was contained in the rear wheel hub , and was engaged and controlled by backpedaling , thus eliminating the issue of tyre wear . in the united states , the coaster brake was the most commonly fitted brake throughout the first half of the 20th century , often comprising the only braking system on the bicycle . brake types . spoon brakes . the spoon brake , or plunger brake was probably the first type of bicycle brake and precedes the pneumatic tyre . whittbs , pp.153 & ndash ; 154 spoon brakes were used on penny farthings with solid rubber tyres in the 1800s and continued to be used after the introduction of the pneumatic-tyred safety bicycle . the spoon brake consists of a pad ( often leather ) or metal shoe ( possibly rubber faced ) , which is pressed onto the top of the front tyre . these were almost always rod-operated by a right-hand lever . in developing world , a foot-operated form of the spoon brake sometimes is retrofitted to old rod brake roadsters . it consists of a spring-loaded flap attached to the back of the fork crown . this is depressed against the front tyre by the rider 's foot . perhaps more so than any other form of bicycle brake , the spoon brake is sensitive to road conditions and increases tyre wear dramatically . though made obsolete by the introduction of the duck brake , coaster brake , and rod brake , spoon brakes continued to be used in the west supplementally on adult bicycles until the 1930s , and on children 's bicycles until the 1950s . in the developing world , they were manufactured until much more recently . file : bicycle spoon brake on 1886 swift safety bicycle at coventry transport museum.png spoon brake on front wheel of 1886 swift safety bicycle at coventry transport museum file : bicycle spoon brake variation.jpg spoon brake variation at the batavus museum in heerenveen , netherlands file : bicycle spoon brake on 1898 columbia model 51 ladies chainless.png bicycle spoon brake on 1898 columbia model 51 ladies chainless file : antique 1 ( brake detail ) . jpg spoon brake on front wheel file : marian038.jpg improvised spoon brake on a chinese cargo tricycle . duck brake . invented in 1897 , the duck brake or duck roller brake used a rod operated by a lever on the handlebar to pull twin friction rollers ( usually made of wood or rubber ) against the front tyre . mounted on axles secured by friction washers and set at an angle to conform to the shape of the tyre , the rollers were forced against their friction washers upon contacting the tyre , thus braking the front wheel . a tension spring held the rollers away from the tyre except when braking . braking power was enhanced by an extra-long brake lever mounted in parallel with and behind the handlebar , which provided additional leverage when braking ( two hands could be used to pull the lever if necessary ) . used in combination with a rear coaster brake , a cyclist of the day could stop much more quickly and with better modulation of braking effort than was possible using only a spoon brake or rear coaster brake . whitt , frank r . and wilson , david g . , bicycling science ( 2nd ed . ) , massachusetts institute of technology , ( 1982 ) , , pp . 198-233 : the spoon brake was fairly ineffective , while the coaster brake did not operate on the front tyre , the most effective position on a two-wheel vehicle during a hard stop . parliamentary debates : senate and house of representatives , tariff preferences , volume 34 ( 19 september 1906 ) , p . 4951 known colloquially as the duck brake , the design was used by many notable riders of the day , and was widely exported to england , australia , and other countries . parliamentary debates , p . 4951 in 1902 , louis h . bill was granted a patent for an improved version of the duck roller brake ( patent 708,114 ) for use on motorized bicycles ( motorcycles ) . bill , louis h . , united states patent office , letters patent no . 708,114 , september 2 , 1902 duck brake company , testimonial of geo . a . wyman ( 1903 ) : george a . wyman , who crossed the united states aboard a motorized bicycle with a duck roller brake praised its efficiency , stating that '' i controlled my motorbike with it on the steepest grades of the rocky mountains '' . . rim brakes . rim brakes are so called because braking force is applied by friction pads to the rim of the rotating wheel , thus slowing it and the bicycle . brake pads can be made of leather , rubber or cork and are often mounted in metal '' shoes '' . rim brakes are typically actuated by a lever mounted on the handlebar . advantages and disadvantages . rim brakes are inexpensive , light , mechanically simple , easy to maintain , and powerful . however , they perform relatively poorly when the rims are wet , and will brake unevenly if the rims are even slightly warped . because rims can carry debris from the ground to the brake pads , rim brakes are more prone to clogging with mud or snow than disc brakes ( where braking surfaces are higher from the ground ) , particularly when riding on unpaved surfaces . the low price and ease of maintenance of rim brakes makes them popular in low- to mid-price commuter bikes , where the disadvantages are alleviated by the unchallenging conditions . the light weight of rim brakes also makes them desirable in road racing bicycles . rim brakes require regular maintenance . brake pads wear down and have to be replaced . as they wear down , their position may need to be adjusted as the material wears away . because the motion of most brakes is not perfectly horizontal , the pads may lose their centering as they wear , causing the pads to wear unevenly . over longer time and use , rims can become worn . rims should be checked for wear periodically as they can fail catastrophically if the braking surface becomes too worn . wear is accelerated by wet and muddy conditions . rim brakes require that the rims be straight ( not out-of-round or warped ) . if a rim has a pronounced wobble , then the braking force may be intermittent or uneven , and the pads may rub the rims even when the brake is not applied . during braking , the friction surfaces ( brake pads and rims ) will experience thermal heating . in normal use this is not a problem , as the brakes are applied with limited force and for a short time , so the heat quickly dissipates to the surrounding air . however , on a heavily laden bike on a long descent , heat energy may be added more quickly than it can dissipate causing heat build-up , which may damage components and cause brake failure . a ceramic coating for the rims is available which may reduce wear and can also improve both wet and dry braking . it may also slightly reduce heat transfer to the inside of the rims because it is a thermal insulator . . brake pads . brake pads are available with numerous shapes and materials . many consist of a replaceable rubber pad held on a mounting , or brake shoe , with a post or bolt on the back to attach to the brake . some are made as one piece with the attachment directly molded in the pad for lower production costs ; brake pads of the cartridge type are held in place by a metal split pin or threaded grub screw and can be replaced without moving the brake shoe from its alignment to the rim . the rubber can be softer for more braking force with less lever effort , or harder for longer life . many pad designs have a rectangular shape ; others are longer and curved to match the radius of the rim . larger pads do not necessarily provide more braking force , but will wear more slowly ( in relation to thickness ) , so can usually be thinner . in general , a brake can be fitted with a variety of pads , as long as the mounting is compatible . carbon fiber rims may be more sensitive to damage by incorrectly-matched brake pads , and generally must use non-abrasive cork pads . ceramic-coated rims should be used with special pads because of heat build-up at the pad-rim interface ; standard pads can leave a '' glaze '' on the ceramic braking surface , reducing its inherent roughness and leading to a severe drop in wet-weather braking performance . ceramic pads usually contain chromium compounds to resist heat . for wet-weather use , brake pads containing iron ( iii ) oxide are sometimes used as these have higher friction on a wet aluminum rim than the usual rubber . these salmon-colored pads were first made by scott-mathauser and are now produced by kool-stop . to minimise excessive rim wear , a brake pad should be hard enough that it does not embed road grit or chips of rim metal in the face of the pad , since these act as grinding/gouging agents and markedly reduce rim life . self-assisting characteristics . if the front brake is mounted in front of the fork a so-called self-assisting ( '' servo '' ) effect occurs . the friction force between brake shoe and rim creates a bending moment around the point where the brake bolt emerges from the fork . this wedges the shoes higher upon the tapered rim , thus increasing the normal force between shoes and rim surface . self-assist reduces the input force needed to apply the brake . rear brakes mounted behind the seat-tube supports experience precisely the opposite effect . thus the front brake is typically more effective than the rear when the brakes are so mounted . types of rim brakes . the following are among the many sub-types of rim brakes : rim brakes have been the subject of countless '' engineering innovations '' . some of the more unusual results can be seen here . rod-actuated brakes . the '' rod-actuated brake '' , or simply '' rod brake '' , ( roller lever brake in raleigh terminology ) uses a series of rods and pivots , rather than bowden cables , to transmit force applied to a hand lever to pull friction pads upwards against the inner surface , which faces the hub , of the wheel rim . they were often called '' stirrup brakes '' due to their shape . rod brakes are used with a rim profile known as the westwood rim , which has a slightly concave area on the braking surface and lacks the flat outer surface required by brakes that apply the pads on opposite sides of the rim . the rear linkage mechanism is complicated by the need to allow rotation where the fork and handlebars attach to the frame . a common setup was to combine a front rod brake with a rear coaster brake . although heavy and complex , the linkages are reliable and durable and can be repaired or adjusted with simple hand tools . the design is still in use , typically on african and asian roadsters such as the sohrab and flying pigeon . caliper brakes . the caliper brake is a class of cable-actuated brake in which the brake mounts to a single point above the wheel , theoretically allowing the arms to auto-centre on the rim . arms extend around the tyre and end in brake shoes that press against the rim . while some designs incorporate dual pivot points & mdash ; the arms pivot on a sub-frame & mdash ; the entire assembly still mounts to a single point . caliper brakes tend to become less effective as tyres get wider , and so deeper , reducing the brakes ' mechanical advantage . thus caliper brakes are rarely found on modern mountain bikes . but they are almost ubiquitous on road bikes , particularly the side-pull caliper brakes . side-pull caliper brakes . '' single-pivot side-pull caliper brakes '' consist of two curved arms that cross at a pivot above the wheel and hold the brake pads on opposite sides of the rim . these arms have extensions on one side , one attached to the cable , the other to the cable housing . when the brake lever is squeezed , the arms move together and the brake pads squeeze the rim . these brakes are simple and effective for relatively narrow tyres but have significant flex and resulting poor performance if the arms are made long enough to fit wide tyres . if not adjusted properly , low-quality varieties tend to rotate to one side during actuation and tend to stay there , making it difficult to evenly space brake shoes away from the rim . these brakes are now used on inexpensive bikes ; before the introduction of dual-pivot caliper brakes they were used on all types of road bikes . '' dual-pivot side-pull caliper brakes '' are used on most modern racing bicycles . one arm pivots at the centre , like a side-pull ; and the other pivots at the side , like a centre-pull . the cable housing attaches like that of a side-pull brake . the centering of side-pull brakes was improved with the mass-market adoption of dual-pivot side-pulls ( an old design re-discovered by shimano in the early 1990s ) . these brakes offer a higher mechanical advantage , and result in better braking . dual-pivot brakes are slightly heavier than conventional side-pull calipers and can not accurately track an out-of-true rim , or a wheel that flexes from side to side in the frame during hard climbing . it is common to see professional racers climbing mountains with the quick-release undone on the rear brake , to eliminate drag from this source . centre-pull caliper brakes . this type of brake has symmetrical arms and therefore centre more effectively . the cable housing attaches to a fixed cable stop attached to the frame , and the inner cable bolts to a sliding piece ( called a '' braking delta '' , '' braking triangle '' , or '' yoke '' ) or a small pulley , over which runs a straddle cable connecting the two brake arms . tension on the cable is evenly distributed to the two arms , preventing the brake from taking a '' set '' to one side or the other . these brakes were reasonably priced , and in the past filled the price niche between the cheaper and the more expensive models of side-pull brakes . they are more effective than side-pull brakes in long reach applications as the distance between the pivot and brake pad or cable attachment is much shorter , reducing flex . it is important that the fixed bridge holding the pivots is very stiff . u-brakes . '' u-brakes '' ( also known by the trademarked term '' 990-style '' ) are essentially the same design as the centre-pull caliper brake . the difference is that the two arm pivots attach directly to the frame or fork while those of the centre-pull caliper brake attach to an integral bridge frame that mounts to the frame or fork by a single bolt . like roller cam brakes , this is a caliper design with pivots located above the rim . thus u-brakes are often interchangeable with , and have the same maintenance issues as , roller cam brakes . u-brakes were used on mountain bikes through the early 1990s , particularly under the chainstays , a rear brake mounting location that was then popular . this location usually benefits from higher frame stiffness , an important consideration with a powerful brake since flex in the stays will increase lever travel and reduce effective braking force . unfortunately it is also very prone to clogging by mud , which meant that u-brakes quickly fell out of favour on cross-country bikes . u-brakes are the current standard on freestyle bmx frames and forks . the u-brake 's main advantage over cantilever and linear-pull brakes in this application is that sideways protrusion of the brake and cable system is minimal , and the exposed parts are smooth . this is especially valuable on freestyle bmx bikes where any protruding parts are susceptible to damage and may interfere with the rider 's body or clothing . cantilever brakes . the cantilever brake is a class of brake in which each arm is attached to a separate pivot point on one side of the seat stay or fork . thus all cantilever brakes are dual-pivot . both first- and second-class lever designs exist ; second-class is by far the most common . in the second-class lever design , the arm pivots below the rim . the brake shoe is mounted above the pivot and is pressed against the rim as the two arms are drawn together . in the first-class lever design , the arm pivots above the rim . the brake shoe is mounted below the pivot and is pressed against the rim as the two arms are forced apart . due to a wider possible distance between the mounts and pads , cantilever brakes are often preferred for bicycles that use wide tyres , such as on mountain bikes . because the arms move only in their designed arcs , the brake shoe must be adjustable in several planes . thus cantilever brake shoes are notoriously difficult to adjust . as the brake shoes of a second-class cantilever brake wears , they ride lower on the rim . eventually , one may go underneath the rim , so that the brake does not function . there are several brake types based on the cantilever brake design : cantilever brakes and v-brakes - both second class lever designs - and roller cam brakes and u-brakes - both first class lever designs . traditional cantilever brakes . this type of brake pre-dates the v-brakes . it is a centre-pull cantilever design with an outwardly angled arm protruding on each side , a cable stop on the frame or fork to terminate the cable housing , and a straddle cable between the arms similar to centre-pull caliper brakes . the cable from the brake lever pulls upwards on the straddle cable , causing the brake arms to rotate up and inward thus squeezing the rim between the brake pads . originally , cantilever brakes had nearly horizontal arms and were designed for maximum clearance on touring or cyclo-cross bicycles . when the mountain bike became popular , cantilever brakes were adopted for these too but the smaller mtb frames meant that riders often fouled the rear brake arms with their heels . '' low profile '' cantilevers were designed to overcome this , where the arms are closer to 45 degrees from horizontal . low profile brakes require more careful attention to cable geometry than traditional cantilevers but are now the most common type . traditional cantilever brakes are difficult to adapt to bicycle suspensions and protrude somewhat from the frame . accordingly , they are usually found only on bicycles without suspension . v-brakes . '' linear-pull brakes '' or '' direct-pull brakes '' , commonly referred to by shimano 's trademark '' v-brakes '' , are a side-pull version of cantilever brakes and mount on the same frame bosses . however , the arms are longer , with the cable housing attached to one arm and the cable to the other . as the cable pulls against the housing the arms are drawn together . because the housing enters from vertically above one arm yet force must be transmitted laterally between arms , the flexible housing is extended by a rigid tube with a 90° bend known as the '' noodle '' ( a noodle with a 135° bend is used where the front brake is operated by the right hand , as this gives a smoother curve in the cable housing ) . the noodle seats in a stirrup attached to the arm . a flexible bellows often covers the exposed cable . since there is no intervening mechanism between the cable and the arms , the design is called '' direct-pull '' . and since the arms move the same distance that the cable moves with regard to its housing , the design is also called '' linear-pull '' . the term '' v-brake '' is trademarked by shimano and represents the most popular implementation of this design . some high-end v-brakes use a four-pivot parallel motion so the brake pads contact at virtually the same position on the wheel rim regardless of wear . v-brakes function well with the suspension systems found on many mountain bikes because they do not require a separate cable stop on the frame or fork . because of the higher mechanical advantage of v-brakes , they require brake levers with longer cable travel than levers intended for older types of brakes . mechanical ( i.e . cable-actuated ) disc brakes use the same amount of cable travel as v-brakes , except for those that are described as being '' road '' specific . as a general rule , mechanical disc brakes for so-called '' flat bar '' bicycles ( chiefly mountain and hybrid bicycles ) are compatible with v-brake levers , whereas mechanical disc brakes intended for '' drop-bar '' bicycles are compatible with the cable pull of older brake designs ( cantilever , caliper , and u-brake ) . poorly designed v-brakes can suffer from a sudden failure when the noodle end pulls through the metal stirrup , leaving the wheel with no braking power . although the noodle can be regarded as a service item and changed regularly , the hole in the stirrup may enlarge through wear . the stirrup can not normally be replaced , so good-quality v-brakes use a durable metal for the stirrup . '' mini v-brakes '' ( or '' mini v 's '' ) are v-brakes with shorter arms , typically between 8 and 9 centimeters . this reduces the required cable pull , making them compatible with brake levers intended for cantilever brakes . mini v-brakes retain advantages specific to v-brakes such as not requiring extra cable stops . on the downside , their shorter arms provide very small tyre and wheel clearance and generally make for a less forgiving setup : they can only accommodate smaller tyre sizes compared to cantilever brakes , may pose problems for mounting fenders , can be clogged more easily by mud , and they can make it harder to change wheels . v-brakes always use thin and relatively long brake pads . the thin pads ease wheel removal , which is achieved by pushing the arms together and unhooking the noodle from the stirrup . the additional length gives good pad life by compensating for the thinner material depth . roller cam brakes . '' roller cam brakes '' are centre-pull cantilever brakes actuated by the cable pulling a single two-sided sliding cam . ( first and second-class lever designs exist ; first-class is most common and is described here . ) each arm has a cam follower . as the cam presses against the follower it forces the arms apart . as the top of each arm moves outward , the brake shoe below the pivot is forced inward against the rim . pictures of a rear and a front roller cam brake . there is much in favor of the roller cam brake design . since the cam controls the rate of closure , the clamping force can be made non-linear with the pull . and since the design can provide positive mechanical advantage , maximum clamping force can be higher than that of other types of brakes . they are known for being strong and controllable . on the downside , they require some skill to set up and can complicate wheel changes . and they require maintenance : like u-brakes , as the pad wears it strikes the rim higher ; unless re-adjusted it can eventually contact the tyre 's sidewall . the roller cam design was first developed by charlie cunningham of wtb around 1982 and licensed to suntour . private communication by jeff archer of the museum of mountain bike art & technology roller cam brakes were used on early mountain bikes in the 1980s and into the 1990s , mounted to the fork blades and seat stays in the standard locations , as well as below the chain stays for improved stiffness as they do not protrude to interfere with the crank . it is not unusual for a bicycle to have a single roller cam brake ( or u-brake ) combined with another type . they are still used on some bmx and recumbent bicycles . there are two rare variants that use the roller cam principle . for locations where centre-pull is inappropriate , the side-pull '' toggle cam brake '' was developed . drawings and technical description . also a first-class cantilever , it uses a single-sided sliding cam ( the toggle ) an example of the toggle integral to the toggle cam brake appears here the cam surface is the upper edge of the 'tail ' on the large central piece . the cable attaches to one of the three holes . note that the cam must flare at twice the rate of the two-sided roller cam design in order to move the arms the same amount . against one arm that is attached by a link to the other arm . as the cam presses against the follower , the force is also transmitted to the other arm via the link . and specifically for suspension forks where the housing must terminate at the brake frame , the side-pull '' sabre cam brake '' was developed . a picture of the rare sabre cam brake may be found at mombat - click on the 2nd thumb from the left . in the sabre cam design , the cable end is fixed and the housing moves the single-sided cam . delta brakes . the '' delta brake '' is a road bicycle brake named due to its triangular shape . the cable enters at the centre , pulls a corner of a parallelogram linkage housed inside the brake across two opposite corners , pushing out at the other two corners on to the brake arms above the pivots , so that the arms below the pivots push pads in against the rim . a feature of the design is that the mechanical advantage varies as a tangent function across its range , where that of most other designs remains fixed . many consider the brake attractive , and it has a lower wind profile than some other common brakes . however , bicycle quarterly criticized the delta brake for being heavy , giving mediocre stopping power , and suffering disadvantageous variable mechanical advantage . in particular , with a small parallelogram , pad wear causes mechanical advantage to rise dramatically . however , with high leverage , the stroke of the lever is not enough to fully apply the brake , so the rider can have brakes that feel normal in light braking but which can not be applied harder for hard braking . the basic design dates from at least the 1930s . they were made most prominently by campagnolo in 1985 , but brakes based on the same mechanism were also manufactured by modolo ( kronos ) , weinmann , and others . they are no longer made and are now uncommon . hydraulic rim brakes . this is one of the least common types of brakes . they are mounted either on the same pivot points used for cantilever and linear-pull brakes or they can be mounted on four-bolt brake mounts found on many trials frames . they were available on some high-end mountain bikes in the early 1990s , but declined in popularity with the rise of disc brakes . the moderate performance advantage ( greater power and control ) they offer over cable actuated rim brakes is offset by their greater weight and complexity . some e-bikes continue to use them since they are powerful , relatively low-maintenance and weight is less of an issue when electric assistance is available . disc brakes . a disc brake consists of a metal disc , or '' rotor '' , attached to the wheel hub that rotates with the wheel . calipers are attached to the frame or fork along with pads that squeeze the rotors for braking . disc brakes may be actuated mechanically by cable , or hydraulically . disc brakes are most common for mountain bikes ( including nearly all downhill bikes ) , and are also seen on some hybrid bicycles and touring bicycles . towards the end of the 2010s , disc brakes have become increasingly common also on racing bicycles . a disc brake is sometimes employed as a drag brake . many hydraulic disc brakes have a self-adjusting mechanism so as the brake pad wears , the pistons keep the distance from the pad to the disc consistent to maintain the same brake lever throw . some hydraulic brakes , especially older ones , and most mechanical discs have manual controls to adjust the pad-to-rotor gap . several adjustments are often required during the life of the pads . advantages . disc brakes tend to perform equally well in all conditions including water , mud , and snow due to several factors : the braking surface is farther from the ground and possible contaminants like mud which can coat or freeze on the rim and pads . with rim brakes , the first point that mud builds up on a mountain bike ridden in thick mud is usually the brakes . a mountain bicycle with disc brakes is less susceptible to mud buildup provided the rear frame and front fork yoke have sufficient clearance from the wheels . disc brakes may be made of materials that dissipate heat better than the wheel rim , but undersized sport sized discs will be too small to take advantage of the fact there are holes in the rotor , providing a path for water and debris to get out from under the pads . wheel rims tend to be made of lightweight metal . brake discs and pads are harder and can accept higher maximum loads . it is possible to ride a bicycle with a buckled wheel if it has disc brakes , where it would not be possible with a rim brake because the buckled wheel would bind on the brake pads . other reasons include : while all types of brakes will eventually wear out the braking surface , a brake disc is easier and cheaper to replace than a wheel rim or drum . the use of very wide tyres favors disc brakes , as rim brakes require ever-longer arms to clear the wider tyre . longer arms tend to flex more , degrading braking . disc brakes are unaffected by tyre width . unlike some rarer rim brake designs , disc brakes are compatible with bicycle suspension . different wheel sizes can be used with the same frame : i.e . the same frame built for 29 '' tires can often also fit 27.5+ ( 650+ ) tires , despite the two wheel sizes having different rim diameters . this is possible with disc brakes , so long as the rotor sizes are consistent and the frame has enough clearance ; with rim brakes , this would be impossible , as the different rim sizes would not allow the same rim brakes to work with a different sized wheel . wheel size optionality with disc brakes allows the rider more options , including using a smaller diameter rim-sized wheel ( such as 27.5+ ) with a higher volume wider tire with the same outer diameter size as a larger rim-sized wheel ( such as 29 '' ) -- the outer diameter consistency is important as it preserves the geometry of the frame between the two different wheel sizes . disadvantages . disc brakes require a hub built to accept the disc , and a fork ( for front brakes ) or frame ( for rear brakes ) built to accept the caliper . front hubs designed for discs often move the left hub 's flange inward to make room for the disc , which causes the wheel to be dished . a dished wheel is laterally weaker when forced to the non-disc side . other hubs use conventional flange spacing and provide a wheel without dish , but require a less common wide-spaced fork . a rim brake works directly on the rim and the attached tyre ; a disc brake applies a potentially large torque moment at the hub . the latter has two main disadvantages : the torque moment must be transmitted to the tyre through the wheel components : flanges , spokes , nipples , and rim spoke bed . an engineered disc brake would reduce weight by not having most of the metal rim components a front disc brake places a bending moment on the fork between the caliper anchor points and the tip of the dropout . in order to counter this moment and to support the anchor points and weight of the caliper , the fork must be of a certain size ( most likely heavier ) . : the heavier fork and wheels compound the weight disadvantage of the brake assembly itself . heat build-up can lead to failure with disc brakes . disc brakes heat discs in the same way as rim brakes heat rims , but discs provide an inherently smaller surface to dissipate heat . excessive heat leads to boiling hydraulic fluid , resulting in brake fade or total failure . overheating is more common in road cycling assuming the brakes are undersized to reduce weight . recorded cases of disc brake failures usually involves several kilometers of downhill , combined with small underweight discs . the design and positioning of disc brakes can interfere with pannier racks not designed for them . for this reason , many manufacturers produce '' disc '' and '' non-disc '' versions . there have been some problems using disc brakes with certain frame designs . under hard braking , the front wheel can come out from the dropouts . the problem has occurred when the brake pads and dropouts are aligned so the brake reaction force tends to eject the wheel from the dropout . under repeated hard braking , the axle moves in the dropout in a way that unscrews the quick release . riders should make sure the skewers are properly tightened before riding . forks that use different brake/dropout orientations or through-axles are not subject to this problem . hydraulic vs . '' mechanical '' . there are two main types of disc brake : '' mechanical '' ( cable-actuated ) and hydraulic . advantages and disadvantages are highly discussed by the users of each system . as advantages of cable-actuated disc brakes are argued lower cost , lower maintenance , and lighter system weight , hydraulic disc brakes are said to offer more braking power and better control . cable-actuated disc brakes were traditionally the only type of disc brake that could be used with the brake levers found on drop handlebars , sheldon brown , quoted at but this is no longer the case . . single vs . dual actuation . many disc brakes have their pads actuated from both sides of the caliper , while some have only one pad that moves . dual actuation can move both pads relative to the caliper , or can move one pad relative to the caliper , then move the caliper and other pad relative to the rotor , called a '' floating caliper '' design . single-actuation brakes use either a multi-part rotor that floats axially on the hub , or bend the rotor sideways as needed . bending the rotor is theoretically inferior , but in practice gives good service , even under high-force braking with a hot disc , and may yield more progressiveness . multiple pistons . for disc brakes with a hydraulic system , high-performance calipers usually use two or three pistons per side ; lower-cost and lower-performance calipers often have only one per side . using more pistons allows a larger piston area and thus increased leverage with a given master cylinder . also , pistons may be of several sizes so pad force can be controlled across the face of the pad , especially when the pad is long and narrow . a long narrow pad may be desired to increase pad area and thus reduce the frequency of pad changes . in contrast , a single large piston may be heavier . caliper mounting standards . there are many standards for mounting disc brake calipers . i.s . ( international standard ) is different for 160mm and 203mm rotor and differs between forks with a qr and 20 & nbsp ; mm through axle . the post-mount standard also differs by disc size and axle type . many incompatible variants were produced over the years , mostly by fork manufacturers . the mount used on the rockshox boxxer is the most typical of these specialty mounts , but most fork manufactures now use either the is or post-mount standard for their current forks . as a point of reference , hayes currently sells no fewer than 13 different adapters to fit their brakes to various mounting patterns . . advantages and disadvantages of various types of mounts . a disadvantage of post mounts is that the bolt is threaded directly into the fork lowers . if the threads are stripped or if the bolt is stuck , then the threads will need to be repaired , or the seized bolt drilled out . frame manufacturers have standardized the is mount for the rear disc brake mount . in recent years post mount has gained ground and is becoming more common . this is mostly due to decreased manufacturing and part cost for the brake calipers when using post mount . a limitation of the mount is that the location of the rotor is more constrained : it is possible to encounter incompatible hub/fork combinations , where the rotor is out of range . disc mounting standards . there are many options for rotor mounting . is is a six-bolt mount and is the industry standard . centerlock is patented by shimano and uses a splined interface along with a lockring to secure the disc . the advantages of centerlock are that the splined interface is theoretically stiffer , and removing the disc is quicker because it only requires one lockring to be removed . some of the disadvantages are that the design is patented requiring a licensing fee from shimano . a shimano cassette lockring tool ( or an external bb tool in case of through-axle hub ) is needed to remove the rotor and is more expensive and less common than a torx key . advantages of is six-bolt are that there are more choices when it comes to hubs and rotors . examples of mounting standards are shown here : centerlock ( shimano proprietary ) international standard ( is ) ( in widespread use ) 44mm bcd hope technology 's 3-bolt pattern ( proprietary ) rohloff 's 4-bolt pattern ( proprietary ) . disc sizes . rotors come in many different sizes , such as and diameter . other sizes are available as manufacturers make discs specific to their calipers & mdash ; the dimensions often vary by a few millimeters . larger rotors provide greater braking force for a given pad pressure , by virtue of a longer moment arm for the caliper to act on . smaller rotors provide less stopping power but also less weight and better protection from knocks . larger rotors dissipate heat more quickly and have a larger amount of mass to absorb heat , reducing brake fade or failure . downhill bikes usually have larger brakes to handle greater braking loads . cross country bicycles usually use smaller rotors which handle smaller loads but offer considerable weight savings . it is also common to use a larger diameter rotor on the front wheel and a smaller rotor on the rear wheel since the front wheel does the most braking ( up to 90 % of the total ) . wilsonbs , p . 245 : '' the front brake therefore has to provide 90 percent of the total retarding force at a deceleration of 0.5 g . '' . drum brakes .