1943 in literature

events . january 4 – thomas mann completes joseph der ernährer ( joseph the provider ) in california , the last of his joseph and his brothers ( joseph und seine brüder ) tetralogy , on which he began in december 1926 . february 4 – the première of bertolt brecht 's the good person of szechwan ( der gute mensch von sezuan ) takes place at the schauspielhaus zürich in switzerland , with leonard steckel directing . march – the self-illustrated children 's novella the little prince by the exiled french aviator antoine de saint-exupéry , the all-time best-selling book originated in french , is published in new york . may – a strongly antisemitic production of shakespeare 's the merchant of venice is staged at the burgtheater in vienna , with werner krauss as shylock . june 30 – having transferred from the merchant marine to the united states navy and served eight days of active duty jack kerouac is honorably discharged on psychiatric grounds . in new york city , he , william s . burroughs and allen ginsberg become friends . september george orwell resigns from the bbc to become literary editor of the left-wing london paper tribune . retreating german forces set fire to the library of the royal society of naples , and on september 30 to the montesano villa containing the most valuable state archives of naples . september 9 – the première of bertolt brecht 's life of galileo ( leben des galilei , 1939 ) is held at the schauspielhaus zürich in switzerland , with leonard steckel directing and playing the title role . october – tristan bernard is arrested , but subsequently released from the drancy internment camp in france after public protests . october 14 – the contents of biblioteca della comunità israelitica in rome are looted by nazi german troops . december philip larkin , with a degree from the university of oxford , takes his first post as a librarian in wellington , shropshire . philip van doren stern sends copies of his story '' the greatest gift '' to friends as a christmas card . december 22 – on the death of children 's writer and illustrator beatrix potter at near sawrey , over 4,000 acres ( 1620 ha ) of land in the english lake district are bequeathed to the national trust for places of historic interest or natural beauty ( the heelis bequest ) . unknown dates isaac bashevis singer becomes a naturalized u.s . citizen . publication begins of a new comprehensive edition of friedrich hölderlin 's complete works ( the sämtliche werke , or große stuttgarter ausgabe ) . the federal bureau of investigation in the united states places richard wright under surveillance . new books . fiction . lars ahlin – tåbb with the manifesto ( tåbb med manifestet ) sabahattin ali – madonna in a fur coat ( kürk mantolu madonna ) sholem asch – the apostle marcel aymé – the passer through walls ( le passe-muraille ) nigel balchin – the small back room vaikom muhammad basheer – premalekhanam henry bellamann – victoria grandolet georges bernanos – monsieur ouine marjorie bowen – airing in a closed carriage ivan bunin – dark avenues ( « тёмные аллеи » , tyomnyye allei , short stories , first edition ) john dickson carr ( as carter dickson ) – she died a lady raymond chandler – the lady in the lake colette – le képi simone de beauvoir – she came to stay ( l'invitée ) pierre drieu la rochelle – the man on horseback ( l'homme à cheval ) howard fast – citizen tom paine carlo emilio gadda – gli anni jean genet ( anonymously ) – our lady of the flowers ( notre dame des fleurs ) robert graves – i , claudius elizabeth janet gray – adam of the road graham greene – the ministry of fear hermann hesse – the glass bead game ( das glasperlenspiel ) aleksander kamiński ( as juliusz górecki ) – kamienie na szaniec ( stones for the rampart ) c . s . lewis – perelandra clarice lispector – near to the wild heart ( perto do coração selvagem ) h . p . lovecraft – beyond the wall of sleep ( collection ) compton mackenzie – keep the home guard turning naguib mahfouz – rhadopis of nubia bruce marshall – yellow tapers for paris c . l . moore – earth 's last citadel robert musil ( died 1942 ) – the man without qualities ( der mann ohne eigenschaften , publication concludes , uncompleted ) kate o'brien – the last of summer e . phillips oppenheim – mr . mirakel roger peyrefitte – les amitiés particulières ( special friendships ) ellery queen – there was an old woman ayn rand – the fountainhead betty smith – a tree grows in brooklyn margit söderholm – sunshine follows rain antal szerb – the queen 's necklace ( a királyné nyaklánca ) phoebe atwood taylor going , going , gone proof of the pudding file for record ( as alice tilton ) kylie tennant – ride on stranger h . g . wells – crux ansata dorothy whipple – they were sisters chancellor williams – the raven virginia woolf ( suicide 1941 ) – a haunted house and other short stories . children and young people . enid blyton the mystery of the burnt cottage the magic faraway tree virginia lee burton – the little house eleanor estes – rufus m . roald dahl – the gremlins esther forbes – johnny tremaine c . s . forester – the ship mary norton – the magic bed knob ; or , how to become a witch in ten easy lessons arthur ransome – the picts and the martyrs antoine de saint-exupéry – le petit prince ( the little prince ) malcolm saville – mystery at witch end ( first in the lone pine series of twenty books ) laura ingalls wilder – these happy golden years . drama . bertolt brecht the good person of szechwan ( der gute mensch von sezuan ) life of galileo ( leben des galilei ) albert camus – the misunderstanding ( le malentendu ) moss hart – winged victory frank harvey – brighton rock fritz hochwälder – das heilige experiment ( the holy experiment , the strong are lonely ) esther mccracken – living room elena miramova – dark eyes m . j . molloy – old road armijn pane – kami , perempuan ( we , the women ) j.b . priestley – they came to a city terence rattigan - while the sun shines nelson rodrigues – vestido de noiva ( the wedding dress ) jean-paul sartre – the flies ( les mouches ) yang jiang – as you desire ( chenxin ruyi ) . non-fiction . georges bataille – l'expérience intérieure james burnham – the managerial revolution julius evola – the doctrine of awakening ( la dottrina del risveglio ) katharine butler hathaway – the little locksmith louis hjelmslev – prolegomena to a theory of language ( omkring sprogteoriens grundlæggelse ) c . s . lewis – the abolition of man john neal – observations on american art : selections from the writings of john neal ( 1793-1876 ) ( edited by harold edward dickson ) reinhold niebuhr – the nature and destiny of man martin noth – uberlieferungsgeschischtliche studien : die sammelnden und bearbeitenden geschichtswerke im alten testament jean-paul sartre – being and nothingness ( l'être et le néant : essai d'ontologie phénoménologique ) j . a . schumpeter – capitalism , socialism and democracy edna walling – gardens in australia william foote whyte – street corner society stefan zweig ( suicide 1942 ) – the world of yesterday ( first english edition ) . births . january 4 doris kearns goodwin , american political biographer hwang sok-yong , korean novelist jesús torbado , spanish novelist ( died 2018 ) priit vesilind , estonian-american author and photographer january 8 – charles murray , american political science writer ( the bell curve ) january 11 – jim hightower , american radio host and author january 13 – lorna sage , english scholar and biographer ( died 2001 ) february 8 – pirzada qasim , pakistani poet and academic february 15 – elke heidenreich , german journalist and writer february 16 – graham lord , rhodesian-born english literary biographer and novelist ( died 2015 ) february 18 – graeme garden , scottish-born writer , comedian and actor february 21 – lyudmila ulitskaya , russian fiction writer february 22 – terry eagleton , english scholar and publicist february 27 – sheila rowbotham , english feminist author march 26 – bob woodward , american journalist april 6 – max clifford , english publicist april 17 – gwynne dyer , canadian journalist april 22 – louise glück , american poet , recipient of the nobel prize in literature april 30 – paul jennings , english-born australian children 's author may 5 – michael palin , english comedy writer and television broadcaster may 7 – peter carey , australian novelist may 8 – pat barker , english novelist may 20 – justin cartwright , south african-born novelist ( died 2018 ) june 7 nikki giovanni , american author , poet and educator michael pennington , english writer , actor and director june 10 – simon jenkins , english journalist june 15 – xaviera hollander , dutch east indies-born writer july 14 – christopher priest , english novelist july 16 – reinaldo arenas , cuban writer ( died 1990 ) august 2 – rose tremain ( rosemary thomson ) , english novelist august 30 – robert crumb , american cartoonist september 12 – michael ondaatje , ceylonese-born canadian novelist and poet september 24 – antonio tabucchi , italian writer , academic and translator ( died 2012 ) october 5 – michael morpurgo , english children 's writer october 8 - r . l . stine , american novelist october 9 – l . e . modesitt , jr . , american fantasy and science fiction writer october 17 – laila al-othman , kuwaiti writer november 5 – sam shepard , american playwright , writer and actor november 6 – berlie doherty ( beryl hollingworth ) , english children 's and young-adults ' writer november 7 – stephen greenblatt , anerican shakespeare scholar november 12 – wallace shawn , american actor and dramatist december 9 – joanna trollope , english novelist unknown dates christine evans , welsh poet in english vicki feaver , english poet and academic hadrawi ( mohamed ibrahim warsame ) , somali poet ebrahim hussein , tanzanian playwright in swahili . deaths . january 3 – f . m . cornford , english classics and poet ( born 1874 ) january 9 – r . g . collingwood , english philosopher and historian ( born 1889 ) january 13 – else ury , german children 's fiction writer ( killed in auschwitz concentration camp ; born 1877 ) march 10 – laurence binyon , english poet and scholar ( born 1869 ) march 13 – stephen vincent benét , american author ( born 1898 ) april 7 – jovan dučić , herzegovina serb poet and diplomat ( born 1871 ) april 29 – sidney keyes , english poet ( killed in action ; born 1922 ) april 30 – beatrice webb , english sociologist , economist and social reformer ( born 1858 ) may 27 – arthur mee , english encyclopedist and writer ( born 1875 ) may 29 – guido mazzoni , italian poet ( born 1859 ) june 17 – annie s . swan ( 'david lyall ' ) , scottish novelist and journalist ( born 1859 ) june 28 – frida uhl , austrian writer and translator ( born 1872 ) c . august 8 – haig acterian ( mihail ) , romanian poet , dramatist and journalist ( missing in action ; born 1904 ) august 12 – kurt eggers , nazi german writer , poet , songwriter and playwright ( killed in action ; born 1905 ) august 22 – virgilio dávila , puerto rican poet and politician ( born 1869 ) august 24 – simone weil , french philosopher ( born 1909 ) october 3 – ida lee , australian historian and poet ( born 1865 ) october 7 – radclyffe hall , english novelist and poet ( born 1880 ) november 19 – georg hermann , german fiction writer ( killed in auschwitz concentration camp ; born 1871 ) november 27 – louis esson , australian poet and playwright ( born 1878 ) november 30 – etty hillesum , dutch correspondent and diarist ( killed in auschwitz concentration camp ; born 1914 ) december 2 drummond allison , english poet ( killed in action ; born 1921 ) nordahl grieg , norwegian poet and author ( born 1902 ) december 22 – beatrix potter , english children 's writer and illustrator ( born 1866 ) . awards . frost medal : edna st . vincent millay james tait black memorial prize for fiction : mary lavin , tales from bective bridge james tait black memorial prize for biography : g . g . coulton , fourscore years newbery medal for children 's literature : elizabeth janet gray , adam of the road nobel prize for literature : not awarded prix goncourt : marius grout , passage de l'homme pulitzer prize for drama : thornton wilder , the skin of our teeth pulitzer prize for poetry : robert frost : a witness tree pulitzer prize for the novel : upton sinclair – dragon 's teeth . references .