Psychobilly

first wave in britain . ' '' american nightmare '' may have been the first psychobilly song . the meteors also articulated psychobilly 's politics stance , a reaction to the right- and left-wing political attitudes which divided other british youth cultures . fans of the meteors , known as '' the wrecking crew '' , are often attributed with inventing the style of moshing known as '' wrecking '' , which became synonymous with the psychobilly movement . the short-lived sharks , formed in bristol in 1980 , followed closely behind the meteors with their influential album phantom rockers . downey , p.81 . '' another london band the ricochets were the first band after the meteors to call their music psychobilly . their debut album made in the shade from 1982 is another influential psychobilly album . '' demented are go are a welsh psychobilly band that was formed around 1982 in cardiff . they were one of the earliest in the initial wave of bands to mix punk rock with rockabilly , and as a result , are considered to be highly influential to the psychobilly scene . another significant british band were the guana batz , formed in feltham , middlesex in 1983 . their first album , 1985 's held down to vinyl at last , has been described by tiger army frontman nick 13 as '' the most important release since the meteors ' first two albums . '' the klub foot nightclub , opened in 1982 at the clarendon hotel in hammersmith , served as a center for britain 's emerging psychobilly movement and hosted many bands associated with the style . johnny bowler of the guana batz describes the club as '' the focal point for the whole psychobilly scene . you 'd get people from all over at those gigs . it built the scene . '' representatives from record labels such as nervous used the klub foot as a recruiting ground to sign up new bands . a live compilation album entitled stomping at the klub foot was released in 1984 , documenting the club 's scene and the bands who played there . at the same time psychobilly bands were forming elsewhere in europe , such as batmobile who emerged in the netherlands in 1983 , released their debut album in 1985 , and soon began headlining at psychobilly festivals and at the klub foot . the mid-80s saw another , even darker side to psychobilly . as soon as the music crashed into action , the audience simply set upon each other in a free-for-all brawl . these gigs were advertised as such . not surprisingly , this dangerous trend was short-lived , but the occasional fracas persisted . second wave in europe . the second wave of psychobilly is noted as having begun with the 1986 release of british band demented are go 's debut album in sickness & in health . the genre soon spread throughout europe , inspiring a number of new acts such as mad sin ( formed in germany in 1987 ) and the nekromantix ( formed in denmark in 1989 ) , who released the album curse of the coffin in 1991 . the quakes formed in buffalo , new york in 1986 , but had such difficulty building a following in their hometown that they moved to london the following year , where they released the album voice of america in 1990 . another significant release of this era was the compilation album rockabilly psychosis and the garage disease , which acknowledged the genre 's roots in rockabilly and garage rock . the second-wave bands broadened the music 's scope , with the introduction of new and diverse musical influences into the sound . record labels such as nervous and crazy love helped the genre to expand , although it still remained largely unnoticed in the united states , where the albums were poorly distributed and most psychobilly bands preferred to play weekenders than to tour . nick 13 states that while other british youth trends such as scooter riding , the skinhead subculture , and 2 tone ska crossed over to the united states during the 1980s , psychobilly did not . however , one american act that emulated the style was the reverend horton heat , formed in dallas , texas in 1985 . their 1990 single '' psychobilly freakout '' helped introduce american audiences to the genre . the band was heavily inspired by the cramps , and original cramps members lux interior and poison ivy have both identified the reverend horton heat as the latter-day rockabilly/psychobilly band most closely resembling the style and tone of the cramps . downey , p.79 . horton heat noted that the lack of audience awareness of the band was in some ways a benefit : '' somehow , as a band , we continued to fly just below the radar of the whole music business . which means we got to concentrate on being touring musicians , not recording artists . '' . third wave internationally . each played their own us live tours , motivating the fledgling us scene . tiger army , formed in berkeley in 1996 , became the dominant american psychobilly act following the release of their 1999 self-titled debut . their touring in support of the album helped to establish a foothold for psychobilly across the united states . los angeles-based hellcat records , run by rancid 's tim armstrong , became home to many psychobilly acts , including tiger army , devil 's brigade and the danish groups nekromantix and horrorpops , both of whom relocated to southern california in the early 2000s . guana batz members pip hancox and johnny bowler relocated there as well , moving to san diego where they sometimes perform with slim jim phantom of the stray cats under the name guana cats . another notable california psychobilly band formed in the 1990s was the chop tops . they have toured with bands like german psychobillies mad sin and the nekromantix , and have opened for the dead kennedys , suicidal tendencies , dick dale , john lee hooker , and chuck berry . the genre remained vital in europe , where new acts continued to appear . in 1992 , the kryptonix emerged in france while the godless wicked creeps formed in denmark the following year , downey , p.82 . the sharks re-formed in britain , releasing the album recreational killer , the snakes formed in italy in 2004 . psychobilly also expended to new continents battle of ninjamanz formed in japan in 1994 and os catalepticos formed in brazil in 1996 . in the uk however most bands had split up , the hangmen - who had formed after the first and second waves - became reliant on live events that did not specifically cater to the much depreciated psychobilly audiences , resulting in the genre being introduced to a wider audience and the band acquiring a more diverse following that included punks and bikers . . canada . psychobilly also spread to canada . stylistically , déjà voodoo ( who sometimes described themselves as '' sludgeabilly '' ) and condition , both from montreal , might be considered early forerunners of the genre . as early as 1983 , both bands issued recordings that displayed the rockabilly and garage punk influences of psychobilly , as well as a lyrical tendency towards horror and dark themes , often presented with humour . although it was not acknowledged as such at the time , montreal 's mongols likely came closest to true psychobilly . from the somber cramps-ish original title track to the covers of deranged rockabilly ( hasil adkins ) , fifties rhythm ' n ' blues ( via psychobilly forefathers the sonics ) , sixties garage rock by quebec teenage sensations les lutins , and obscure , off-kilter instrumentals ( one by the nautiloids ) , their mini-lp sleepwalk ( 1986 ) runs the gamut of all the musical bases of the genre . in addition , a few years later , the mongols had their only other recording , '' bébé cadavre '' ( cadaver baby ) , included on the lachés lousses compilation ( 1990 ) . edmonton 's dusty chaps might also be seen as an early exponent of the style with the inclusion of their sinister '' psychopath of love '' on nervous records ' compilation boppin ' in canada ( 1991 ) . following in those tracks , in the mid-nineties , were vancouver 's deadcats . their guitarist , mike dennis , had previously played in hardcore punk bands the bill of rights and forbidden beat . besides his own band , dennis also issued early recordings by montreal psychobillies the alley dukes , and bloodshot bill - who is also sometimes associated with the genre - on his flying saucer records label . the gutter demons were a band formed in 2002 in montreal , quebec , who became one of the most recognizable canadian psychobilly bands , their live debut came supporting the hangmen from the uk on their canadian tour of that year . the brains is a band from montreal . the creepshow is a band from burlington , ontario , canada . which formed in 2005 ; they write the majority of their songs about horror films . the switchblade valentines are a canadian psychobilly band from victoria . big john bates is known as '' one of vancouver 's most notorious musicians '' ( globe & mail - toronto ) . the band re-branded in 2011 as '' americana noir '' ( a rustic offshoot of the dark cabaret genre ) when the gretsch-endorsed bates was joined by montana 's brandy bones on hofner upright bass and cello . lauren spike is a band from toronto , ontario , canada , who have played many large shows such as amnesia rockfest . . musical style . musically , psychobilly is rooted primarily in two genres : late 1970s punk rock and 1950s american rockabilly . tiger army frontman nick 13 explains : '' the number-one misconception people have is that psychobilly is the same thing as rockabilly . rockabilly is on the family tree , but it 's a totally different sound and attitude . '' psychobilly progenitors the cramps acknowledge their music 's deep roots in american blues , rhythm and blues , and traditional rock and roll . alternative press writer ryan downey notes that contemporary psychobilly also draws from other rock genres and subgenres : '' driven by the rhythmic pounding of a double bass , the music swings with the snarl of punk rock while sometimes thrashing alongside speed metal or crashing headlong into country icon hank williams . '' craig brackenridge lists other sources of inspiration : 1960s garage punk , glam rock , revival rock ' n ' roll , and heavy metal . nate katz states that '' while traces of glam , metal , and punk can be found in psychobilly , at its core , psychobilly emerged from rockabilly , particularly the neo-rockabilly movement in london during the late 1970s '' . katz states that '' the sharks brought in elements of new wave music to their sound . '' moreover , '' in the song '' take a razor to your head , '' they clearly seek out those breaking away from neo-rockabilly into psychobilly '' . downey acknowledges that contemporary psychobilly 's roots extend into 2 tone ska , garage rock , hardcore punk , street punk and oi ! . hilary okun , publicist for epitaph and hellcat records , notes : '' the music appeals to fans of punk , indie , metal , new wave , goth , rockabilly , surf , and country . '' the influence of heavy metal on the psychobilly style resulted in the nekromantix 's 1994 album brought back to life being nominated for a grammy award in the category of '' best heavy metal album . '' psychobilly is commonly played with a simple guitar/bass/drum/vocal arrangement , with many bands consisting of only power trio . often the guitarist or bassist will be the lead singing , with few acts having a dedicated singer ( mad sin being one of the examples with a dedicated singer ) . psychobilly guitarists often play rockabilly-style hollowbody archtop guitars with f-holes and a tremolo bar . guitarists may play punk-style power chords one moment , and then shift into rockabilly-style fingerpicking and rockabilly guitar-style seventh chords , with a heavy focus on minor chords and palm muting . notes are often bent , either by pulling the string down or by using the tremolo bar . gretsch hollowbody guitars are a popular choice . guitarists often use 1950s-style tube amplifiers such as by makers such as fender and it is common to see stacks of two speaker cabinets . as with rockabilly guitarists , the overdrive tone usually comes from what is produced naturally by overdriving the tube amp , rather than by plugging into a distortion pedal . an upright double bass is often used instead of the electric bass found in most rock bands ( though an electric bass is sometimes optional ) . the use of the upright bass is influenced by 1950s rockabilly and rock and roll musicians , particularly in the use of walking bass lines and the use of slapping . the bass is often played in the slap style , in which the player snaps the string by pulling it until it hits the fingerboard , or hits the strings against the fingerboard , which adds a high-pitched percussive '' clack '' or '' slap '' sound to the low-pitched notes . kim nekroman and geoff kresge are two examples of psychobilly bassists who have developed a rapid , percussive slap bass technique . this live nekromantix song showcases kim 's rapid percussive slapping . this live tiger army song shows kresge 's rapid slap bass technique . psychobilly bassists often use gut strings , to get the deep , low 1950s tone . like rockabilly bassists , psychobilly bassists often use both a bridge pickup and a fingerboard pickup , with the latter being used to pick up slapping and percussive sounds . psychobilly bassists often decorate their basses by painting them with retro pin-up style images or designs or by putting stickers on them . some acts have made their upright bass the centerpiece of their stage shows ; some psychobilly musicians elaborately decorate their upright bass , such as nekromantix frontman kim nekroman , whose '' coffinbass '' is in the shape of a coffin , with a headstock in the shape of a cross . nekroman created his original '' coffinbass '' from an actual child-sized coffin , and has since designed new models to achieve better acoustics , as well as collapsibility for easier transportation . another notable act to use a coffin-shaped bass is the brazilian psychobilly band os catalepticos . horrorpops frontwoman patricia day also uses an elaborately painted and decorated double bass . the cramps performed without a bass player in their early career , using two guitars instead . they did not add a bass guitar to their arrangement until 1986 , and have used an electric bass since that time . cramps guitarist/bassist poison ivy sees this as one of the distinctions that separate the band from the psychobilly movement : '' i think psychobilly has evolved into a gamut of things . it seems to involve upright bass and playing songs extremely fast . that 's certainly not what we do . '' samantha von trash 's history of psychobilly lists 13 essential albums for people new to psychobilly : the cramps : songs the lord taught us ; reverend horton heat : smoke 'em if you got 'em ; the misfits : static age ; social distortion : mommy 's little monster ; the essential johnny cash ; cult of the psychic fetus : funeral home sessions ; cult of the psychic fetus : she devil ; demented are go : satan 's rejects ; 7 shot screamers : keep the flame alive ; nekromantix : curse of the coffin ; '' rockabilly riot ! '' compilation ; thee merry widows ' self-titled ep ; stray cats : either built for speed or rock this town . stage shows . the performance style in psychobilly concerts emphasizes high energy and a lot of interactions between the band members and with the audience . the horrorpops sometimes switch instruments for fun , and kim nekroman does stunts such as playing the fingerboard of his coffinbass with his tongue . demented are go are known for their wild stage show , which included simulated on-stage sex with a vacuum cleaner . the australian band zombie ghost train were known for appearing on stage in '' zombified '' clothes , featuring rips and bloodstains , and zombie make up , complete with fake stitches across the face . the phenomenauts are known for their inventive and fun-filled live shows , which often include smoke machines , the streamerator 2000 , and various on-stage theatrics . big john bates was banned in one venue due to concerns about their overly risque stage antics . deadbolt is known for its use of power tools during their live sets , and it is customary for the audience to be showered with sparks of red-hot metal during their live shows . king kurt , a 1980s band , was known for its infamous '' food fight '' gigs , in which eggs and bags of flour were thrown around on and off stage and audience members were given free haircuts . '' king kurt had a bad reputation for doing things that would make people question the band 's stability . these included going on stage in dresses , dressed as zulus , and playing drinking games on stage . tabloids often accused them of mixing drugs . into whatever they made people drink on stage , tossing dead animals into the crowds , and rampant sex occurring as they played . '' '' at any psychobilly show , you might see some dancing… only , it 's not your average dancing . that would be what 's called moshing . according to wreckingpit.com , wrecking is more like a demented hybrid of '' slam-dancing and freestyle wrestling '' . it 's basically the semi-official psycho happy-dance , hence the nekromantix song , '' struck by a wrecking ball '' . '' '' originally , the dancing was known as 'going mental'- this type of dancing eventually became known as 'stomping ' , and then finally took on its official name : 'wrecking ' '' . one definition of '' wrecking '' is '' a strange form of dance that can best be described as a combination of slam dancing , swing dancing , and fistfights . '' . lyrical style . lyrically , psychobilly bands tend to favor topics and imagery drawn from horror , science fiction and exploitation films , violence , lurid sexuality , and other taboo topics , usually presented in a comedic or tongue-in-cheek fashion reminiscent of the camp ( style ) . shawn mcintosh and marc leverette note that while rockabilly and punk scenes took their retro '' nostalgia very seriously , striving for authenticity '' , in the psychobilly scene , the '' aesthetics of kitsch , camp and cheese '' are openly embraced . psychobilly bands drew on '' all eras of horror , from gothic novels and classic films to schlocky cold war flicks to psychological thrillers and splatter films . '' psychobilly songs make reference to slashers ( the meteor 's michael myers ) and serial killers ( e.g . , the frantic flintstone 's jack the ripper ) . most acts avoid '' serious '' subjects such as politics . original psychobilly act the meteors articulated a very politics stance to the scene , a reaction to the right- and left-wing political attitudes dividing british youth cultures of the late 1970s and early 1980s . this attitude has carried through later generations of psychobilly . nekromantix frontman kim nekroman describes : '' we are all different people and have different political views . psychobilly is all about having fun . politics is not fun and therefore has nothing to do with psychobilly ! '' nate katz explains the rationale for psychobilly 's apolitical stance as follows : 1980 was an important year for britain . recently elected margaret thatcher 's policies led to a drastic decline in employment , especially among the blue collared and youth ( kim , 2005 ) . a year later , there were five race riots within the london area . on a political level , london was incredibly tense . fans of psychobilly ( known as psychos ) wanted none of this , or at the very least a break from the stress created by the political world . by establishing an unwritten rule that the music was to be apolitical , psychobilly music became a method of escape from the real world . katz notes that at the '' same time in the 1980s , the revival of the b-movie , particularly the return of horror movies , occurred . , such as the howling , the shining , a remake of the thing , friday the 13th , and an american werewolf in london ( all 80s movies ) . psychos gravitated towards these movies due to their lack of seriousness , mindless gore , and enjoyed the throwback to the original b-movies of the 1950s . '' . fashion and subculture . according to nate katz , '' in its early days , psychobilly relied almost entirely on word of mouth to be spread throughout london . if your friends did not know of it a band or gig , the odds were that you did not either . '' the then manager of the meteors , nick garrard , produced a magazine called 'cat talk ' which was heavy on meteors content & their new style of psychobilly music . one of the band 's original fans ( proff ) produced gig flyers with a heavy horror/frankenstein theme . roy williams of nervous records created a newsletter that would be passed around known as 'zorch news ' , which allowed fans to keep up with psychobilly news that specifically related to bands involved with nervous records . '' despite being starved of the oxygen of mainstream music press attention for more than 25 years , psychobilly has thrived in the underground , building a network of fiercely loyal followers and producing a huge number of bands who each peddle their own brand of the genre . '' fanzines are one of the ways the psychobilly scene created a social network , with deathrow being the '' . only long running psychobilly fanzine . '' psychobilly musicians and fans , who are sometimes called '' psychos '' or just '' psychobillies , '' often dress in styles that borrow from 1950s rockabilly and rock and roll , as well as 1970s punk fashions . long '' old mans '' overcoats , army trousers , bleached jeans & dr martin boots were all part of the early '' psycho '' uniform along with band logo t-shirts . heavily painted & studded leather jackets were also worn . this was topped off by a 1950s style quiff or flat-top , often bleached with shaved back & sides . psychobilly band members of both sexes often have prominent tattoos , often with a vintage theme . psychobilly '' tattoos followed the same general notions as band designs , being highly influenced by the same movies . common tattoos were images of the macabre nature such as bats , skulls , gravestones , as well as the occasional pin-up doll and band logo . '' the goal of the psychobilly scene member is to '' live fast , die young , and leave a ( not so ) beautiful corpse . '' other aesthetic later influences include the scooterboy and skinhead subcultures , although not all performers or fans choose to dress in these styles . scooterboy fashion includes flight jackets , mechanic 's jackets , and motorcycle jackets . '' skinheads brought in things such as doc martens and flight jacket . and punks brought in clothes such as the leather jacket and tighter clothing ; beneath the jacket was often a band t-shirt or a tartan shirt taken from rockabillies '' psychos often cut the arms off of their leather jackets , converting them into vests , and decorate the jackets with horror imagery or band logos . men often wear brothel creepers or dr . martens boots and shave their heads into high wedge-shaped pompadours or quiffs , military-style crops , or mohawks . the sharks song '' take a razor to your head '' articulated the early psychobilly scene 's code of dress , which was a reaction to the earlier british teddy boy movement : teddy boys had long , strongly-moulded greased-up hair with a quiff at the front and the side combed back to form a duck 's ass at the rear . the shark 's song said : '' when your mom says you look really nice / when you 're dressed up like a ted / it 's time to follow this cat 's advice / take a razor to your head '' . '' like most hairstyles of the 1980s , things were taken to the extreme . people in the psychobilly scene tried to get their hair as tall as possible and brought in streaks of strange colors . '' lucky-13 '' is an american hot rod clothing company proudly servicing pinup , rockabilly , psychobilly , rock n ' roll , and punk rock guys and gals for over 15 years '' inked fashion calls itself '' the rockabilly shop for petticoat , psychobilly and rockabilly clothing . '' paper doll productions sells what it calls the '' . boldest psychobilly designs on the market today , fantastic for anyone who has a love of vintage style and classic horror . inspired by rockabilly fashion , psychobilly has the same influences of 40 's and 50 's clothing but features a far greater modern flair , incorporating bold colours and horror themed designs to create an entirely unique genre of clothing . '' . see also . hasil adkins legendary stardust cowboy ( norman carl odam ) , psychobilly pioneer list of psychobilly bands . references . further reading . brackenridge , craig . hells bent on rockin ' : a history of psychobilly . published january 1 , 2007 by cherry red books . polhumus , ted . streetstyle : from sidewalk to catwalk . ( new york , thames , 1994 ) . ( it contains a history of psychobilly up until the early 1990s ) '' psychobilly meltdown . '' ( 1988 , october 9 ) . melody maker , 64 , 12 . wilson , alan . deathrow : the chronicles of psychobilly : the very best of britain 's essential psycho fanzine issues 1-38 . published october 1 , 2006 by cherry red books .