Iraq and weapons of mass destruction

program development 1960s–1980s . 1959 august 17 ussr and iraq signed an agreement for the ussr to build a nuclear power plant and established a nuclear program as part of their mutual understanding . 1968 a soviet supplied irt-2000 research reactor together with a number of other facilities that could be used for radioisotope production was built close to baghdad . 1975 saddam hussein arrived in moscow and asked about building an advanced model of an atomic power station . moscow would approve only if the station was regulated by the international atomic energy agency , but iraq refused . however , an agreement of co-operation was signed on april 15 , which superseded the one of 1959 . after 6 months paris agreed to sell 72 & nbsp ; kg of 93 % uranium and built a nuclear power plant without iaea control at a price of 3 & nbsp ; billion . in the early 1970s , saddam hussein ordered the creation of a clandestine nuclear weapons program . iraq 's weapons of mass destruction programs were assisted by a wide variety of firms and governments in the 1970s and 1980s . as part of project 922 , german firms such as karl kolb helped build iraqi chemical weapons facilities such as laboratories , bunkers , an administrative building , and first production buildings in the early 1980s under the cover of a pesticide plant . other german firms sent 1,027 tons of precursors of mustard gas , sarin , tabun , and tear gasses in all . this work allowed iraq to produce 150 tons of mustard agent and 60 tons of tabun in 1983 and 1984 respectively , continuing throughout the decade . five other german firms supplied equipment to manufacture botulin toxin and mycotoxin for germ warfare . in 1988 , german engineers presented centrifuge data that helped iraq expand its nuclear weapons program . laboratory equipment and other information was provided , involving many german engineers . all told , 52 % of iraq 's international chemical weapon equipment was of german origin . the state establishment for pesticide production ( sepp ) ordered culture media and incubators from germany 's water engineering trading . . western help with iraq 's wmd program . the united states supported iraq during the iran–iraq war with over 500 & nbsp ; million worth of dual use equipment that were approved by the commerce department . among them were advanced computers , some of which were used in iraq 's nuclear program . timmerman , kenneth r . the death lobby : how the west armed iraq . new york , houghton mifflin company , 1991 . the non-profit american type culture collection and the centers for disease control sold or sent biological samples of anthrax , west nile virus and botulism to iraq up until 1989 , which iraq claimed it needed for medical research . a number of these materials were used for iraq 's biological weapons research program , while others were used for vaccine development . for example , the iraqi military settled on the american type culture collection strain 14578 as the exclusive anthrax strain for use as a biological weapon , according to charles duelfer . duelfer , charles . comprehensive report of the special advisor to the director of central intelligence on iraq 's weapons of mass destruction , 30 september 2004 , vol 3 , '' biological warfare '' , p.21 . in the late 1980s , the british government secretly gave the arms company matrix churchill permission to supply parts for saddam hussein 's weapons program , while british industry supplied gerald bull as he developed the iraqi supergun . in march 1990 , a case of nuclear triggers bound for iraq were seized at heathrow airport . the scott report uncovered much of the secrecy that had surrounded the arms-to-iraq affair when it became known . hidden assets , history today ; march 1994 the british government also financed a chlorine factory that was intended to be used for manufacturing mustard gas . iraq 's nuclear weapons program suffered a serious setback in 1981 when the osiraq reactor , which would have been capable of breeding weapons-usable nuclear material , was operation opera before it could be commissioned . david albright and mark hibbs , writing for the bulletin of the atomic scientists , disagree with this view , however . there were far too many technological challenges unsolved , they say . . iran–iraq war . in 1980 , the u.s . defense intelligence agency filed a report stating that iraq had been actively acquiring chemical weapons capacities for several years , which later proved to be accurate . in november 1980 , two months into the iran–iraq war , the first reported use of chemical weapons took place when tehran radio reported a poison gas attack on susangerd by iraqi forces . the united nations reported many similar attacks occurred the following year , leading iran to develop and deploy a mustard gas capability . by 1984 , iraq was using poison gas with great effectiveness against iranian '' human wave '' attacks . chemical weapons were used extensively against iran during the iran–iraq war . on january 14 , 1991 , the defense intelligence agency said an iraqi agent described , in medically accurate terms , military smallpox casualties he said he saw in 1985 or 1986 . two weeks later , the armed forces medical intelligence center reported that eight of 69 iraqi prisoners of war whose blood was tested showed an immunity to smallpox , which had not occurred naturally in iraq since 1971 ; the same prisoners had also been inoculated for anthrax . the assumption being that iraq used both smallpox and anthrax during this war . the washington post reported that in 1984 the cia secretly started providing intelligence to the iraqi army during the iran-iraq war . this included information to target chemical weapons strikes . the same year it was confirmed beyond doubt by european doctors and un expert missions that iraq was employing chemical weapons against the iranians . most of these occurred during the iran–iraq war , but chemical weapons were used at least once against the shia popular uprising in southern iraq in 1991 . chemical weapons were used extensively , with post-war iranian estimates stating that more than 100,000 iranians were affected by saddam hussein 's chemical weapons during the eight-year war with iraq . iran today is the world 's second-most afflicted country by weapons of mass destruction , only after japan . the official estimate does not include the civilian population contaminated in bordering towns or the children and relatives of veterans , many of whom have developed blood , lung and skin complications , according to the organization for veterans . nerve gas agents killed about 20,000 iranian soldiers immediately , according to official reports . of the 90,000 survivors , some 5,000 seek medical treatment regularly and about 1,000 are still hospitalized with severe , chronic conditions . many others were hit by mustard gas . despite the removal of saddam hussein and his administration by american forces , there is deep resentment and anger in iran that it was western nations that helped iraq develop and direct its chemical weapons arsenal in the first place and that the world did nothing to punish iraq for its use of chemical weapons throughout the war . for example , the united states and the uk blocked condemnation of iraq 's known chemical weapons attacks at the un security council . no resolution was passed during the war that specifically criticized iraq 's use of chemical weapons , despite the wishes of the majority to condemn this use . on march 21 , 1986 the united nation security council recognized that '' chemical weapons on many occasions have been used by iraqi forces against iranian forces '' ; this statement was opposed by the united states , the sole country to vote against it in the security council ( the uk abstained ) . on march 23 , 1988 western media sources reported from halabja in iraqi kurdistan , that several days before iraq had launched a large scale chemical assault on the town . later estimates were that 7,000 people had been killed and 20,000 wounded . the halabja poison gas attack caused an international outcry against the iraqis . later that year the u.s . senate proposed the prevention of genocide act of 1988 , cutting off all u.s . assistance to iraq and stopping u.s . imports of iraqi oil . the reagan administration opposed the bill , calling it premature , and eventually prevented it from taking effect , partly due to a mistaken dia assessment which blamed iran for the attack . at the time of the attack the town was held by iranian troops and iraqi kurdish guerrillas allied with tehran . the iraqis blamed the halabja attack on iranian forces . this was still the position of saddam hussein in his december 2003 captivity . on august 21 , 2006 , the trial of saddam hussein and six codefendants , including hassan al-majid ( '' chemical ali '' ) , opened on charges of genocide against the kurds . while this trial does not cover the halabja attack , it does cover attacks on other villages during the iraqi '' anfal '' operation alleged to have included bombing with chemical weapons . . chemical weapon attacks . based on a series of polls taken from june–september 2003 . , pipa , 2 october 2003 . see also . at the center of the storm : my years at the cia alexander coker death of david kelly dodgy dossier corinne heraud iraqi aluminum tubes office of special plans operation rockingham demetrius perricos project babylon , a project with unknown objectives commissioned by iraqi president saddam hussein to build a series of '' superguns '' yellowcake forgery . references . further reading . coletta , giovanni . '' politicising intelligence : what went wrong with the uk and us assessments on iraqi wmd in 2002 '' journal of intelligence history ( 2018 ) 17 1 pp 65–78 is a scholarly analysis . isikoff , michael . and david corn . hubris : the inside story of spin , scandal , and the selling of the iraq war ( 2006 ) is journalistic . jervis , robert . 2010 . why intelligence fails lessons from the iranian revolution and the iraq war . cornell university press . lake , david a . '' two cheers for bargaining theory : assessing rationalist explanations of the iraq war . '' international security 35.3 ( 2010 ) : 7–52 . braut-hegghammer , målfrid . 2020 . '' cheater 's dilemma : iraq , weapons of mass destruction , and the path to war . '' international security . external links . congressional research service ( crs ) reports regarding iraq wmd theories and conspiracies prospect magazine looksmart – iraq wmd controversy directory category washington post article by arthur keller a former cia case worker who worked on trying to find wmds in iraq richard s . tracey , trapped by a mindset : the iraq wmd intelligence failure , 23 january 2007 , air & space power journal . teaser of upcoming documentary film land of confusion featuring pennsylvania army national guard soldiers assigned to the iraq survey group in 2004–05 . annotated bibliography for the iraqi nuclear weapons program from the alsos digital library for nuclear issues