Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

history . the technikum was conceived in the early 1900s by the german-jewish fund ezrah as a school of engineering and sciences . it was to be the only institution of higher learning in the then ottoman palestine , other than the bezalel academy of art and design in jerusalem ( founded in 1907 ) . in october 1913 , the board of trustees selected german as the language of instruction , provoking a major controversy known as the war of the languages . after opposition from american and russian jews to the use of german , the board of trustees reversed itself in february 1914 and selected hebrew as the language of instruction . the german name technikum was also replaced by the hebrew name technion . technion 's cornerstone was laid in 1912 , and studies began 12 years later in 1924 . in 1923 albert einstein visited and planted the now-famous first arecaceae , as an initiative of nobel tradition . the first palm tree still stands today in front of the old technion building , which is now the madatech museum , in the hadar neighborhood . einstein founded the first technion society , and served as its president upon his return to germany . in 1924 , arthur blok became the technion 's first president . . campuses . haifa . technion city generally refers to the 1.2-square-kilometer site located on the pine-covered north-eastern slopes of mount carmel . the campus comprises 100 buildings , occupied by thousands of people every day . the technion has two additional campuses . its original building in midtown haifa , in use by the technion until the mid-1980s , now houses the israel national museum of science , technology and space . the rappaport faculty of medicine is located in the neighborhood of bat galim , adjacent to rambam hospital , the largest medical center in northern israel . recreational activities on the main campus include an olympic-size swimming pool as well as gymnastics , squash , and tennis facilities . sports facilities . ciar.technion.ac.il . retrieved on 5 october 2013 . the technion symphony orchestra and choir are composed mainly of technion students and staff . each term , the orchestra offers a series of daytime and evening concerts . films and live performances by leading israeli artists take place on campus on a regular basis . tel aviv . technion 's division of continuing education and external studies has been operating in the tel aviv area since 1958 . in july 2013 , the technion moved to a new campus in sarona . the technion satellite campus in sarona includes three buildings in a 1,800 sq . meter area , with a total of 16 modern classrooms . among the programs that study at sarona are the technion 's international mba program , which includes students from around the world and guest lecturers from universities such as london business school , columbia university , and insead . . cornell tech . on 19 december 2011 , a bid by a consortium of cornell university and technion won a competition to establish a new high-tier applied science and engineering institution in new york city . the competition was established by new york city mayor michael bloomberg in order to increase entrepreneurship and job growth in the city 's technology sector . the winning bid consisted of a state-of-the-art tech campus being built on roosevelt island , which will have its first phase completed by 2017 , with a temporary off-site campus opening in 2013 at the google new york city headquarters building at 111 eighth avenue . the new 'school of genius ' in new york city has been named the jacobs technion-cornell institute . its founding director was craig gotsman , technion 's hewlett-packard professor of computer engineering . in 2015 , aol announced an investment of 5 million in a video research project at the institute . positive media coverage abounds , as well as some small scale protests from the margins of political and environmental activism . . guangdong technion israel institute of technology . in september 2013 the li ka shing foundation and the technion announced they would be joining forces to create a new institute for technology at shantou university , guangdong , south-eastern china . the li ka shing foundation pledged a grant of us 130 million for the creation of the institute . the degrees taught , including bachelors , masters and doctorates , will be accredited by the technion . the total construction costs are 147 million . english will be gtiit 's language of instruction . gtiit will comprise three units : the college of engineering ; the college of science ; and the college of life science . the goal is to have about 5,000 students eventually . the institute will eventually grant technion engineering degrees at all levels - bachelor , masters and phd . initially the courses offered are chemical engineering , biotechnology and food engineering , materials engineering . by 2020 the institute will start teaching other disciplines from mechanics to aerospace engineering . . faculty . aerospace engineering . founded in 1954 , the faculty of aerospace engineering conducts research and education in a wide range of aerospace disciplines . the aerospace research center also consists of the aerodynamics ( wind tunnels ) laboratory , the aerospace structures laboratory , the combustion and rocket propulsion laboratory , the turbo and jet engine laboratory , the flight control laboratory and the design for manufacturing laboratory . architecture and town planning . the technion faculty of architecture awards barch degrees awarded after five years of study . its graduate program in architecture accepts about 15 students each year , and it accepts about 4–5 doctoral students , focusing on subjects such as architectural theory and philosophy , bio-climate and energy conscious design , morphology , computer application , person-environment relations , housing , architectural history , and urban design . . biology . the faculty of biology was established in 1971 . advanced research is carried out in 23 research groups , focusing on a variety of aspects of cellular , molecular and developmental biology . the faculty has extensive collaborations with the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries . the faculty has around 350 undergraduate students and over 100 graduate students . the technion insider : technion prospectus from 2007 . . biomedical engineering . established in 1968 , the faculty of biomedical engineering has a multidisciplinary scope nurturing research activities that blend medical and biological engineering . research projects have resulted in the development of patented medical aids . recent research breakthroughs include the identification of a structured neurological code for syllables and could let paraplegics '' speak '' virtually through the connection of the brain to a computer . siegel , judy . ( 23 august 2012 ) israeli research may help severely paralyzed speak jpost israel news . jpost . retrieved on 5 october 2013 . . biotechnology and food engineering . unique in israel , the faculty of biotechnology and food engineering offers a blend of courses in engineering , life and natural sciences as well as joint degree programs with the faculties of biology and chemistry . the faculty houses biotechnology laboratories , as well as a large food processing pilot plant and a packaging laboratory . it currently has 350 undergraduates and more than 120 graduate students . civil and environmental engineering . in 2002 , two of the original technion faculties – civil and agricultural engineering , were merged to create the faculty of civil and environmental engineering . its state vision is to '' maintain and enhance the leading position of the faculty of civil & environmental engineering amongst the top departments in the world . and to position the faculty as the national center for research & development and human resources for the sustainable development . '' technion faculty of civil and environmental engineering דף בית . cee.technion.ac.il . retrieved on 5 october 2013 . the faculty is the home of technion 's expanding international school of engineering . chemical engineering . the wolfson faculty of chemical engineering is israel 's oldest and largest faculty in the field , educating the vast majority of chemical engineers in israel 's chemical industries . research activities include materials , complex fluids , processing , transport and surface phenomena and process control . chemistry . the schulich faculty of chemistry offers a variety of joint programs , including with materials engineering , chemical engineering , physics , and food engineering . it also offers a joint degree with the faculty of biology leading to a degree in molecular biochemistry . around 100 research projects at the faculty are sponsored by industry and national and international foundations . it also offers a variety of outreach and youth programs . . computer science . founded in 1969 , this is one of the largest technion faculties , with over 1,000 undergraduate students and 200 graduate students . the faculty of computer science was ranked 15th among 500 universities in computer sciences for 2011 and 18th of 500 since 2012 . the faculty is located in the taub family science and technology center , following the support of the philanthropist henry taub . education in technology and science . founded in 1965 , the department of education in technology & science became a faculty in 2015 . the faculty trains undergraduates in the most advanced methods of teaching science and technology in schools . the faculty is home to a research and development center in the field . it has over 100 graduate students and 350 undergraduate students including second career engineers and scientists who elect to study toward stem educator career . electrical engineering . the faculty of electrical engineering claims to be the major source of engineers who lead the development of advanced israeli technology in the fields of electronics , computers and communications . some 2000 undergraduate students study in the department for a bsc degree in electrical engineering / computer engineering / computer and software engineering , and 400 graduate students study for the degrees of msc and phd . the department has extensive relations with industry as well as academic and industrial special liaison support programs . technion – electrical engineering : your portal to high-tech . webee.technion.ac.il . retrieved on 5 october 2013 . . humanities and arts . the department of humanities and arts serves all the technion community , offering courses taught by renowned visiting and adjunct scholars including philosophy of science , social and political sciences , linguistics , psychology , law and anthropology and an array of theoretical and performing arts courses . the technion theater . the technion theater was established in 1986 , by professor ouriel zohar . the theater teaches 8 courses , and it has about 150 students per semester . the theater presented 52 performances in different styles , some by hanoch levin , yehoshua sobol , moliere , shakespeare , pierre de marivaux , henrik ibsen and bernard shaw , sławomir mrożek among others . the theater also presented plays written by the director and the actors . the theater is invited to many festivals in europe universities . director scandar copti received ophir award in 2010 , played in '' end end '' directed by zohar , which was presented in jerusalem festival in 2001 . shlomo plessner participated in collective plays '' soft mattress '' and '' mix marriage '' 1986–1987 . the play '' transparent chains '' by sheli baliti from the faculty of chemical engineering performed at bratislava in 2006 , granada , haifa cinematheque , neve yosef festival and the theatre department at the university of haifa in 2007 . the play an enemy of the people by ibsen , the main actor rooney navon , professor at the faculty of civil and environmental engineering , received honorable nomination at benevento in italy in 2009 , and also in isfia near haifa . the show '' invisible clothes '' written and directed by ouriel zohar presented at the international theater festival in saint petersburg state university in 2012 . industrial engineering and management . the william davidson faculty of industrial engineering & management ( ie & m ) is the oldest such department in israel . ie & m was launched as a technion academic department in 1958 . the department grew under the leadership of pinchas naor , who served as its founding dean . naor 's vision was to combine industrial engineering with management by creating a large , inherently multidisciplinary unit covering a wide spectrum of activities such as applied engineering , mathematical modeling , economics , behavioral sciences , operations research , and statistics . . materials science and engineering . home to nobel laureate in chemistry distinguished dan shechtman , the faculty of materials engineering is israel 's major study center in materials science . the faculty houses the electron microscopy center , the x-ray diffraction laboratory , the atomic force microscopy laboratory and the physical and mechanical measurements lab . . mathematics . the faculty of mathematics houses both pure and applied mathematics , and was home to the mathematician paul erdős . founded in 1950 , it has around 46 faculty members , 200 undergraduate students and 100 graduate students . it provides instruction for students in all other technion faculties and organizes mathematics competition for gifted high school students and a summer camp in number theory . mechanical engineering . founded in 1948 , the technion faculty of mechanical engineering has over 830 students and 215 graduate students . research is conducted in the faculty 's 36 laboratories across the whole spectrum of mechanical engineering , from nano-scale fields through to applied engineering of national projects . . medicine . the ruth and bruce rappaport faculty of medicine is home to two nobel laureates : avram hershko and aaron ciechanover . it is one of four state-sponsored medical schools in israel . it was founded in 1979 through the philanthropy of bruce rappaport and is active in basic science research and pre-clinical medical training in anatomy , biochemistry , biophysics , immunology , microbiology , physiology , and pharmacology . rambam mourns baruch rappaport visionary and generous donor . rambam.org.il ( 11 january 2010 ) . retrieved on 5 october 2013 . other facilities on the faculty of medicine campus include teaching laboratories , a medical library , lecture halls , and seminar rooms . academic programs lead to master of science ( m.s . ) , doctor of philosophy ( phd ) , and doctor of medicine ( m.d . ) degrees . it also offers medical training leading to a m.d . degree to qualified american and canadian graduates of pre-med programs under the technion american medical school program ( teams ) . ( 3 june 2012 ) . retrieved on 5 october 2013 . the school has developed collaborative research and medical education programs with various institutions in medicine and bio-medical engineering including harvard university , new york university , johns hopkins university , university of toronto , university of california , santa cruz and mayo medical school . physics . the faculty of physics engages in experimental and theoretical research in the fields of astrophysics , high energy physics , solid state physics and biophysics . founded in 1960 , it includes the einstein institute of physics , the lidow physics complex , the rosen solid state building and the werksman physics building . multidisciplinary centers . nanotechnology and science . the russell berrie nanotechnology institute ( rbni ) was established in january 2005 as a joint endeavour of the russell berrie foundation , the government of israel , and the technion . it is one of the largest academic programs in israel , and is among the largest nanotechnology centers in europe and the us . rbni has over 110 faculty members , and approximately 300 graduate students and postdoctoral fellows under its auspices at technion . its multidisciplinary activities span 14 different faculties . energy research . the grand technion energy program is a multidisciplinary center of excellence bringing together technion 's top researchers in energy science and technology from over nine different faculties . founded in 2007 , gtep 's 4-point strategy targets research and development of alternative fuels ; renewable energy sources ; energy storage and conversion ; and energy conservation . the gtep is presently the only center in israel offering graduate studies in energy science and technology . space research . the asher space research institute is a specialized institute dedicated to multidisciplinary science research . established in 1984 , its members come from five technion faculties , and it has a technical staff of technion scientists in a variety of space-related fields : ( physics , aerospace engineering , mechanical engineering , electrical engineering , autonomous systems , and computer sciences ) . . technology transfer . technion has an impressive record in technology transfer . its dedicated office to bridge the transition of scientific and technological discovery to successfully commercialized innovation has been active since 2007 as t3 technion technology transfer as of 2011 , 424 patents were granted to technion innovations , with 845 patents pending . t 3 's partners include incubators , entrepreneurs , private investors , vcs and angel groups . it has strategic partnerships with microsoft , ibm , intel , philips , johnson & johnson , coca-cola , among others . technion international . the technion international ( ti ) is a department in the technion , offering courses taught entirely in english . the ti began its first year in 2009 , and now offers a full bsc in civil engineering , bsc in mechanical engineering as well as various study abroad options , all taught in english . student come from all over the globe – asia , africa , north and south america , europe and israel . they live on campus and enjoy trips around israel and activities throughout the year . outreach programs . technion offers after-school and summer enrichment courses for young people on subjects ranging from introductory electronics and computer programming to aerospace , architecture , biology , chemistry and physics . two examples are scitech and the math summer camp , devoted to number theory . technion recently set up and orchestrated the israeli chapter of engineers without borders , which among other projects , installed a network of biogas systems in rural nepal providing sustainable energy and improved sanitation . technion focus magazine – students – engineering with a soul . focus.technion.ac.il . retrieved on 5 october 2013 . . technion in the israeli society . the technion takes an active role in empowering students from unrepresented groups in the israeli society , such as haredim and arabs , by giving dedicated scholarships , social programs , and additional financial support . moreover , the technion is one of the main sponsors for the israeli league of first robotics competition which became a formal project of the technion since 2013 . . rankings . in 2019 , the shanghai academic ranking rated the technion as 85th in its list of the top 100 universities in the world . in 2012 , the magazine business insider ranked technion among the top 25 engineering schools in the world . technion in top 25 engineering schools in the world . israel21c ( 10 july 2012 ) . retrieved on 5 october 2013 . in 2012 , the center for world university rankings ranked technion 51st in the world and third in israel in its cwur world university rankings . for national rankings in 2011 , technion was ranked the no . 2 of universities in israel by arwu . in global rankings for that year , technion was ranked 102–150 by arwu , no . 220 by qs . it was ranked 401–500 by times higher education world university rankings in 2020 . in 2013 , the technion was the only school outside of the united states to make it into the top 10 on a new bloomberg rankings list of schools whose graduates are ceos of top u.s . tech companies . . research highlights . in 1982 , dan shechtman discovered a quasicrystal structure . this is a structure with a symmetry in the order of 5 – a phenomenon considered impossible until then by the then-current prevailing theories of crystallography . in 2011 he won the nobel prize in chemistry for this discovery . in 2004 , two technion professors , avram hershko and aaron ciechanover , won the nobel prize for the discovery of the biological system responsible for disassembling protein in the cell . shulamit levenberg , 37 , was chosen by scientific american magazine as one of the leading scientists in 2006 for the discovery of a method to transplant skin in a way the body does not reject . bme person info הנדסה ביו רפואית בטכניון . bm.technion.ac.il . retrieved on 5 october 2013 . moussa b.h . youdim developed rasagiline , a drug marketed by teva pharmaceuticals as azilect for the treatment of neurodegenerative disease , especially parkinson 's disease . in 1998 , technion successfully launched the '' gurwin techsat ii '' microsatellite , making technion one of five universities with a student program that designs , builds , and launches its own satellite . the satellite stayed in orbit until 2010 in the 1970s , computer scientists abraham lempel and jacob ziv developed the lempel-ziv-welch algorithm for data compression . in 1995 and 2007 they won an ieee richard w . hamming medal for pioneering work in data compression and especially for developing the algorithm . in 2019 , a team of 12 students won a gold medal at igem for developing bee-free honey . the technion library system . the technion library system is made of the elyachar central library and research libraries that are located in the faculty buildings . the central library determines professional policies and guidelines and provides services for all the technion libraries , including the library operating systems , the libraries ' web portal , acquisitions , cataloging , classification , and interlibrary loans . the faculty research libraries ' aim is to focus on the information needs of their students and academic staff . the libraries are transforming from traditional academic libraries to learning commons . the transition includes an ongoing process of evaluation of the libraries ' collections with the aim of identifying items in high demand and use to keep , valuable items to preserve , items in nominal use to archive in the central library , rare and precious items to preserve in the historical archive of the technion , at the central library , and items to withdraw , according to professional criteria . demographics . the percentage of arab students at the technion equals the percentage of the general arab population in israel : 20 % . . nobel laureates and notable people . nobel laureates . 2004 avram hershko , chemistry 2004 aaron ciechanover , chemistry 2011 dan shechtman , chemistry 2013 arieh warshel , chemistry . select faculty . moshe arens , professor of aeronautics from 1957 to 1962 . eli biham , cryptanalyst and cryptographer yaakov dori , president avram hershko and aaron ciechanover , recipients of the 2004 nobel prize in chemistry for the discovery of ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation amos horev , former president , former chairman of rafael ; member of the israeli turkel commission of inquiry into the gaza flotilla raid abraham lempel and jacob ziv , developers of the lempel-ziv ( lzw ) compression algorithm liviu librescu , hero during the virginia tech shooting marcelle machluf , biotechnology and food engineering shlomo moran , computer scientist eliahu nissim ( born 1933 ) , professor of aeronautical engineering ; president of the open university of israel asher peres , co-discoverer of quantum teleportation , awarded the 2004 rothschild prize in physics anat rafaeli , organisational behaviour researcher nathan rosen , co-author with albert einstein and boris podolsky of physics paper about the epr paradox in quantum mechanics rachel shalon , first woman engineer in israel shlomo shamai , electrical information theorist dan shechtman , first observer of quasicrystals and winner of the 2011 nobel prize in chemistry daniel weihs ( born 1942 ) , aeronautical engineering professor shmuel zaks , computer scientist and mathematician mario livio , astrophysicist and an author of works that popularize science and mathematics . notable alumni . technion graduates have been estimated to constitute over 70 percent of the founders and managers of high-tech businesses in israel . 80 percent of israeli nasdaq companies were founded and/or are led by technion graduates , and 74 percent of managers in israel 's electronic industries hold technion degrees . in the book , technion nation , shlomo maital , amnon frenkel and ilana debare document the contribution of technion alumni in building the modern state of israel . johny srouji – senior vice president of hardware technologies at apple inc . reporting to ceo tim cook shai agassi – it entrepreneur , former executive board member of sap ag and founder of better place saul amarel – pioneer in artificial intelligence nagourney , saul . '' saul amarel , 74 , an innovator in the artificial intelligence field '' , the new york times , 21 december 2002 . accessed 24 november 2007 . ella amitay sadovsky – artist ron arad ( b . 1958 ) – air force weapon systems officer ; classified as missing in action since 1986 itzhak bentov – inventor and author moti bodek ( b . 1961 ) – architect andrei broder – captcha developer , vice president of yahoo , formerly vice president of altavista shimshon brokman ( b . 1957 ) – olympic sailor yaron brook – president and executive director of the ayn rand institute chaim elata - professor emeritus of mechanical engineering , president of ben-gurion university of the negev , and chairman of the israel public utility authority for electricity haim eshed ( b . 1933 ) – retired brigadier general in the israel defense forces , former director of space programs for the israel ministry of defense and former officer in the israeli military intelligence . now professor at the asher institute for space research at technion . yona friedman ( b . 1923 ) – architect yossi gross – medical devices innovator and entrepreneur ; founding partner of rainbow medical andi gutmans – developer of php and co-founder of zend technologies abraham h . haddad – computer scientist daniel hershkowitz ( born 1953 ) - politician , mathematician , rabbi , and president of bar-ilan university maor farid - researcher at mit , social activist and author hossam haick – scientist and engineer ram karmi ( b . 1931 ) – architect shaul ladany – world-record-holding racewalker , bergen-belsen survivor , munich massacre survivor , professor of industrial engineering uzi landau – politician , minister of tourism daniel m . lewin – co-founder and cto of akamai , holder of two technion degrees , killed while resisting the hijacking of american airlines flight in the 11 september attacks on the united states . yoelle maarek - research vp , amazon yuval ne'eman ( 1925–2006 ) - physics , politician , and president of tel aviv university eliahu nissim ( born 1933 ) - professor of aeronautical engineering ; president of the open university of israel neri oxman – architect and designer who teaches at mit , known for her work in environmental design and digital morphogenesis guillermo sapiro – contributor to adobe software including photoshop and after effects . also one of the people who originally developed the lossless jpeg loco-i algorithm which is used in mars rovers ' icer image file format . amos shapira , former president of el al airlines , cellcom , and the university of haifa zehev tadmor ( born 1937 ) - chemical engineer and president of the technion yossi vardi – for over 40 years he has founded and helped build over 60 high-tech companies in a variety of fields , among them software , energy , internet , mobile , electro-optics and water technology . arieh warshel – chemist known for the development of multiscale models for complex chemical systems and the winner of the 2013 nobel prize in chemistry . daniel zajfman ( born 1959 ) - physicist ; president of the weizmann institute shlomo zilberstein – computer scientist known for his contributions to artificial intelligence , as well as a professor and associate dean at the university of massachusetts amherst yehuda and zohar zisapel – co-founders of the rad group , '' fathers '' of israel 's hi-tech industry . partnerships . technion and the technische universität darmstadt have formed a partnership in cyber security , entrepreneurship and materials science . technion recently became a partner of washington university in st . louis through the mcdonnell international scholars academy . . see also . israel association for automatic control matam , haifa high tech park in haifa , israel list of investors in bernard l . madoff securities list of universities in israel science and technology in israel unit 8200 unit 81 talpiot program . references . external links . technion live – division of public affairs & resource development at technion – israel institute of technology . multimedia resource in english . new renderings of cornell-technion campus in new york city technion – israel institute of technology website radio 1m – the students ' radio station technion suing senior professor for 50 % of his company stake