Archibald Campbell Tait

life . left born at 2 park place edinburgh post office directory 1811 in edinburgh , scotland , the son of craufurd tait ws of harviestoun ( 1777–1832 ) and susan née campbell ( 1777–1814 ) tait was educated at the royal high school and at the edinburgh academy , where he was twice elected dux . his parents were presbyterians but he early turned towards the scottish episcopal church . he was confirmed in his first year at oxford , having entered balliol college in october 1830 as a snell exhibitioner from the university of glasgow . he won an open scholarship , took his degree with a first-class in literae humaniores ( classics ) in 1833 and became a fellow and tutor of balliol . he was ordained deacon in 1836 and priest in 1838 and served a curacy at baldon . rapid changes among the fellows found him , at age 26 , '' the senior and most responsible of the four balliol tutors . '' the experience gained during this period stood him in good stead afterwards as a member of the first oxford university commission ( 1850–52 ) . he never sympathised with the principles of the oxford movement and , on the appearance of tract 90 in 1841 , he drafted the famous protest of the '' four tutors '' against it ; but this was his only important contribution to the controversy . on the other hand , although his sympathies were on the whole with the liberal movement in the university , he never took a lead in the matter . in 1842 , he became an undistinguished but useful successor to arnold as headmaster of rugby school ( one of his pupils was lewis carroll ) ; and a serious illness in 1848 , the first of many , led him to welcome the comparative leisure that followed upon his appointment to the deanery of carlisle in 1849 . his life there , however , was one of no little activity ; he served on the university commission , he restored his cathedral , and he did much excellent pastoral work . there , too , he suffered the great sorrow of his life . he had married catharine spooner at rugby in 1843 . she had opposed him becoming headmaster at rugby because of differences in their belief , but she still married him . in fact catharine was a great support to him and on her own account she helped the poor in the town and established a school for girls . in 1856 , within five weeks , five of their nine children died due to virulent scarlet fever in 1856 . two were spared and in time they were joined by another two siblings . not long afterwards , he was consecrated bishop of london on 22 november 1856 at the chapel royal , whitehall , by john bird sumner , archbishop of canterbury , as successor to charles james blomfield . his translation to canterbury in 1868 ( he had refused the archbishopric of york in 1862 ) constituted a recognition of his work but made no break in it . his last years were interrupted by illness and saddened by the death in 1878 of his only son , craufurd ( 1848–1878 ) , and of his wife , catharine née spooner ( 1819–1878 ) . notable accomplishments . left if blomfield had almost remodelled the idea of a bishop 's work , his successor surpassed him . tait had all blomfield 's earnestness and his powers of work , with far wider interests . blomfield had given himself zealously to the work of church-building ; tait followed in his steps by inaugurating ( 1863 ) the bishop of london 's fund . he devoted a very large part of his time at london in actual evangelistic work ; and , to the end , his interest in the pastoral side of the work of the clergy was greater than anything else . with his wife , he was instrumental in organising women 's work upon a sound basis , and he did not a little for the healthful regulation of anglican sisterhoods during the formative period in which this was particularly necessary . nor was he less successful in the larger matters of administration and organisation , which brought into play his sound practical judgment and strong common-sense . he was constant in his attendance in parliament and spared no pains in pressing on measures of practical utility . the modification of the terms of clerical subscription ( 1865 ) , the new lectionary ( 1871 ) , the burials act ( 1880 ) were largely owing to him ; for all of them , and especially the last , he incurred much obloquy at the time . dealings with liberalism . with regard to the liberal trend in modern thought , he was in sympathy with it . his object in dealing with questions of faith , as in dealing with the ritual question , was primarily a practical one : he wished to secure peace and obedience to the law as he saw it . consequently , after his sympathies had led him to express himself favourably towards some movement , he frequently found himself compelled to draw back . he expressed a qualified sympathy with some of the writers of essays and reviews and then joined in the censure of it by the bishops ( 1861 ) . the same kind of apparent vacillation was found in his action in other cases ; e.g . , in the case of john william colenso ( 1863 ) and in the controversy as to the use or disuse of the athanasian creed ( 1872 ) . it was naturally and widely misunderstood . some who did not know him thought , or pretended to think , that he was a socinian or a free-thinker . the world at large knew better ; but even frederick temple warned him , in the case of essays and reviews , '' you will not keep friends if you compel them to feel that in every crisis of life they must be on their guard against trusting you . '' . dealings with the oxford movement . image : tateblacksheep.jpg thumb upright illustration from punch magazine , showing archbishop tait , trying to control the '' ritualist black sheep '' with his crook called the '' public worship regulation act '' as regards oxford movement , tait was concerned with it during the whole of his episcopate and , above all , on the issue of ritualism , on which it naturally came into most direct conflict with the recognised ecclesiastical practice of the day . he had to deal with the st george's-in-the-east riots , in 1859 , and the troubles at st alban 's , holborn , in their earlier stages ( 1867 ) ; he took part as assessor in the privy council judgment in the ridsdale case ( 1877 ) ; he was more closely concerned than any other bishop with the agitation against confession in 1858 and again in 1877 . his method throughout was the same : he endeavoured to obtain a compliance to the law as declared by the courts ; failing this , he made the most earnest efforts to secure obedience to the ruling of the ordinary for the sake of the peace of the church ; after this , he could do nothing . he did not perceive how much of reason the '' ritualists '' had on their side : that they were fighting for practices which , they contended , were covered by the letter of the rubric ; and that , where rubrics were notoriously disregarded on all hands , it was not fair to proceed against one class of delinquent only . in fact , if others were inclined to ignore it altogether , tait could hardly realise anything but the connection between the english church and the state . from such a position there seemed to be no escape but in legislation for the deprivation of the recalcitrant clergy ; and the public worship regulation act 1874 was the result . left for this tait was by no means responsible as a whole : some of the provisions which proved most irksome were the result of amendments by lord shaftesbury which the bishops were unable to resist ; and it must be borne in mind that the most disastrous results of the measure were not contemplated by those who were instrumental in passing it . the results followed inevitably : clergy were cited before a new tribunal , and not only deprived but imprisoned . a widespread feeling of indignation spread not only among high churchmen , but among many who cared little or nothing for the ritual practices involved ; and it seemed impossible to foretell what the outcome would be . but the aged archbishop was moved as much as anybody , and tried hard to mitigate such a state of things . at length , when the rev . ah mackonochie was on the point of being deprived of his benefice of st . alban 's , holborn , for contumacy , the archbishop , then on his deathbed at addington palace , took steps which resulted in the carrying out of an exchange of benefices ( which had already been projected ) , which removed him from the jurisdiction of the court . this proved to be the turning-point ; and although the ritual difficulty by no means ceased , it was afterwards dealt with from a different point of view , and the public worship regulation act became practically obsolete . death and legacy . archbishop tait died on the first day of advent in 1882 at addington , london . tait was a churchman by conviction ; but , although the work of his life was all done in england , he remained a scotsman to the end . it was the opinion of some that he never really understood the historical position of the english church and took no pains to learn . john tillotson , one of his predecessors in the archbishopric , was a favourite hero of his , and in some ways the two men resembled one another . tait had none of tillotson 's gentleness , and he rode roughshod over the obstacles in his way . he can not be called a great ecclesiastical statesman , but he administered his office well and was undoubtedly one of the foremost public men of his day . memorials . after his death , a stone monument and bronze bust were erected in edinburgh , on the site of the house in which he was born , between the university of edinburgh 's mcewan hall and reid concert hall . works . the dangers and safeguards of modern theology ( 1861 ) harmony of revelation and the sciences ( 1864 ) . notes . references . . further reading . . external links .