Guy Debord

death . just before debord 's death , he filmed ( although did not release ) a documentary , son art et son temps ( his art and his times ) , an autobiography of sorts that focused primarily on social issues in paris in the 1990s . it has been suggested that his dark depiction of this period was a suicide note of sorts . both debord 's depression and alcohol consumption had become problematic , resulting in a form of neuritis . perhaps to end the suffering caused by these conditions , debord died by suicide on 30 november 1994 . this was not the first time he attempted to end his life . debord 's suicide is as controversial as it is unclear . some assert it was a revolutionary act related to his career . due to his involvement with the radical situationist international ( si ) , as well as his sadness at 'the society as a spectacle ' being considered a cliché in later life , many think that debord felt hopeless about the very society he was trying to shed light on . debord was said to be '' victim of the spectacle he fought '' . among the many commentaries on debord 's demise , one scholar noted : '' guy debord did not kill himself . he was murdered by the thoughtlessness and selfishness of so-called scholars ( primarily trendy lit-criters ) who colonized his brilliant ideas and transformed his radical politics into an academic status symbol not worth the pulp it 's printed on… '' . legacy . on 29 january 2009 , fifteen years after his death , christine albanel , minister of culture , classified the archive of his works as a '' national treasure '' in response to a sale request by yale university . the ministry declared that '' he has been one of the most important contemporary thinkers , with a capital place in history of ideas from the second half of the twentieth century . '' journal officiel de la republique francaise du 12 fevrier 2009 ( texte 120 ) similarly , debord once called his book , the society of the spectacle , '' the most important book of the twentieth century '' . he continues to be a canonical and controversial figure particularly among european scholars of radical politics and modern art . written works . guy debord 's best known works are his theoretical books , the society of the spectacle and comments on the society of the spectacle . in addition to these he wrote a number of autobiographical books including mémoires , panégyrique , cette mauvaise réputation . , and considérations sur l'assassinat de gérard lebovici . he was also the author of numerous short pieces , sometimes anonymous , for the journals potlatch , les lèvres nues , les chats sont verts , and internationale situationniste . the society of the spectacle was written in an '' interesting prose '' , unlike most writings in that time or of that nature . for debord , the spectacle is viewed as false representations in our real lives . the spectacle is a materialized worldview . the spectacle 'subjects human beings to itself' . debord was deeply distressed by the hegemony of governments and media over everyday life through mass production and consumption . he criticized both the capitalism of the west and the dictatorial communism of the eastern bloc for the lack of autonomy allowed to individuals by both types of governmental structure . debord postulated that alienation had gained a new relevance through the invasive forces of the 'spectacle ' – '' a social relation between people that is mediated by images '' consisting of mass media , advertising , and popular culture . the spectacle is a self-fulfilling control mechanism for society . debord 's analysis developed the notions of '' reification '' and commodity fetishism pioneered by karl marx and georg lukács . semiotics was also a major influence , particularly the work of his contemporary , roland barthes , who was the first to envisage bourgeois society as a spectacle , and to study in detail the political function of fashion within that spectacle . philippe sollers '' l'antifascisme de barthes '' , le monde // hors-série roland barthes , juillet-août , 2015 debord 's analysis of '' the spectaclist society '' probed the historical , economic , and psychological roots of the media and popular culture . central to this school of thought was the claim that alienation is more than an emotive description or an aspect of individual psychology : rather , it is a consequence of the mercantile form of social organization that has reached its climax in capitalism , as theorized by herbert marcuse of the frankfurt school . the situationist international ( si ) , a political/artistic movement organized by debord and his colleagues and represented by a journal of the same name , attempted to create a series of strategies for engaging in class struggle by reclaiming individual autonomy from the spectacle . these strategies , including '' dérive '' and '' détournement , '' drew on the traditions of lettrism . as founder of the si , it has been suggested that debord felt driven to generalize and define the values , ideas , and characteristics of the entire group , which may have contributed to his hand-picking and expulsion of members . the hierarchical and dictatorial nature of the si existed , however , in the groups that birthed it , including the letterists and the surrealists . debord 's first book , mémoires , was bound with a sandpaper cover so that it would damage other books placed next to it . debord has been the subject of numerous biographies , works of fiction , artworks , and songs , many of which are catalogued in the bibliography by shigenobu gonzalves , '' guy debord ou la beauté du negatif . '' often , it is suggested that debord was opposed to the creation of art , however , debord writes in the situationist international magazine ( '' contre le cinema '' ) that he believes that '' ordinary '' ( quotidian ) people should make '' everyday '' ( quotidian ) art ; art and creation should liberate from the spectacle , from capitalism , and from the banality of everyday life in contemporary society . in '' the society of the spectacle , '' debord argues that it is the price put on art that destroys the integrity of the art object , not the material or the creation itself . it is important to note that debord does not equate art to '' the spectacle . '' . films . debord began an interest in film early in his life when he lived in cannes in the late 1940s . debord recounted that , during his youth , he was allowed to do very little other than attend films . he said that he frequently would leave in the middle of a film screening to go home because films often bored him . debord joined the lettrists just as isidore isou was producing films and the lettrists attempted to sabotage charlie chaplin 's trip to paris through negative criticism . overall , debord challenged the conventions of filmmaking ; prompting his audience to interact with the medium instead of being passive receivers of information . as a matter of fact , his film hurlements exclusively consists of a series of black and white screens and silence with a bit of commentary dispersed throughout . debord directed his first film , hurlements en faveur de sade in 1952 with the voices of michèle bernstein and gil wolman . the film has no images represented ; instead , it shows bright white when there is speaking and black when there is not . long silences separate speaking parts . the film ends with 24 minutes of black silence . people were reported to have become angry and left screenings of this film . the script is composed of quotes appropriated from various sources and made into a montage with a sort of non-linear narrative . later , through the financial support of michèle bernstein and asger jorn , debord produced a second film , sur le passage de quelques personnes à travers une assez courte unité de temps , which combined scenes with his friends and scenes from mass media culture . this integration of debord 's world with mass media culture became a running motif climaxing with '' the society of the spectacle '' . debord wrote the book the society of the spectacle before writing the movie . when asked why he made the book into a movie , debord said , '' i do n't understand why this surprised people . the book was already written like a script '' . debord 's last film , '' son art et son temps '' , was not produced during his lifetime . it worked as a final statement where debord recounted his works and a cultural documentary of '' his time '' . hurlements en faveur de sade ( howls for sade ) 1952 sur le passage de quelques personnes à travers une assez courte unité de temps ( on the passage of a few persons through a rather brief unity of time ) 1959 ( short film , dansk-fransk experimentalfilmskompagni ) critique de la séparation ( critique of separation ) 1961 ( short film , dansk-fransk experimentalfilmskompagni ) la société du spectacle ( society of the spectacle ) 1973 ( simar films ) réfutation de tous les judgements , tant élogieux qu'hostiles , qui ont été jusqu'ici portés sur le film '' la société du spectacle '' ( refutation of all the judgements , pro or con , thus far rendered on the film '' the society of the spectacle '' ) 1975 ( short film , simar films ) ( a latin palindrome meaning '' we go round and round in the night , consumed by fire '' ) ( simar films ) 1978 – this film was meant to be debord 's last and is largely autobiographical . the script was reprinted in 2007 in no : a journal of the arts . guy debord , son art , son temps ( guy debord – his art and his time ) 1994 ( a '' sabotage television film '' by guy debord and brigitte cornand , canal plus ) complete cinematic works ( ak press , 2003 , translated and edited by ken knabb ) includes the scripts for all six of debord 's films , along with related documents and extensive annotations . bibliography . mémoires , 1959 ( co-authored by asger jorn ) , reprinted by allia ( 2004 ) , . la société du spectacle , 1967 , numerous editions ; in english : the society of the spectacle , zone books 1995 , . society of the spectacle , rebel press 2004 , . the society of the spectacle : annotated edition , bureau of public secrets , 2014 , . la véritable scission dans l'internationale , champ libre , 1972 ( co-authored by gianfranco sanguinetti ) ; in english : the real split in the international , pluto press 2003 , . œuvres cinématographiques complètes , champ libre , 1978 , new edition in 1994 ; in english : complete cinematic works : scripts , stills , and documents , ak press 2003 , . considérations sur l'assassinat de gérard lebovici , éditions gérard lebovici , 1985 ; in english : considerations on the assassination of gérard lebovici , tamtam 2001 , . le jeu de la guerre , 1987 ; in english a game of war , atlas press 2008 , commentaires sur la société du spectacle , éditions gérard lebovici , 1988 ; in english : comments on the society of the spectacle , verso 1990 , . panégyrique volume 1 , 1989 ; in english : panegyric , verso 2004 , reprinted 2009 , ; in portuguese : '' panegírico '' 2002 , . all the guy debord 's books and films as well as unpublished texts were gathered in a volume of œuvres , éditions gallimard , collection quarto , paris , 2006 . '' the proletariat as subject and as representation '' . references . further reading . mario perniola , an aesthetic of the grand style : guy debord , in '' substance '' , 1999 , n.90 . internationale situationniste , paris , 1958–1969 . réédition intégrale chez van gennep , amsterdam 1972 , chez champ libre 1975 , et chez fayard 1997 , ; complete translations are available in german : situationistische internationale , gesammelte ausgabe des organs der situationistischen internationale , hamburg : mad verlag 1976–1977 , ; and in spanish : internacional situacionista : textos completos en castellano de la revista internationale situationniste ( 1958–1969 ) , madrid : literatura gris 1999–2001 , . the situationist international by simon ford , black dog publishing , 2004 , illustrated . debord : le naufrageur , jean-marie apostolidès , flammarion , 2016 . lipstick traces : a secret history of the twentieth century , greil marcus , harvard university press , 1990 , . situationist international anthology , translated and edited by ken knabb , bureau of public secrets 1981 ; revised and expanded edition 2006 , . guy debord , anselm jappe , university of california press 1999 , . guy debord – revolutionary , len bracken , feral house 1997 , . i situazionisti , mario perniola , roma , castelvecchi 2005 , . della critica radicale – bibliografia ragionata sull internazionale situazionista – con documenti inediti in italiano , gianluigi balsebre , bologna , grafton 9 , 1995 . the game of war : the life and death of guy debord . , andrew hussey , cape 2001 , . guy debord and the situationist international , edited by tom mcdonough , mit press 2002 , . '' the beautiful language of my century '' : reinventing the language of contestation in postwar france , 1945–1968 , tom mcdonough , mit press 2007 , . guy debord , andy merrifield , reaktion 2005 , . 50 years of recuperation of the situationist international , mckenzie wark , princeton architectural press , new york , 2008 . los situacionistas y la anarquía , miguel amorós , bilbao , muturreko burutazioak , 2008 , . debord ou la diffraction du temps , stéphane zagdanski , gallimard , 2008 . fabien danesi , le cinéma de guy debord ou la négativité à l'œuvre : 1952–1994 , paris , paris expérimental , 2011 . fabien danesi , fabrice flahutez et emmanuel guy , la fabrique du cinéma de guy debord , arles ( bouches-du-rhône ) , actes sud , 2013 . fabien danesi , fabrice flahutez , emmanuel guy , undercover guy debord , ( english-french ) , paris , artvenir , 2012 . external links . situationist international online letters 1957–1994 the marxist critique of religion in the films of guy debord guy debord 's howls for sade libcom.org/library : guy debord archive a brief biography and several texts , including society of the spectacle '' comments on the society of the spectacle '' ( 1988 ) guy debord and the situationists audio recordings and films by guy debord at ubu.web michael löwy on guy debord , in radical philosophy the strange life of guy debord ( french ) films / writings and literature on guy debord '' on guy debord ’ s films '' guy debord and the aesthetics of cine-sabotage constructing situations : guy debord 's detournement of fiction wall street vs the indigenous peoples movement—on guy debord 's work and the ngo-isation of indigenous peoples movements class wargames presents guy debord 's the game of war quote : '' anyone who has skimmed guy debord 's wikipedia page or watched the american music awards could condemn our culture as a masquerade , a spectacle of virtuality . ''