1911 in literature

events . january – the journal ay qap begins monthly publication in arabic script in troitsk , to promote modern kazakh literature and progressive thought . february–march – antisemitic riots break out in paris over the staging of henri bernstein 's après moi by the comédie-française , instigated by the far-right action française led by writer charles maurras , but in conjunction with the far-left guerre sociale . march – filippo tommaso marinetti in paris plans a futurism conference and publishes a manifesto , le futurisme , at sansot . april – hugo gernsback begins to publish his pioneering science fiction novel ralph 124c 41+ in the monthly u.s . magazine modern electrics . c . april 8 – the english poet lascelles abercrombie and his family move near dymock in rural gloucestershire , as the first of the dymock poets . may 31 – the french publishers éditions gallimard is founded in paris by gaston gallimard as les éditions de la nouvelle revue française ( nrf ) . its first publication is paul claudel 's play l'otage . summer – jaroslav hašek begins publishing stories of the good soldier švejk ( dobrý voják švejk ) in the prague newspaper karikatura , edited by the illustrator josef lada . september 7 – wilhelm apollinaris de kostrowitzky , writing as '' guillaume apollinaire '' , is suspected in the theft of the mona lisa from the louvre museum in paris on august 21 and imprisoned for six days . this year he publishes his first book of poetry , le bestiaire ou cortège d'orphée . october 16 – the new building for the mitchell library opens in glasgow . october 17 – rudolf wilhelm friedrich ditzen , the later german novelist hans fallada , kills his best friend in a suicide pact staged as a duel . november the kalem company of new york agrees to pay the estate of author lew wallace 25,000 for having adapted ben hur ( 1907 film ) from his novel without securing prior rights . virginia stephen begins to share her brother adrian stephen 's london house at 38 brunswick square with other members of the bloomsbury group : leonard woolf ( her future husband ) , john maynard keynes and duncan grant . chronology in oxford world 's classics editions of her works . december 16 – the u.k . copyright act consolidates copyright law in the british empire and confirms the six libraries to which a copy of every book published in the u.k . must be deposited by the publisher : the british library ( london ) ; the bodleian library ( oxford ) ; the advocates library ( edinburgh ) ; the national library of wales ( aberystwyth ) ; trinity college , dublin ; and cambridge university library . new books . fiction . pío baroja las inquietudes de shanti andía the tree of knowledge ( el árbol de la ciencia ) lima barreto – triste fim de policarpo quaresma ( the sad end of policarpo quaresma ) max beerbohm – zuleika dobson hilaire belloc – the four men : a farrago arnold bennett – the card j . d . beresford – the hampdenshire wonder ambrose bierce – the devil 's dictionary algernon blackwood – the centaur j . e . casely-hayford – ethiopia unbound g . k . chesterton – the innocence of father brown hugh clifford – the downfall of the gods joseph conrad – under western eyes marie corelli – life everlasting warwick deeping - fox farm penelope delta – paramythi horis onoma ( a tale without a name ) theodore dreiser – jennie gerhardt w . e . b . du bois – the quest of the silver fleece edna ferber – dawn o'hara ford madox ford – ladies whose bright eyes e . m . forster – the celestial omnibus r . austin freeman – the eye of osiris charlotte perkins gilman – moving the mountain anna katharine green – initials only ian hay – a safety match robert hichens – the fruitful vine violet jacob – flemington pauline johnson – legends of vancouver mary johnston – the long roll eduard von keyserling – wellen valery larbaud – fermina márquez d . h . lawrence – the white peacock stephen leacock – nonsense novels gaston leroux balaoo the phantom of the opera ( le fantôme de l'opéra , book publication ) katherine mansfield – in a german pension ( short stories ) john masefield jim davis ; or , the captive of smugglers the street of today a.e.w . mason – miranda of the balcony e . phillips oppenheim – the temptation of tavernake mori ōgai ( 森 鷗外 ) – the wild geese ( 雁 , gan , serialization begins ) baroness orczy – a true woman forrest reid – the bracknels ameen rihani – the book of khalid saki – the chronicles of clovis una lucy silberrad the affairs of john bolsover sampson rideout , quaker bram stoker – the lair of the white worm gene stratton-porter – the harvester kathleen thompson norris – mother sigrid undset – jenny hugh walpole – mr . perrin and mr . traill mary augusta ward – the case of richard meynell h . g . wells – the new machiavelli edith wharton – ethan frome owen wister – padre ignacio jerzy żuławski – stara ziemia ( the old earth ) , last of the trylogia księżycowa ( lunar trilogy ) . children and young people . j . m . barrie – peter and wendy ( later editions peter pan and wendy ) l . frank baum the sea fairies the daring twins aunt jane 's nieces and uncle john ( as edith van dyne ) the flying girl ( as edith van dyne ) frances hodgson burnett – the secret garden l . m . montgomery – the story girl ferenc móra – mindenki jánoskája ( johnny to everyone ) lucy fitch perkins – dutch twins ( first in the twins series ) beatrix potter – the tale of timmy tiptoes jean webster – just patty . drama . hugo ball – die nase des michelangelo . tragikomödie in vier auftritten tristan bernard – the little cafe ( le petit café ) hall caine – the quality of mercy ( also known as the unwritten law ; a new version of jan the icelander ) george diamandy – dolorosa st . john greer ervine – mixed marriage a . de herz biruința ( victory ) când ochii plâng ( when eyes shed tears ) edward knoblock – kismet gregorio martínez sierra canción de cuna ( cradle song ) primavera en otoño ( spring in autumn ) charles mcevoy – all that matters mrs clifford mills – where the rainbow ends emma orczy – the duke 's wager louis n . parker – disraeli rainis – indulis un ārija ( indulis and ārija ) arthur schnitzler – das weite land ( the vast domain , the distant land , or undiscovered country ) george bernard shaw – fanny 's first play karl vollmöller – the miracle ( das mirakel ) hugo von hofmannsthal – jedermann w . b . yeats – the countess cathleen ( adapted for performance ) . poetry . edwin james brady – river rovers else lasker-schüler – meine wunder john masefield – the everlasting mercy . non-fiction . encyclopædia britannica eleventh edition . wassily kandinsky – über das geistige in der kunst ( concerning the spiritual in art ; dated 1912 ) walter john kilner – the human atmosphere jack london – the cruise of the snark filippo tommaso marinetti – le futurisme robert michels – political parties ( book ) ( zur soziologie des parteiwesens in der modernen demokratie ; untersuchungen über die oligarchischen tendenzen des gruppenlebens ) george moore – ave ( part 1 of his three-volume autobiography , hail and farewell ) john muir – my first summer in the sierra r . scott-moncrieff ( editor ) – the household book of lady grisell baillie , 1692–1733 c . t . onions – a shakespeare glossary percy simpson – shakespearean punctuation rudolf steiner – mystics of the renaissance ( english translation ) evelyn underhill – mysticism : a study of the nature and development of man 's spiritual consciousness a . e . waite the pictorial key to the tarot the secret tradition in freemasonry . births . january 9 – eva alexanderson , swedish novelist and translator ( died 1994 ) january 18 – josé maría arguedas , peruvian author ( died 1969 ) january 24 c . l . moore , american science fiction author ( died 1987 ) l . ron hubbard , american science fiction writer , founder of scientology ( died 1986 ) february 4 – geoffrey willans , english novelist and comic writer ( died 1958 ) february 8 – elizabeth bishop , american poet , pulitzer prize winner ( died 1979 ) february 17 – margaret st . clair , american science fiction writer ( died 1995 ) march 11 – fitzroy maclean , scottish political writer and autobiographer ( died 1996 ) march 16 – sybille bedford , german-born english novelist and journalist ( died 2006 ) march 26 – tennessee williams , american playwright ( died 1983 ) april 19 frank barlow , english historian , ( died 2009 ) ) ursula moray williams , english children 's writer ( died 2006 ) april 8 – emil cioran , romanian-born french philosopher and essayist ( died 1995 ) may 15 – max frisch , swiss author ( died 1991 ) may 20 – annie m . g . schmidt , dutch children 's author ( died 1995 ) may 28 – fritz hochwälder , austrian playwright ( died 1986 ) june 2 – xiao hong ( qiao yin , 張廼瑩 ) chinese author ( died 1942 ) june 6 – verna aardema ( verna norberg ) , american children 's author ( died 2000 ) june 30 – czesław miłosz , lithuanian-born polish author , nobel prize in literature winner ( died 2004 ) july 17 – yang jiang , chinese playwright , author , and translator ( died 2016 ) july 21 – marshall mcluhan , canadian media theorist ( died 1980 ) july 22 – george ivașcu , romanian journalist , literary critic , and communist militant ( died 1988 ) october 13 – millosh gjergj nikolla , albanian poet and writer ( died 1938 ) november 2 – odysseas elytis , greek poet , nobel prize winner ( died 1996 ) november 19 – mary elizabeth counselman , american author and poet ( died 1995 ) december 11 – naguib mahfouz , egyptian novelist , nobel prize in literature winner ( died 2006 ) december 25 – noel langley , south african-born american screenwriter ( died 1980 ) . deaths . january 23 – david graham phillips , american journalist and novelist ( murdered , born 1867 ) february 25 – friedrich spielhagen , german novelist , literary theorist and translator ( born 1829 ) march 7 – antonio fogazzaro , italian novelist ( born 1842 ) april 14 – george cary eggleston , american memoirist ( born 1839 ) april 25 – emilio salgari , italian adventure novelist ( suicide , born 1862 ) april 30 – stanisław brzozowski , polish philosopher , publicist and critic ( tuberculosis , born 1878 ) may 1 – hannah whitall smith , american quaker author ( born 1832 ) may 9 – thomas wentworth higginson , american writer , abolitionist and advocate of women 's suffrage ( born 1823 ) may 29 – w . s . gilbert , english librettist , dramatist and comic poet ( born 1836 ) june 7 – henry abbey , american poet ( born 1842 ) june 10 – adolf wilbrandt , german novelist and dramatist ( born 1837 ) june 14 – charlotte o'conor eccles , irish-born london writer , translator and journalist ( born 1863 ) july 21 – philippe monnier , swiss writer in french ( born 1864 ) september 4 – john francon williams , welsh-born writer , historian , and cartographer ( born 1854 ) september 5 – katherine thurston , irish novelist ( born 1875 ) september 9 – francis march , american lexicographer and philologist ( born 1825 ) october 8 – hesba stretton ( sarah smith ) , english children 's writer ( born 1832 ) october 29 – joseph pulitzer , hungarian-born american journalist and publisher ( born 1847 ) november 9 – howard pyle , american children 's author ( born 1853 ) december 1 – richard barham middleton , english poet and fiction writer ( born 1882 ) december 13 – henrietta stannard , english novelist ( writing as john strange winter , born 1856 ) december 29 – rosamund marriott watson , english poet ( born 1860 ) . awards . newdigate prize : roger heath , '' achilles '' nobel prize for literature : maurice maeterlinck , belgian poet , playwright , and essayist prix goncourt : alphonse de châteaubriant , monsieur des lourdines . references . external links . '' 100 years on : the best books of 1911 '' , stuart kelly , the scotsman , 24 december 2011