Charles Pinckney (governor)

early life and education . pinckney was born and educated in charles town in the province of south carolina . his father , colonel charles pinckney , was a rich lawyer and planter . his mother was frances brewton ( b . 1733 ) , daughter of a goldsmith and his wife , and sister of miles brewton and rebecca brewton motte , who were both also prominent in charleston history . his father had signed a loyalty oath to the british after they occupied charleston in 1780 during the american revolutionary war . this enabled him to keep his property . on his death in 1782 , the senior pinckney bequeathed snee farm , a plantation outside the city , and his numerous slaves , to his eldest son charles . marriage and family . busy with the war and his political career , pinckney did not marry until 1788 . he married mary eleanor laurens on april 27 , 1788 , at saint philip 's church , charleston , charleston county , south carolina . mary was the daughter of henry laurens , the wealthy and politically powerful south carolina slave trader . they had at least three children . among his in-laws were father-in-law henry laurens , colonel john laurens and u.s . representative david ramsay . a brother-in-law married the daughter of south carolina governor john rutledge . career . he was elected as a delegate to the third continental congress ( 1777–78 ) . he started to practice law in charleston in 1779 at the age of 21 . about that time , well after the war for independence had begun , young pinckney enlisted in the militia . he became a lieutenant , and served at the siege of savannah ( september–october 1779 ) . when charleston fell to the british the next year , the young pinckney was captured ; he was held as a prisoner until june 1781 and sent north for a potential exchange . he did not return to charleston until 1783 . ( his father was also captured . along with more than 160 men , colonel pinckney agreed to sign an oath of allegiance to the british , in order to avoid having his property confiscated and destroyed . after the war , pinckney was fined 12 % on his property for having sworn a loyalist allegiance . ) pinckney was elected again to the continental congress following the war , serving 1784–87 . he was elected to the state legislature for several terms ( 1779–80 , 1786–1789 , and 1792–1796 ) . as a nationalist , he worked hard in congress trying to ensure that the united states would receive navigation rights from spain to the mississippi river and to strengthen congressional power . pinckney eventually owned several plantations and a townhouse in charleston in addition to snee farm : frankville and hopton , situated on both sides of the congaree river , five miles from columbia ; a plantation in georgetown consisting of 560 acres of tidal swamp and 600 acres of high land ; a tract of 1200 acres called lynches creek ; fee farm on the ashepoo river ; shell hall , a house with four acres of land at haddrell 's point in christ church parish ; a house and garden lot on meeting street , charleston ; wright 's savannah plantation on the carolina side of the savannah river ; and a tract of land on the santee river above the canal , including a ferry , called mount tacitus . after pinckney married eleanor laurens in 1788 , the elegant three-storied brick home at 16 meeting street in charleston presumably became his principal residence . in the 1790 federal census , he is recorded as holding '' 14 slaves in st . philip 's and st . michael 's parish , 52 slaves in st . bartholomew , and 45 slaves in the orangeburg district '' , all in addition to snee farm , where his father 's probate record had listed 40 slaves in 1787 . [ susan hart vincent , of historic land design , charles pinckney national historic site : cultural landscape report , pp . 16-18 , department of interior , 1998 , full text at internet archive pinckney 's role in the philadelphia convention is controversial . although one of the youngest delegates , he later claimed to have been the most influential one and contended he had submitted a draft , known as the pinckney plan , that was the basis of the final constitution . this was strongly disputed by james madison and some of the other framers . james madison on the pinckney plan , farrand 's records of the federal convention , pinckney submitted an elaborate form of the virginia plan , proposed first by edmund randolph , but it was disregarded by the other delegates . historians assess him as an important contributing delegate . macdonald forrest , e pluribus anum : the formation of the american republic 1776–1790 ( houghton mifflin company : library of congress catalog card : 65-111322 ) 1965 pp . 166–167 . pinckney boasted that he was 24 , allowing him to claim distinction as the youngest delegate , but he was 29 years old at the time of the convention . yates publishing . u.s . and international marriage records , 1560–1900 database on-line . provo , ut , us : the generations network , inc . , 2004 . he attended full-time , spoke often and effectively , and contributed to the final draft and to resolution of problems that arose during the debates . he also worked for ratification of the constitution in south carolina ( 1788 ) . at the convention , pierce butler and pinckney , both from south carolina , introduced the fugitive slave clause ( article iv , section ii , clause iii ) . james wilson of pennsylvania objected , saying that it was special protection for slaveholders , requiring all state governments to enforce it at taxpayers ' expense , in places where no one or most residents did not own slaves . butler withdrew the clause . but , the next day , a southerner reinstated the clause and the convention adopted it without further objection . this clause was added to the clause that provided extradition for fugitives from justice . paul finkelman , slavery and the founders : race and liberty in the age of jefferson , p . 82 , 2nd edition , 2001 . this clause was first applied to fugitive slaves and required that they be extradited upon the claims of their masters . despite the clause , free states sometimes declined to enforce it . the fugitive slave act of 1850 increased requirements on the states and penalties for failure to assist in the return of slaves . this practice was not eliminated until the thirteenth amendment abolished the institution of slavery . in 1864 , during the civil war , an effort to repeal this clause of the constitution had failed . the vote in the house was 69 for repeal and 38 against , which was short of the two-to-one vote required to amend the constitution . see the congressional globe , 38th cong . , 1st sess . , 1325 ( 1864 ) pinckney introduced a clause into the constitution article vi , in opposition to an established state religion . his '' no religious test '' clause read as follows : once the inclusion of the phrase was brought to a vote , it passed with little opposition . for the first time , an official of a national government was not required to have a religion . drawn from original source : drawn from original source : '' the individual liberties within the body of the constitution : a symposium : the no religious test clause and the constitution of religious liberty : a machine that has gone of itself . '' case western reserve law review 37 : 674–747 . dreisbach , daniel l . 1999 . pinckney is also responsible for the inclusion of the writ of habeas corpus into the constitution . a constitutional history of habeas corpus , p . 127 ; william duker , university of michigan , 1980 the contribution of charles pinckney to the formation of the american union , p . 74 ; andrew j . bethea , 1937 initially introduced as '' nor shall the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus ever be suspended , except in case of rebellion or invasion '' , the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus under the constitution it is now a part of article 1 of the united states constitution . pinckney 's political career blossomed . from 1789 to 1792 , the state legislature elected him as governor of south carolina , and in 1790 he chaired the state constitutional convention . during this period , he became associated with the federalist party , in which he and his cousin charles cotesworth pinckney were leaders . but , with the passage of time , the former 's views began to change . in 1795 he attacked the federalist-backed jay 's treaty . he increasingly began to cast his lot with carolina back-country democratic-republicans against his own eastern elite . the population in the western part of the state was increasing , but legislative apportionment favored the low country planters . in 1796 pinckney was elected governor again by the state legislature . in 1798 his democratic-republican supporters in the legislature elected him to the u.s . senate . he strongly opposed actions by his former party . in the presidential election of 1800 , he served as thomas jefferson 's campaign manager in south carolina . the victorious jefferson appointed pinckney as minister to spain ( 1801–05 ) . he tried but did not succeed in gaining cession by spain of the floridas to the united states . he facilitated spanish acquiescence in the transfer of louisiana from france to the united states in 1803 by the louisiana purchase . ( spain had already returned rule of this territory to france under napoleon . ) pinckney returned from spain to charleston and to leadership of the state democratic-republican party . he served in the legislature in 1805–06 , and was elected again as governor ( 1806–08 ) . in this position , he favored legislative reapportionment , in order to give more fair representation to back-country districts . he also advocated universal white manhood suffrage . he served again in the legislature from 1810 to 1814 , and then temporarily withdrew from politics . in 1818 he won election to the united states house of representatives , where he fought against the missouri compromise . a major slaveholder whose wealth depended on enslaved labor at his plantations , he supported expansion of the institution of slavery to new territories and states . in 1821 , with his health beginning to fail , pinckney retired for the last time from politics . he died in 1824 . legacy and honors . pinckney 's snee farm plantation is maintained as charles pinckney national historic site . his son , henry l . pinckney ( september 24 , 1794 – february 3 , 1863 ) was a u.s . representative from south carolina , and mayor of charleston . his daughter married robert young hayne , who became a u.s . representative , mayor of charleston , and governor of south carolina . charles pinckney was also a freemason and a member of solomon ’ s lodge no . 1 in charleston , south carolina . see also . u.s . constitution , slavery debate in convention . references . marty d . mathews , forgotten founder : the life and times of charles pinckney ( columbia : university of south carolina press , 2004 ) . external links . sciway biography of charles pinckney nga biography of charles pinckney the plan of charles pinckney – submitted as an alternative to the virginia plan