Schengen Information System

participating nations . information in sis is shared among the institutions of countries participating in the schengen agreement application convention ( saac ) . the five original participating countries were france , germany , belgium , the netherlands , and luxembourg . twenty-one additional countries have joined the system since its creation : spain , portugal , italy , austria , greece , finland , sweden , switzerland , denmark , iceland , norway , estonia , the czech republic , hungary , latvia , lithuania , malta , poland , slovakia , slovenia and liechtenstein . among the current participants , iceland , liechtenstein , norway , and switzerland are members of the european free trade area but not of the european union . although ireland and the united kingdom ( while still an eu member ) had not signed the schengen agreement application convention , they had the right to take part in schengen co-operation under the terms of the treaty of amsterdam , which introduced the provisions of schengen acquis into european union law . schengen allowed the united kingdom and ireland to take part in all or part of the schengen convention arrangements . ireland and the united kingdom do not have access to article 26d ( former 96 ) data because these countries operate a common travel area and do not intend to remove the border controls between themselves and the rest of europe . european citizens still have the right of free movement to the uk and ireland but must pass through a border control point , unlike the other schengen signatory countries , among whom internal border controls have been largely abolished . since 1 august 2018 , bulgaria and romania have full access to sis ; before that they had access to sis only for law enforcement purposes . croatia has access to sis for law enforcement purposes , while cyprus does not have any access . ireland joins the law enforcement aspect on 1 january 2021 and will have '' full operational capacity '' from march 2021 . the uk did 571 million searches in the database in 2019 . . introduction . sis information is stored according to the legislation of each participating country . there are more than 46 million entries ( called '' alerts '' ) in sis , most about lost identity documents . sis statewatch 2013 person alerts make up around 1.9 percent of the database ( about 885,000 records ) . each alert contains information such as : name , date of birth , gender , nationality , aliases , arms or history of violence , the reason for the alert and the action to be taken if the person is encountered . sis does not record travellers ' entries and exits from the schengen area . commission staff working document : impact assessment report on the establishment of an eu entry exit system eulex 6 april 2016 p 11 accessed 19 april 2017 proposal for a regulation of the european parliament and of the council establishing an entry/exit system ( ees ) to register entry and exit data of third country nationals crossing the external borders of the member states of the european union europa p 2 . accessed 12 october 2013 . council of the european union : questionnaire on the possible creation of a system of electronic recording of entries and exits of third country nationals in the schengen area ( reply from greece ) statewatch 2013 . smart borders for an open and secure europe europa . . history . on 25 march 1957 , the treaty of rome was completed . on 3 february 1958 , the economic union of the benelux countries was formed . both agreements aimed to enable the free movement of people and goods across national borders . the benelux countries , as a smaller group , were able to quickly implement the agreement . the european communities ' focus was on economic integration . it was not until the agreement of saarbrücken was completed on 13 july 1984 , that border controls between france and germany were eased . on 14 june 1985 , france , germany and three of the benelux nations completed the schengen agreement . border controls on people and goods between these nations were gradually relaxed . on 19 june 1990 , the initial five nations were joined by spain , portugal , italy , greece , austria and five nordic passport union countries : denmark , finland , iceland , norway and sweden . on 21 december 2007 , the schengen border-free zone was enlarged to include estonia , the czech republic , hungary , latvia , lithuania , malta , poland , slovakia and slovenia . legal aspects and technical characteristics . sis was created to maintain european security after 25 march 2001 when border security between fifteen nations was relaxed . the sis requires schengen nations to respect the legal force of the information it contains . it also requires the nations to respect the privacy and personal freedom of the people whose data is held according to national data laws . sis 's information processing system must be permanently connected to member nations ' databases and must be updated in real-time . these commitments are supplemented by consultation procedures between the member nations . discussions may take place about issues such as confirmation of information , variation of actions directed by sis , questions of residency , and international warrants for arrest . sis is controlled by an authority composed of representatives of the member nations . personal data protection is a key responsibility . at a technical level , the participating countries adopted a data-processing star architecture made up of a central site containing the reference database , known as c-sis , for which the responsibility is entrusted to the french republic by the caas , and a site by country , known as n-sis , containing a copy of the database . data . the type of data about people kept in sis includes : requests for extradition ; undesirability of presence in particular territory ; minor age ; mental illnesses ; missing person status ; a need for protection ; requests by a judicial authority ; and suspected of crime . the sis also keeps data referring to lost , stolen and misappropriated firearms , identity documents , motor vehicles and banknotes . france is responsible for management of sis and uses an automated system of data updates which occur every five minutes . the sis automatically directs data to queries arriving via large national databases . each member nation has an office responsible for sis communications . sis also has a function called '' supplementary information request at the national entry '' ( sirene ) . the sirene office records an '' hit '' on a sis data record and forwards further information to assist investigations . police co-operation and legal mutual assistance . in addition to sis and sirene , the schengen convention ensured police co-operation and legal mutual assistance . police of member nations can cooperate to prevent and identify crime ( article 39 ) ; to continue surveillance across borders ( article 40 ) ; to pursue across borders in certain circumstances ( article 41 ) ; and to share information that is significant for the repression or the prevention of in flagrante delicto or threats to order and public safety ( article 46 ) . this allows execution of criminal judgements and extraditions where a national attempts to take refuge in another territory . system evolution . in november 2011 , sis1 was renewed for a second time . the main reason for renewal was to connect more nations . in 2007 , while developments were in progress , portugal had offered the use of a version called '' sisone4all '' developed by sef ( portugal 's border and foreigners service ) and critical software . sisone4all critical software . on 15 october 2010 , bulgaria and romania joined sis ii for law enforcement cooperation . council decision 29 june 2010 on the application of the provisions of the schengen acquis relating to the schengen information system in the republic of bulgaria and romania ( 2010/365/eu ) europa on 9 april 2013 , sis ii went live . proposition de résolution le système d'information schengen senat.fr on 27 june 2017 , croatia joined sis ii for law enforcement cooperation . council decision ( eu ) 2017/733 of 25 april 2017 on the application of the provisions of the schengen acquis relating to the schengen information system in the republic of croatia europa . on 1 august 2018 , bulgaria and romania gained full access to sis . on 1 january 2021 , ireland joined the law enforcement aspect . . brexit . use of the schengen information system is limited to members of the european union and signatories of the schengen agreement application convention . while still a member of the eu but not of the schengen agreement , the uk had limited access to the sis . this access ceases with effect from 1 january 2021 . in june 2020 , the security and intelligence subcommittee of the house of lords , on hearing evidence by home office minister james brokenshire , expressed concerns that failure of the ( post-brexit ) trade negotiation between the uk and the eu could lead to worrying delays in access to counter-terrorism intelligence .