1984 in music

specific locations . 1984 in british music 1984 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1984 in country music 1984 in heavy metal music 1984 in hip hop music 1984 in jazz . events . january–march . in january 1984 , iain williams & the 1984 project recorded the dance track '' love is suicide '' at trident studios in soho , london . the track features hans zimmer on fairlight cm and alan murphy on guitar . january 11 – bbc radio 1 dj mike read announces on air that he will not play the single '' relax '' by frankie goes to hollywood because of its suggestive lyrics . the bbc places a total ban on the record at about the same time . january 17 – the sing blue silver tour continues on to japan and north america as duran duran becomes the first act to utilize live video cameras and screens in their show . they break every existing merchandise record during this tour . january 21 – '' relax '' reaches number one in the uk singles chart , despite the bbc ban ; it will spend a total of 42 weeks in the top 40 . january 27 – michael jackson 's scalp is burned during the filming of a pepsi commercial and he is admitted to hospital . around this time , jackson also releases the title track from his album thriller as the lp 's final single . february 14 elton john marries studio engineer renate blauel . joe perry and brad whitford attend an aerosmith concert and re-join the band , which embarks on a reunion tour '' back in the saddle '' later in the year . february 16 – jerry lee lewis surrenders to federal authorities on charges of income tax evasion . lewis is later acquitted . february 28 recovering from the scalp burns sustained a month earlier , michael jackson wins eight grammy awards out of twelve nominations at the 26th annual grammy awards , breaking the record for the most grammys won in a single year . he wins seven for the album thriller ( including album of the year and record of the year for '' beat it '' ) and one for his work on the audiobook for the film e.t . the extra-terrestrial . hosted by john denver , this year 's grammys ceremony receives the highest ratings in the awarding body 's history , a record currently unmatched . along with the awards received by michael jackson , the police 's '' every breath you take '' wins song of the year , while culture club win best new artist . february 29 – german industrial band kmfdm is founded , and holds its first performance at the grand palais in paris , france . march 1 sting plays his last concerts with the police at the end of the synchronicity tour ; the band takes a '' pause '' after the tour and only play a few special events together after this , until 2007 , when they would organize a reunion tour . alice cooper , who has not toured for his last two albums , parts ways with his longtime label warner bros . and goes on hiatus from the music industry . cooper begins mulling over plans for a comeback , which he would carry out in 1986 . april–june . april 1 new york rock and roll magazine trouser press folds after a decade , publishing its 96th and final issue . in los angeles , marvin gaye is shot and killed during an argument with his father . may 1 – mick fleetwood , of fleetwood mac , files for bankruptcy in the united states . may 2 – lionel richie 's hit '' hello '' becomes motown 's first ever uk million-selling single . may 5 the pretenders singer chrissie hynde marries simple minds singer jim kerr . in luxembourg , the eurovision song contest 1984 is won by the swedish entry , '' diggi-loo diggi-ley '' , performed by the herreys . june 8 – billy joel performs at wembley arena ; the concert is later broadcast on bbc television in two parts . june 16 – frankie goes to hollywood begin a nine-week stay at the top of the uk singles chart with '' two tribes '' . june 18 – at the climax of a judas priest concert at madison square garden , fans begin ripping out the cushions from the seats and throwing them on stage . judas priest pay damages through insurance and are banned from madison square garden for life over the incident . june 25 – prince releases his sixth album purple rain ; the album sells over 20 million copies and gives prince two us number one singles with '' when doves cry '' and '' let 's go crazy '' . july–september . july 1 – during his performance at the first ever cornerstone festival in grayslake , illinois , steve taylor jumps off the stage , breaking his ankle . taylor hops back on stage and finishes his show . the next few shows on taylor 's tour were performed from a wheel chair . july 10 – the last original member of menudo , ricky meléndez , leaves the group and is replaced by ricky martin . meanwhile , menudomania reaches asia in 1984 . july 14 eddie van halen makes a special guest appearance at a concert by the jacksons in dallas , texas , playing the guitar solo for '' beat it '' live . selena y los dinos release their first album mis primeras grabaciones . august 4 – the album purple rain by prince reached number one on the us billboard top 200 album charts . it will spent 24 consecutive weeks at the spot . august 9 – iron maiden kicks off the world slavery tour in warsaw , poland , with shows in hungary and yugoslavia soon to follow . this marks the first time a western band has ever brought a full concert production behind the iron curtain . august 10 – red hot chili peppers release their debut album the red hot chili peppers . august 25 – kathleen battle makes her solo recital debut at the salzburg festival . august 31 – canadian music video channel muchmusic begins broadcasting . the first video played is rush 's '' the enemy within '' . september 2 – van halen concludes its 1984 world tour with a show in nuremberg , germany as part of the monsters of rock festival tour . this would be the band 's last concert with david lee roth as lead singer until 2007 . september 7 – janet jackson elopes with fellow singer james debarge . the marriage would be annulled in 1985 . september 11 – country singer barbara mandrell suffers serious injuries in a head-on automobile collision on a tennessee highway . she will make a comeback after spending over a year rehabilitating . september 14 – the first annual mtv video music awards are held in new york city . herbie hancock wins the most awards with five , and the cars take the highest prize of video of the year for '' you might think '' . much attention is garnered by madonna 's controversial performance of her hit single '' like a virgin '' in which she rolls around on the stage , revealing lacy stockings and garters , and grinds her crotch against her veil . september 21 – the first compact disc manufacturing plant in north america opens in terre haute , indiana . cds have previously had to be expensively imported from japan or west germany . bruce springsteen 's born in the u.s.a . is designated as the first cd ever made in the united states . october–december . october 1 – the canadian music video series video hits premieres on cbc television . october 23 – a report on the ethiopian famine by bbc journalist michael buerk is broadcast in the uk and receives an unprecedented public response . among those watching is bob geldof , who is inspired to release a charity record to raise money to help with famine relief . october 26 – turner broadcasting system launches cable music channel , a music video channel intended to compete directly with mtv . the first video played is '' i love l.a . '' by randy newman . the channel would only last 34 days . november 4 – kick-off of prince 's purple rain tour in detroit . the highest-grossing tour of 1984/85 . november 5 – bryan adams releases his breakout album called reckless , spawning multiple hit singles , achieving diamond certification in canada and topping the charts in the united states . november 20 – michael jackson receives a star on the hollywood walk of fame directly in front of mann 's chinese theater . jackson leaves after only three minutes at the request of security , as the crush of 5,000 onlookers becomes a safety concern . november 25 – the band aid single '' do they know it 's christmas ? '' is recorded at sarm studios in notting hill , london , by a gathering of performers that includes paul young , simon le bon , bono , phil collins , paul weller , sting , boy george and tony hadley . november 28 – the bring me sunshine charity concert at the london palladium , in memory of eric morecambe , includes musical performances by kenny ball & his jazzmen , des o'connor and ernie wise . december – tipper gore forms the parents music resource center ( pmrc ) in response to the '' filth '' she hears on her daughter 's copy of prince 's purple rain . december 1 – frankie goes to hollywood become the first act to take their first three singles to the uk 1 position since gerry & the pacemakers in 1963 , when '' the power of love '' tops the chart . december 3 – bob geldof and band aid release the single '' do they know it 's christmas ? '' , which becomes the fastest-selling single of all time in the uk . december 8 mötley crüe member vince neil is involved in a serious car accident . he is drunk at the time , and razzle ( nicholas dingley ) of hanoi rocks is killed in the accident . cyndi lauper , with the fourth single from her 1983 debut she 's so unusual , '' all through the night '' , becomes the first woman in the 26-year history of the billboard hot 100 to have four singles from one album in the top five . week of december 8 , 1984 : cyndi lauper makes history on the chart december 9 – the jacksons conclude their victory tour with the last of six concerts at dodger stadium in los angeles . at the end of their final show , lead singer michael jackson surprises not only his fans , but also his band members with the announcement that he would be permanently leaving the jacksons , stating that this would be the last time that they all performed together . the tour , which consisted of 55 shows over five months , has reportedly grossed 75 million , a new industry record . as for the jacksons , they would release one more album in 1989 before splitting up , occasionally regrouping in the years afterward for reunion performances with and without michael . december 11 – while on tour , bucks fizz 's tour bus crashes . all members of the group are injured and member mike nolan suffers brain damage after falling into a coma . december 13 – george harrison makes a rare public appearance , joining deep purple on stage in sydney , australia for their encore rendition of '' lucille '' . december 31 def leppard 's drummer rick allen loses his left arm in a car wreck . the thirteenth annual new year 's rockin ' eve special airs on abc , with appearances by jermaine jackson , ronnie milsap , night ranger , scandal , john waite and barry manilow . uk singles sales this year are the second highest ever , after 1978 . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1984 . bands disbanded . see musical groups disestablished in 1984 . bands reformed . deep purple . albums released . january–march . . significant hits . . christmas songs . '' do they know it 's christmas ? '' – band aid '' last christmas '' – wham ! '' thank god it 's christmas '' – queen '' another rock n ' roll christmas '' – gary glitter . published popular music . '' after all these years '' w . fred ebb m . john kander from the musical the rink '' the cosby show theme song '' m . stu gardner and bill cosby '' cover me '' w.m . bruce springsteen '' every time i turn around '' w.m . judy hart angelo & gary portnoy , theme from the tv series punky brewster '' friends '' m . john leffler , theme from the tv series kate and allie '' ghostbusters '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . ray parker , jr . '' hallelujah '' w.m . leonard cohen '' i just called to say i love you '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . stevie wonder '' let 's go crazy '' w.m . prince ( musician ) '' like a virgin '' w.m . billy steinberg & tom kelly '' lights out '' w.m . peter wolf & don covay '' missing you '' w.m . john waite , chaz sanford & mark leonard '' murder , she wrote theme song '' m . john addison '' no more lonely nights '' w.m . paul mccartney '' rock you like a hurricane '' w.m . rudolf schenker , klaus meine & herman rarebell '' time after time '' w.m . cyndi lauper & rob hyman '' to all the girls i 've loved before '' w . hal david m . albert hammond '' wake me up before you go-go '' w.m . george michael '' what 's love got to do with it ? '' w.m . terry britten & graham lyle '' when doves cry '' w.m . prince . classical music . samuel adler – sonata for viola and piano elliott carter canon for 4 , homage to william , for flute , bass clarinet , violin , and cello esprit rude/esprit doux , for flute and clarinet riconoscenza per goffredo petrassi , for violin brian cherney – into the distant stillness george crumb a haunted landscape for orchestra the sleeper for soprano and piano mario davidovsky – divertimento for cello and orchestra peter maxwell davies – symphony no . 3 ludovico einaudi – altissimo lorenzo ferrero my blues ombres , for orchestra and live electronics frans geysen a + b a/b , for keyboard instrument kataloog in grijs 1 , for marimba late spiegels , for flute , oboe , piano and double bass omtrent a-b-c , for recorder quintet tonen-trappenhuisje voor hanne , for keyboard instrument twee orgels , for two organs karel goeyvaerts aquarius-tango , for piano zum wassermann , for chamber orchestra ( 14 musicians ) de zang van aquarius , for 8 bass clarinets daron hagen – a walt whitman requiem john harbison – string quartet no . 1 robin holloway – concerto for viola mauricio kagel – der eid des hippokrates , for piano 3 hands wojciech kilar – angelus , cantata for soprano , mixed choir and symphony orchestra ian mcdougall – concerto for clarinet elizabeth maconchy – string quartet no . 13 , quartetto corto ingram marshall – voces resonae henri pousseur chronique canine , for 2 pianos cortège des belles ténébreuses au jardin boréal , for cor anglais , viola , horn , tuba , and 2 percussionists l'étoile des langues , for narrators and 4 singers litanie du cristal des fleurs , for piano left hand litanie du miel matinal , for high melody instrument les noces d'icare et de mnémosyne , for variable forces patchwork des tribus américaines , for wind orchestra sixième vue sur les jardins interdits , for string trio sonate des maîtres viennois ( ‘ dicté par . no.4 ’ ) , for piano tango de jeanne-la-sibylle , for piano left hand steve reich – the desert music wolfgang rihm vorgefühle for orchestra schattenstück for orchestra fusées for orchestra blaubuch : string quartet no . 6 john serry sr . – elegy for organ tōru takemitsu – riverrun for piano and orchestra robert ward – saxophone concerto malcolm williamson a pilgrim liturgy – for soloists , mixed choir & orchestra cortège for a warrior for orchestra hymna titu for piano solo symphony no . 7 . ballet . see list of 1984 ballet premieres . opera . philip glass akhnaten the civil wars ( rome section ) luigi nono – prometeo krzysztof penderecki – the black mask peter schickele – the abduction of figaro , attributed to p . d . q . bach . karlheinz stockhausen – samstag aus licht ( produced by la scala , milan ) . jazz . musical theater . starlight express – andrew lloyd webber and richard stilgoe forty-second street – london production the rink – broadway production opened at the martin beck theatre on february 9 and ran for 233 performances sunday in the park with george ( stephen sondheim ) – broadway production opened at the booth theatre on may 2 and ran for 604 performances . musical films . amadeus asha jyoti beat street breakin' breakin ' 2 : electric boogaloo conexión caribe the cotton club footloose give my regards to broad street hard to hold the muppets take manhattan purple rain streets of fire sunny then sings my soul this is spinal tap . musical television . the girl from moonooloo starring jacki weaver and david atkins january 2 – jocelyn oxlade , english-filipino singer-songwriter and model ( kitty girls ) january 9 – drew brown ( onerepublic ) january 17 – calvin harris , scottish electronic musician , dj , producer ( taylor swift , rita ora , dua lipa ) sharaya j , hawaiian-born american female rapper and choreographer . january 18 kristy lee cook , american idol finalist benji schwimmer , winner of so you think you can dance 2006 january 20 toni gonzaga , filipina actress and singer bonnie mckee , american singer-songwriter january 24 – witold kiełtyka , polish musician ( died 2007 ) january 26 – wu qian , pianist january 27 – davetta sherwood , american actress and singer january 29 – diana rouvas , australian singer-songwriter and the voice australia contestant , later winner january 30 – kid cudi , american rapper february 9 – han geng , chinese singer in korea ( super junior ) february 11 – aubrey o'day , american singer-songwriter , dancer and actress ( danity kane , dumblonde ) february 12 – jamie scott , english singer-songwriter february 14 – víkingur ólafsson , icelandic pianist february 15 – dorota rabczewska , polish singer and model february 20 – audra mae , american singer-songwriter february 23 – grieves , american hip hop artist february 25 – lovefoxxx ( css ( band ) ) february 26 – natalia lafourcade , mexican pop-rock singer and songwriter march 3 – tim maddren , new zealand entertainer ( hi-5 ) march 9 – priscilla ahn , american singer , songwriter and multi-instrumentalist . march 18 – vonzell solomon , us singer march 20 – christy carlson romano , american actress and singer march 24 – evan felker , american singer-songwriter and guitarist march 25 – katharine mcphee , american idol finalist , american singer and actress march 26 – stéphanie lapointe , canadian singer march 31 – jack antonoff , american musician , singer-songwriter and record producer . ( taylor swift , lorde , fun . , bleachers ) april 3 – chrissie fit , american actress and singer april 6 – max bemis , american musician ( say anything ) april 7 – belly ( rapper ) , palestinian-jordanian-canadian1 rapper , singer , songwriter and record producer . april 10 – mandy moore , american singer-songwriter , actress and musician april 14 – adán sánchez , american-mexican musician ( d . 2004 ) april 22 – amelle berrabah , british singer ( sugababes ) april 24 – tyson ritter american singer/songwriter of ( the all-american rejects ) april 27 – patrick stump , american singer/musician ( fall out boy ) may 1 – keiichiro koyama , japanese singer ( news ) and actor may 2 rose falcon , american singer-songwriter james brooks ( electronic musician ) , canadian-american edm artist may 3 – cheryl burke , american dancer , model and tv host . may 4 – little boots , british , singer , musician , dj , record producer , songwriter may 5 – wade macneil , canadian guitarist may 10 – pe'er tasi , israeli singer may 11 – gerald clayton , dutch-american pianist and composer ( the clayton brothers ) may 14 – olly murs , english , singer-songwriter , television presenter and x factor competitor may 15 – mr probz , dutch singer , musician and actor ( robin schulz ) may 17 – passenger , english singer-songwriter may 25 marion raven , norwegian singer-songwriter ( m2m ) nikolai pokotylo , russian may 27 – rachel parris , british comedien , musician and singer may 29 – ina wroldsen , norwegian singer-songwriter june 4 – rainie yang , taiwanese singer june 17 – john gallagher , jr . , american actor , singer and dancer june 23 – duffy , welsh singer-songwriter june 29 han ji-hye , korean actress/singer derek lee rock , american drummer ( mêlée and suburban legends ) june 30 – fantasia barrino , american singer july 1 – jason reeves ( songwriter ) , american singer-songwriter and musician july 4 gina glocksen , american idol finalist stix izza , american musician july 5 – elisabeth schwarz , austrian operatic soprano . july 7 – marie-mai , canadian singer july 9 – jacob hoggard , canadian singer/lead singer of hedley july 12 gareth gates , english singer jack conte , american musician july 15 – vice cooler , american singer-songwriter ( hawnay troof and xbxrx ) july 17 – asami kimura , japanese singer july 21 – blake lewis , american idol runner- up july 24 dhani lennevald ( a teens ) tyler kyte , canadian actor/singer july 25 – dong-hyek lim , pianist july 26 – alex parks , english singer-songwriter july 30 – gina rodriguez , american actress , rapper , dancer , model , writer , producer and director . august 3 – carah faye charnow , american singer for the band shiny toy guns august 5 helene fischer , soviet-born german singer taylor locke ( rooney ) august 21 alizée , french singer , dancer and voice actress . melissa schuman , singer ( dream ) august 24 – yesung , korean singer ( super junior ) august 31 – will martin , new zealand-born classical crossover singer september – di wu , chinese-american pianist september 1 – joe trohman , american musician september 10 – how to dress well , tom krell , american singer-songwriter september 16 sabrina bryan , american actress and singer katie melua , georgian-british singer , songwriter and musician september 22 – theresa fu , hong kong singer and actress september 23 – louis stephens ( rooney ) september 26 – keisha buchanan , english singer-songwriter ( sugababes ) september 27 – avril lavigne , canadian rock singer-songwriter , voice actress and musician september 28 – melody thornton , american singer-songwriter , dancer and television personality ( pussycat dolls ) october 3 – ashlee simpson , american singer-songwriter , actress october 4 – lena katina , russian singer ( t.a.t.u . ) october 8 – emily williams , new zealand singer , songwriter and actress october 10 – stephanie cheng , cantopop hong kong singer october 12 – matthew dewey , australian composer october 15 – jessie ware , english singer and songwriter october 16 – shayne ward , english singer and winner of reality tv show the x factor october 25 sara lumholdt ( a teens ) katy perry , american singer/songwriter , advocate october 27 – kelly osbourne , american singer november 6 – patina miller , american actress and singer november 9 delta goodrem , australian singer-songwriter , musician and actress se7en , south korean singer november 12 – sandara park , member of south korean girl group 2ne1 , previously actress november 14 – luiz filipe coelho , violinist november 18 – johnny christ , ( avenged sevenfold ) november 21 – willy mason , american singer-songwriter november 22 – scarlett johansson , american singer and actress november 28 – trey songz , american singer december 12 – gabrielle ruiz , american actress , broadway performer and musician ( crazy ex-girlfriend ) december 15 – joshua third , guitarist ( the horrors ) december 17 – asuka fukuda , japanese singer december 18 – julia holter , american singer , songwriter , record producer , composer and artist december 20 – david tavaré , spanish singer december 22 – basshunter , swedish singer , record producer and dj december 23 – alison sudol , american singer-songwriter , actress and writer december 25 – the veronicas ( lisa and jess origliasso ) australian singer-songwriters , musicians and advocates december 30 – andra day , american singer and songwriter unknown – dy ( rapper ) , canadian rapper jimmy napes , english songwriter and record producer . deaths . january 1 – alexis korner , blues musician , 55 ( lung cancer ) january 18 – vassilis tsitsanis , greek composer , 69 january 21 – jackie wilson , singer , 49 ( pneumonia ) january 23 – samuel gardner , violinist and composer , 92 january 30 – luke kelly , member of the dubliners , 43 ( brain tumour ) february 1 – ada '' bricktop '' smith , singer and dancer , 89 february 15 avon long , american actor and singer , 73 ethel merman , singer and actress , 76 march 9 – imogen holst , conductor and composer , 76 april 1 – marvin gaye , singer/songwriter , 44 ( gunshot ) april 6 jimmy kennedy , irish-born british songwriter , 81 hryhory kytasty , composer , 77 april 20 – mabel mercer , cabaret singer , 84 april 23 – juan tizol , trombonist and composer , 84 april 26 – count basie , jazz musician , 79 april 27 – z.z . hill , blues singer , 48 may 1 – gordon jenkins , us conductor , songwriter and pianist , 73 may 29 – sanford gold , jazz pianist , 72 june – mohamed mooge liibaan , singer and instrumentalist june 8 – gordon jacob , composer , 88 june 15 – meredith willson , us songwriter , 82 june 28 – mischa spoliansky , russian born composer and conductor july 4 – jimmie spheeris , american singer-songwriter , 34 july 14 bill stapleton , jazz trumpeter , 49 ( alcohol-related ) philippé wynne , r & b singer , 43 july 19 – madeleine sibille , operatic soprano , 89 july 25 – big mama thornton , r & b singer , 57 july 29 – lorenz fehenberger , operatic tenor , 71 july 31 – paul le flem , composer , 103 august 4 – babe russin , saxophonist , 73 august 5 – tuts washington , r & b pianist , 67 august 12 – margaret sutherland , composer , 86 august 30 – emil newman , conductor and composer , 73 august 31 – carlo zecchi , pianist , music teacher and conductor , 81 september 3 dora labbette , operatic soprano , 86 arthur schwartz , composer and film producer , 83 september 6 – ernest tubb , country & western musician , 70 september 10 herman sherman , jazz saxophonist and bandleader , 61 trummy young , swing trombonist , 72 september 15 – charles lynch , irish concert pianist , 77 september 20 – steve goodman , singer/songwriter best known for '' city of new orleans '' , 36 ( leukaemia ) october 3 lina bruna rasa , operatic soprano , 67 harrison potter , pianist , 93 october 4 – carl von garaguly , violinist and conductor october 12 – jesús maría sanromá , pianist , 81 october 16 – jiří jelínek , jazz trumpeter , singer and artist , 62 october 20 – budd johnson , jazz musician , 73 october 26 – john woods duke , composer , 85 november 8 – carl gustav sparre olsen , violinist and composer , 81 november 16 – leonard rose , cellist , 66 november 20 – alexander moyzes , slovak composer , 78 december 7 – jon b . higgins , american carnatic musician , 45 ( road accident ) december 9 – razzle ( nicholas dingley ) , drummer of hanoi rocks , 24 ( car accident ) december 10 – charlie teagarden , jazz trumpeter , 71 december 13 – max schönherr , conductor and composer , 81 december 15 – jan peerce , operatic tenor , 80 december 21 – josé luis rodríguez vélez , panamanian composer , orchestra director , saxophonist , clarinetist and guitarist , 69 december 25 – ron tabak , former lead singer of prism , 31 . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1984 . country music association awards . . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1984 . charts . list of no . 1 hits . list of hot 100 number-one singles of 1984 ( u.s . ) cashbox top 100 number-one singles of 1984 list of number-one singles from the 1980s ( uk ) . list of no . 1 albums . list of number-one albums of 1984 ( u.s . ) . see also . 1984 in heavy metal music 1984 in country music 1984 in british music record labels established in 1984 timeline of musical events 1984 ronald reagan in music . references .