Diels–Alder reaction

mechanism . the reaction is an example of a concerted pericyclic reaction . carey , part b . , pp . 474–526 it is believed to occur via a single , cyclic transition state , with no intermediates generated during the course of the reaction . as such , the diels–alder reaction is governed by orbital symmetry considerations : it is classified as a π 4 s + π 2 s cycloaddition , indicating that it proceeds through the suprafacial/suprafacial interaction of a 4π electron system ( the diene structure ) with a 2π electron system ( the dienophile structure ) , an interaction that leads to a transition state without an additional orbital symmetry-imposed energetic barrier and allows the diels-alder reaction to take place with relative ease . carey , part a . , pp . 836–50 a consideration of the reactants ' frontier molecular orbitals ( fmo ) makes plain why this is so . ( the same conclusion can be drawn from an orbital correlation diagram or a dewar-zimmerman analysis . ) for the more common '' normal '' electron demand diels–alder reaction , the more important of the two homo/lumo interactions is that between the electron-rich diene 's ψ 2 as the highest occupied molecular orbital ( homo ) with the electron-deficient dienophile 's π as the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital ( lumo ) . however , the homo–lumo energy gap is close enough that the roles can be reversed by switching electronic effects of the substituents on the two components . in an inverse electron-demand diels–alder reaction , electron-withdrawing substituents on the diene lower the energy of its empty ψ 3 orbital and electron-donating substituents on the dienophile raise the energy of its filled π orbital sufficiently that the interaction between these two orbitals becomes the most energetically significant stabilizing orbital interaction . regardless of which situation pertains , the homo and lumo of the components are in phase and a bonding interaction results as can be seen in the diagram below . since the reactants are in their ground state , the reaction is initiated thermally and does not require activation by light . the '' prevailing opinion '' carey , part a . , p . 839 is that most diels–alder reactions proceed through a concerted mechanism ; the issue , however , has been thoroughly contested . despite the fact that the vast majority of diels–alder reactions exhibit stereospecific , syn addition of the two components , a diradical intermediate has been postulated ( and supported with computational evidence ) on the grounds that the observed stereospecificity does not rule out a two-step addition involving an intermediate that collapses to product faster than it can rotate to allow for inversion of stereochemistry . there is a notable rate enhancement when certain diels–alder reactions are carried out in polar organic solvents such as dimethylformamide and ethylene glycol . and even in water . the reaction of cyclopentadiene and butenone for example is 700 times faster in water relative to 2,2,4-trimethylpentane as solvent . several explanations for this effect have been proposed , such as an increase in effective concentration due to hydrophobic packing or hydrogen-bond stabilization of the transition state . the geometry of the diene and dienophile components each propagate into stereochemical details of the product . for intermolecular reactions especially , the preferred positional and stereochemical relationship of subtituents of the two components compared to each other are controlled by electronic effects . however , for intramolecular diels–alder cycloaddition reactions , the conformational stability of the structure the transition state can be an overwhelming influence . regioselectivity . frontier molecular orbital theory has also been used to explain the regioselectivity patterns observed in diels–alder reactions of substituted systems . calculation of the energy and orbital coefficients of the components ' frontier orbitals provides a picture that is in good accord with the more straightforward analysis of the substituents ' resonance effects , as illustrated below . in general , the regioselectivity found for both normal and inverse electron-demand diels–alder reaction follows the ortho-para rule , so named , because the cyclohexene product bears substituents in positions that are analogous to the ortho and para positions of disubstituted arenes . for example , in a normal-demand scenario , a diene bearing an electron-donating group ( edg ) at c1 has its largest homo coefficient at c4 , while the dienophile with an electron withdrawing group ( ewg ) at c1 has the largest lumo coefficient at c2 . pairing these two coefficients gives the '' ortho '' product as seen in case 1 in the figure below . a diene substituted at c2 as in case 2 below has the largest homo coefficient at c1 , giving rise to the '' para '' product . similar analyses for the corresponding inverse-demand scenarios gives rise to the analogous products as seen in cases 3 and 4 . examining the canonical mesomeric forms above , it is easy to verify that these results are in accord with expectations based on consideration of electron density and polarization . in general , with respect to the energetically most well-matched homo-lumo pair , maximizing the interaction energy by forming bonds between centers with the largest frontier orbital coefficients allows the prediction of the main regioisomer that will result from a given diene-dienophile combination . in a more sophisticated treatment , three types of substituents ( z withdrawing : homo and lumo lowering ( cf 3 , no 2 , cn , c ( o ) ch 3 ) , x donating : homo and lumo raising ( me , ome , nme 2 ) , c conjugating : homo raising and lumo lowering ( ph , vinyl ) ) are considered , resulting in a total of 18 possible combinations . the maximization of orbital interaction correctly predicts the product in all cases for which experimental data is available . for instance , in uncommon combinations involving x groups on both diene and dienophile , a 1,3-substitution pattern may be favored , an outcome not accounted for by a simplistic resonance structure argument . however , cases where the resonance argument and the matching of largest orbital coefficients disagree are rare . stereospecificity and stereoselectivity . diels–alder reactions , as concerted cycloadditions , are stereospecific . stereochemical information of the diene and the dienophile are retained in the product , as a syn addition with respect to each component . for example , substituents in a cis ( trans , resp . ) relationship on the double bond of the dienophile give rise to substituents that are cis ( trans , resp . ) on those same carbons with respect to the cyclohexene ring . likewise , cis , cis- and trans , trans-disubstitued dienes give cis substituents at these carbons of the product whereas cis , trans-disubstituted dienes give trans substituents : diels–alder reactions in which adjacent stereocenters are generated at the two ends of the newly-formed single bonds imply two different possible stereochemical outcomes . this is a stereoselective situation based on the relative orientation of the two separate components when they react with each other . in the context of the diels–alder reaction , the transition state in which the most significant substituent ( an electron-withdrawing and/or conjugating group ) on the dienophile is oriented towards the diene π system and slips under it as the reaction takes place is known as the endo transition state . in the alternative exo transition state , it is oriented away from it . ( there is a more general usage of the terms endo and exo in stereochemical nomenclature . ) in cases where the dienophile has a single electron-withdrawing / conjugating substituent , or two electron-withdrawing / conjugating substituents cis to each other , the outcome can often be predicted . in these '' normal demand '' diels–alder scenarios , the endo transition state is typically preferred , despite often being more sterically congested . this preference is known as the alder endo rule . as originally stated by alder , the transition state that is preferred is the one with a '' maximum accumulation of double bonds . '' endo selectivity is typically higher for rigid dienophiles such as maleic anhydride and benzoquinone ; for others , such as acrylates and crotonates , selectivity is not very pronounced . attractions may play a part as well , and solvent can sometimes make a substantial difference in selectivity . the secondary orbital overlap explanation was first proposed by woodward and hoffmann . in this explanation , the orbitals associated with the group in conjugation with the dienophile double-bond overlap with the interior orbitals of the diene , a situation that is possible only for the endo transition state . although the original explanation only invoked the orbital on the atom α to the dienophile double bond , salem and houk have subsequently proposed that orbitals on the α and β carbons both participate when molecular geometry allows . often , as with highly substituted dienes , very bulky dienophiles , or reversible reactions ( as in the case of furan as diene ) , steric effects can override the normal endo selectivity in favor of the exo isomer . the diene . the diene component of the diels–alder reaction can be either open-chain or cyclic , and it can host many different types of substituents ; it must , however , be able to exist in the s-cis conformation , since this is the only conformer that can participate in the reaction . a bulky substituent at the c2 or c3 position can increase reaction rate by destabilizing the s-trans conformation and forcing the diene into the reactive s-cis conformation . 2-tert-butyl-buta-1,3-diene , for example , is 27 times more reactive than simple butadiene . conversely , a diene having bulky substituents at both c2 and c3 are less reactive because the steric interactions between the substituents destabilize the s-cis conformation . dienes with bulky terminal substituents ( c1 and c4 ) decrease the rate of reaction , presumably by impeding the approach of the diene and dienophile . an especially reactive diene is 1-methoxy-3-trimethylsiloxy-buta-1,3-diene , otherwise known as danishefsky 's diene . it has particular synthetic utility as means of furnishing α , β–unsaturated cyclohexenone systems by elimination of the 1-methoxy substituent after deprotection of the enol silyl ether . other synthetically useful derivatives of danishefsky 's diene include 1,3-alkoxy-1-trimethylsiloxy-1,3-butadienes ( brassard dienes ) and 1-dialkylamino-3-trimethylsiloxy-1,3-butadienes ( rawal dienes ) . the increased reactivity of these and similar dienes is a result of synergistic contributions from donor groups at c1 and c3 , raising the homo significantly above that of a comparable monosubstituted diene . unstable ( and thus highly reactive ) dienes , of which perhaps the most synthetically useful are o-quinodimethanes , can be generated in situ . a strong driving force for the 4+2 cycloaddition of such species is a result of the establishment ( or reestablishment ) of aromaticity . common methods for generating o-quinodimethanes include pyrolysis of benzocyclobutenes or the corresponding sulfone , 1,4-elimination of ortho benzylic silanes or stannanes , and reduction of α , α'-ortho benzylic dibromides . on the contrary , stable dienes are rather unreactive and undergo diels–alder reactions only at elevated temperatures : for example , naphthalene can function as a diene , leading to adducts only with highly reactive dienophiles , such as n-phenyl-maleimide . anthracene , being less aromatic ( and therefore more reactive for diels–alder syntheses ) in its central ring can form a 9,10 adduct with maleic anhydride at 80 & nbsp ; °c and even with acetylene , a weak dienophile , at 250 & nbsp ; °c . margareta avram ( 1983 ) . chimie organica p . 318-323 . editura academiei republicii socialiste românia . the dienophile . in a normal demand diels–alder reaction , the dienophile has an electron-withdrawing group in conjugation with the alkene ; in an inverse-demand scenario , the dienophile is conjugated with an electron-donating group . dienophiles can be chosen to contain a '' masked functionality '' . the dienophile undergoes diels–alder reaction with a diene introducing such a functionality onto the product molecule . a series of reactions then follow to transform the functionality into a desirable group . the end product can not not be made in a single da step because equivalent dienophile is either unreactive or inaccessible . an example of such approach is the use of α-chloroacrylonitrile ( ch 2 cclcn ) . when reacted with a diene , this dienophile will introduce α-chloronitrile functionality onto the product molecule . this is a '' masked functionality '' which can be then hydrolyzed to form a ketone . α-chloroacrylonitrile dienophile is an equivalent of ketene dienophile ( ch 2 c o ) , which would produce same product in one da step . the problem is that ketene itself can not be used in diels–alder reactions because it reacts with dienes in unwanted manner ( by 2+2 cycloaddition ) , and therefore '' masked functionality '' approach has to be used . other such functionalities are phosphonium substituents ( yielding exocyclic double bonds after wittig reaction ) , various sulfoxide and sulfonyl functionalities ( both are acetylene equivalents ) , and nitro groups ( ketene equivalents ) . . variants on the classical diels–alder reaction . hetero-diels–alder . diels–alder reactions involving at least one heteroatom are also known and are collectively called hetero-diels–alder reactions . carbonyl groups , for example , can successfully react with dienes to yield dihydropyran rings , a reaction known as the oxo-diels–alder reaction , and imines can be used , either as the dienophile or at various sites in the diene , to form various n-heterocyclic compounds through the aza-diels–alder reaction . nitroso compounds ( r-n o ) can react with dienes to form oxazines . chlorosulfonyl isocyanate can be utilized as a dienophile to prepare vince lactam . . lewis acid activation . lewis acids such as zinc chloride , boron trifluoride , tin tetrachloride , aluminum chloride , etc . can act as catalysts of normal-demand diels–alder reactions by coordination to the dienophile . the complexed dienophile becomes more electrophilic and more reactive toward the diene , increasing the reaction rate and often improving the regio- and stereoselectivity as well . lewis acid catalysis also enables diels–alder reactions to proceed at low temperatures , i.e . without thermal activation . . asymmetric diels–alder . many methods have been developed for influencing the stereoselectivity of the diels–alder reaction , such as the use of chiral auxiliaries , catalysis by chiral lewis acids , and organocatalysis . evans auxiliaries , oxazaborolidines , bis-oxazoline–copper chelates , imidazoline catalysis , and many other methodologies exist for effecting diastereo- and enantioselective diels-alder reactions . hexadehydro diels–alder . in the hexadehydro diels–alder reaction , alkynes and diynes are used instead of alkenes and dienes , forming an unstable benzyne intermediate which can then be trapped to form an aromatic product . this reaction allows the formation of heavily-functionalized aromatic rings in a single step . hoye , t . r . ; baire , b . ; niu , d . ; willoughby , p . h . ; woods , b . p . nature , 2012 , 490 , 208 . applications . the retro diels–alder reaction is used in the industrial production of cyclopentadiene . cyclopentadiene is a precursor to various norbornenes , which are common monomers . the diels–alder reaction is also employed in the production of vitamin b6 . through vinyl norbornene . . history . the work by diels and alder is described in a series of 28 articles published in the justus liebigs annalen der chemie and berichte der deutschen chemischen gesellschaft from 1928 to 1937 . the first 19 articles were authored by diels and alder , while the later articles were authored by diels and various contributors . the first application of diels–alder reaction in total synthesis was illustrated by r . b . woodward 's syntheses of the steroids cortisone and cholesterol . the reaction of butadiene with the quinone below furnished the c and d rings of the steroid skeleton with the desired regiochemistry . e . j . corey , in his original 1969 synthesis of prostaglandins f2α and e2 , utilized a diels–alder reaction early in the synthesis to establish the relative stereochemistry of three contiguous stereocenters on the prostaglandin cyclopentane core . to mitigate isomerization of the substituted cyclopentadiene via 1,5-hydride shift , it was found necessary to keep this intermediate below 0 & nbsp ; °c until the diels–alder could take place . thus activation by strongly lewis acidic cupric tetrafluoroborate was required to allow for the reaction to take place . the use of 2-chloroacrylonitrile as dienophile is a viable synthetic equivalent for ketene , a structure that typically underdoes a 2+2 cycloaddition to give a cyclobutanone dimer rather than participating in diels–alder reactions with 1,3-dienes . hydrolysis of the epimeric mixture of chloronitrile adducts revealed the desired bicycloheptanone in high yield . samuel j . danishefsky used a diels–alder reaction to synthesize prephenic acid , a biosynthetic precursor of the amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine , in 1979 . this sequence is notable as one of the earliest to feature 1-methoxy-3-siloxybutadiene , the so-called danishefsky diene , in total synthesis . its utility is apparent below , namely , the ready furnishing of α , β–unsaturated cyclohexenone systems . in their 1980 synthesis of reserpine , paul wender and coworkers used a diels–alder reaction to set the cis-decalin framework of the d and e rings of the natural product . the initial diels-alder between 2-acetoxyacrylic acid and the 1,2-dihydropyridine-1-carboxylate shown below put the newly installed carboxyl group in a position to rearrange exclusively to the cis-fused rings after conversion to the isoquinuclidene shown below . the cis-fusion allowed for the establishment of the stereochemistry at c17 and c18 : first by cleavage of the acetate group at c18 to give a ketone that can modulate the stereochemistry of the methoxy group c17 , and then by reduction of the ketone at c18 from the exo face to achieve the stereochemistry of the final product . in stephen f . martin 's synthesis of reserpine , the cis-fused d and e rings were also formed by a diels–alder reaction . intramolecular diels–alder of the pyranone below with subsequent extrusion of carbon dioxide via a retro 4+2 afforded the bicyclic lactam . epoxidation from the less hindered α-face , followed by epoxide opening at the less hindered c18 afforded the desired stereochemistry at these positions , while the cis-fusion was achieved with hydrogenation , again proceeding primarily from the less hindered face . a pyranone was similarly used as the dienophile by k . c . nicolaou 's group in the total synthesis of taxol . the intermolecular reaction of the hydroxy-pyrone and α , β–unsaturated ester shown below suffered from poor yield and regioselectivity ; however , when directed by phenylboronic acid the desired adduct could be obtained in 61 % yield after cleavage of the boronate with 2,2-dimethyl-1,3-propanediol . the stereospecificity of the diels–alder reaction in this instance allowed for the definition of four stereocenters that were carried on to the final product . a diels–alder reaction was the key step in amos smith 's synthesis of ( - ) -furaquinocin c . dione 1 was converted to the requisite diene by enolization using two successive silylations with tmscl . the diels–alder cycloaddition with bromoquinone was followed by a spontaneous dehydrohalogenation to re-form the aromatic ring . the diene in this instance is notable as a rare example of a cyclic derivative of danishefsky 's diene . viresh rawal and sergey kozmin , in their 1998 synthesis of tabersonine , used a diels–alder to establish cis relative stereochemistry of the alkaloid core . conversion of the cis-aldehyde to its corresponding alkene by wittig olefination and subsequent ring-closing metathesis with a schrock carbene gave the second ring of the alkaloid core . the diene in this instance is notable as an example of a 1-amino-3-siloxybutadiene , otherwise known as a rawal diene . in 1988 , william okamura and richard gibbs reported an enantioselective synthesis of ( + ) -sterpurene that featured a remarkable intramolecular diels–alder reaction of an allene . the sigmatropic reaction 2,3-sigmatropic rearrangement of the thiophenyl group to give the sulfoxide as below proceeded enantiospecifically due to the predefined stereochemistry of the propargylic alcohol . in this way , the single allene isomer formed could direct the diels-alder to occur on only one face of the generated 'diene ' . andrew myers ' 2005 synthesis of tetracycline achieved the linear tetracyclic core of the antibiotic with a diels–alder reaction . thermally initiated , conrotatory opening of the benzocyclobutene generated the o-quinodimethane , which reacted intermolecularly to give the tetracycline skeleton ; the diastereomer shown was then crystallized from methanol after purification by column chromatography . the authors note that the dienophile 's free hydroxyl group was integral to the success of the reaction , as hydroxyl-protected variants did not react under several different reaction conditions . takemura et al . synthesized cantharadrin in 1980 by diels-alder , utilizing high pressure . synthetic applications of the diels–alder reaction have been reviewed extensively . . see also . bradsher cycloaddition wagner-jauregg reaction imine diels–alder reaction aza-diels–alder reaction . references . bibliography . . external links . english translation of diels and alder 's seminal 1928 german article that won them the nobel prize . english title : 'syntheses of the hydroaromatic series ' ; german title '' synthesen in der hydroaromatischen reihe '' .