Holstein

history . origins . after the migration period of the early middle ages , holstein was adjacent to obotrites on the coast of the baltic sea and the land of the danes in jutland . with the conquest of old saxony by charlemagne circa 800 , he granted the land north of the eider river ( schleswig ) to the danes by the treaty of heiligen signed in 811 . the ownership of what would late become eastern holstein ( districts of plön and ostholstein ) was given to obotrites , namely the wagrians , and the saxon elite was deported to various areas of the empire . after 814 , however , the saxons were restored to western holstein . the wagrians were pushed out of the limes saxoniae - the new border running from the elbe river near boizenburg northwards along the bille river to the mouth of the schwentine at the kiel fjord and the baltic sea . for the following 300 years , holstein continued to be a part of saxony . the county of holstein . the new county of holstein was established in 1111 ; it was first a fief of the duchy of saxony , then of the duchy of saxe-lauenburg , and finally of the prince-bishopric of lübeck . with the establishment of the new territorial unit , expansion to the east began and the wagrians were finally defeated in 1138 . the county of holstein was ruled by the house of schaumburg ; the first count was adolf i , count of holstein . holstein was temporarily occupied by denmark after the battle of stellau ( 1201 ) , but was reconquered by the count of schauenburg and his allies in the battle of bornhöved ( 1227 ) . partitions of the county of holstein ( 1111–1474 ) . the counts of schauenburg and holstein partitioned holstein several times among the inheriting sons into up to six lines , named after their towns of residence : holstein-itzehoe , branch county between 1261 and 1290 , partitioned from holstein , repartitioned into holstein-pinneberg , holstein-plön and holstein-rendsburg holstein-kiel , branch county between 1261 and 1390 , partitioned from holstein , in 1273 holstein-segeberg ( first ) was partitioned from holstein-kiel , but reverted in 1308 , but then lost to holstein-pinneberg , holstein-plön and holstein-rendsburg in 1316 ; holstein-kiel acquired holstein-plön in 1350 , and merged itself into holstein-rendsburg holstein-pinneberg , branch county between 1290 and 1640 , partitioned from holstein-itzehoe , acquired a share of holstein-segeberg in 1316 , merged into the duchy of holstein holstein-plön , branch county between 1290 and 1390 , partitioned from holstein-itzehoe , acquired a share of holstein-segeberg in 1316 , merged into holstein-kiel holstein-rendsburg , branch county between 1290 and 1474 , partitioned from holstein-itzehoe , acquired a share of holstein-segeberg ( first ) in 1316 , and holstein-kiel in 1390 , in 1381/1384 holstein-segeberg ( second ) was partitioned from holstein-rendsburg , but reverted in 1403 , elevated to ducal rank in 1474 holstein-segeberg ( first ) , branch county between 1273 and 1308 , partitioned from and reverted to holstein-kiel , but seized by allied holstein-pinneberg , holstein-plön , and holstein-rendsburg , partitioning segeberg in three shares , each merged into one of the lines in 1316 holstein-segeberg ( second ) , branch county between 1381/1384 and 1403 , partitioned from and reverted to holstein-rendsburg in 1386 king olav iv of norway and his mother-regent , queen margaret i , enfeoffed in nyborg gerhard vi , count of holstein-rendsburg and his cognatic successors with the duchy of schleswig . esben albrectsen , '' das abel-geschlecht und die schauenburger als herzöge von schleswig '' , marion hartwig and frauke witte ( trls . ) , in : die fürsten des landes : herzöge und grafen von schleswig , holstein und lauenburg de slevigske hertuger ; german , carsten porskrog rasmussen ( ed . ) on behalf of the gesellschaft für schleswig-holsteinische geschichte , neumünster : wachholtz , 2008 , pp . 52-71 , here pp . 63seq . he thus became as gerhard ii duke of schleswig . until 1390 the rendsburg branch united by inheritance all branches except of that of holstein-pinneberg . when the holstein-rendsburg line of the schauenburg counts became extinct with the death of adolf viii , count of holstein ( and in personal union as adolf i duke of schleswig ) in 1459 , christian i of denmark inherited – from his maternal uncle adolf i – the duchy of schleswig , a danish fief . through the treaty of ribe ( 1460 ) christian was elected count of holstein-rendsburg , then still a saxe-lauenburgian subfief within the holy roman empire . the duchy of holstein . in 1474 lauenburg 's liege lord , the german emperor frederick iii , elevated christian i as count of holstein-rendsburg to duke of holstein , thus becoming an immediate imperial ( reichsunmittelbar ) vassal ( see imperial immediacy ) . the duchy of holstein retained that status until the dissolution of the empire in 1806 . partitions of the duchy of holstein ( 1474–1866 ) . in 1490 , the duchy of holstein was divided into holstein-segeberg and holstein-gottorp . holstein-segeberg remained with the danish king and was also known as royal holstein ; later it came to be known as holstein-glückstadt . holstein-gottorp , also known as ducal holstein , was given to a cadet branch of the house of oldenburg , to which the kings of denmark belonged . between 1533 and 1544 king christian iii of denmark ruled the entire duchies of holstein and of schleswig also in the name of his then still minor half-brothers john the elder and adolf . in 1544 they partitioned the duchies of holstein ( a fief of the holy roman empire ) and of schleswig ( a danish fief ) in an unusual way , following negotiations between the brothers and the estates of the realm of the duchies , which had constituted in 1460 by the treaty of ribe and strictly opposed a factual partition . the elder three brothers determined their youngest brother frederick for a career as lutheran administrator of an ecclesiastical state within the holy roman empire . in 1551 frederick became administrator of the prince-bishopric of hildesheim , comprising ecclesiastical and secular power , and , however , lacking secular power bishop of schleswig with the pertaining revenues from episcopal estates . so the revenues of the duchies were divided in three equal shares by assigning the revenues of particular areas and estate ( land ) to each of the elder brothers , while other general revenues , such as taxes from towns and customs dues , were levied together but then shared among the brothers . the estates , whose revenues were assigned to the parties , made holstein and schleswig look like patchworks , technically inhibiting the emergence of separate new duchies , as intended by the estates of the duchies . the secular rule in the fiscally divided duchies thus became a condominium of the parties . as dukes of holstein and schleswig the rulers of both houses bore the formal title of '' duke of schleswig , holstein , ditmarsh and stormarn '' . the three shares are usually called : gottorp ducal share in holstein and schleswig , partitioned from ducal holstein in 1544 , acquired half of haderslev share in 1581 ( thus thereafter simply called ducal share ) , merged into the royal share in 1773 with its ruler receiving in return the prior danish-held county of oldenburg . haderslev ducal share in holstein and schleswig , partitioned from ducal holstein in 1544 , halved between gottorp and royal share in 1581 royal share in holstein and schleswig , acquired half of haderslev share in 1581 , the county of holstein-pinneberg in 1640 and the gottorp share in 1713 ( northern part ) and 1773 ( southern part ) , thus then comprising all of holstein . between 1648 and 1773 the royal share used to be called holstein-glückstadt after its capital glückstadt . parts of the former county of holstein-pinneberg were transformed 1649/50 into the imperial county of rantzau , which fell back to the danish crown in 1726 . the dynastic name holstein-gottorp comes as convenient usage from the technically more correct duke of schleswig and holstein at gottorp . adolf , the third son of duke and king frederick i and the second youngest half-brother of king christian iii , founded the dynastic branch called house of holstein-gottorp , which is a cadet branch of the then royal danish house of oldenburg . the danish monarchs and the dukes of holstein-gottorp ruled both duchies together as to general government , however , collected their revenues in their separate estates . john the elder conveniently called duke of schleswig-holstein-haderslev produced no issue , so no branch emerged from his side . similar to the above-mentioned agreement christian iii 's youngest son john the younger gained for him and his heirs a share in holstein 's and schleswig 's revenues in 1564 , comprising a third of the royal share , thus a ninth of holstein and schleswig as to the fiscal point of view . john the younger and his heirs , however , had no share in the condominial rule , so they were not ruling but mere titular dukes . the share of john the elder , who died in 1581 , was halved between adolf and frederick ii , thus increasing again the royal share by a fiscal sixth of holstein and schleswig . cf . carsten porskrog rasmussen , '' die dänischen könige als herzöge von schleswig und holstein '' , frauke witte and marion hartwig ( trls . ) , in : die fürsten des landes : herzöge und grafen von schleswig , holstein und lauenburg de slevigske hertuger ; german , carsten porskrog rasmussen ( ed . ) on behalf of the gesellschaft für schleswig-holsteinische geschichte , neumünster : wachholtz , 2008 , pp . 73–109 , here pp . 87seq . as an effect the complicated fiscal division of both separate duchies , holstein and schleswig , with shares of each party scattered in both duchies , provided them with a condominial government binding both together , partially superseding their legally different affiliation as holy roman and danish fiefs . the county of holstein-pinneberg , which had remained a separately ruled territory in holstein until its line was extinct in 1640 , was merged into the then royal share of the duchy of holstein . the duke of holstein-gottorp became emperor of russia in 1762 as peter iii and was planning an attack on denmark to recover the holstein-gottorp lands possessions in schleswig , which were seized by the danish king in 1713 . although peter was soon overthrown by his wife , catherine the great , the danes determined to rid themselves of this problem . in 1773 , they exchanged the duchy of oldenburg for the gottorp lands in holstein , bringing all of holstein under their control . thus , holstein was again united in one state . the territory of holstein was enlarged by the conquest of the independent dithmarschen in 1559 , which was divided among the three ducal houses . after 1581 the southern part remained to the danish crown , the northern part was ruled by the house of gottorp until 1773 . united holstein . with the dissolution of the holy roman empire in 1806 holstein 's imperial vassal status turned void . it thus became a sovereign state . because of its personal union with denmark , the duchy of holstein did not come under french occupation during the napoleonic era ( however , the neighboring duchy of lauenburg was annexed by france in 1811 and became a part of bouches-de-l'elbe ) . from 1815 to 1864 it was a member of the german confederation , though still in personal union with denmark ( the king of denmark being also duke of holstein ) . with denmark , quickly defeating it in 1864 and forcing it to cede the duchies . however , the duchies were not given to the duke of augustenborg . in 1865 an arrangement was worked out between prussia and austria where the austrians occupied and administered holstein , while the prussians did the same in schleswig . this arrangement came to an end with the austro-prussian war of 1866 , which resulted in schleswig and holstein both being incorporated into prussia as the province of schleswig-holstein . holstein , meanwhile including former saxe-lauenburg ( as of 1876 ) and the former free city of lübeck and region of lübeck ( both as of 1937 ) regained statehood , now united with schleswig , in 1946 , when the british occupation government elevated the province to the schleswig-holstein , followed by the official dissolution of prussia in 1947 . for a list of rulers , see counts of schauenburg and holstein and list of rulers of schleswig-holstein . geography . as of 1864 , holstein bordered denmark in the north , the principality of lübeck ( formerly the prince-bishopric of lübeck , an exclave of the grand duchy of oldenburg ) , the free city of lübeck , and the duchy of saxe-lauenburg in the east , and the kingdom of hanover and the free and hanseatic city of hamburg in the south . it also borders the north sea in the west and the baltic sea in the east . its only major island is fehmarn , originally a part of the duchy of schleswig until 1867 . cities in holstein included kiel , altona , glückstadt , rendsburg , segeberg , heiligenhafen , oldenburg in holstein , and plön . it had an area of 8,385 & nbsp ; km 2 . notes . . references . external links . map of schleswig-holstein in 1730