Almanac

etymology . the etymology of the word is unclear . it has been suggested that the word almanac derives from a greek word meaning calendar . however , that word appears only once in antiquity , by eusebius who quotes porphyry as to the coptic egyptian use of astrological charts ( almenichiaká ) . the earliest almanacs were calendars that included agricultural , astronomical , or meteorological data . but it is highly unlikely roger bacon received the word from this etymology : '' notwithstanding the suggestive sound and use of this word ( of which however the real form is very uncertain ) , the difficulties of connecting it historically either with the spanish arabic manākh , or with medieval latin almanach without arabic intermediation , seem insurmountable . '' oxford english dictionary the earliest documented use of the word in any language is in latin in 1267 by roger bacon , where it meant a set of tables detailing movements of heavenly bodies including the moon . one etymology report says '' the ultimate source of the word is obscure . its first syllable , al- , and its general relevance to medieval science and technology , strongly suggest an arabic origin , but no convincing candidate has been found '' . ernest weekley similarly states of almanac : '' first seen in roger bacon . apparently from spanish arabic , al-manakh , but this is not an arabic word.the word remains a puzzle . '' walter william skeat concludes that the construction of an arabic origin is '' not satisfactory '' . the oxford english dictionary similarly says '' the word has no etymon in arabic '' but indirect circumstantial evidence '' points to a spanish arabic al-manākh '' . '' almanac '' in new english dictionary on historical principles ( which has an extra '' note as to the origin and history of the word almanac '' ) . the reason why the proposed arabic word is speculatively spelled al-manākh is that the spelling occurred as '' almanach '' , as well as almanac ( and roger bacon used both spellings ) . the earliest use of the word was in the context of astronomy calendars . the prestige of the tables of toledo and other astronomy in medieval islam at the time of the word 's emergence in the west , together with the absence of the word in arabic , suggest it may have been invented in the west and is pseudo-arabic . at that time in the west , it would have been prestigious to attach an arabic appellation to a set of astronomical tables . also around that time , prompted by that motive , the latin writer pseudo-geber wrote under an arabic pseudonym . ( the later alchemical word alkahest is known to be pseudo-arabic . ) . history . hemerologies and parapegmata . the earlier texts considered to be almanacs have been found in the near east , dating back to the middle of the second millennium bc . they have been called generally hemerologies , from the greek hēmerā , meaning '' day '' . among them is the so-called babylonian almanac , which lists favorable and unfavorable days with advice on what to do on each of them . successive variants and versions aimed at different readership have been found . livingstone , a . ( 1998 ) '' the use of magic in the assyrian and babylonian hemerologies and menolgies . '' studi epigrafici e linguistici sul vicino oriente antico 15 ( 1998 ) 59 . egyptian lists of good and bad moments , three times each day , have also been found . many of these prognostics were connected with celestial events . the flooding of the nile valley , a most important event in ancient egypt , was expected to occur at the summer solstice , but as the civil calendar had exactly 365 days , over the centuries , the date was drifting in the calendar . the first heliacal rising of sirius was used for its prediction and this practice , the observation of some star and its connecting to some event apparently spread . the greek almanac , known as parapegma , has existed in the form of an inscribed stone on which the days of the month were indicated by movable pegs inserted into bored holes , hence the name . there were also written texts and according to diogenes laërtius , parapegma was the title of a book by democritus . lehoux d . , parapegmata , astrology , weather , and calendars in the ancient world ( thesis ) , national library of canada , 2000 ; includes a list of surviving parapegmata ( plural of 'parapegma ' ) and bibliography . ptolemy , the alexandrian astronomer ( 2nd century ) wrote a treatise , phaseis— '' phases of fixed stars and collection of weather-changes '' is the translation of its full title—the core of which is a parapegma , a list of dates of seasonally regular weather changes , first appearances and last appearances of stars or constellations at sunrise or sunset , and solar events such as solstices , all organized according to the solar year . with the astronomical computations were expected weather phenomena , composed as a digest of observations made by various authorities of the past . parapegmata had been composed for centuries . ptolemy believed that astronomical phenomena caused the changes in seasonal weather ; his explanation of why there was not an exact correlation of these events was that the physical influences of other heavenly bodies also came into play . hence for him , weather prediction was a special division of astrology . . ephemerides , zijs and tables . the origins of the almanac can be connected to ancient babylonian astronomy , when tables of planetary periods were produced in order to predict lunar and planetary phenomena . similar treatises called zij were later composed in medieval islamic astronomy . the modern almanac differs from babylonian , ptolemaic and zij tables in the sense that '' the entries found in the almanacs give directly the positions of the celestial bodies and need no further computation '' , in contrast to the more common '' auxiliary astronomical tables '' based on ptolemy 's almagest . the earliest known almanac in this modern sense is the almanac of azarqueil written in 1088 by abū ishāq ibrāhīm al-zarqālī ( latinized as arzachel ) in toledo , al-andalus . the work provided the true daily positions of the sun , moon and planets for four years from 1088 to 1092 , as well as many other related tables . a latin translation and adaptation of the work appeared as the tables of toledo in the 12th century and the alfonsine tables in the 13th century . image : hindu calendar 1871-72.jpg right thumb a page from the almanac for the hindu year 1871-72 . medieval examples . after almanacs were devised , people still saw little difference between predicting the movements of the stars and tides , and predicting the future in the divination sense . early almanacs therefore contained general horoscopes , as well as the more concrete information . in 1150 solomon jarchus created such an almanac considered to be among the first modern almanacs . copies of 12th century almanacs are found in the british museum , and in the universities of oxford and cambridge . in 1300 , petrus de dacia created an almanac ( savilian library , oxford ) . this was the same year roger bacon , ofm , produced his as well . in 1327 walter de elvendene created an almanac and later on john somers of oxford , in 1380 . in 1386 nicholas de lynne , oxford produced an almanac . in 1457 the first printed almanac was published at mainz , by gutenberg ( eight years before the famous bible ) . regio-montanus produced an almanac in 1472 ( nuremberg , 1472 ) , which was continued in print for several centuries in many editions . in 1497 the sheapheard ’ s kalendar , translated from french ( richard pynson ) became the first english printed almanac . early modern era . . england . by the second half of the 16th century , yearly almanacs were being produced in england by men such as anthony askham , thomas buckminster , john dade and gabriel frende . in the 17th century , english almanacs were bestsellers , second only to the bible ; by the middle of the century , 400,000 almanacs were being produced annually ( a complete listing can be found in the english short title catalogue ) . until its deregulation in 1775 , the stationers ' company maintained a lucrative monopoly over almanac publication in england . lyons , martyn . ( 2011 ) . books : a living history . los angeles , ca : getty publications . pp . 123 richard allestree ( who is not the same as this richard allestree ) wrote one of the more popular english almanacs , producing yearly volumes from 1617 to 1643 , but his is by no means the earliest or the longest-running almanac . works that satirized this type of publication appeared in the late 1500s . during the next century , a writer using the pseudonym of '' poor richard , knight of the burnt island '' began to publish a series of such parodies that were entitled poor robin . the 1664 issue of the series stated : '' this month we may expect to hear of the death of some man , woman , or child , either in kent or christendom . '' . british america and united states . the first almanac printed in the thirteen colonies of british america was william pierce 's 1639 an almanac calculated for new england . the almanac was the first in a series of such publications that stephen daye , or day , printed each year until 1649 in cambridge , massachusetts . ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) morrison , p . 32 . the cambridge/boston area in massachusetts soon became the first center in the colonies for the annual publication of almanacs , to be followed by philadelphia during the first half of the eighteenth century . nathaniel ames of dedham , massachusetts , issued his popular astronomical diary and almanack in 1725 and annually after c.1732 . james franklin published the rhode island almanack by '' poor robin '' for each year from 1728 to 1735 . ( 1 ) ( 2 ) james ' brother , benjamin franklin , published his annual poor richard 's almanack in philadelphia from 1732 to 1758 . samuel stearns of paxton , massachusetts , issued the north-american almanack , published annually from 1771 to 1784 , as well as the first american nautical almanac , the navigator 's kalendar , or nautical almanack , for 1783 . andrew ellicott of ellicott 's upper mills , maryland , authored a series of almanacs , the united states almanack , the earliest known copy of which bears the date of 1782 . benjamin banneker , a free african american living near ellicott 's mills , composed a series of almanacs for the years of 1792 to 1797 . . contemporary use . currently published almanacs such as whitaker 's almanack have expanded their scope and contents beyond that of their historical counterparts . modern almanacs include a comprehensive presentation of statistical and descriptive data covering the entire world . contents also include discussions of topical developments and a summary of recent historical events . other currently published almanacs ( ca . 2006 ) include time almanac with information please , world almanac , farmers ' almanac and old farmer 's almanac and the almanac for farmers & city folk . the inverness almanac , an almanac/literary journal , was published in west marin , california , from 2015 to 2016 . in 2007 , harrowsmith country life magazine launched a canadian almanac , written in canada , with all-canadian content . the nonprofit agrarian organization the greenhorns currently publishes the new farmer 's almanac as a resource for young farmers . major topics covered by almanacs ( reflected by their tables of contents ) include : geography , government , demographics , agriculture , economics and business , health and medicine , religion , mass media , transportation , science and technology , sport , and awards/prizes . other examples include the almanac of american politics published by columbia books & information services , the almanac of american literature , the almanac of british politics and the wapsipinicon almanac . the gps almanac , as part of the data transmitted by each gps satellite , contains coarse orbit and status information for all satellites in the constellation , an ionospheric model , and information to relate gps derived time to coordinated universal time ( utc ) . hence the gps almanac provides a similar goal as the ancient babylonian almanac , to find celestial bodies .