Space rock

history . origins and emergence . humanity 's entry into outer space provided ample subject matter for rock and roll and r & b songs from the mid-1950s through the early 1960s . it also inspired new sounds and sound effects to be used in the music itself . a prominent early example of space rock is the 1959 concept album i hear a new world by british producer and songwriter joe meek . the album was inspired by the space race and concerned human 's first close encounter with alien life forms . meek then went on to have a uk and us no 1 success in 1961 with '' telstar '' , named after the newly launched communications satellite and thus intended to commemorate the new space age . its main instrument was a clavioline , an electronic forerunner of synthesizers . pink floyd 's early albums contain pioneering examples of space rock : '' lucifer sam '' , a.robbins '' the trouser press record guide '' ( collier books , 1991 ) , '' astronomy domine '' , bruce eder , astronomy domine song review , allmusic '' pow r . toc h . '' nicholas schaffner , '' saucerful of secrets : the pink floyd odyssey '' , ( dell , 1992 ) , , p.66 . and '' interstellar overdrive '' richie unterberger , interstellar overdrive song review , allmusic from their 1967 debut album the piper at the gates of dawn are examples . their second album a saucerful of secrets contained further examples : '' let there be more light '' and '' set the controls for the heart of the sun '' with explicit science fiction themes , and their third , more ( 1969 ) had '' cirrus minor '' . in early 1971 , pink floyd began writing the song that would become known as '' echoes '' , from the 1971 album meddle . the song was performed from april until september 1971 , with an alternative set of lyrics , written about two planets meeting in space . before the meddle album released , the lyrics were changed to an aquatic theme , because of the band 's concern that they were being labelled as a space rock band . the beatles ' song '' flying '' ( 1967 ) , originally titled '' aerial tour instrumental '' , was a psychedelic instrumental about the sensation of flying , whether in a craft or in your own head space . allmusic review by richie unterberger jimi hendrix is also an early innovator of the genre , with such tracks as '' third stone from the sun '' , '' 1983 . ( a merman i should turn to be ) '' and '' the stars that play with laughing sam 's dice '' . david bowie 's '' space oddity '' ( 1969 ) is , apart from '' telstar '' , probably the best example of a space rock song achieving mainstream recognition . a major album in the history of space rock was hawkwind 's space ritual ( 1973 ) , wilson neate , space ritual review , allmusic a two-disc live album advertised as '' 88 minutes of brain-damage '' documenting hawkwind 's 1972 tour that included a liquid light show and lasers , nude dancers ( notably the earth-mother figure stacia ) , wild costumes and psychedelic imagery . this hard-edged concert experience attracted a motley but dedicated collection of psychedelic drug users , science-fiction fans and motorcycle riders . the science fiction author michael moorcock collaborated with hawkwind on many occasions and wrote the lyrics for many of the spoken-word sections on space ritual . in europe , hungarian band omega was the biggest space rock band with albums time robber ( 1976 ) , skyrover ( 1978 ) , and gammapolis ( 1979 ) . other european bands include the progressive rock groups eloy and nektar . nektar , who were known for having a rhythmic liquid/slide light show at their concerts , released their album journey to the centre of the eye in 1971 . apart from hawkwind , marc bolan and his band t . rex probably had the most success with space rock , mainly appearing on album tracks such as '' ballrooms of mars '' , '' venus loon '' and '' spaceball ricochet '' , although he characterised his music as '' cosmic rock '' ( at the end of his first no 1 hit in the uk - hot love ) . like hawkwind 's dave brock , bolan used pentatonic guitar progressions to design riffs . in the 1980s , uk band mournblade , cited in the music press as 'hawkwind influenced ' , blended space rock with a harder , more nwobhm edge and linked into the emerging 'grebo revival ' scene of the late 1980s . 1990s revival . shoegazing , stoner rock and noise pop genres emerged into the mainstream with the explosion of bands such as kyuss , monster magnet , the desert sessions , slowdive , the verve , my bloody valentine , flying saucer attack , loop , ride , shiner , the flaming lips , failure , year of the rabbit , cave in , sun dial , hum , orange goblin , porcupine tree , spacemen 3 , spiritualized , and mercury rev . the sonic experimentation and emphasis placed on texture by these bands led them to be dubbed '' space rock '' . in the mid-1990s , a number of bands built on the space rock styles of hawkwind and gong appeared in america . some of these bands were signed to cleopatra records , which then proceeded to release numerous space rock compilations . starting in 1997 , daevid allen of gong , along with members of hawkwind and other space rock bands , started to perform with spirits burning , a studio project created to celebrate space rock . the strange daze festivals from 1997 to 2001 showcased the american space rock scene in three-day outdoor festivals . a michigan-based space rock scene included burnt hair records , darla records , and bands such as windy & carl , mahogany , sweet trip , füxa and auburn lull . this was a modern movement of the traditional '' space rock '' sound and was pinned detroit space rock . french band air released albums moon safari and le voyage dans la lune . 21st century . in 2005 , tom delonge formed the rock supergroup angels & airwaves , who are known for having space rock influences in both its music and lyrics , in addition to having space-themed imagery and artwork . in 2009 an off-duty nasa worker from the shuttle program synchronised footage of a discovery launch with the flowers of hell 's '' sympathy for vengeance '' in an online video which became popular amongst staff at the kennedy space center . the band starset includes space related themes released in their debut album transmissions in 2014 which featured samples such as radio communications between ground control and astronauts , the doppler effect , and even the exploration of space by dr edwin p . hubble . . see also . space-themed music space music space disco space age pop . references . tr : space metal