Iconostasis

location . the nave is the main body of the church where most of the worshippers stand , and the sanctuary is the area around the altar , east of the nave . the sanctuary is usually one to three steps higher than the nave . the iconostasis does not sit directly on the edge of the sanctuary , but is usually set a few feet back from the edge of the top step . this forms a walkway in front of the iconostasis for the clergy , called a soleas . in the very center of the soleas is an extension ( or thrust ) , often rounded , called the ambon , on which the deacon will stand to give ektenia during the services . the iconostasis , though often tall , rarely touches the ceiling . acoustics , this permits the ekphonesis ( liturgical exclamations ) of the clergy to be heard clearly by the faithful . in small , modern churches the iconostasis may be completely absent : in such cases it is replaced by a few small icons on analogia ( lecterns ) , forming a virtual divide . the iconostasis typically has three openings or sets of doors : the royal doors or holy doors in the center , and the north and south doors to either side . the beautiful gates are sometimes called the royal doors , but that name more properly belongs to the central doors connecting the narthex , or porch , to the nave . so called because the emperor used to enter by these doors during official ceremonies at hagia sophia in constantinople . they remain shut whenever a service is not being held . modern custom as to when they should be opened during services varies depending upon jurisdiction and local custom . the north and south doors are often called deacons ' doors because the deacons use them frequently . icons of sainted deacons are often depicted on these doors ( particularly st . stephen the protomartyr and ephrem the syrian ) . alternatively , they may be called angels ' doors , and the archangels michael and gabriel are often depicted there . the south door is typically the '' entrance '' door , and michael is depicted there because he is the '' defender '' ; the north door is the '' exit '' , and gabriel is depicted here because he is the '' messenger '' of god . ( in the greek and antiochian liturgical tradition , the archangel michael is usually stationed on the north ( i.e . '' exit '' ) door , and gabriel on the south ( i.e . '' entrance '' ) door , and that it is far more common in modern times to see the archangels than the deacons on these doors ) . these doors may also be casually referred to as the '' side doors '' . there are some exceptions where both the side doors depict archangel michael . the most notable exception is of the church of saint george ( aghios georgios ) inside the ecumenical patriarchate of constantinople ( in today 's istanbul ) . in many monastery churches and chapels ( though often not in the katholikon , the monastery 's main church ) one may find iconostases with only two doors : the holy doors and the north door . these churches are used for simpler monastic observances when only a hieromonk would be serving alone . placement of icons . a number of guidelines or rubrics govern which icons are on which parts of the iconostasis , although there is some room for variation . in its fullest slavic development it comprised five tiers of icons : the bottom tier is sometimes called sovereign . on the right side of the beautiful gates ( from the nave facing forward ) is an icon of christ ( often pantokrator ) , which symbolized his second coming and on the left side is an icon of the theotokos ( virgin mary ) , symbolizing christ 's incarnation , and entrance into this world . therefore , all things take place between christ 's first and second coming . other icons on this tier beside those on the doors themselves usually include depictions of the patron saint or feast day to which the church is dedicated , st . john the baptist , st . nicholas , one or more of the four evangelists etc . above this are two interchangeable tiers : the deisis and the twelve great feasts : in the center of the deisis is a large icon of christ enthroned . to the left and right are icons of john the baptist and the theotokos in attitudes of supplication . they are often flanked by icons of the archangels michael and gabriel , then sts . peter and paul , and then any other important church fathers that may be desired for inclusion as space allows . the feasts tier contains icons of the twelve great feasts of the liturgical year . above this , the top two tiers are also interchangeable with each other : the old testament prophets and patriarchs—the latter including the 12 sons of jacob—often to either side of an icon of our lady of the sign ; and the twelve apostles , often to either side of and icon depicting either christ at the second coming or the holy trinity . it is also not uncommon to find an icon of the mystical supper , which depicts the last supper , and by extension the communion of saints in the kingdom of god , somewhere above the beautiful gates . the sovereign ( bottom ) tier is found in all iconostases , but other tiers are somewhat optional . in general , preference is given to the deisis or the feasts tiers if only some of them can be included , and only the largest and most elaborate iconostases have all five tiers . many modern iconostases in the greek tradition only include the bottom ( '' sovereign '' ) tier , and on occasion a second tier of smaller icons , usually depicting either the great feasts or the apostles ( with an icon of the mystical supper , or occasionally the hospitality of abraham ) above the beautiful gates . when the iconostasis does not reach all the way to the ceiling , it is often surmounted by a central cross , centered directly above the beautiful gates . if the cross bears an iconographic depiction of christ crucified , it is often flanked by icons of the theotokos and st . john the evangelist standing at the foot of the cross . rubrics . there are rules regarding who may enter or leave the sanctuary ( altar ) , and by which door . neither the beautiful gates ( holy/royal doors – central doors ) nor the space between them and the altar table may be used by laity under any circumstances , although infants are either carried into the altar through them in the '' churching '' rite if they are boys , or if they are girls , the infant is simply presented at the doors . metropolitan philip '' prayers at the churching of a mother and her child '' in a pocket prayer book for orthodox christians ( englewood , new jersey : 1956 ) p . 118 bishops may enter through the beautiful gates at any time ; priests and deacons may do so only at specific times during the services when the gates are open ( but during bright week they always enter and exit through them ) . all others enter the sanctuary through the side doors . in a convent , only the abbess and elder nuns are permitted to enter the sanctuary ( altar ) , and they may only enter through the side doors . the abbess may enter at any time , but the other nuns need a blessing to enter . male members of the laity who are usually allowed to enter the sanctuary include those involved in the running of the particular church , i.e . , cantors and choristers , altar servers/acolytes , church keepers and vestryman , etc . in the romanian tradition , on the day of the consecration of the altar in the church , the laity , including women , were permitted to enter and venerate the altar until the beginning of the vespers of consecration . these guidelines were developed over the course of many centuries , with both theologically symbolic and practical reasons for them . theological implications . the iconostasis does not really '' separate '' the nave from the holy of holies ; rather , it brings them together . the iconostasis is the link between heaven ( the holy of holies ) and the nave ( the holy place ) . therefore , everything is symbolic upon the iconostasis . the icons of christ , the theotokos , and various saints and feasts are there because christ , the theotokos , the saints etc . , lead us and guide us into the holy of holies . therefore , the personages on the icons upon the iconostasis guide us into heaven , and therefore the iconostasis connects not separates . the icons upon the iconostasis also are windows and bridges into heaven ( although all icons , no matter where , are windows and bridges into heaven ) . therefore , in a sense the iconostasis represents christ , who is the connection , the door , between both realms . the perfect explanation for the iconostasis , and its uniting purpose , is seen in hebrews 10:19-20 , '' therefore , brethren , since we have confidence to enter the sanctuary by the blood of jesus , by the new and living way which he opened for us through the curtain , that is through his flesh . '' . evolution . archaeological evidence from the stoudios monastery in constantinople suggests that the iconostasis evolved from the early templon . a basilica dedicated to john the baptist was built in 463 ad . in it the chancel barrier surrounded the altar in a π shape , with one large door facing the nave and two smaller doors on the other sides . twelve piers held chancel slabs of about 1.6 meters in length . the height of the slabs is not known . the chancel barrier was not merely a low parapet ( a short wall ) ; remains of colonnettes have been found , suggesting that the barrier carried an architrave on top of the columns . matthews , thomas f . the early churches of constantinople : architecture and liturgy . pennsylvania state university press , pa , 1971 , in early churches , including the hagia sophia ( '' great church '' ) in constantinople , the altar , at least in large churches , was under a ciborium ( '' ciborion '' : κιβώριον in greek ) , usually a structure with four columns and a domed canopy . this had curtains on rods on all four sides , which were closed for sections of the liturgy , as is still performed in the coptic and armenian churches . the orthodox armenian apostolic church and catholic armenian catholic church ; a comparison with the biblical kodesh hakodashim was intended . the small domed structures , usually with red curtains , that are often shown near the writing saint in early evangelist portraits , especially in the east , represent a ciborium , bock covers the use and decline of ciborium curtains in considerable detail , though he is an old source . as do the structures surrounding many manuscript portraits of medieval rulers . grove , 2.1 as the iconostasis grew , the ciborium declined , although some late examples , by now invisible to the congregation , were produced . the templon gradually replaced all other forms of chancel barriers in byzantine churches in the 6th , 7th , and 8th centuries , except in cappadocia . the invention of the solid icon screen is ascribed to saint basil the great . as late as the 10th century , a simple wooden chancel barrier separated the apse from the nave in the rock-cut churches in derinkuyu , though by the late 11th century , the templon had become standard . this may have been because of the veneration and imitation of the great church hagia sophia in constantinople , though the columnar form of chancel barrier does predate hagia sophia . the rood screens or pulpita that most large european roman catholic churches and cathedrals had acquired by late medieval times occupied a similar position between chancel and nave but served a different function . the choir was usually east of the screen . many survive , often most completely in scandinavia , and more were built in the gothic revival , particularly in anglican churches in england . in wooden examples , painted panels were typically waist-high , with a wooden tracery section above allowing a view through , and then a large carved beam supporting a rood cross crucifix , often life-size , above that . larger churches had stone screens , which might impede virtually all view by the congregation . gallery . file : iconostas uspenskiy.jpg dormition cathedral , russia file : iconostasis in st . andrew 's church.jpg the baroque three-tier iconostasis designed by rastrelli . in saint andrew 's church of kiev , ukraine file : open doors on an iconostas in a church in chicago.jpg modern cossack baroque iconostasis with doors open to sanctuary at st . joseph the betrothed ukrainian greek catholic church file : osiosloukas2.jpg hosios loukas ( middle byzantine ) , distomo , in boeotia , greece file : a church in parga.jpg parga , greece file : nikozja savvas3.jpg church of st . sabbas , nicosia , cyprus file:07thessaloniki agia sophia05.jpg hagia sophia , thessaloniki file:07thessaloniki metropolitan04.jpg marble iconostasis at the metropolitan cathedral of st . gregory palamas , thessaloniki file:07thessaloniki taxiarches02.jpg chapel of the archangels , thessalonika file : greek orthodox catholicon in the church of the holy sepulchre , jerusalem.jpg iconostasis at the catholicon , church of the holy sepulchre ( tomb of jesus ) , jerusalem . file : іканастас мікольскай царквы ў магілёве , foto 1.jpg convent of saint nicholas , belarus file : alexander nevsky cathedral 36.jpg alexander nevsky cathedral , bulgaria file : iconostasis in yaroslavl.png church of the prophet elias , yaroslavl file : astrakhan maria-ascension cathedral interior.jpg , astrakhan file : iconostasisofbulgarianrockchurch.jpg rock church , northern bulgaria file : moscow archangel michael cathedral interior.jpg cathedral of the archangel michael , moscow kremlin file : russia-moscow-kremlin museums exhibitions-15.jpg portion of iconostas displayed in the kremlin museums file : church of the descent of the holy spirit upon the apostles ( sergiev posad ) 21.jpg a church in troitse-sergiyeva lavra file : russia-moscow-kremlin museums exhibitions-3.jpg kremlin museums file : icon 01013 stavni kiota . blagoveschenie . svyatye i apostoly.jpg holy doors depicting the annunciation , apostles and saints file : kings gate of iconostasis.jpg troyan monastery , bulgaria file : sarajevo old-orthodox church 03.jpg old orthodox church , sarajevo file : professorangelopoulos88.jpg boston , massachusetts , united states file : ortodoxa kyrkan i torneå 2007-06-04.jpg tornio , finland file : śnietnica ikonostas.jpg śnietnica , poland ( greek catholic ) file : iconostasis at saint mary 's russian orthodox church in mckeesport , pa.jpg mckeesport , pa file : sv stefan interior.jpg bulgarian st . stephen church in istanbul file : saint vladimir skete ( valaam monastery ) 09.jpg saint vladimir skete ( valaam monastery ) , church of st . ludmila file : interiorofachapel.jpg an improvised iconostasis in st.dimitrius chapel on the beach of olympiaki akti , greece file : vladimir putin 7 january 2008-11.jpg vladimir putin in front of a baroque icon screen in veliky ustyug file : iconostasis of hajdudorog.jpg a greek catholic iconostasis in hajdúdorog , hungary file : st-barbara-krefeld-ikonostase.jpg modern iconostasis in saint barbara russian orthodox church in krefeld , germany . see also . ambon ( liturgy ) rood screen soleas templon iconostasis of the cathedral of hajdúdorog . notes . references . franz johann joseph bock , the hangings of the ciborium of the altar ( translated section of his organ für christliche kunst ) , the ecclesiologist , volume 26 , 1868 , ecclesiological society/stevenson , google books '' grove '' , van hemeldonck , g . , '' ciborium ( ii ) . '' in grove art online . oxford art online , subscription required , ( accessed april 25 , 2011 ) . efthalia rentetzi , le iconostasis delle chiese greche in italia , athens 2008 . external links . photo of early iconostasis . church of the aposltes , athens 1000 ad the bulgarian orthodox iconostasis