Pachisi

history . gamesmen similar to chaupar with different colour schemes along with dice have been identified from the iron age during the painted grey ware period from sites in mathura and noh ( 1100-800 bc . ) cruciform boards have been depicted from art reliefs of chandraketugarh dated to 2nd century bc-1st century bc . a 6th- or 7th-century representation of lord shiva and the goddess parvati is said to be playing chaupar ( a closely related game ) murray 1913 , p 50 . in fact depicts only dice and not the distinctive board . parlett 1999 , p 43 . in a similar period , a board identical to pachisi was discovered in the ellora cave system . a song dynasty ( 960–1279 ) document referencing the chinese game ch ' u-p ' u 樗蒲 ( wade–giles , pinyin chūpú ) , '' invented in western india and spread to china in the time of the cao wei ( ad 220–265 ) '' murray 1952 , p 36 . may relate to chaupar , but the actual nature of the chinese game ( which may be more closely related to backgammon ) is uncertain . speculation that pachisi derived from the earlier game of ashtapada is plausible but unsubstantiated . philologist irving finkel wrote : the game of pachisi was played by akbar in a truly regal manner . the court itself , divided into red and white squares , being the board , and an enormous stone raised on four feet , representing the central point . it was here that akbar and his courtiers played this game ; sixteen young slaves from the harem wearing the players ' colours , represented the pieces , and moved to the squares according to the throw of the dice . it is said that the emperor took such a fancy to playing the game on this grand scale that he had a court for pachisi constructed in all his palaces , and traces of such are still visible at agra and allahabad . falkener 1892 , pp . 257–58 ; quoting m.l . rousselet : india and its native princes , 1876 . finkel adds : to date , these grandiose boards still represent the earliest secure evidence for the existence of the game in india . the game 's role in the history of india still remains to be investigated . it is often assumed that the gambling game that plays so significant a role in the mahabharata , the classical literary epic , is pachisi , but the descriptions , such as they are , do not tie in with the game , and this conclusion is perhaps erroneous . finkel 2004 , p . 47 . in 1938 , the american toy and game company transogram introduced a mass market board game version called game of india , later marketed as pa-chiz-si : the game of india . . players . pachisi is a game for two , three , or four players , mohr 1997 , p . 68 . four usually play in two teams . one team has yellow and black pieces , the other team has red and green . the team which moves all its pieces to the finish first , wins the game . traditional equipment . each player has four beehive-shaped pieces ( this can be increased to up to 16 pieces on each side in some versions ) . the pieces of one player are distinguishable from another by their colours : black , green , red , and yellow . six cowry are used to determine the amount to move the players ' pieces . the shells are thrown from the player 's hand and the number of cowries which fall with their openings upwards indicate how many spaces the player may move : the board is usually embroidery on cloth . the playing area is cruciform . there is a large square in the centre , called the charkoni , which is the starting and finishing position of the pieces . the four arms are divided into three columns of eight squares . the players ' pieces are moved along these columns during play . twelve squares are specially marked as castle squares . four of these are positioned at the end of the middle columns of each arm ; the other eight are four squares inwards from the end of the outer columns on each arm . a piece may not be captured by an opponent while it lies on a castle square . gameplay . each player 's objective is to move all four of their pieces completely around the board , counter-clockwise , before their opponents do . the pieces start and finish on the charkoni . the playing order is decided by each player throwing the cowries . the player with the highest score starts , and turns continue counter-clockwise around the board . in some versions , each player throws the cowrie shells and pieces can not move until a 2 , 3 , or 4 is thrown . if a 6 , 10 , or 25 is thrown , the player gets a grace , which enables the player to introduce one of their pieces from the charkoni onto the board . the player then repeats his or her turn . in other versions , this includes 10 , 25 , or 35 to introduce another of their pieces . the newly introduced pawn will be landed on square number 1 , which is very first square for every respective player : here , it is said that on throwing 10 or 25 or 35 , you will introduce your new pawn at square number 1 , and then you will add your second throw numbers that will be appeared on your cowries and 7 , 14 as a grace without introduction of pieces ( here , it should be clear to players that on throwing 7 or 14 , you can not introduce your new pawn , you only get an extra turn ) . a player needs to have at least one piece on the board to be able to throw a 7 or 14 . simply put , on throwing 10 or 25 or 35 , you can not introduce your new pawn directly to 10 or 25 or 35 number square directly , you have to land the new pawn on square number 1 and then add your remaining numbers . once your all pawns have entered the game , throwing 10 or 25 or 35 allows you to move the respective numbers ahead . each player 's first piece may leave the charkoni on any throw after it has been introduced onto the board . each player moves their pieces down the centre column of their own arm of the board , then counter-clockwise around the outside columns . a player may have any number of pieces on the board at one time . only one piece may be moved with a single throw , or if the player chooses , they can decline to move any piece on a throw . in some versions , a player can move any number of their pieces with a single throw . also , if the player casts a value higher than they are eligible to move in a single throw , then the player automatically loses that turn . more than one piece of the same team may occupy a single square ( not true for all squares in some versions ) . however , a piece may not move onto a castle square that is already occupied by an opponent 's piece . if a piece lands on a square ( other than a castle square ) occupied by any number of the opponent 's pieces , those pieces are captured/killed and must return to the charkoni . captured pieces may only enter the game again with a grace throw . a player making a capture is allowed another turn ( not true in some versions ) . in some versions , a player can not take their pieces back to the charkoni/home , unless they have captured/killed at least one of the opponent 's pieces . some versions have a rule where if , for example , two players are playing against each other , and player 1 captures a piece of player 2 , then player 2 , in their immediate turn after being captured for the first time , captures the same piece player 1 just used to capture , in the same square where the capture took place , then player 1 's capture/kill is invalidated . player 1 will need to recapture player 2 's piece again to be able to go back to the charkoni , but player 2 is free to go ahead to their respective charkoni , unless the above repeats . a piece completes its trip around the board by moving back up its central column . returning pieces may be placed on their side in order to distinguish them from pieces that have just entered . a piece can only return to the charkoni by a direct throw . four of the castle squares are placed so they are exactly 25 moves from the charkoni . a common strategy is for returning pieces to stay on these squares , where they are safe from capture , until a 25 is thrown . the pieces can then finish the game directly . this is where the name of the game comes from . in some versions , where more emphasis is put on the throwing of the cowries , experienced players can cause cowries to land in a specific way , so there are certain other rules to make the game more exciting . if a player has their pieces closer to the end , and does not need a higher value throw , there are ways to nullify the higher value throw . if the player casts a 10 , 25 , or 30 , the player needs to consecutively throw either 10 , 25 , or 30 three times ( including the original throw ) to nullify the higher value throw . if the player casts a 7 , the player must consecutively cast a 7 only 3 times ( including the original throw ) to nullify the throw . if the player casts a 14 , the player must consecutively cast a 14 only 3 times ( including the original throw ) to nullify the throw . since throwing three consecutive throws of 10 , 25 , or 30 in a single turn nullifies them , players can instead throw a 7 or 14 in between to keep their turn going . ex : a player can throw the following in a single turn : 25 , 25 , 14 , 10 , 30 , 7 , 25 , 30 , 7 , 10 , 14 , 25 , 3 . once all of the player 's pieces are introduced onto the board , every time a player throws a 10 , 25 , or 30 , the player must move their piece one additional square , which is known as pyada . ex : a player casts 25 , 25 , 3 in their turn , their pieces can move a total of 53 squares . however , when all the player 's pieces have already been introduced onto the board , the player can then move a total of 55 squares ( 25+25+3+1+1 ) , meaning 2 pyadas extra . see also . ashte kashte—a game with similar rules chaupur patolli parqués mensch ärgere dich nicht ludo . references . bibliography . further reading . . external links .