Robert Smithson

industrial ruins and disrupted landscapes . while smithson did not find '' beauty '' in the evidence of abuse and neglect , he did see the state of things as demonstrative of the continually transforming relationships between humans and landscape . he claimed , '' the best sites for 'earth art ' are sites that have been disrupted by industry , reckless urbanization , or nature 's own devastation . '' . smithson became particularly interested in the notion of industrial decay within the spectrum of anti-aesthetic dynamic relationships which he saw present in the picturesque landscape . in his proposal to make process art out of the dredging of the pond in central park , smithson sought to insert himself into the dynamic evolution of the park . . while in earlier 18th-century formal characterizations of the pastoral and the sublime , something like a '' gash in the ground '' or pile of rocks , if encountered by a '' leveling improver '' , as described by price , would have been smoothed over and the area terraformed into a more aesthetically pleasing contour . for smithson , it was not necessary that the disruption become a visual aspect of a landscape ; by his anti-formalist logic , more important was the temporal scar worked over by natural or human intervention . he saw parallels to olmsted 's central park as a '' sylvan '' green overlay on the depleted landscape that preceded his central park . defending himself against allegations that he and other earth artists '' cut and gouge the land like army engineers '' , smithson , in his own essay , charges that one of such opinions '' failed to recognize the possibility of a direct organic manipulation of the land . '' and would '' turn his back on the contradictions that inhabit our landscapes '' . . . significant works . spiral jetty . spiral jetty ( 1970 ) is an land art in the form of a 1,500-foot-long ( 460 m ) , 15-foot-wide ( 4.6 m ) counterclockwise spiral of local basalt rocks and mud , forming a jetty that juts from the shore of the great salt lake near rozel point in utah . over the years it has accumulated a patina of salt crystals when the level of the lake is low . some art historians consider the spiral jetty to be the most important work by smithson . he documented the construction of the sculpture in a 32-minute color film also titled spiral jetty . smithson wrote that he deliberately chose the site due to its proximity to a derelict oil jetty . in later years oil and gas extraction has threatened the area . . partially buried woodshed . partially buried woodshed ( 1970 ) is an land art created at kent state university in kent , ohio . the work consisted of a derelict woodshed on campus that he covered with earth until the central beam broke , illustrating the concept of entropy . by 2018 , only a mound of dirt and the structure 's concrete foundation remain . an informational plaque is located in a small wooded area immediately behind the liquid crystal institute building on the kent state university main campus . . broken circle/spiral hill . in 1971 he created broken circle/spiral hill for the exhibition for the sonsbeek'71 art festival at emmen , the netherlands . the subject of the 1971 sonsbeek exhibition was beyond lawn and order ( dutch : buiten de perken ) . the broken circle earthwork was built in a quarry lake 10-to-15 feet deep . it was 140 feet in diameter , with the canal 12 feet wide , and built of white and yellow sand . the accompanying spiral hill is made of earth , black topsoil , and white sand , and was 75 feet in diameter at its base . . unrealized projects . during his lifetime , smithson created several proposals for projects that were unrealized , either due to their visionary nature , lack support or their impracticality . between 1966 and 1967 he produced proposals for the dallas-fort worth regional airport as concepts for '' aerial art '' , monumental-scaled earthworks to be seen by air travelers . in 1970 smithson created a series of drawing for floating island : to travel around manhattan island . the proposed project consisted of a barge containing broken concrete or glass to be pulled by a tugboat around manhattan . other versions of the project were of a barge filled with earth and plated with trees and other vegetation . in 1971 he drew towards the development of a '' cinema cavern '' , a design for a theater to be built inside a cave with spelunkers as the intended audience . in 1973 he designed the bingham canyon reclamation project , a visionary proposal for the copper pit mine in utah owned by the kennecott copper corporation . the mining company responded negatively to the proposal and it was never built . . collections . the work of robert smithson is held in numerous public collections around the world including the museum of modern art , new york , the smithsonian american art museum , solomon r . guggenheim museum , new york , the tate modern , london , the whitney museum of american art , new york , among others . . death and legacy . on july 20 , 1973 , smithson , a photographer and the pilot died in a light aircraft crash while inspecting the site of amarillo ramp on the ranch of stanley marsh 3 near amarillo , texas in a beechcraft baron ; the national transportation safety board attributed the accident to the pilot 's failure to maintain airspeed , with distraction being a contributing factor . the work was subsequently completed by smithson 's widow nancy holt , richard serra and tony shafrazi . it was originally built to rise from a shallow artificial lake , but the lake later dried up , and the earthwork has become overgrown and eroded . smithson has a following among many contemporary artists . artists tacita dean , sam durant , renée green , lee ranaldo , vik muniz , mike nelson , and the bruce high quality foundation have all made homages to smithson 's works . in 2017 the holt/smithson foundation was founded to preserve , through public service , the investigative spirit the two artists who '' developed innovative methods of exploring our relationship with the planet , and expanded the limits of artistic practice . '' the goal of the foundation is to '' increase awareness of both artists ' creative legacies '' . . gallery . image : emmen smithson broken circle.jpg broken circle , emmen , the netherlands image : emmen smithson spiral hill.jpg spiral hill , emmen , the netherlands image : spiral-jetty-from-rozel-point.png spiral jetty , utah , usa image : partially buried woodshed plaque.jpg partially buried woodshed plaque , kent , oh , us image : partially buried woodshed remains.jpg partially buried woodshed remains , kent , oh , us . references . bibliography . . retrieved 2 june 2007 . ingrid commandeur and trudy van riemsdijk-zandee : robert smithson : art in continual movement . alauda publications , amsterdam ( 2012 ) , . external links . the estate of robert smithson holt/smithson foundation