Belvoir Castle

history . first castle . a norman castle originally stood on the high ground within the wapentake of framland , overlooking the adjacent wapentake of winnibriggs . in lincolnshire and dominating both . it was built on the land of robert de todeni , mentioned in the domesday book of 1086 , and inherited from him by william d'aubigny . it then eventually passed to william 's granddaughter isabel , who married robert de ros circa 1234 . belvoir was a royal manor until it was granted to robert de ros in 1257 . he was given a licence to crenellate in 1267 . when the male de ros line died out in 1508 , the manor and castle passed to george manners , 11th baron de ros , nephew of the last de ros baron , who inherited the castle and barony through his mother . his son was created earl of rutland in 1525 . second castle . the norman castle had been in ruins since 1464 and in 1528 , thomas manners , 1st earl of rutland started construction of a new castle . it was completed in 1555 . much of the stone for this building came from croxton abbey and belvoir priory following their dissolution . in the early 17th century , castle servants witches of belvoir were accused of murdering the 6th earl 's two young sons by witchcraft . joan died while in prison and margaret and phillipa were hanged . during the english civil war , it was one of the more notable strongholds of the king 's supporters and king charles spent a night here on his way into lincolnshire . . third castle . in 1649 , the castle was destroyed by parliamentarians . a new building was started in 1654 which was designed as a large family home by the architect john webb . work was completed by 1668 and cost £11,730 ( £ million today ) . the 9th earl was created duke of rutland in 1703 . belvoir castle has been the home of the manners family for five hundred years and seat of the dukes of rutland for over three centuries . fourth castle . in 1799 , the 5th duke of rutland married lady elizabeth howard . the new duchess of rutland soon chose architect james wyatt to rebuild the castle in the romantic gothic revival style . the duke , one of the wealthiest landholders in the united kingdom of great britain and ireland , sold seven assorted villages and their surrounding lands to fund the massive project . the project was nearing completion when , on 26 october 1816 , it was almost destroyed by a fire . the loss - including pictures by titian , rubens , van dyck , and reynolds - was estimated at £120,000 ( £ million today ) . rebuilt , again , to largely the same designs , at a cost of an additional £82,000 ( £ million today ) , the castle was largely completed by 1832 . the architect sir james thornton ( who was the duke 's friend and chaplain and vicar of nearby bottesford ) was chiefly responsible for this rebuilding , and the result bears a superficial resemblance to a medieval castle , its central tower reminiscent of windsor castle . whilst visiting belvoir castle in the 1840s , anna , duchess of bedford , found that the normal time for dinner was between 7:00 and 8:30 & nbsp ; p.m . an extra meal called luncheon had been created to fill the midday gap between breakfast and dinner , but as this new meal was very light , the long afternoon with no refreshment at all left people feeling hungry . she found a light meal of tea ( usually darjeeling ) and cakes or sandwiches was the perfect balance . the duchess found taking an afternoon snack to be such a perfect refreshment that she soon began inviting her friends to join her . tea ( meal ) quickly became an established and convivial repast in many middle and upper class households . p . 209 , pool , daniel ( 1993 ) '' what jane austen ate and charles dickens knew , '' touchstone/simon & schuster , new york the castle is open to the public and contains many works of art . the highlights of the tour are the lavish staterooms , the most famous being the elizabeth saloon ( named after the wife of the 5th duke ) , the regents gallery and the roman-inspired state dining room . the queen 's royal lancers regimental museum of the 17th and 21st lancers was established here in 1964 , but was required to leave in october 2007 . the queen 's royal lancers and nottinghamshire yeomanry museum is now at thoresby hall . estate . the castle sits in an estate of almost . . gardens . 250px belvoir gardens was designed and landscaped by elizabeth howard , 5th duchess of rutland , who was married to john manners , the 5th duke of rutland . it was created in 1799 , the year belvoir castle was built . there are many unusual features to the gardens , for example the natural amphitheatre which faces the estate was formed by the moraines of glaciers and a 'root house ' or summer house which survives to this day . these natural amphitheatres are now embedded with fresh water springs to ensure blooming plants throughout the year . belvoir gardens was also the first site of mass spring flower bedding , a concept developed by mr divers , head gardener of the gardens at the time . the once thriving gardens are now slowly being restored to its former glory . '' friends of belvoir gardens '' is a programme which encourages enthusiasts with green fingers to volunteer to help manage this beautifully preserved garden . name . the castle 's name means beautiful view . in 2018 , the 11th duchess of rutland gave a televised tour of the castle to journalist phil spencer , explaining how the name belvoir is a norman import by the french-speaking invaders of the 11th century , but the native anglo-saxon population was unable to pronounce such a foreign word , preferring to call it '' beaver castle '' a usage which persists today . . mausoleum . the traditional burial place of the manners family was st mary the virgin 's church , bottesford . since elevation to the dukedom in 1703 most dukes have been buried in the grounds of the mausoleum at belvoir castle . the mausoleum at belvoir castle was built by the 5th duke of rutland , following the death of his wife , elizabeth howard ( 1780-1825 ) , daughter of the 5th earl of carlisle . after its construction , most of the 18th century monuments in belton church were moved to the mausoleum which then became the family 's main place of burial . burials in the mausoleum . john manners , 1st duke of rutland john manners , 2nd duke of rutland john manners , 3rd duke of rutland charles manners , 4th duke of rutland john manners , 5th duke of rutland marion margaret violet lindsay manners , duchess of rutland charles manners , 10th duke of rutland . in literature . letitia elizabeth landon 's poem is inscribed to lady emmeline stuart-wortley , daughter of john manners , 5th duke of rutland . in 2012 , catherine bailey published a history of belvoir castle chronicling a mystery surrounding one of its occupants , john manners , the 9th duke of rutland , which she encountered and worked to unravel while researching in the estate 's archives . . present use . a corner of the castle is still used as the family home of the manners family . several films and television programmes have used it as a location , notably the 1980 film little lord fauntleroy starring sir alec guinness and ricky schroder . the castle itself was used as a location for the da vinci code — it represented castel gandolfo , the pope 's summer residence . it also featured in the 1985 film young sherlock holmes starring nicholas rowe and alan cox . in september 2007 , it was used as a location for the young victoria . in the 2001 jim henson production of jack and the beanstalk : the real story , the castle is where the giant bones have been discovered . the kitchen scenes of hill house were filmed here for the the haunting ( 1999 film ) which is a remake of the 1963 version . the castle was used as one of several stand-ins for buckingham palace for the 1991 comedy film king ralph . belvoir castle is the host of belvoir fireworks , an annual pyrotechnic and firework competition that takes place in mid-august . the grounds also host belvoir cricket club in knipton , a village cricket club with teams playing in various leagues across nottinghamshire . the 1st xi play in the nottinghamshire premier league . in 2009 , belvoir castle hosted the cla game fair . in august 2010 , the castle 's website was mistakenly hacked and taken over by an algerian group who blanked the pages and inserted anti-semitic texts in arabic . the hackers had mistaken belvoir castle for belvoir fortress , which is located in israel . mistaken identity for algerian hackers in september 2010 , the belvoir wassailers—the castle 's own male voice choir—was reformed at the request of the duchess . directed by robert-john edwards , and accompanied on the piano by paul emmett , the belvoir wassailers performed at the castle 's annual belvoir by candlelight celebration in december 2010 . the choir is currently working on a variety of new material , including popular and folk music . in november 2014 , emma manners , duchess of rutland appointed timothy grayson as the castle 's poet-in-residence . briery wood heronry is a biological site of special scientific interest in the grounds . belvoir castle was used as a stand-in for windsor castle in the second series of british television series the crown . . see also . list of castles in leicestershire treasure houses of britain , 1985 tv documentary that is , in part , on belvoir castle . references . external links . official website belvoir gardens belvoir castle contact information manners arms flickr photos tagged belvoir castle belvoir castle view video retrieved 18 december 2010 belvoir gardens