Kinmen

cross-strait relations . in the controversy regarding the political status of taiwan , the china ( prc ) has continuously claimed the territory of kinmen county as part of fujian , claiming the kinmen islands as a county taiwan ( republic of china ) claims the dadeng ( tateng ) islands in dadeng subdistrict , xiang'an district , xiamen , fujian as part of kinmen county . . education . in august 2010 , national quemoy university was established from the predecessor national kinmen institute of technology and kinmen division of national kaohsiung university of applied sciences established in 1997 . it is located in jinning township . the islands also have a satellite campuses of ming chuan university and national university of kaohsiung . secondary educational institutions include national kinmen senior high school and national kinmen agricultural and industrial vocational senior high school . in total , there are 24 junior high schools , elementary schools and kindergartens . the kinmen county government have invested millions in education in kinmen , with an average of nt 20,000 per student . schools in the county also accept the growing number of taiwanese students whose parents are doing business in fujian . the county government has been striving to encourage universities in taiwan island and mainland china to set up branches in the county , as well as to attract chinese mainland students to study in kinmen . . infrastructure . electricity . the kinmen power company was founded in 1967 and gradually built five power plants in the county and is in charge of providing power resources to all residents in kinmen . it used to rely on diesel fuel which created high cost burden to its management . since 1992 , the roc central government approved the power company to authorize taiwan power company ( taipower ) for five-year management . all of the power development projects were invested by taipower and helped the region economic development . in july 1997 , kinmen power company was officially incorporated to taipower . in 1999 , the diesel-fired tashan power plant was built to supply electricity to kinmen grid . the other smaller power plants were subsequently discontinued to reduce cost . the county is also powered up by its jinmen wind wind farm with a capacity of 4mw and photovoltaic system with a capacity of 0.792 mw . . submarine telecommunication cable . in august 2012 , kinmen and xiamen established the first submarine telecommunication cable between the two sides . on taiwan side , the infrastructure was constructed by chunghwa telecom , while on mainland china 's side was done by china telecom , china unicom and china mobile . the project was initially launched in 1996 and took 16 years to build . the telecommunication system consists of two cables , one is a long cable that runs from kinmen 's lake tzu and xiamen 's mount guanyin , and the other is a long cable that runs from guningtou on greater kinmen island ( roc ) to dadeng island ( prc ) . the system is a non-repeater system with a bilateral transmission capacity of 90 gbit/s , which might be expanded in the future if demand arises . . water supply . the current daily water demand for kinmen is 50,000 tonnes , which are used for households , industries and agriculture sectors . one tonne of water produced for kinmen costs about nt 50–60 and may surge to nt 70 during summer . in extreme drought condition , water shipment from taiwan island may cost as much as nt 200 per tonne . because kinmen residents pay only nt 10 for each tonne water they use , the cost of water supply has become a heavy burden for the county government . for decades , kinmen has been facing difficulties in water supply to its residence due to its shallow lakes , lack of rainfall and geographical constraints which makes building reservoirs and dams unfeasible . therefore , kinmen often overuses its groundwater , causing rising tidal flood and soil salinity . in early september 2013 , the people 's republic of china government agreed to supply kinmen with water from jinjiang city in fujian due to the ongoing water shortage problem in kinmen . kinmen draws more than 8,000 tonnes of groundwater every day and water from its reservoir is barely enough to support the residents during the dry season . the shortage problem will heavily hit the local economy by 2016 if no mitigation plan is enacted . the water supply agreement was officially signed on 20 july 2015 in kinmen between kinmen county waterworks director weng wen-kuei and fujian water supply co chairman zhu jinliang witnessed by kinmen county magistrate chen fu-hai and fujian province governor su shulin . the water pipeline was officially opened on 5 august 2018 when the first water supply was delivered in a ceremony held in both kinmen county and jinjiang city in mainland china . . transportation . air . kinmen is served by kinmen airport , a domestic airport located at jinhu , kinmen , connecting kinmen with magong airport , penghu and taipei songshan , kaohsiung , taichung , chiayi and tainan airport on taiwan island . sea . people coming from mainland china can also visit kinmen using ferry via fujian from xiamen at wutong ferry terminal or from quanzhou arriving at shuitou pier in jincheng , kinmen . kinmen to xiamen ferry , is a popular route between the chinese mainland and taiwanese tourists alike , with brisk connections available between the ferry ports and kinmen airport ( for taiwanese destinations ) and xiamen 's airport and xiamen north railway station ( for mainland destinations ) . the kinmen-quanzhou ferry is only available to local travellers and foreigner passport holders are not permitted to use this service . a new commercial port has been built adjacent to the shuitou pier on newly reclaimed land . this will handle the majority of sea freight to and from kinmen . previously most of this traffic was handled by a smaller port on the south-east corner of the island in jinhu township . in the past , due to constant artillery shelling from the chinese mainland , an underground port was used to supply the island in times of conflict at the jhaishan tunnels on the south-western tip of the island but this has been decommissioned and turned into a tourist attraction . greatly used as a transit route between the chinese mainland and taiwan island , buses also connect to the ferry terminal to allow for quick transfer to the xiamen . road . a bridge , kinmen bridge , connecting kinmen island ( greater kinmen ) and lieyu is planned to be completed by 2020 , estimated to cost nt 7.5 billion ( us 250 million ) . it is expected to increase local tourism ; the bridge 's main body will have the largest span in the world when completed . in october 2019 , mainland china announced a plan to build a bridge linking xiamen to kinmen . taiwan 's mainland affairs council ( mac ) said that the plans were made unilaterally by china as part of its schemes to absorb taiwan and divide taiwanese society and that they see no need for bridges linking either matsu or kinmen to china . . gallery . file : wuwangzaiju.jpg calligraphy by former president chiang kai-shek etched on wu-wang-zai-ju inscribed rock file : 遍布反登陆桩的上林海滩 - anti-landing spikes on shanglin coast - 2014.09 - panoramio.jpg anti-landing spikes on lesser kinmen ( lieyu ) near shi islet with xiamen ( amoy ) in the background file : shuitou historical residence 水頭古厝 - panoramio.jpg shuitou historical residence file : jincheng - daitianfu - dscf9406.jpg daitianfu in jincheng