Tikhvin Cemetery

establishment . the cemetery is located close to alexander nevsky square , to the right of the pathway leading from the gate church to the . this land had previously been occupied with ornamental and vegetable gardens . the first cemetery in the monastery , the lazarevskoe cemetery , had been established in 1717 , and by the early nineteenth century was becoming overcrowded . in march 1823 the monastery authorities proposed the creation of a new burial ground opposite the st . petersburg theological consistory . the new cemetery , initially called the '' new lazarevsky '' , was established in the eastern part of the plot of land , between the pathway to the monastery , and the consistory building , enclosed with a wooden fence . over time it expanded to the west , into the areas formerly occupied by monastic gardens , and in the 1870s it was enclosed with a stone wall . . cemetery church . the brothers d . m . and n . m . polezhaev , wealthy merchants , funded the construction of a cemetery church , laid down on 26 september 1869 and built to the design of architect n . p . grebyonki . the church was consecrated on 2 february 1873 in the name of the icon of the theotokos of tikhvin , which from about 1876 became the common name of the cemetery . two icons , one of dimitry of rostov , and one of mary of egypt , were painted by pavel pleshanov for the church . in 1825 the church and cemetery were visited by emperor alexander i , prior to his journey to taganrog . the burial vault of polezhaev family was in the crypt of the church , and in 1901 the church underwent renovations . in 1918 archpriest peter skipetrov of the gate church , who had been shot and killed during an early attempt by the bolsheviks to requisition the monastery on 19 january 1918 , was buried under the church 's altar . the church was closed in 1931 and between 1935 and 1937 it was converted into a post office , with the destruction of its facades and interiors . with the establishment of the state museum of urban sculpture , the building housed its scientific department , and now houses an exhibition hall as part of the museum . . burials . the rate of burials in the old and new lazarevskoe cemeteries was about equal during the early years of the latter 's existence , though by the 1830s the new lazarevskoe cemetery became more popular . burials initially took place in the eastern part of the cemetery , and in 1825 the holy fool monk patermufy was buried there . in 1826 the writer nikolay karamzin was buried in the cemetery , followed in 1833 by nikolay gnedich , a contemporary of pushkin's . gnedich 's funeral on 6 february 1833 was attended by many prominent literary figures , including pushkin , ivan krylov , pyotr vyazemsky , pyotr pletnyov , fyodor tolstoy and alexey olenin . with the exception of pushkin , all would eventually be buried in the lavra 's cemeteries ; krylov , vyazemsky , pletnyov and olenin in the tikhvin , and tolstoy in the lazarevskoe . in 1844 another contemporary poet of pushkin 's , yevgeny baratynsky , was buried in the cemetery . the cemetery became a popular and prestigious burial ground for those of many areas of society . the wealthy merchant a.i . kosikovsky was buried under a monumental sarcophagus on a high pedestal surmounted by a canopy on eight fluted columns . opposite it stood a similarly grand monument to the statesman pavel demidov , which has since been lost . in 1857 the remains of the composer mikhail glinka were returned from berlin and buried in the cemetery , with a grand monument erected two years later to the design of architect i . i . gornostayev , with sculptures by . on 1 february 1881 the author fyodor dostoevsky was buried in the cemetery , with a similarly large monument . during the 1880s composers modest mussorgsky and alexander borodin were buried in the northern part of the grounds , with pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky following in 1891 . eventually all the members of the group of composers termed '' the five '' , or the '' mighty handful '' ; mussorgsky , borodin , as well as mily balakirev , césar cui and nikolai rimsky-korsakov , were buried in the cemetery . by the beginning of the 20th century the tikhvin cemetery contained 1,325 monuments of various designs and sizes , including monumental crosses on pedestals , sarcophagi and steles . there were several family plots with chapels and large crypts of granite and marble . . soviet necropolis . during the early soviet period a number of monuments were stolen or destroyed . the cemetery was officially closed for burials in 1927 , though they continued until 1932 , and it was decided to turn it into a necropolis museum , displaying historically and artistically significant graves . alongside this was concept of gathering together the graves of the friends and contemporaries of alexander pushkin for the 1937 centenary commemorations of the poet 's death . the architectural and planning department of , the city administration , was tasked with creating a memorial park project . plans were drawn up by architects e.n . sandler and e.k . reimers , with further input from the city 's chief architect lev ilyin . the funeral affair trust was established to run the necropolis museum , including removing abandoned gravestones for sale as building materials . the funeral affair trust was authorised to acquire and transfer important graves and monuments from other cemeteries and churches across the city . meanwhile , those existing graves in the cemetery that were not considered particularly artistic or historic were to be demolished to create space for those brought from other locations . a list of graves in the cemetery was compiled and work began in 1935 , planned for completion on 15 august the following year . a 3 july 1935 resolution from the presidium of lensovet set out the vision for the future of the necropolis museums . the tikhvin cemetery and the literary walk in the volkovo cemetery . after the reconstruction will be turned into necropolis parks of a remarkable and revolutionary culture , with the appearance of parks . freed from ordinary graves , they will not be of a graveyard nature at all , but will actually represent extensive , architecturally decorated green spaces , sometimes decorated with certain monuments standing on the graves above these wonderful people . the short timeframe allowed for completion of the work led to the hasty and unsystematic demolition of a number of monuments , with the bulk of the work only being completed by august 1937 , with remedial work continuing for many years afterwards . the reconstruction radically altered the nature and appearance of the tikhvin cemetery . with the intention being to create an '' artists ' necropolis '' , graves of those from other sections of society were removed . fewer than a hundred of the original monuments were preserved . some were transferred to the neighbouring '' necropolis of the xviii century '' , the former lazarevskoe cemetery , while others , including those of aleksandr gradovsky , anatoly koni and viktor pashutin , were transferred to the other museum necropolis being established in the volkov cemetery . meanwhile , the remains of prominent artists , sculptors , composers and musicians were reburied in the cemetery . among them were personal friends of pushkin , including konstantin danzas , anton delvig , and fyodor matyushkin . some remains came from cemeteries earmarked for demolition , such as the , , and ; and others from those that were intended to be kept open , such as the smolensky , volkovo , novodevichy , and nikolskoe cemetery . the necropolis was created during an ongoing anti-religious campaign , therefore monuments with religious symbols were often replaced by monuments made by the museum . the cemetery reconstruction project concentrated the representatives of each type of art together , with even monuments that had been in the tikhvin originally being moved to fit the new organisational scheme . composers and musicians were reburied mainly on the '' composer 's path '' , near the northern boundary of the cemetery . painters and sculptors were placed in the western part , while those who in their lifetimes had been associated with pushkin were placed close to the eastern section , near the cemetery entrance . some of the older monuments from the removed graves were retained to serve as decorative ornaments , such as columns placed at the intersection of avenues . the decoration of the park-necropolis was to be enhanced by the construction of one large and four small fountains , and the installation of granite benches . the tikhvin church was slated for demolition to improve the access direct from alexander nevsky square . the organisers were faced with the problem that despite designating the cemetery to be the artists ' necropolis , historically the tikhvin had primarily been the burial ground of statesmen , military leaders , scientists , and composers . there were relatively few graves of writers , who had tended to prefer the smolensky cemetery ; or artists , who had traditionally chosen the nikolskoe or novodevichy cemetery . this necessitated the transfer of a large number of burials and monuments , which took place in two main periods , from 1936 to 1941 and from 1948 to 1952 . during the second world war and the siege of leningrad , the museum worked to provide protection and shelter for monuments . only a single gravestone was damaged , that of the actress varvara asenkova . the monument , designed by , consisted of a granite canopy over a pedestal with a verse epitaph and bronze bust of the actress by ivan vitali and had been transferred along with the actress 's remains from the smolensky cemetery in 1936 . it was destroyed by a direct hit from a bomb in 1943 . in 1955 the museum installed a marble replica of the bust made by d.a . sprishinym . other monuments were stored in the lavra 's annunciation church . restoration work began immediately after the end of the war , with the necropolis-museum opening in august 1947 . the programme of moving and installing monuments resumed after the war and continued until the mid-1950s . there were also several burials of prominent soviet citizens , as the cemetery gained the status of an urban pantheon . those buried here included the scientist sergey lebedev in 1934 , artist mikhail avilov in 1954 , and actor nikolay cherkasov in 1966 . in 1972 the remains of the composer alexander glazunov were transferred from paris . in 1968 fyodor dostoevsky 's wife anna dostoevskaya was reburied next to her husband , while theatre director georgy tovstonogov was interred in the cemetery in 1989 . so far tovstonogov 's has been the last burial to take place in the cemetery . . references . external links . guide to the tikhvinskoye cemetery