Anthony Collins

life and writings . collins was born in heston , near hounslow in middlesex , england , the son of lawyer henry collins ( 1646/7–1705 ) and mary ( née dineley ) . he had two sisters : anne collins ( born 1678 ) , who married henry lovibond ( born 1675 ) , and mary collins ( born 1680 ) , who married edward lovibond ( 1675–1737 ) , a merchant and director of the east india company . mary and edward 's son was the poet edward lovibond . collins was educated at eton college and king 's college , cambridge , and studied law at the middle temple . the most interesting episode of his life was his intimacy with john locke , who in his letters speaks of him with affection and admiration . in 1715 he settled in essex , where he held the offices of justice of the peace and deputy-lieutenant , which he had previously held in middlesex . he died at his house in harley street , london . his writings gather together the results of previous english freethoughts . the imperturbable courtesy of his style is in striking contrast to the violence of his opponents ; and , in spite of his unorthodoxy , he was not an atheist or even an agnostic . in his own words , '' ignorance is the foundation of atheism , and freethinking the cure of it '' ( discourse of freethinking , 105 ) . essay concerning the use of reason . his first notable work was his essay concerning the use of reason in propositions the evidence whereof depends on human testimony ( 1707 ) , in which he rejected the distinction between '' above reason '' and '' contrary to reason '' , and demanded that revelation should conform to man 's natural ideas of god . like all his works , it was published anonymously , although the identity of the author was never long concealed . a discourse of freethinking . six years later appeared his chief work , a discourse of freethinking , occasioned by the rise and growth of a sect called freethinkers ( 1713 ) . notwithstanding the ambiguity of its title , and the fact that it attacks the priests of all churches without moderation , it contends for the most part , at least explicitly , for no more than must be admitted by every protestant . freethinking is a right which can not and must not be limited , for it is the only means of attaining a knowledge of truth , it essentially contributes to the well-being of society , and is not only permitted but enjoined by the bible . in fact the first introduction of christianity and the success of all missionary enterprise involve freethinking ( in its etymological sense ) on the part of those converted . in england this essay , which was regarded and treated as a plea for deism , caused a great sensation , eliciting several replies , from among others william whiston , bishop hare , bishop benjamin hoadly , and richard bentley , who , under the signature of '' phileleutherus lipsiensis '' , roughly handles certain arguments carelessly expressed by collins , but triumphs chiefly by an attack on the trivial points of scholarship , his own pamphlet being by no means faultless in this very respect . jonathan swift also , being satirically referred to in the book , made it the subject of a caricature . discourse of the grounds and reasons of the christian religion . in 1724 collins published his discourse of the grounds and reasons of the christian religion , with an apology for free debate and liberty of writing prefixed . ostensibly it is written in opposition to whiston 's attempt to show that the books of the old testament did originally contain prophecies of events in the new testament story , but that these had been eliminated or corrupted by the jews , and to prove that the fulfilment of prophecy by the events of christ 's life is all '' secondary , secret , allegorical , and mystical , '' since the original and literal reference is always to some other fact . since , further , according to him the fulfilment of prophecy is the only valid proof of christianity , he thus secretly aims a blow at christianity as a revelation . the canonicity of the new testament he ventures openly to deny , on the ground that the canon could be fixed only by men who were inspired . no less than thirty-five answers were directed against this book , the most noteworthy of which were those of bishop edward chandler , arthur sykes and samuel clarke . to these , but with special reference to the work of chandler , which maintained that a number of prophecies were literally fulfilled by christ , collins replied with his scheme of literal prophecy considered ( 1727 ) . an appendix contends against whiston that the book of daniel was forged in the time of antiochus epiphanes . necessitarianism . in philosophy , collins takes a foremost place as a defender of necessitarianism . his brief inquiry concerning human liberty ( 1717 ) has not been excelled , at all events in its main outlines , as a statement of the determinist standpoint . he was attacked in an elaborate treatise by samuel clarke , in whose system the freedom of will is made essential to religion and morality . during clarke 's lifetime , fearing perhaps being branded as an enemy of religion and morality , collins made no reply , but in 1729 he published an answer , entitled liberty and necessity . other works . besides these works he wrote a letter to mr dodwell , arguing that the soul may be material , and , secondly , that if the soul be immaterial it does not follow , as clarke had contended , that it is immortal . vindication of the divine attributes ( 1710 ) priestcraft in perfection ( 1709 ) , in which he asserts that the clause '' the church . faith '' in the twentieth of the thirty-nine articles was inserted by fraud . collins became known as one of the best read men in england . he was a bibliophile who amassed one of the largest private libraries of the time , consisting of some 6,906 books on all subjects , but particularly favoring works on history , theology , and philosophy . it has been argued ( see jacobson , '' the england libertarian heritage '' ) that collins was the unknown author of ten of '' the independent whig '' essays . marriages and children . collins married first martha child ( 1677–1703 ) a daughter of sir francis child mp ( 1642–1713 ) and elizabeth , ( 1652–1720 ) . they had two sons both of whom died young , the eldest in infancy , the second was anthony collins 1723 ) ; and two daughters : elizabeth collins ( born who , in 1738 , married walter cary ; and martha collins 1744 ) who , in 1741 , married robert fairfax , 7th lord fairfax of cameron ( 1706–1793 ) . his second marriage was to elizabeth wrottesley ( born , a daughter of walter wrottesley , 3rd baron wrottesley ( 1659–1712 ) and eleanora , ( 1661–1692 ) . notes . references . . further reading . see collins ' library catalogue ( ed . by giovanni tarantino ) : anthony collins tarantino g . 'the books and times of anthony collins , free-thinker , radical reader and independent whig ' , in varieties of seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century english radicalism in context , ed . by ariel hessayon and david finnegan ( ashgate , 2011 ) , 221–240 tarantino g . , lo scrittoio di anthony collins ( 1676–1729 ) : i libri e i tempi di un libero pensatore ( milan : francoangeli , 2007 ) . external links . a discourse of free-thinking , 1713 priestcraft in perfection , 1710 a philosophical inquiry concerning human liberty , 1717 the scheme of literal prophecy considered , 1727 a discourse of the grounds and reasons of the christian religion , 1737