Henry Eyring (chemist)

history . eyring , a third-generation member of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( lds church ) , was reared on a cattle ranch in colonia juárez , chihuahua , a mormon colony , for the first 11 years of his life . his father practiced plural marriage ; he was married to two daughters of miles park romney , the great-grandfather of mitt romney . eyring 's father treated both wives with equal respect and care and made sure to provide the children with a healthy family environment . in july 1912 , the eyrings and about 4,200 other immigrants were driven out of mexico by violent insurgents during the mexican revolution and moved to el paso , texas . after living in el paso for approximately one year , the eyrings relocated to pima , arizona , where he completed high school and showed a special aptitude for mathematics and science . he also studied at gila academy in thatcher , arizona , now eastern arizona college . one of the pillars at the front of the main building still bears his name , along with that of his brother-in-law , spencer w . kimball , later president of the lds church . by 1919 , eyring had received a state fellowship to the university of arizona , where he received degrees in mining engineering , metallurgy , and chemistry . he subsequently pursued and received his doctoral degree in chemistry from the university of california , berkeley in 1927 for a thesis entitled : a comparison of the ionization by , and stopping power for , alpha particles of elements and compounds . after a review of his dissertation , princeton university recruited eyring as an instructor in 1931 . he would continue his work at princeton until 1946 aaas - the world 's largest general scientific society when he was offered a position as dean of the graduate school at the university of utah . the chemistry building on the university of utah campus is now named in his honor . a prolific writer , he authored more than 600 scientific articles , ten scientific books , and a few books on the subject of science and religion . he received the wolf prize in chemistry in 1980 and the national medal of science in 1966 for developing the absolute rate theory or transition state theory of chemical reactions , one of the most important developments of 20th-century chemistry . several other chemists later received the nobel prize for work based on it , and his failure to receive the nobel was a matter of surprise to many . g.b . kauffman ; the nobel centennial 1901—2001 ; chem . educator 2001 , 6 , 370—384 the nobel prize organization admitted that '' strangely , eyring never received a nobel prize '' ; the royal swedish academy of sciences apparently did not understand eyring 's theory until it was too late to award him the nobel . the academy awarded him the berzelius medal in 1977 as partial compensation . '' the nobel prize in chemistry : the development of modern chemistry '' . nobelprize.org . retrieved 12 jun 2010 . sterling m . mcmurrin believed eyring should have received the nobel prize but was not awarded it because of his religion . '' matters of conscience : conversations with sterling m . mcmurrin on philosophy , education , and religion '' by sterling m . mcmurrin & l . jackson newell , signature books , 1996 eyring was elected president of the american chemical society in 1963 and the association for the advancement of science in 1965 . personal life . eyring married mildred bennion . she was a native of granger , utah , who had a degree from the university of utah and served as head of the physical education department there . she met eyring while pursuing a doctorate at the university of wisconsin . gerald n . lund , '' elder henry b . eyring : molded by defining influences '' , ensign , september 1995 . they had three sons together . the oldest , edward m . '' ted '' eyring is an emeritus professor of chemistry at the university of utah . the second son , henry b . eyring is a general authority of the lds church , while the youngest son harden b . eyring is a higher education administrator for the state of utah . his wife , mildred , died june 25 , 1969 , in salt lake city , utah . on august 13 , 1971 , he married winifred brennan in the lds church 's salt lake temple . eyring was a member of the lds church throughout his life . his views of science and religion were captured in this quote : '' is there any conflict between science and religion ? there is no conflict in the mind of god , but often there is conflict in the minds of men . '' eyring also feared overeager defenders of faith would discard new scientific findings because of apparent contradictions . he encouraged parents and teachers to distinguish between '' what they know to be true and what they think may be true , '' to avoid clumping them together and '' throwing the baby out with the bath . '' as a member of the lds church , eyring served as a branch president , district president , and , for over twenty years , a member of the general board of the deseret sunday school union . his son , henry b . eyring , is currently an apostle and member of the church 's first presidency . awards . aaas newcomb cleveland prize ( 1932 ) bingham medal ( 1949 ) of the society of rheology peter debye award in physical chemistry ( 1964 ) national medal of science ( 1966 ) irving langmuir award ( 1967 ) linus pauling award ( 1969 ) elliott cresson medal ( 1969 ) from the franklin institute golden plate award of the academy of achievement ( 1974 ) t . w . richards medal ( 1975 ) priestley medal ( 1975 ) berzelius medal ( 1979 ) wolf prize ( 1980 ) member of international academy of quantum molecular science member of u.s . national academy of sciences . scientific publications : books . henry eyring authored , co-authored , or edited the following books or journals : a generalized theory of plasticity involving the virial theorem the activated complex in chemisorption and catalysis an examination into the origin , possible synthesis , and physical properties of diamonds annual review of physical chemistry basic chemical kinetics deformation kinetics with alexander stephen krausz electrochemistry kinetic evidence of phase structure modern chemical kinetics non-classical reaction kinetics physical chemistry , an advanced treatise ( 1970 ) quantum chemistry reactions in condensed phases the significance of isotopic reactions in rate theory significant liquid structures some aspects of catalytic hydrogenation statistical mechanics statistical mechanics and dynamics theoretical chemistry : advances and perspectives . volume 2 the theory of rate processes in biology and medicine with frank h . johnson and betsy jones stover theory of optical activity ( monographs on chemistry series ) with d.j . caldwell time and change valency . religious publications : books . reflections of a scientist ( 1983 ) the faith of a scientist . bookcraft , inc . ( 1967 ) science and your faith in god . bookcraft , inc . ( 1958 ) . see also . eyring equation mormon scientist : the life and faith of henry eyring . references . . external links . the chemistry department:1946-2000 by edward m . eyring , april k . heiselt , & kelly erickson ( university of utah ) biography from the national academy of sciences mini-biography of henry eyring biography at the aaas henry eyring papers , ms 8 at the university of utah henry eyring speeches , mss sc 586 at l . tom perry special collections , brigham young university '' the reconciliation of faith and science : henry eyring 's achievement '' - 1982 article on eyring as an lds scientist from dialogue : a journal of mormon thought