Karyotype

history of karyotype studies . chromosomes were first observed in plant cells by carl wilhelm von nägeli in 1842 . their behavior in animal ( salamander ) cells was described by walther flemming , the discoverer of mitosis , in 1882 . the name was coined by another german anatomist , heinrich von waldeyer in 1888 . it is new latin from ancient greek κάρυον karyon , '' kernel '' , '' seed '' , or '' nucleus '' , and τύπος typos , '' general form '' ) the next stage took place after the development of genetics in the early 20th century , when it was appreciated that chromosomes ( that can be observed by karyotype ) were the carrier of genes . in 1922 seems to have been the first person to define the karyotype as the phenotypic appearance of the somatic chromosomes , in contrast to their gene contents . delaunay l . n . comparative karyological study of species muscari mill . and bellevalia lapeyr . bulletin of the tiflis botanical garden . 1922 , v . 2 , n . 1 , p . 1-32in russian the subsequent history of the concept can be followed in the works of c . d . darlington darlington c.d . 1939 . evolution of genetic systems . cambridge university press . 2nd ed , revised and enlarged , 1958 . oliver & boyd , edinburgh . and michael jd white . white m.j.d . 1973 . animal cytology and evolution . 3rd ed , cambridge university press . investigation into the human karyotype took many years to settle the most basic question : how many chromosomes does a normal diploid human cell contain ? in 1912 , hans von winiwarter reported 47 chromosomes in spermatogonia and 48 in oogonia , concluding an xx/xo sex determination mechanism . painter in 1922 was not certain whether the diploid of humans was 46 or 48 , at first favoring 46 , but revised his opinion from 46 to 48 , and he correctly insisted on humans having an xx/xy system . considering the techniques of the time , these results were remarkable . joe hin tjio working in albert levan 's lab found the chromosome count to be 46 using new techniques available at the time : using cells in tissue culture pretreating cells in a hypotonic solution , which swells them and spreads the chromosomes arresting mitosis in metaphase by a solution of colchicine squashing the preparation on the slide forcing the chromosomes into a single plane cutting up a photomicrograph and arranging the result into an indisputable karyogram . the work took place in 1955 , and was published in 1956 . the karyotype of humans includes only 46 chromosomes . hsu t.c . 1979 . human and mammalian cytogenetics : a historical perspective . springer-verlag , ny . the other great apes have 48 chromosomes . human chromosome 2 is now known to be a result of an end-to-end fusion of two ancestral ape chromosomes . human chromosome 2 is a fusion of two ancestral . chromosomes alec macandrew ; accessed 18 may 2006 . evidence of common ancestry : human chromosome 2 ( video ) 2007 . observations on karyotypes . staining . the study of karyotypes is made possible by staining . usually , a suitable dye , such as giemsa , a preparation which includes the dyes methylene blue , eosin y and azure-a , b , c is applied after cells have been arrested during cell division by a solution of colchicine usually in metaphase or prometaphase when most condensed . in order for the giemsa stain to adhere correctly , all chromosomal proteins must be digested and removed . for humans , white blood cells are used most frequently because they are easily induced to divide and grow in tissue culture . gustashaw k.m . 1991 . chromosome stains . in the act cytogenetics laboratory manual 2nd ed , ed . m.j . barch . the association of cytogenetic technologists , raven press , new york . sometimes observations may be made on non-dividing ( interphase ) cells . the sex of an unborn fetus can be determined by observation of interphase cells ( see amniocentesis and barr body ) . observations . six different characteristics of karyotypes are usually observed and compared : differences in absolute sizes of chromosomes . chromosomes can vary in absolute size by as much as twenty-fold between genera of the same family . for example , the legumes lotus tenuis and vicia faba each have six pairs of chromosomes , yet v . faba chromosomes are many times larger . these differences probably reflect different amounts of dna duplication . differences in the position of centromeres . these differences probably came about through translocations . differences in relative size of chromosomes . these differences probably arose from segmental interchange of unequal lengths . differences in basic number of chromosomes . these differences could have resulted from successive unequal translocations which removed all the essential genetic material from a chromosome , permitting its loss without penalty to the organism ( the dislocation hypothesis ) or through fusion . humans have one pair fewer chromosomes than the great apes . human chromosome 2 appears to have resulted from the fusion of two ancestral chromosomes , and many of the genes of those two original chromosomes have been translocated to other chromosomes . differences in number and position of satellites . satellites are small bodies attached to a chromosome by a thin thread . differences in degree and distribution of heterochromatin regions . heterochromatin stains darker than euchromatin . heterochromatin is packed tighter . heterochromatin consists mainly of genetically inactive and repetitive dna sequences as well as containing a larger amount of adenine-thymine pairs . euchromatin is usually under active transcription and stains much lighter as it has less affinity for the giemsa stain . thompson & thompson genetics in medicine 7th ed euchromatin regions contain larger amounts of guanine-cytosine pairs . the staining technique using giemsa staining is called g banding and therefore produces the typical '' g-bands '' . a full account of a karyotype may therefore include the number , type , shape and banding of the chromosomes , as well as other cytogenetic information . variation is often found : between the sexes , between the germ-line and soma ( between gametes and the rest of the body ) , between members of a population ( polymorphism ( biology ) ) , in allopatric speciation , and in mosaics or otherwise abnormal individuals . . human karyotype . the typical human karyotypes contain 22 pairs of autosome chromosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes ( allosomes ) . the most common karyotypes for females contain two x chromosomes and are denoted 46 , xx ; males usually have both an x and a y chromosome denoted 46 , xy . approximately 1.7 % percent of humans are intersex , sometimes due to variations in sex chromosomes . some variations in karyotype , whether to autosomes or allosomes , cause chromosome abnormalities . diversity and evolution of karyotypes . although the replication and transcription of dna is highly standardized in eukaryotes , the same can not be said for their karyotypes , which are highly variable . there is variation between species in chromosome number , and in detailed organization , despite their construction from the same chromatin . this variation provides the basis for a range of studies in evolutionary cytology . in some cases there is even significant variation within species . in a review , godfrey and masters conclude : although much is known about karyotypes at the descriptive level , and it is clear that changes in karyotype organization has had effects on the evolutionary course of many species , it is quite unclear what the general significance might be . changes during development . instead of the usual gene repression , some organisms go in for large-scale elimination of heterochromatin , or other kinds of visible adjustment to the karyotype . chromosome elimination . in some species , as in many sciaridae , entire chromosomes are eliminated during development . chromatin diminution ( founding father : theodor boveri ) . in this process , found in some copepods and roundworms such as ascaris suum , portions of the chromosomes are cast away in particular cells . this process is a carefully organised genome rearrangement where new telomeres are constructed and certain heterochromatin regions are lost . in a . suum , all the somatic cell precursors undergo chromatin diminution . gilbert s.f . 2006 . developmental biology . sinauer associates , stamford ct . 8th ed , chapter 9 x-inactivation . the inactivation of one x chromosome takes place during the early development of mammals ( see barr body and dosage compensation ) . in placental mammals , the inactivation is random as between the two xs ; thus the mammalian female is a mosaic in respect of her x chromosomes . in marsupials it is always the paternal x which is inactivated . in human females some 15 % of somatic cells escape inactivation , and the number of genes affected on the inactivated x chromosome varies between cells : in fibroblast cells up about 25 % of genes on the barr body escape inactivation . . number of chromosomes in a set . a spectacular example of variability between closely related species is the muntjac , which was investigated by kurt benirschke and doris wurster . the diploid number of the chinese muntjac , muntiacus reevesi , was found to be 46 , all telocentric . when they looked at the karyotype of the closely related indian muntjac , muntiacus muntjak , they were astonished to find it had female 6 , male 7 chromosomes . the number of chromosomes in the karyotype between ( relatively ) unrelated species is hugely variable . the low record is held by the nematode parascaris univalens , where the haploid n 1 ; and an ant : myrmecia pilosula . the high record would be somewhere amongst the ferns , with the adder 's tongue fern ophioglossum ahead with an average of 1262 chromosomes . top score for animals might be the shortnose sturgeon acipenser brevirostrum at 372 chromosomes . the existence of supernumerary or b chromosomes means that chromosome number can vary even within one interbreeding population ; and aneuploids are another example , though in this case they would not be regarded as normal members of the population . fundamental number . the fundamental number , fn , of a karyotype is the number of visible major chromosomal arms per set of chromosomes . thus , fn ≤ 2 x 2n , the difference depending on the number of chromosomes considered single-armed ( acrocentric or telocentric ) present . humans have fn 82 , due to the presence of five acrocentric chromosome pairs : 13 , 14 , 15 , 21 , and 22 ( the human y chromosome is also acrocentric ) . the fundamental autosomal number or autosomal fundamental number , fna or an , of a karyotype is the number of visible major chromosomal arms per set of autosomes ( non-allosome ) . ploidy . ploidy is the number of complete sets of chromosomes in a cell . polyploidy , where there are more than two sets of homologous chromosomes in the cells , occurs mainly in plants . it has been of major significance in plant evolution according to stebbins . the proportion of flowering plants which are polyploid was estimated by stebbins to be 30–35 % , but in grasses the average is much higher , about 70 % . polyploidy in lower plants ( ferns , horsetails and psilotales ) is also common , and some species of ferns have reached levels of polyploidy far in excess of the highest levels known in flowering plants . polyploidy in animals is much less common , but it has been significant in some groups . polyploid series in related species which consist entirely of multiples of a single basic number are known as euploid . haplo-diploidy , where one sex is diploid , and the other haploid . it is a common arrangement in the hymenoptera , and in some other groups . endopolyploidy occurs when in adult differentiated tissues the cells have ceased to divide by mitosis , but the nuclei contain more than the original somatic number of chromosomes . in the endocycle ( endomitosis or endoreduplication ) chromosomes in a 'resting ' nucleus undergo reduplication , the daughter chromosomes separating from each other inside an intact nuclear membrane . in many instances , endopolyploid nuclei contain tens of thousands of chromosomes ( which can not be exactly counted ) . the cells do not always contain exact multiples ( powers of two ) , which is why the simple definition 'an increase in the number of chromosome sets caused by replication without cell division ' is not quite accurate . this process ( especially studied in insects and some higher plants such as maize ) may be a developmental strategy for increasing the productivity of tissues which are highly active in biosynthesis . the phenomenon occurs sporadically throughout the eukaryote kingdom from protozoa to humans ; it is diverse and complex , and serves differentiation and morphogenesis in many ways . nagl w . 1978 . endopolyploidy and polyteny in differentiation and evolution : towards an understanding of quantitative and qualitative variation of nuclear dna in ontogeny and phylogeny . elsevier , new york . see paleopolyploidy for the investigation of ancient karyotype duplications . aneuploidy . aneuploidy is the condition in which the chromosome number in the cells is not the typical number for the species . this would give rise to a chromosome abnormality such as an extra chromosome or one or more chromosomes lost . abnormalities in chromosome number usually cause a defect in development . down syndrome and turner syndrome are examples of this . aneuploidy may also occur within a group of closely related species . classic examples in plants are the genus crepis , where the gametic ( haploid ) numbers form the series x 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , and 7 ; and crocus , where every number from x 3 to x 15 is represented by at least one species . evidence of various kinds shows that trends of evolution have gone in different directions in different groups . stebbins , g . ledley , jr . 1972 . chromosomal evolution in higher plants . nelson , london . p18 in primates , the great apes have 24x2 chromosomes whereas humans have 23x2 . human chromosome 2 was formed by a merger of ancestral chromosomes , reducing the number . . chromosomal polymorphism . some species are polymorphic for different chromosome structural forms . the structural variation may be associated with different numbers of chromosomes in different individuals , which occurs in the ladybird beetle chilocorus stigma , some mantids of the genus ameles , the european shrew sorex araneus . there is some evidence from the case of the mollusc thais lapillus ( the dog whelk ) on the brittany coast , that the two chromosome morphs are adapted to different habitats . . species trees . the detailed study of chromosome banding in insects with polytene chromosomes can reveal relationships between closely related species : the classic example is the study of chromosome banding in hawaiian drosophila by hampton l . carson . in about , the hawaiian islands have the most diverse collection of drosophilid flies in the world , living from rainforests to subalpine meadows . these roughly 800 hawaiian drosophilid species are usually assigned to two genera , drosophila and drosophila , in the family drosophilidae . the polytene banding of the 'picture wing ' group , the best-studied group of hawaiian drosophilids , enabled carson to work out the evolutionary tree long before genome analysis was practicable . in a sense , gene arrangements are visible in the banding patterns of each chromosome . chromosome rearrangements , especially inversions , make it possible to see which species are closely related . the results are clear . the inversions , when plotted in tree form ( and independent of all other information ) , show a clear '' flow '' of species from older to newer islands . there are also cases of colonization back to older islands , and skipping of islands , but these are much less frequent . using k-ar dating , the present islands date from 0.4 million years ago ( mya ) ( mauna kea ) to 10mya ( necker ) . the oldest member of the hawaiian archipelago still above the sea is kure atoll , which can be dated to 30 mya . the archipelago itself ( produced by the pacific plate moving over a hot spot ) has existed for far longer , at least into the cretaceous . previous islands now beneath the sea ( guyots ) form the emperor seamount chain . all of the native drosophila and scaptomyza species in hawaii have apparently descended from a single ancestral species that colonized the islands , probably 20 million years ago . the subsequent adaptive radiation was spurred by a lack of competition and a wide variety of niches . although it would be possible for a single gravid female to colonise an island , it is more likely to have been a group from the same species . there are other animals and plants on the hawaiian archipelago which have undergone similar , if less spectacular , adaptive radiations . . chromosome banding . chromosomes display a banded pattern when treated with some stains . bands are alternating light and dark stripes that appear along the lengths of chromosomes . unique banding patterns are used to identify chromosomes and to diagnose chromosomal aberrations , including chromosome breakage , loss , duplication , translocation or inverted segments . a range of different chromosome treatments produce a range of banding patterns : g-bands , r-bands , c-bands , q-bands , t-bands and nor-bands . depiction of karyotypes . types of banding . cytogenetics employs several techniques to visualize different aspects of chromosomes : g-banding is obtained with giemsa stain following digestion of chromosomes with trypsin . it yields a series of lightly and darkly stained bands — the dark regions tend to be heterochromatic , late-replicating and at rich . the light regions tend to be euchromatic , early-replicating and gc rich . this method will normally produce 300–400 bands in a normal , human genome . r-banding is the reverse of g-banding ( the r stands for '' reverse '' ) . the dark regions are euchromatic ( guanine-cytosine rich regions ) and the bright regions are heterochromatic ( thymine-adenine rich regions ) . c-banding : giemsa binds to constitutive heterochromatin , so it stains centromeres.the name is derived from centromeric or constitutive heterochromatin . the preparations undergo alkaline denaturation prior to staining leading to an almost complete depurination of the dna . after washing the probe the remaining dna is renatured again and stained with giemsa solution consisting of methylene azure , methylene violet , methylene blue , and eosin . heterochromatin binds a lot of the dye , while the rest of the chromosomes absorb only little of it . the c-bonding proved to be especially well-suited for the characterization of plant chromosomes . q-banding is a fluorescent pattern obtained using quinacrine for staining . the pattern of bands is very similar to that seen in g-banding.they can be recognized by a yellow fluorescence of differing intensity . most part of the stained dna is heterochromatin . quinacrin ( atebrin ) binds both regions rich in at and in gc , but only the at-quinacrin-complex fluoresces . since regions rich in at are more common in heterochromatin than in euchromatin , these regions are labelled preferentially . the different intensities of the single bands mirror the different contents of at . other fluorochromes like dapi or hoechst 33258 lead also to characteristic , reproducible patterns . each of them produces its specific pattern . in other words : the properties of the bonds and the specificity of the fluorochromes are not exclusively based on their affinity to regions rich in at . rather , the distribution of at and the association of at with other molecules like histones , for example , influences the binding properties of the fluorochromes . t-banding : visualize telomeres . silver staining : silver nitrate stains the nucleolar organization region-associated protein . this yields a dark region where the silver is deposited , denoting the activity of rrna genes within the nor . classic karyotype cytogenetics . in the '' classic '' ( depicted ) karyotype , a dye , often giemsa ( g-banding ) , less frequently mepacrine , is used to stain bands on the chromosomes . giemsa is specific for the phosphate groups of dna . quinacrine binds to the adenine-thymine-rich regions . each chromosome has a characteristic banding pattern that helps to identify them ; both chromosomes in a pair will have the same banding pattern . karyotypes are arranged with the short arm of the chromosome on top , and the long arm on the bottom . some karyotypes call the short and long arms p and q , respectively . in addition , the differently stained regions and sub-regions are given numerical designations from proximal to distal on the chromosome arms . for example , cri du chat syndrome involves a deletion on the short arm of chromosome 5 . it is written as 46 , xx,5p- . the critical region for this syndrome is deletion of p15.2 ( the locus on the chromosome ) , which is written as 46 , xx , del ( 5 ) ( p15.2 ) . . multicolor fish ( mfish ) and spectral karyotype ( sky technique ) . multicolor fish and the older spectral karyotyping are molecular cytogenetic techniques used to simultaneously visualize all the pairs of chromosomes in an organism in different colors . fluorescently labeled probes for each chromosome are made by labeling chromosome-specific dna with different fluorophores . because there are a limited number of spectrally distinct fluorophores , a combinatorial labeling method is used to generate many different colors . fluorophore combinations are captured and analyzed by a fluorescence microscope using up to 7 narrow-banded fluorescence filters or , in the case of spectral karyotyping , by using an interferometer attached to a fluorescence microscope . in the case of an mfish image , every combination of fluorochromes from the resulting original images is replaced by a false color in a dedicated image analysis software . thus , chromosomes or chromosome sections can be visualized and identified , allowing for the analysis of chromosomal rearrangements . in the case of spectral karyotyping , image processing software assigns a false color to each spectrally different combination , allowing the visualization of the individually colored chromosomes . multicolor fish is used to identify structural chromosome aberrations in cancer cells and other disease conditions when giemsa banding or other techniques are not accurate enough . digital karyotyping . digital karyotyping is a technique used to quantify the dna copy number on a genomic scale . short sequences of dna from specific loci all over the genome are isolated and enumerated . this method is also known as virtual karyotype . chromosome abnormalities . chromosome abnormalities can be numerical , as in the presence of extra or missing chromosomes , or structural , as in derivative chromosome , translocations , inversions , large-scale deletions or duplications . numerical abnormalities , also known as aneuploidy , often occur as a result of nondisjunction during meiosis in the formation of a gamete ; trisomy , in which three copies of a chromosome are present instead of the usual two , are common numerical abnormalities . structural abnormalities often arise from errors in homologous recombination . both types of abnormalities can occur in gametes and therefore will be present in all cells of an affected person 's body , or they can occur during mitosis and give rise to a genetic mosaic individual who has some normal and some abnormal cells . in humans . chromosomal abnormalities that lead to disease in humans include turner syndrome results from a single x chromosome ( 45 , x or 45 , x0 ) . klinefelter syndrome , the most common male chromosomal disease , otherwise known as 47 , xxy , is caused by an extra x chromosome . edwards syndrome is caused by trisomy ( three copies ) of chromosome 18 . down syndrome , a common chromosomal disease , is caused by trisomy of chromosome 21 . patau syndrome is caused by trisomy of chromosome 13 . trisomy 9 , believed to be the 4th most common trisomy , has many long lived affected individuals but only in a form other than a full trisomy , such as trisomy 9p syndrome or mosaic trisomy 9 . they often function quite well , but tend to have trouble with speech . also documented are trisomy 8 and trisomy 16 , although they generally do not survive to birth . some disorders arise from loss of just a piece of one chromosome , including cri du chat ( cry of the cat ) , from a truncated short arm on chromosome 5 . the name comes from the babies ' distinctive cry , caused by abnormal formation of the larynx . 1p36 deletion syndrome , from the loss of part of the short arm of chromosome 1 . angelman syndrome & ndash ; 50 % of cases have a segment of the long arm of chromosome 15 missing ; a deletion of the maternal genes , example of imprinting disorder . prader-willi syndrome & ndash ; 50 % of cases have a segment of the long arm of chromosome 15 missing ; a deletion of the paternal genes , example of imprinting disorder . chromosomal abnormalities can also occur in cancerous cells of an otherwise genetically normal individual ; one well-documented example is the philadelphia chromosome , a translocation mutation commonly associated with chronic myelogenous leukemia and less often with acute lymphoblastic leukemia .