Oswald Boelcke

into battle . new fighters arrived on 16 september . there was a prototype albatros d.ii for boelcke , and five albatros d.is to be shared by his pilots . the new aircraft outclassed any previous german aircraft , as well as those of their enemies . with more powerful engines , the new arrivals were faster , climbed more quickly to a higher ceiling , and carried two nose machine guns instead of one . with these new airplanes , jasta 2 flew its first squadron missions on 17 september . boelcke shot down his 27th victim , while his men shot down four more . despite this initial success , squadron training continued . boelcke now discussed flights beforehand and listened to his pilots ' input . he then issued orders for the mission . post flight , he debriefed his men . on 22 september , rainy weather had aggravated boelcke 's asthma to the point he could not fly . he refused to go to hospital , but devolved command on oberleutnant gunther viehweger . that night , jasta 2 transferred from bertincourt to lagnicourt because british artillery was beginning to shell the jasta . the next day , in a letter home , boelcke noted he was still trying to impress his pilots that they should fight as a team instead of individually . nevertheless , when the squadron flew six sorties that day without him , it shot down three enemy aircraft . boelcke returned to flight status and command on the 27th . the squadron 's september monthly activity report , written by boelcke , reported 186 sorties flown , 69 of which resulted in combat . ten victories were credited to him , and 15 more were shared among his men . the jasta suffered four casualties . by 1 october , the squadron had ten pilots ; besides boelcke , five of them had shot down enemy aircraft . boelcke scored his 30th victory , but the jasta lost a pilot to antiaircraft fire . the next day began a stretch of rainy weather that prevented flying until the 7th . on 8 october , general erich ludendorff reorganized the makeshift fliegertruppe into the luftstreitkräfte and appointed lieutenant general ernst von hoeppner to the new post of chief of field aviation . hoeppner immediately had the dicta boelcke distributed within the new air force . on 10 october , a clear day saw the resumption of flying . jasta 2 flew 31 sorties , fought during 18 of them , and claimed five victories , including boelcke 's 33rd . more air battles came on the 16th ; among the four victories for the jasta were two more by boelcke . his hot streak ran throughout the month ; he scored 11 victories in october , with his 40th coming on 26 october . by this time , it was becoming obvious that the royal flying corps had lost its mastery of the air . jasta 2 had 50 victories to its credit—26 in october alone—with only six casualties . the german air service had suffered only 39 casualties between mid-september and mid-october , and had shot down 211 enemy aircraft . boelcke 's final mission . on the evening of 27 october , a depressed and wornout boelcke left the jasta mess early to return to his room . he complained of the racket in the mess to his batman , then sat staring into the fire . böhme showed up and joined him , also stating the mess was too noisy . they shared a long talk , ending only when the orderly suggested bedtime . though the following day was misty with a cloud layer , the squadron flew four missions during the morning , as well as another later in the day . on the sixth mission of the day , boelcke and five of his pilots attacked a pair of british airplanes from no . 24 squadron raf . boelcke and böhme chased the airco dh.2 of captain arthur gerald knight , while richthofen pursued the other dh.2 , flown by captain alfred edwin mckay . mckay evaded richthofen by crossing behind knight , cutting off boelcke and böhme . both of them jerked their planes upward to avoid colliding with mckay . each was hidden from the other by their aircraft 's wings . neither was aware of the other 's position . just as böhme spotted the other plane bobbing up below him , boelcke 's upper left wing brushed the undercarriage of böhme 's albatros . the slight impact split the fabric on the wing of boelcke 's albatros . as the fabric tore away , the wing lost lift , and the stricken plane spiraled down to glide into an impact near a german artillery battery near bapaume . although the crash seemed survivable , boelcke was not wearing his crash helmet , nor was his safety belt fastened . he died of a fractured skull . a horrified and distraught böhme returned to base . he overturned his airplane while landing , and blanked the accident from his mind in his distress . he lamented , '' destiny is generally cruelly stupid in her choices . '' however , the official inquiry stated he was not at fault . in memoriam . pilots from jasta 2 rushed forward to the artillery position where boelcke had crashed , hoping he was still alive . the gunners handed over his body to them . despite boelcke being protestant , his memorial service was held in the catholic cambrai cathedral on 31 october . among the many wreaths , there was one from captain wilson and three of his fellow prisoners ; its ribbon was addressed to '' the opponent we admired and esteemed so highly '' . another wreath of british origin had been air dropped at the authorization of the royal flying corps ; it read '' to the memory of captain boelcke , our brave and chivalrous opponent . '' left crown prince rupert was the most socially prominent guest at the rites . two generals spoke at the service . as the funeral procession left the cathedral , richthofen preceded the coffin , displaying boelcke 's decorations on a black velvet cushion . the sun broke through the gloom as the coffin was placed on a gun caisson . idling aircraft criss-crossed overhead in tribute . the journey to a waiting train passed through an honor guard to the sound of fired rifle salutes , followed by a hymn . the train crept away to a mourning nation , through magdeburg and halberstadt on its path to dessau . when the train arrived in dessau the next day , boelcke was taken to his home church , saint john 's . there he was laid out before the altar , attended by an honor guard of decorated sergeant pilots . condolences , decorations , and honors flooded in from the crowned heads of europe . when the funeral service was held on the afternoon of 2 november , the crowd was packed with royalty , generals , and nobility . the kaiser designated general moriz von lyncker to give boelcke 's funeral oration , followed by a speech by lieth-thomsen . oswald boelcke was then buried in the ehrenfriedhof ( cemetery of honor ) in dessau . legacy . boelcke is deemed to be the progenitor of air to air combat tactics , fighter squadron organization , early warning systems , and the german air force ; he has been dubbed '' the father of air combat '' . from his first victories onward , the news of his success both instructed and motivated both his fellow fliers and the german public . it was at his instigation that the imperial german air service founded its jastaschule ( fighter school ) to teach aerial tactics . the promulgation of his dicta boelcke set tactics for the german fighter force . the concentration of fighter airplanes into squadrons gained germany air supremacy on the western front , and was the basis for their wartime successes . jasta 2 , renamed jagdstaffel boelcke in his honor , remained one of germany 's premier fighter squadrons after boelcke 's death , outscoring all but one other jasta . the 336 victories the jasta scored during the war came at the price of 44 casualties . of the first 15 pilots chosen by boelcke , eight became aces—seven of them within the squadron . three of the 15 , at various times , commanded the jasta . by war 's end , 25 aces had served in the squadron and accounted for 90 % of its victories . four of its aces became generals during world war ii -- gerhard bassenge , ernst bormann , hermann frommherz , and otto höhne . the most notable of boelcke 's original roster of pilots was manfred von richthofen . the '' red baron '' acknowledged boelcke 's influence in the richthofen dicta ; indeed , the opening sentence of his tactical manual for wing operations refers to boelcke . the richthofen dicta section entitled '' the one to one battle '' quotes boelcke . and , as was done with dicta boelcke , the richthofen dicta was distributed service-wide by the german high command . boelcke was one of the few german heroes of world war i not tainted by association with the nazi cause , as he was killed in action before the nazi party was founded . nevertheless , the third reich co-opted his name for kampfgeschwader 27 , a luftwaffe medium bomber wing , for boelcke . also , boelcke 's barracks later became a subcamp of the mittelbau-dora concentration camp . boelcke 's name appears on the coat of arms of the present-day german air force fighter-bomber wing taktisches luftwaffengeschwader 31 . the wing conducts a pilgrimage to boelcke 's grave on the anniversary of his death . he is also extensively commemorated on the wing 's home airfield at norvenich air base . he is memorialized by murals on base buildings , portraits in their halls , and a bust in the headquarters entry . the base magazine is named for him . an airplane tail section on static display is emblazoned with his name and a painting of his fokker . the dicta boelcke has , over time , evolved into widespread use of tactics , techniques , and procedures manuals for air forces worldwide . the united states joint chiefs of staff ( jcs ) , the united states navy ( usn ) , and the united states air force ( usaf ) each have their own air tactics manuals . under the auspices of the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) , the usaf trains german , dutch , norwegian , turkish , italian , and greek fighter pilots , using air tactics manuals descended from the dicta boelcke . joe pappalardi , 23 june 2014 , '' the texas air base where nato fighter pilots are forged '' , popular mechanics having scored 18 of his 40 victories in different versions of the fokker eindecker , he became the most successful pilot in the type . awards and honors . prussian/imperial german awards pour le mérite royal house order of hohenzollern , knight 's cross with swords iron cross : first and second class lifesaving medal other german awards duchy of anhalt : house order of albert the bear , knight 's cross , 1st and 2nd class friedrich cross , 2nd class kingdom of bavaria : military merit order , 4th class with swords duchies of saxe-altenburg , saxe-coburg-gotha , and saxe-meiningen joint award : saxe-ernestine house order kingdom of württemberg : knight of the military merit order foreign awards ottoman empire : imtiyaz medal austro-hungary : order of the iron crown , 3rd class with war decoration kingdom of bulgaria : order of bravery , 3rd class honors by order of the emperor , jagdstaffel 2 was renamed as jagdstaffel boelcke on 17 december 1916 . references . footnotes . . notes . . bibliography . at project gutenberg , translated and published in english as knight of germany : oswald boelcke , german ace . havertown , pa : casemate ( 2009 ) , first edition ( 1985 ) . . further reading . . external links .