Jakob Ammann

schism . jakob ammann is known because of his prominent involvement in a schism among the swiss brethren that began in 1693 . until recent decades , he was often heavily blamed for the division , being portrayed as an angry , harsh , and demanding leader who imposed his views on others . with the publication of some of the correspondence from the period ( beginning in 1950 , with mast ’ s '' amish letters '' ) and the uncovering of new evidence , ammann ’ s reputation has received a more positive appraisal among some researchers . because of their prominent roles , jakob ammann and hans reist have been used to characterize the two sides of the schism , but the issues were broader than the two most prominent men involved . . background . in the mid-1600s , a fresh influx of converts came into swiss anabaptism . the reformed pastor at burgdorf even complained that half of the people in the villages in his area were either anabaptist or deeply sympathetic to their cause . these fresh converts—zealous for their new faith—were in fact a sort of new movement within swiss anabaptism . of the nearly 200 surnames among the amish in the 1690s , only a very few were found in the reist side , indicating that the two sides formed mostly around two groups of people with different origins . because of persecution , many swiss brethren families had emigrated or been evicted from swiss territory into the alsace and palatinate before the division . the civil authorities tended to be more lenient in the new locations , and in some cases welcomed the newcomers as they were looking for people to develop their lands . this emigration tended to create a different environment than the swiss who had not emigrated were experiencing , making some of the issues come to the fore . another important aspect in the schism was a conference held at ohnenheim , alsace , by several swiss brethren ministers and elders in 1660 , in which they formally adopted the dordrecht confession of faith that had been drawn up by dutch mennonites . until this time , the swiss brethren ( who did not use the name '' mennonite '' for themselves ) had no official confession of faith beyond the schleitheim confession . the dordrecht confession contained two points that the swiss brethren had not historically practiced : foot washing ( article xi ) and social avoidance ( including not eating meals with those who had been shunned , article xvii ) . swiss brethren had practiced excommunication and a refusal to '' eat '' the lord 's supper with those banned , but their avoidance did not include refraining from eating regular meals with those in the bann . these two issues , foot washing and not eating '' physical '' meals with the excommunicated , would be at the core of the schism . beginning . in 1693 , jakob ammann , '' together with the ministers and elders , '' sent a general letter to people within the swiss brethren congregations , asking for a meeting in which he wanted clarification about where they stood on three issues : 1 ) shunning those who had been banned , 2 ) whether liars should be excommunicated , and 3 ) if people could be saved who did not follow god ’ s word . this last issue was referring to the '' good-hearted '' , meaning those who sympathized with the anabaptists and even helped them materially in times of persecution , but who would not take the step of rebaptism . those siding with ammann felt that these '' good-hearted '' people should not be looked upon and consoled as '' saved '' unless they took up the cross and followed christ in rebaptism and obedience to his teachings . along with feetwashing , these three issues were at the core of the division . however , other issues surfaced during the discussions in the following years , including frequency of communion and how church discipline should be conducted . another issue mentioned during the time of the schism was the establishment of stricter regulations concerning dress and beard styles . however , social avoidance of banned individuals was the most controversial of all the issues , and thus it has sometimes been erroneously considered as the only cause of the schism . excommunications . jakob ammann and nicolas augsburger were chosen by a ministerial committee to travel to switzerland for a meeting with church leaders to find out where the swiss congregations stood on the disputed issues . at first , a few of the swiss ministers agreed with ammann ’ s view , but in a later meeting hans reist would not agree with social avoidance , using matthew 15:17 as a basis for '' what enters the mouth is no sin . '' another meeting was called , in which hans reist did not show up , saying he was busy . at this point , jakob ammann became irritated ( verdreiszlich ) and then proceeded to announce that hans reist was excommunicated on six points . when ammann questioned some of the other swiss ministers at the meeting where they stood on the issues , they pleaded for time to consult with their congregations . ammann saw this as a turning back , since some of them had previously expressed agreement with his side . he then proceeded to announce the excommunication of six of the present ministers . amman and the four men with him then left '' without shaking hands with anyone . '' these excommunications created a definite breach within the swiss brethren movement . the reist side eventually excommunicated the ammann side as well . . attempts at reconciliation . within a few years , several attempts were made at reconciliation . in february 1700 , jakob ammann and several of his co-ministers removed the ban from the swiss ministers and excommunicated themselves in recognition that they had acted too rashly and had '' grievously erred . '' they did not feel that they were in error concerning the issues they had brought up , but rather that they had not given sufficient time for the reist side to consider the issues before excommunicating them . also , they felt that they should not have excommunicated the swiss ministers on the spot , but should have consulted with the whole congregation before proceeding . however , while hans reist and some of the swiss ministers appear to have accepted the repentance of ammann and his co-workers , they held firm to their position of not accepting social shunning . some of the other issues had been accepted by the swiss ministers , but the main body of amish and the reist side were never able to reconcile on the issue of social shunning . today in north america , the amish and mennonites ( the reist side became known as mennonites after the schism ; in a paradox , it was the amish side that was pushing for the introduction of dutch mennonite ideas , but those opposing the ideas eventually became known as mennonites ) live side by side in many communities and work together peacefully in publishing , see the weekly amish newspaper die botschaft , which only accepts '' scribes '' from '' team mennonites and old order amish '' . businesses , and charitable aid projects . however , official sharing of ministry and communion is rare among the most conservative groups of old order amish and mennonites . in more moderate groups , there remains little to no effect from the schism , with the exception of names of churches . notes .