Summertime (1955 film)

plot . jane hudson ( katharine hepburn ) is an unmarried , middle-aged , self-described '' fancy secretary '' from akron , ohio on her summer vacation , enjoying her lifelong dream of a trip to venice after having saved money for it over several years . on the vaporetto to her hotel , she meets two fellow americans , lloyd ( macdonald parke ) and edith ( jane rose ) mcilhenny . at the hotel , they are greeted by signora fiorini ( isa miranda ) , a widow who has converted her home into a pensione . also staying at the property are eddie yaeger ( darren mcgavin ) , a young american painter , and his wife phyl ( mari aldon ) . jane is pestered off and on during her stay by mauro , a friendly italian street urchin . on her first evening in venice , jane walks to the piazza san marco , where the sight of so many romantic couples intensifies her loneliness . while seated at an outdoor caffè , she becomes aware of a lone italian man watching her ; panicking , she quickly leaves . the following day , jane goes shopping and sees a red glass goblet in the window of an antiques store . upon entering the shop , she discovers that the owner , renato de rossi ( rossano brazzi ) , is the man from whom she had fled the night before . he assures her that the goblet is an authentic 18th-century artifact , and she purchases it after he teaches her the art of bargaining . hoping to see her again , renato offers to search for a matching goblet . the next morning , jane returns to the shop with mauro , and is disappointed to discover that renato is not there . jane is humiliated when she accidentally steps backward into a canal while filming de rossi 's shop . she begs mauro to take her home to the pensione fiorini . that evening , de rossi comes to her pensione and confesses his attraction for her . when jane resists his advances , he warns her not to waste an opportunity for happiness , and she is about to agree to have dinner with him when the mcilhennys return from a shopping trip to murano where they purchased a set of new red goblets similar to the one jane bought . renato realizes that she thinks he has swindled her , but he assures her that some designs have been used for centuries on murano and he insists that her goblet is an antique . the couple attend a concert at the piazza , where an orchestra plays the overture to la gazza ladra . when a flower seller approaches them , renato is surprised when jane chooses a simple gardenia instead of an orchid . later , as the couple wander through venice , jane drops her gardenia into a canal ; despite much effort , renato is unable to retrieve it for her . as they return to the pensione , renato kisses jane , and she responds passionately and murmurs , '' i love you , '' before rushing off to her room . the next day , jane treats herself to salon treatments and new clothes in anticipation of their date that evening . while she waits for him at the piazza , renato 's '' nephew '' vito ( jeremy spenser ) arrives and inadvertently reveals that he is renato 's son . stunned to discover renato is married and has several children , jane takes refuge in a bar where she encounters phyl , who confides that her marriage is in trouble . upon returning to the pensione , jane discovers that eddie is having an affair with signora fiorini , with mauro acting as go-between . she is appalled , saying '' something happens to this city at night . '' renato arrives and tells her that in italy things are different , and the relationship between the signora and eddie is none of her business . he admits that he is married , but claims that he and his wife are separated , which he had concealed because he did not want to scare her away . he accuses her of being immature and unwilling to accept what she can have rather than longing for the unattainable . after dinner , with fireworks in the distance , jane and renato go to renato 's home where their affair is consummated . the couple spend several idyllic days on burano . jane , unwilling to remain in a relationship she knows is destined to end unhappily , decides to return home . renato begs her to stay , but jane insists on leaving , arguing that it is better to leave a party before it ends . although jane asks renato not to come to the train station , she hopes he will ignore her request . later , on the station platform , mauro runs up to say goodbye and offers jane a free trinket as a gift . as the train begins to leave the station , jane is thrilled to see renato running down the platform . he tries to hand her a package through the window but the train is moving too quickly . he stops , opens the box and holds up his gift . it 's another gardenia . cast . katharine hepburn as jane hudson rossano brazzi as renato de rossi isa miranda as signora fiorini darren mcgavin as eddie yaeger mari aldon as phyl yaeger jane rose as mrs . mcilhenny ( rose was the only cast member of the broadway production to appear in the movie ) macdonald parke as mr . mcilhenny gaetano autiero as mauro jeremy spenser as vito de rossi virginia simion as giovanna andré morell as englishman in train compartment ( uncredited ) gino cavalieri as porter at the station ( uncredited ) . production . arthur laurents had written the time of the cuckoo specifically for shirley booth , who starred in the 1952 broadway production and won the tony award for best performance by a leading actress in a play for her performance . producer hal wallis expressed interest in purchasing the film rights , but felt booth was too old for the role , and envisioned katharine hepburn and ezio pinza in the leads . ilya lopert ultimately acquired the rights with the intention of casting booth and hiring anatole litvak to direct . it was later reported that she was negotiating with daniel mann instead , and laurents would be adapting his play for the screen . laurents ' screenplay was allegedly unsatisfactory , and newly hired director david lean tried to improve it with associate producer norman spencer and writers donald ogden stewart and s.n . behrman , but without success . he finally brought in novelist h.e . bates to collaborate with him . numerous names were mentioned in conjunction with the project before filming finally began . at one point producer lopert considered casting director-actor vittorio de sica as renato . roberto rossellini expressed interest in directing the film with ingrid bergman as jane , and olivia de havilland supposedly considered starring in the project . government officials initially resisted director david lean 's request to allow his crew to film on location during the summer months , the height of the tourist season , especially when local gondola , fearful they would lose income , threatened to strike if he was given permission to do so . the problem was resolved when united artists made a generous donation to the fund established to finance the restoration of st mark 's basilica . lean also was required to promise the cardinal that no short dresses or bare arms would be seen in or near the city 's holy sites . edwards , anne , a remarkable woman : a biography of katharine hepburn . new york : william morrow & company , inc . 1985 pp . 290–91 in one scene , the character of jane hudson falls into a canal as she steps backwards while photographing di rossi 's shop in . leading lady katharine hepburn , concerned about her health , was disinclined to do the stunt herself , but lean felt it would be obvious if he replaced her with a stunt double . he filled the water with a disinfectant that caused it to foam , which added to hepburn 's reluctance , then required her to film the scene four times until he was satisfied with the results . that night , hepburn 's eyes began to itch and water . she was eventually diagnosed with a rare form of conjunctivitis that plagued her for the remainder of her life . edwards , pp . 291–92 upon seeing the completed film , hays code head geoffrey shurlock notified united artists executives that the film would not be approved because of its depiction of adultery . of particular concern was the scene in which jane and renato consummate their relationship . eighteen feet of footage were deleted , and the pca granted its approval . the national legion of decency , however , objected to a line of dialogue that was finally trimmed , and the organisation bestowed the film with a b-rating , designating the film '' morally objectionable in part '' . in later years , lean described the film as his favourite . he became so enamoured with venice during filming that he made it his second home . . preservation . the academy film archive preserved summertime in 2008 . . critical reception . bosley crowther of the new york times observed , '' in adapting for the screen arthur laurents ' stage play the time of the cuckoo , mr . lean and h.e . bates discarded most of the individual shadings and psychological subtleties of that romance . they reduced the complicated pondering of an american woman 's first go at love with a middle-aged merchant of venice to pleasingly elemental terms . and they let the evident inspiration for their heroine 's emotional release be little more than the spell cast by the city upon her fitful and lonely state of mind . the challenge thus set of making venice the moving force in propelling the play has been met by mr . lean as the director with magnificent feeling and skill . through the lens of his color camera , the wondrous city of spectacles and moods becomes a rich and exciting organism that fairly takes command of the screen . and the curious hypnotic fascination of that labyrinthine place beside the sea is brilliantly conveyed to the viewer as the impulse for the character 's passing moods . it is venice itself that gives the flavor and the emotional stimulation to this film . for it ca n't be denied that the credibility of the brief love affair . is considerably strained in substance . nor can it be honestly gainsaid that the break-up after a blissful go-round is abrupt and illogical . '' a reviewer for variety wrote that the film '' stacks up as promising entertainment - with some reservations . there is a lack of cohesion and some abruptness in plot transition without a too-clear buildup . lesser characterizations , too , are on the sketchy side . rossano brazzi . scores a triumph of charm and reserve . hepburn turns in a feverish acting chore of proud loneliness . '' in the 21st century , laura bushell of channel 4 rated the film four out of five stars and commented , '' hepburn made a career out of playing vibrant heroines with a vulnerable side and it 's her portrayal of jane 's insecurity and loneliness that give the film its substance . summertimes notions of dating etiquette and holiday romance have dated greatly . but as a coming-of-age story it remains touching . as a showcase for katharine hepburn , it is superb . '' channel 4 review . awards and honours . in popular culture . in the anime based on naoki urasawa 's manga monster , anna liebert 's employer mr . roso states the film as one of his favourites and always cries when it 's on . in addition , he talks about the beauty of venice and its soundtrack as major influences in his life . in the tv series call the midwife episode '' episode 1 '' of series 2 , the midwives jenny , chummy , cynthia and trixie attended the cinema where they watch summertime for jenny 's birthday . see also . do i hear a waltz ? ( 1965 ) , a musical with a book by arthur laurents , music by richard rodgers , and lyrics by stephen sondheim . also adapted from laurents ' 1952 play the time of the cuckoo . list of american films of 1955 . references . external links . summertime an essay by david denby at the criterion collection