Dorestad

history . the township was established at the base of the former roman fortress of levefanum in the 7th century . the frankish carolingian empire and the frisians fought for control of the territory , until the franks gained control of the frisian coast in 719 . dorestad flourished between the 7th century and the mid-9th century . the settlement was well known for minting coins under the control of several frankish rulers . in the 7th century , it was clear that dorestad had the potential to become a major port . it was the meeting point for traders at the time . as a result , the franks and the frisians fought over control of the township . the franks won out at the end of the 7th century and closely monitored the growth of dorestad , which led to dorestad 's economic expansion via international trade and the establishment of a mint in the upper town . it is assumed that there was a toll as well as harbour fees , collected by the king 's representatives at dorestad . over time , many coins have been discovered in the dorestad area , supporting the idea of rapid growth and control of the harbour as well as the presence of a mint . many of the coins that have been discovered bear resemblance to other frankish coins of the period . the numismatic evidence supports the victory of the franks over the frisians . van der tuuk , lute . dorestad revealed . n.p . , 2010 . web . 1 nov . 2013 . it seems that the expansion of dorestad , lower town in particular , lasted until the early 9th century , when the strength of the international trade of luxury items was weakened by the rise of regional trade . the shift in the character of trade occurred as more and more trading towns popped up in the region . the franks seemed to be networking with byzantium and the muslim world . as the trade increased across the board , the franks required more trading settlements to support the economy . mccormick , michael . origins of the european economy . cambridge : cambridge university press , 2001 . 610-12 . print . as a result , the franks slowly lost interest in the town and granted the church of utrecht responsibility over a sizeable portion of dorestad . by expanding the power of the church , the local élite was weakened providing substantial security for the franks . it is generally believed that the township reached its peak around the 820s and the 830s and declined considerably thereafter . it is thought that the decline occurred because of viking raids as well as a decline in the economy . by the 830s , under the control of louis the pious , the expansion of the harbour had halted altogether , but coins continued to be minted for some time . a division occurred in the frankish empire , and louis the pious was removed from the throne by his son . however , lothair i was unable to protect dorestad and the other frankish territories from economic turmoil . as a result , louis the pious quickly took back dorestad and exiled his son to italy . at this time , two things occurred in dorestad that led to its eventual downfall . the first was that the franks lost even more interest in dorestad and as a result , even more control was transferred to the church . the second was that lothair i was stirring up trouble for the franks by encouraging viking raids on the frisian coast when he was exiled . between 834 and 839 , there were extensive raids . although dorestad was raided only once , in 834 , it seems that the town never fully recovered afterwards . to protect the frisian coastline , frankish kings enlisted the help of the danes and appointed haraldr junior and his brother , hroerekr , to protect the emporium . the franks allowed hroerekr to take control of the land as long as he protected the coast from viking invasions . the coast was battered by viking attacks , but it seems that dorestad was left relatively unscathed . the danish rulers held court on the coast for quite some time despite being not well liked by the people that they ruled . by the 9th century , it seems that the need for international trade was waning as regional trade gained importance . under danish control , dorestad became less significant . trading had slowed and now was almost nonexistent . the mint was shut down when hroerekr took control of the lands . as the settlement no longer held much economic or cultural significance . from around 840 , the threat of the vikings receded , as a truce was reached . the franks no longer needed the help of the danes and began to look for ways to dispose of them . that created conflict between the franks and the danes as hroerekr established a gang of men to attack the coast . in 846 , dorestad and two other settlements were plundered once again . while frankish defence was organized , that did not stop the danes from capturing dorestad and a large portion of the frisian coast in 850 . according to forte , oram , and pedersen , dorestad , '' . despite the slaughter and sack of the 830s seems quickly to have recovered its prosperity after each episode , and its disapperance in the 860s was a consequence of a shift in the course of the river channel along which its trade flowed rather than a result of viking raids . '' the site remained uninhabited from the later 9th until the construction of a keep , the nucleus of duurstede castle , in around 1270 , about 800 & nbsp ; m south of the old settlement . the modern settlement of wijk bij duurstede grew up around the castle , gaining city rights in 1300 . location . the main reason that dorestad grew to be a lively trade city ( emporium ) was because of its location . it was located at the crossing of two important river trade routes . along one route , dorestad was connected to the dutch mudflats and frisian area in the north of the netherlands via the kromme rijn , the utrechtse vecht and the almere lake . it was a connection of the german rhineland via the rhine with scandinavia and the baltic sea . the second trade route ran from the lek to the west coast and formed the connection between the rhineland and england . this route could also be used to reach the scheldt river , through which neustria could be reached . vikings . because of its wealth and success as a trade centre , dorestad got the attention of vikings in the 9th century . this resulted in large groups of vikings attacking and looting the city . the first attack took place in 834 and the last attack in 863 . landschap erfgoed utrecht . ( n.d . ) . verhaal . retrieved may 1 , 2020 , from the danish king sigfred felt threatened by the advancement of the franks under the leadership of charlemagne . charlemagne 's attempt to subject the saxons east of the elbe by annexing nordalbingia led to a feud between the factions of halfdan and godfred , two supposed sons of sigfred . the throne of denmark was briefly under control of the son of halfdan , harald klak , but he was driven away by the sons of godfred . the eldest son of louis the pious , lothair , made use of the services provided by the danish clan of the former king harald klak , who fled to francia in 814 . harald was a vassal of king louis with a place in saxony . in the year 819 harald became one of multiple kings in denmark by the hand of louis ' negotiations with the danes . in 826 harald and his clan were baptised in mainz , after which he received the east-frisian county rüstringen , of which the gaus östringen , wangerland , harlingerland and a part of norderland may have consisted . harald was driven from denmark and spent his last 25 years of his life in the county . when lothair got in a feud with his father louis over his reassignment of the empire in 829 , he gave orders to harald the younger , the nephew of harald klak , to make frisia an unviable asset to king louis by means of making crucial trade routes unsafe to travel and burning dorestad to the ground . this would stagnate the transport of goods to the main areas of francia , therefore forcing louis to admit to the demands of lothair . this resulted in dorestad undergoing many attacks and lootings until louis and lothair came to terms in worms in 839 . frisia got divided between lothair and his half-brother charles the bald , where the river meuse became the border . lothair gave dorestad to harald the younger and his brother rorik . with the treaty of verdun in 843 the feud between the brothers ended and the empire got divided once again , and lothair got to rule over all of frisia north of the schelde , which became part of middle francia . after the death of louis the pious in 840 a new feud developed between his three sons , but over in frisia , lothair had a strong position because of the danish warlords that were situated in rüstringen , dorestad and walcheren . the devastating effects of the civil wars were much worse than that of the 'modest ' viking attacks . the frisians and danes got along well , and went as far as to exchange goods . frisia stayed related to the heathen baltic sea culture , and felt threatened and repressed by the centralized way of leadership and the christian beliefs . the frisians did not defend walcheren when the danes attacked in 837 . the frisian count gerulf i of frisia in westergo was accused of neglect , but regained his possessions in 839 . tuuk , l . , 2013 . de friezen - de vroegste geschiedenis van het nederlandse kustgebied . 1st ed . utrecht : omniboek , pp.199 - 206 . ( see image ) . it was found in an old well in dorestad in 1969 . the valuable piece of jewellery may have been placed in the well to protect it from danger , for example the attacks of the vikings on dorestad . rijksmuseum van oudheden . excavation . to find out more about the settlement and its prominence in the early middle ages the site was excavated . some excavations took place in the middle of the nineteenth century and the finds from them are now in the rijksmuseum van oudheden and the british museum . british museum collection the most important findings were discovered during an excavation that took place between 1967 and 1977 . the early-medieval harbour of dorestad . n.p . , n.d . web . 1 nov . 2013 . about 30 hectare were exposed during the excavation and much was learned about the physical parameters of the settlement . it was discovered dorestad was situated one mile north of wijk bij duurstede and was approximately 3 square kilometres in size . this is considered a large settlement for the time period . it is believed that the settlement was separated into three districts : a harbour ( “ lower town ” ) , a trading centre located on the left bank ( “ upper town ” ) , and an agricultural area located further inland . upper and lower town were connected by a single road which acted as the ‘ backbone ’ of the town . the remnants of this road can still be seen today . only the '' lower town '' was excavated by archaeologists as much of dorestad was eroded away by the river bend . when the harbour was excavated the remains of wooden causeways which would have allowed for easy unloading of goods were discovered . these findings correlate to the development of trade on the rhine . it is believed that wine from the vineyards south of mainz was one of the most prominent products traded in dorestad . hodges , richard . mohammed , charlemagne & the origins of europe : archaeology and the pirenne thesis . n.p . : cornell university press , 1983 . 99-100 . google books . web . 1 nov . 2013 old wine barrels have been excavated in dorestad . it is also thought that glassware and lava querns for grinding corn were also transported to dorestad for trading . the existence of these imports allowed dorestad 's economy to grow substantially . while the '' upper town '' was never excavated , the soil of the site has been examined and tested positive for phosphates that confirm its existence . some carolingian artefacts have been found over the years in the trading centre ; however , the majority of items discovered date back to the roman fortress that was established prior to the 7th century . this may be because the residents of dorestad used the tufa blocks from the roman fortress as building material . it is thought that the royal administrators were situated in the upper town . the christian church was granted a piece of land in both the upper and lower town . next to the agricultural sector remains of a building were found as well as many graves . it is assumed that this area comprised the lower church . the conception of the upper and lower township is supported not only by archaeological evidence , but a poem was discovered by the english clergyman alcuin , written at the end of the 8th century , referring to the town as dorstada which is a pluralization of the name . : hinc tua vela leva , fugiens dorstada relinque : : non tibi forte niger hrotberct parat hospita tecta , : nec amat ecce tuum carmen mercator avarus . : hoist your sails , flee and leave behind the ( towns of ) dorestad : : you do not have the fortune of a hospitable roof offered by black hrotberct , : nor does the greedy merchant love your poem . see also . battle of dorestad quentovic . references .