Lanarkshire

administrative history . lanarkshire was historically divided between two administrative areas . in the mid-18th century it was divided again into three wards : the upper , middle and lower wards with their administrative centres at lanark , hamilton and glasgow , respectively , and remained this way until the local government act of 1889 . other significant settlements include coatbridge , east kilbride , motherwell , airdrie , blantyre , cambuslang , rutherglen , wishaw , bellshill , strathaven and carluke . in 1975 , the county council was abolished and the area absorbed into the larger strathclyde region , which itself was abolished when new council areas for scotland were introduced in 1996 . the old area of lanarkshire is now occupied by the council areas of : east dunbartonshire ( 1996–present ) glasgow city council ( 1996–present ) north lanarkshire ( 1996–present ) south lanarkshire ( 1996–present ) north lanarkshire and south lanarkshire have a joint board for valuation and electoral registration . there is also a joint health board , which does not cover rutherglen and the surrounding area in south lanarkshire . without the northern portion of north lanarkshire , this is also a lieutenancy area . coat of arms . lanarkshire was granted a coat of arms by the lord lyon on 24 december 1886 . the arms is : party per chevron gules and argent , two cinquefoils pierced in chief ermine , and in base a man 's heart counter-changed . the cinquefoils come from the arms of the clan hamilton , and the heart from the arms of the clan douglas , the two main local families . the crest is a demi-eagle displayed with two heads , sable beaked gules . the motto is vigilantia . . geography . lanarkshire occupies the strath of the river clyde , which crosses the county from the north-west to south-east . it is predominantly flat and agricultural , rising to the south with the lowther hills of the southern uplands , with culter fell on the border with peeblesshire being the highest point at 748 m ( 2,454 & nbsp ; ft ) . in the east a small portion of the pentland hills lie in the county , in the vicinity of tarbrax and dunsyre . in the far south lies the daer reservoir . northern lanarkshire is dominated by the greater glasgow , scotland 's largest city , though some small bodies of water can be found such as the roughrigg reservoir , lilly loch , hillend reservoir , forrestburn reservoir and black loch . rivers . north medwin river south medwin river river clyde river avon south calder water . mining industry . from the mid-eighteenth century to the early twentieth century lanarkshire profited from its rich seams of coal in places such as glenboig . as the coal industry developed around glasgow in the 1700s the price of coal to the city rose under the control of a cartel of coal owners . the solution was to carve out a canal to take advantage of the good ( and uncontrolled ) coal deposits of the monklands area . by 1793 , the monklands canal was completed and the lanarkshire coal industry thrived . the resulting boom lasted for over 100 years but reached its peak by the second decade of the twentieth century and even two world wars failed to halt the contraction . output in the county continued to fall and the national coal board concentrated investment in ayrshire , fife and the lothians . by 1970 there were only four collieries left in lanarkshire and the closure of cardowan in 1983 brought the long decline to an end . . transport . the m74 motorway links glasgow with carlisle and points further south , with the m8 linking the city to edinburgh . glasgow and the surrounding areas are well served by numerous roads and train lines . the west coast main line cuts north-south across the county and connects glasgow with manchester , birmingham and london . glasgow is also served by the glasgow subway . events . lanarkshire hosted the international children 's games in august 2011 . a total of 1,300 competitors and coaches , along with administrators and delegates , representing 77 cities from 33 countries worldwide attended . civil parishes . barony ( glasgow ) bothwell blantyre biggar cadder carmunnock cambusnethan carluke carstairs carnwath covington carmichael crawfordjohn crawford coulter dalziel dalserf dunsyre dolphinton douglas govan gorbals glasgow hamilton east kilbride lesmahagow lanark libberton lamington new monkland , airdrie old monkland pettinain royalty rutherglen shotts strathaven stonehouse symington wilston wiston and roberton . settlements . abington airdrie allanton anderston annathill ashgill auchengray auchenheath auchenshuggle auldhouse baillieston balornock bargeddie barlanark barmulloch bellahouston bellshill biggar birkenshaw birniehill bishopbriggs blackhill blackwood blantyre blythswood hill bogside bonkle bothwell braehead braidfauld braidwood bridgeton broomhill broomhouse budhill burnbank burnside busby cadder calderbank caldercruix caldermill calderwood calton cambuslang camlachie carnwath cardowan carfin carluke carmichael carmunnock carmyle carnbroe carntyne carstairs carstairs junction cartland castlemilk cessnock chapelhall chapelton chryston cleghorn cleland coalburn coatbridge college milton colston coulter cowcaddens cowlairs craigend craigton cranhill crawford crawfordjohn croftfoot crossford crutherland dalmarnock dalserf dennistoun dolphinton douglas dowanhill drumoyne drumsagard dumbreck dunsyre east crindledyke eastfield east kilbride east mains easterhouse easthall elsrickle fernhill ferniegair finnieston forrestfield forth gallowgate gardenhall garnethill garnkirk garrion bridge garrowhill gartcosh gartloch garthamlock germiston gilshochill glasgow glasgow harbour glassford glenboig glenmavis glespin gorbals govan govanhill greenfield greengairs greenhills haghill hairmyres halfwayhouse hamilton hamiltonhill harthope harthill hartwood hillhead hillhouse hogganfield holytown hutchesontown hyndland ibrox jackton kelvin kelvinbridge kelvindale kelvinside kilncadzow king 's park kinning park kingston kirkfieldbank kirkhill kirkmuirhill lambhill lamington lanark larkhall laurieston law leadhills lesmahagow lightburn lilybank lindsayfield linthouse longriggend luggiebank maryhill maryhill park millerston milton mollinsburn morningside moodiesburn mossend mossneuk motherwell mount vernon muirhead the murray nemphlar nerston netherburn new lanark new stevenston newarthill newbank newbigging newhouse newlandsmuir newmains newton north kelvinside oatlands overtown park district parkhead parkhouse parkhouse partick partickhill peel park pettinain philipshill plains plantation port dundas possilpark provanhall provanmill quarter queenslie quothquan ravenscraig ravenstruther riddrie rigside robertson robroyston rosebank royston ruchazie ruchill rutherglen st leonards salsburgh sandford sandyhills shettleston shieldhall shotts sighthill south busby springboig springburn springhill stand stepps stewartfield stonehouse strathaven summerston swinton symington tannochside tarbrax thankerton thorntonhall thornwood tillietudlem tollcross toryglen townhead tradeston uddingston viewpark the village wattston wellhouse westburn west mains westwood westwoodhill whitehills whiteinch whitlawburn wilsontown wishaw wiston woodlands woolfords yieldshields yorkhill file : airdrie.jpg airdrie file : carluke public park.jpg carluke file : view of glasgow from queens park.jpg glasgow file : new lanark buildings 2009.jpg new lanark . maps . digitised historic and modern maps of lanarkshire are available from national library of scotland including : glasgow and the county of lanark manuscript map drawn by scottish cartographer timothy pont sometime between 1583 and 1596 the nether ward of clyds-dail and glasco from the blaeu atlas of scotland by dutch cartographer joan blaeu published in 1654 a mape of the west of scotland containing clydsdail , nithsdail , ranfrew , shyre of ayre , & galloway manuscript map drawn by the scottish surveyor and map maker john adair in about 1685 map of the town of glasgow & country seven miles around by scottish cartographer thomas richardson published in 1795 ainslie 's map of the southern part of scotland by scottish cartographer john ainslie published in 1821 north and south of lanarkshire from john thomson 's atlas of scotland published in 1832 . references .