Zond 5

background . out of the first four circumlunar missions launched by the soviet union there was one partial success , zond 4 , and three failures . after 's mission in , a follow-up , zond 1968a , was launched on . the launch failed when an erroneous abort command shut down the proton rocket 's second stage . the escape rocket fired and pulled the descent module to safety . in july , zond 1968b was being prepared for launch when the second-stage rocket exploded on the launchpad , killing three people , but leaving the proton first-stage booster rocket and the spacecraft itself with only minor damage . the mission was originally planned to fly astronaut around the moon , but the failures of and led the soviets to send an uncrewed mission instead , from fear of the negative propaganda of an unsuccessful crewed flight . . payload . two russian tortoises ( agrionemys horsfieldii ) were included in the biological payload , weighing each pre-flight . soviet scientists chose tortoises since they were easy to tightly secure . there were also two tortoises used as control specimens and four more in a vivarium . twelve days before launch , the two space-bound tortoises were secured in the vehicle and deprived of food and water ; the control tortoises were similarly deprived . the food deprivation was a part of pathomorphological and histology experiments . the biological payload also included fruit fly eggs , cells of wheat , barley , pea , pine , carrots and tomatoes , specimens of the wildflower species tradescantia , three strains of the single-celled green algae chlorella , and one strain of lysogen . the purpose of sending a variety of terrestrial lifeforms was to test the effect of cosmic radiation on them . however , the test subjects were not analogous to humans , because the choice of life forms were all extremophiles with a substantially higher radioresistance . the russian academy of sciences stated that a mannequin equipped with radiation sensors occupied the pilot 's seat . kazan optical and mechanical plant had developed the afa-ba/40 imager , which was installed on the spacecraft , giving it the ability to image the earth . also contained proton detectors . could transmit some of its data back to ground stations , although data stored onboard and collected after return to earth has less noise . . mission . launch and trajectory . launched on at 9:42.10utc , from site 81 at the baikonur cosmodrome . the thrust of the third-stage rocket was terminated at , which was the start of a 251-second coast . , the upper-stage rocket , ignited and burned for 108 seconds , placing the spacecraft into a parking orbit of . fifty-six minutes into the parking orbit the fired a final time for the trans-lunar injection . after this maneuver , the launch was announced to the world . mission control discovered a problem with 's attitude and traced the cause to a contaminated star tracker . heat caused some of the interior coating to outgas , which delayed an attitude correction on the way to the moon . the maneuver was performed from earth using the sun and the earth as reference points . on , the spacecraft flew around the moon , although it did not orbit it . the closest distance was . on the way back from the moon , another star tracker failed . the spacecraft also erroneously switched off the guided reentry system . the soviet government had deployed eight ships to the indian ocean prior to the launch , as a precaution in case the spacecraft could not reach soviet territory ; only three of them had rescue helicopters on board . . reentry and recovery . on , the reentry capsule entered the earth 's atmosphere . the primary landing zone was in kazakhstan , but instead splashdown in the indian ocean and was recovered by the soviet vessels borovichy ( боровичи ) and vasiliy golovnin ( василий головнин ) . oleg pavlenko ( олег павленко ) , из истории морского космического флота . к 35-летию полета корабля « зонд-5 » ( from the history of the sea space fleet . on the 35th anniversary of the zond 5 mission ) ( includes photos of the reentry capsule recovery ) it landed at −32°38 ' latitude and 65°33 ' longitude , from the nearest soviet naval ship . the landing occurred at night , which impaired recovery efforts . became the first spacecraft to circle the moon and return to earth . the entire journey took 6days , 18hours and 24minutes . although the atmospheric entry would probably have been lethal for human occupants , it did not appear to affect the biological specimens , which were alive when the descent module was opened four days after landing . shadowed the soviet recovery ships , collecting intelligence , but left shortly after the spacecraft was brought on board the soviet ship . results and future plans . high-quality photographs of the earth , the first photos of their kind , were taken at a distance of . british astronomer bernard lovell , considered to be britain 's top space expert , said that the mission showed that the soviets were ahead in the space race . the british interplanetary society believed that the ussr would be able to send cosmonauts around the moon within a matter of months . in , sources in the u.s . claimed the mission was not as successful as the soviets advertised . the mission had been intended to fly closer to the moon , and its actual distance did not allow for useful lunar photography . they also said that the angle at which the spacecraft reentered the atmosphere was too steep for a cosmonaut to have survived . the sources indicated that the spacecraft landed in the indian ocean when the planned location was in soviet territory , which was a factor in the recovery taking ten hours . the official soviet news agency , tass , announced in that the flight had carried living animals . the tortoises were dissected on after fasting for 39days . the flying tortoises , identified as and , had lost 10 % of their body weight during the trip , but showed no loss of appetite . the control tortoises lost 5 % of their weight . comparison of analyses of blood from the space-travelling tortoises and the control specimens revealed no differences . another analysis showed the flying tortoises had elevated iron and glycogen levels in their liver and that the flight also affected the internal structures of their spleens . the authors concluded that the changes in the flight tortoises were primarily due to starvation , with the space travel having little effect . in , it was announced that the spacecraft was planned as a precursor to a crewed lunar spacecraft . the soviets made this announcement a month before the planned apollo 8 flight , in an attempt to show they were close to being able to carry out a crewed trip to the moon . . cosmonaut crew communications test/hoax . the zond 5 caused a scare in the united states when on 19 september 1968 , the voices of cosmonauts valery bykovsky , vitaly sevastyanov and pavel popovich were transmitted from the spacecraft and intercepted by jodrell bank observatory and the cia . the cosmonauts were apparently reading out telemetry data and computer readings , and even discussing making an attempt to land . at the height of the cold war , there was a real concern that the soviets might actually beat nasa to the moon . apollo 17 astronaut eugene cernan remarked that the incident had '' shocked the hell out of us . '' popovich would later recall : '' when we realized we would never make it to the moon , we decided to engage in a little bit of hooliganism . we asked our engineers to link the on-the-probe receiver to the transmitter with a jumper wire . moon flight missions were then controlled from a command centre in yevpatoria , in the crimea . when the probe was on its path round the moon , i was at the center . so i took the mike and said : '' the flight is proceeding according to normal ; we ’ re approaching the surface . '' seconds later my report – as if from outer space – was received on earth , including by the americans . the u.s . space advisor frank borman got a phone call from president nixon actually johnson , who asked : '' why is popovich reporting from the moon ? '' my joke caused real turmoil . in about a month ’ s time . frank came to the ussr , and i was instructed to meet him at the airport . hardly had he walked out of his plane when he shook his fist at me and said : '' hey , you , space hooligan ! '' . location . the return capsule is on display at the rkk energiya museum , located in moscow oblast , russia . . see also . animals in space fe , fi , fo , fum , and phooey , five mice who orbited the moon 75 times in december 1972 , while traveling on nasa 's apollo 17 mission . notes . references . . external links . zond 5 image of earth