Blue Nile

course . the distance of the river from its source to its confluence , has been variously reported as being between and . this uncertainty might result from the fact that the river flows through a series of virtually impenetrable gorges cut in the ethiopian highlands to a depth of some —a depth comparable to that of the grand canyon of the colorado river in the united states . according to materials published by the central statistical agency , the blue nile has a total length of , of which are inside ethiopia . '' climate , 2008 national statistics ( abstract ) '' , table a.1 . central statistical agency website ( accessed 26 december 2009 ) . ethiopia . the blue nile originates at lake tana in ethiopia ( where it is called the abay river ) . the river flows generally south before entering a canyon about long , about from lake tana , which is a tremendous obstacle for travel and communication between north and south ethiopia . the canyon was first referred to as the '' grand canyon '' in 1968 by a british team that accomplished the first descent of the river from lake tana to the end of the canyon ; subsequent river rafting parties called it the '' grand canyon of the nile '' . the blue nile falls ( amharic : tis abay , literally '' great smoke '' ) , one of ethiopia 's biggest tourist attractions , is located at the start of the canyon . the river loops across northwest ethiopia , before being fed by numerous tributaries between lake tana and the sudanese border . those on its left bank , in downstream order , include the wanqa river , the bashilo river , the walaqa river , the wanchet river , the jamma river , the muger river , the guder river , the agwel river , the nedi river , the didessa river and the dabus river . those on the right side , also in downstream order , include the handassa , tul , abbaya , sade , tammi , cha , shita , suha , muga , gulla , temcha , bachat , katlan , jiba , chamoga , weter and the beles . . sudan . alt the blue nile then heads northwest into sudan . it travels for approximately , flowing past er roseires and receiving the dinder river on its right bank at dinder . at khartoum , the blue nile joins the white nile and , as the nile , flows through egypt to the mediterranean sea at alexandria . source . although there are several feeder streams that flow into lake tana , the sacred source of the river is generally considered to be a small spring at gish abay , situated at an elevation of approximately , known as the gilgel abay ( lesser abay river ) . other affluents of this lake include the magech river , the northern gumara , the reb river , the southern gumara river , and the kilte . these lists are based on the compilation in g.w.b . huntingford , historical geography of ethiopia from the first century ad to 1704 ( london : british academy , 1989 ) , p . 34 . water flow . alt the flow of the blue nile reaches maximum volume in the rainy season from june to september , when it supplies 8086 % of the water of the nile proper . the river was a major source of the flooding of the nile in egypt that contributed to the fertility of the nile valley and the consequent rise of ancient egypt and egyptian mythology . with the completion of the aswan dam in 1970 , these floods stopped occurring in lower egypt . during the summer monsoon season , the blue nile floods erode a vast amount of fertile soil from the ethiopian highlands and carry it downstream as silt , turning the water dark brown or almost black . the blue nile is vital to the livelihood of egypt : as the most significant tributary of the nile , it contributes over 85 % of the nile 's streamflow . mohamed helmy mahmoud moustafa elsanabary though shorter than the white nile , 59 % of the water that reaches egypt originates from the ethiopian highlands via the blue nile . the river is also an important resource for sudan , where the roseires dam and sennar dams produce 80 % of the country 's power . these dams also help irrigate the gezira scheme , which is most famous for its high-quality cotton , as well as wheat and animal feed crop production in the area . in november 2012 , ethiopia began construction of the grand ethiopian renaissance dam , a 6000-megawatt hydroelectric dam on the river . the dam is expected to be a boost for the ethiopian economy . sudan and egypt , however , voiced their concerns over a potential reduction in water available . . european exploration . the first european to have seen the blue nile in ethiopia and the river 's source was pedro páez , a spanish jesuit who reached the river 's source on 21 april 1618 . r . e . cheesman , geographical journal , 71 ( 1928 ) , p . 361 however , the portugal joão bermudes , the self-described '' patriarch of ethiopia , '' provided the first description of the tis abay river falls in his memoirs published in 1565 , and a number of europeans who lived in ethiopia in the late 15th century such as pêro da covilhã could have seen the river long before páez , but not reached its source . the source of the nile proper was also reached in 1629 by the portuguese jesuit missionary jerónimo lobo and in 1770 by the scottish explorer james bruce . although a number of european explorers contemplated tracing the course of the nile from the blue nile 's confluence with the white nile to lake tana , its gorge , which begins a few kilometres inside the ethiopian border , has discouraged all attempts since frédéric cailliaud 's attempt in 1821 . the first serious attempt by a non-local to explore this reach of the river was undertaken by the american w.w . macmillan in 1902 , assisted by the norway explorer b.h . jenssen ; jenssen would proceed upriver from khartoum while macmillan sailed downstream from lake tana . however , jenssen 's boats were blocked by the rapids at famaka short of the sudan-ethiopia border , and macmillan 's boats were wrecked shortly after they had been launched . macmillan encouraged jenssen to try to sail upstream from khartoum again in 1905 , but he was forced to stop short of lake tana . alan moorehead , the blue nile , revised edition ( new york : harper and row , 1972 ) , pp . 319f r.e . cheesman , who records his surprise on arriving in ethiopia at finding that the upper waters of '' one of the most famous of the rivers of the world , and one whose name was well known to the ancients '' was in his lifetime '' marked on the map by dotted lines '' , managed to map the upper course of the blue nile between 1925 and 1933 . he did this not by following the river along its banks and through its impassable canyon , but following it from the highlands above , travelling some by mule in the adjacent country . cheesman , pp . 358–374 . in the 1950s and 1960s , several kayakers paddled parts of the canyon . in 1968 , at the request of haile selassie , a team of 60 british and ethiopian servicemen and scientists made the first full descent of the river from lake tana to a point near the sudanese border led by explorer john blashford-snell . snailham , richard . 1970 . the blue nile revealed . london : chatto and windus . the team used specially-built avon inflatables and modified royal engineers assault boats to navigate the formidable rapids . subsequent rafting expeditions in the 1970s and 1980s generally only covered parts of the river canyon . in 1999 , writer virginia morell and photographer nevada wier made the journey by raft from lake tana to the sudan , publishing a documentary about their journey afterwards . in 2000 , american and national geographic reader , kenneth frantz , saw a photo taken by nevada wier for national geographic which would lead him to found the charity bridges to prosperity . this photo showed a bridge broken during world war ii , with 10 men on either side of the broken span pulling each other across the dangerous gap by rope . this historic bridge was built by emperor fasilides in approximately 1660 with roman bridge technology brought to ethiopia by portuguese soldiers during the battle with the muslim invaders in 1507 . in both 2001 and 2009 , bridges to prosperity volunteers travelled from the united states to repair the broken bridge across the blue nile and later built a new suspension bridge not susceptible to flood . on 28 april 2004 , geologist pasquale scaturro and his partner , kayaker and documentary filmmaker gordon brown , became the first known people to navigate the blue nile . though their expedition included a number of others , brown and scaturro were the only ones to remain on the expedition for the entire journey . they chronicled their adventure with an imax camera and two handheld video cams , sharing their story in the film mystery of the nile and in a book of the same title . richard bangs and pasquale scaturro , mystery of the nile . new york : new american library , 2005 on 29 january 2005 , canadian les jickling and his teammate new zealander mark tanner completed the first fully human-powered transit of the entire blue nile and nile in the sudan and egypt . their journey of over took five months and travelled through ethiopia , sudan and egypt . they recount that they paddled through civil war conflict zones , regions known for bandits , and encountered multiple hazards and rapids . . see also . battakhin list of rivers of ethiopia list of rivers of sudan nile white nile . references . external links . the tana project paddling the blue nile