Bosnian language

gallery . file : nauk krstjanski za narod slovinski - divković ( 1611 ) . jpg nauk krstjanski za narod slovinski , by matija divković , the first bosnian printed book . published in venice , 1611 file : bosnian dictionary by muhamed hevaji uskufi bosnevi in 1631.jpg bosnian dictionary by muhamed hevaji uskufi bosnevi , 1631 file : free will and acts of faith wdl2986.pdf the free will and acts of faith , manuscript from the early 19th century file : bosnian book of the science of conduct wdl7479.pdf the bosnian book of the science of conduct by 'abdulvehab žepčevi , 1831 file : bosnian grammar for high schools . parts 1 and 2 , study of voice and form wdl7482.pdf bosnian grammar , 1890 . controversy and recognition . the name '' bosnian language '' is a controversial issue for some croats and serbs , who also refer to it as the '' bosniak '' language / ; . bosniak linguists however insist that the only legitimate name is '' bosnian '' language , and that that is the name that both croats and serbs should use . the controversy arises because the name '' bosnian '' may seem to imply that it is the language of all bosnians , while bosnian croats and serbs reject that designation for their idioms . the language is called bosnian language in the 1995 dayton accords and is concluded by observers to have received legitimacy and international recognition at the time . the international organization for standardization ( iso ) , united states board on geographic names ( bgn ) , and the permanent committee on geographical names ( pcgn ) recognize the bosnian language . furthermore , the status of the bosnian language is also recognized by bodies such as the united nations , unesco , and translation and interpreting accreditation agencies , including internet translation services . most english-speaking language encyclopedias ( routledge , glottolog , ethnologue , etc . ) bernard comrie ( ed . ) : the world 's major languages . second edition . routledge , new york/london , 2009 register the language solely as '' bosnian '' language . the library of congress registered the language as '' bosnian '' and gave it an iso-number . the slavic language institutes in english-speaking countries offer courses in '' bosnian '' or '' bosnian/croatian/serbian '' language , not in '' bosniak '' language ( e.g . columbia , cornell , chicago , washington , kansas ) . the same thing in german-speaking countries , where the language is taught under the name , not ( e.g . vienna , graz , trier ) with very few exceptions . some croatian linguists ( zvonko kovač , ivo pranjković , josip silić ) support the name '' bosnian '' language , whereas others ( radoslav katičić , dalibor brozović , tomislav ladan ) hold that the term bosnian language is the only one appropriate and that accordingly the terms bosnian language and bosniak language refer to two different things . the croatian state institutions , such as the central bureau of statistics , use both terms : '' bosniak '' language was used in the 2001 census , central bureau of statistics of the republic of croatia census of 2001 , population by native language while the census in 2011 used the term '' bosnian '' language . the majority of serbian linguists hold that the term bosniak language is the only one appropriate , which was agreed as early as 1990 . svein mønnesland , » language policy in bosnia-herzegovina « , ( pp 135–155 . ) . in : language : competence–change–contact sprache : kompetenz – kontakt – wandel , edited by : annikki koskensalo , john smeds , rudolf de cillia , ángel huguet ; berlin ; münster : lit verlag , 2012 . , , p . 143 . '' already in 1990 the committee for the serbian language decided that only the term 'bosniac language ' should be used officially in serbia , and this was confirmed in 1998 . '' the original form of the constitution of the federation of bosnia and herzegovina called the language '' bosniac language '' , until 2002 when it was changed in amendment xxix of the constitution of the federation by wolfgang petritsch . the original text of the constitution of the federation of bosnia and herzegovina was agreed in vienna , and was signed by krešimir zubak and haris silajdžić on march 18 , 1994 . the constitution of , the serb-dominated entity within bosnia and herzegovina , did not recognize any language or ethnic group other than serbian . bosniaks were mostly expelled from the territory controlled by the serbs from 1992 , but immediately after the war they demanded the restoration of their civil rights in those territories . the bosnian serbs refused to make reference to the bosnian language in their constitution and as a result had constitutional amendments imposed by high representative wolfgang petritsch . however , the constitution of refers to it as the language spoken by bosniaks , because the serbs were required to recognise the language officially , but wished to avoid recognition of its name . serbia includes the bosnian language as an elective subject in primary schools . montenegro officially recognizes the bosnian language : its 2007 constitution specifically states that although montenegrin is the official language , serbian , bosnian , albanian and croatian are also in official use . see art . 13 of the constitution of the republic of montenegro , adopted on 19 october 2007 , available at the website of the ministry of justice of the republic of montenegro . historical usage of the term . in the work skazanie izjavljenno o pismeneh that was written between 1423 and 1426 , the bulgarian chronicler constantine of kostenets , in parallel with the bulgarian , serbian , slovenian , czech and croatian , he also mentions the bosnian language . the notary book of the town of kotor from july 3 , 1436 recounts a duke buying a girl that is described as a : '' bosnian woman , heretic and in the bosnian language called djevena '' . aleksandar solovjev , trgovanje bosanskim robljem do god . 1661 . - glasnik zemaljskog muzeja , n . s . , 1946 , 1 , 151 . the work thesaurus polyglottus , published in frankfurt am main in 1603 by the german historian and linguist hieronymus megiser , mentions the bosnian dialect alongside the dalmatian , croatian and serbian one . v . putanec , leksikografija , enciklopedija jugoslavije , v , 1962 , 504 . the bosnian franciscan matija divković , regarded as the founder of the modern literature of bosnia and herzegovina , asserts in his work '' nauk krstjanski za narod slovinski '' ( '' the christian doctrine for the slavic peoples '' ) from 1611 his '' translation from latin to the real and true bosnian language '' ( '' a privideh iz dijačkog u pravi i istinit jezik bosanski '' ) bosniak poet and arebica writer muhamed hevaji uskufi bosnevi who refers to the language of his 1632 dictionary magbuli-arif as bosnian . one of the first grammarians , the jesuit clergyman bartol kašić calls the language used in his work from 1640 ritual rimski ( roman rite ) as naški ( '' our language '' ) or bosanski ( '' bosnian '' ) . he used the term '' bosnian '' even though he was born in a chakavian region : instead he decided to adopt a '' common language '' ( lingua communis ) based on a version of shtokavian ikavian . vatroslav jagić , iz prošlost hrvatskog jezika . izabrani kraći spisi . zagreb , 1948 , 49 . the italian linguist jakov mikalja ( 1601–1654 ) who states in his dictionary blagu jezika slovinskoga ( thesaurus lingue illyricae ) from 1649 that he wants to include '' the most beautiful words '' adding that '' of all illyrian languages the bosnian is the most beautiful '' , and that all illyrian writers should try to write in that language . 18th century bosniak chronicler mula mustafa bašeskija who argues in his yearbook of collected bosnian poems that the '' bosnian language '' is much richer than the arabic , because there are 45 words for the verb '' to go '' in bosnian . the venetian writer , naturalist and cartographer alberto fortis ( 1741–1803 ) calls in his work viaggio in dalmazia ( travels into dalmatia ) the language of morlachs as illyrian , morlach and bosnian . the croatian writer and lexicographer matija petar katančić published six volumes of biblical translations in 1831 described as being '' transferred from slavo-illyrian to the pronunciation of the bosnian language '' . croatian writer matija mažuranić refers in the work pogled u bosnu ( 1842 ) to the language of bosnians as illyrian ( a 19th-century synonym to south slavic languages ) mixed with turkish words , with a further statement that they are the speakers of the bosniak language . the bosnian franciscan ivan franjo jukić states in his work zemljopis i poviestnica bosne ( 1851 ) that bosnia was the only turkish land ( i.e . under the control of the ottoman empire ) that remained entirely pure without turkish speakers , both in the villages and so on the highlands . further he states '' . a language other than the bosnian is not spoken in bosnia , the greatest turkish i.e . muslim gentlemen only speak turkish when they are at the vizier '' . ivan kukuljević sakcinski , a 19th-century croatian writer and historian , stated in his work putovanje po bosni ( travels into bosnia ) from 1858 , how the 'turkish ' ( i.e . muslim ) bosniaks , despite converting to the muslim faith , preserved their traditions and the slavic mood , and that they speak the purest variant of the bosnian language , by refusing to add turkish word to their vocabulary . . differences between bosnian , croatian and serbian . the differences between the bosnian , serbian , and croatian literary standards are minimal . although bosnian employs more turkish , persian , and arabic loanwords—commonly called orientalisms— mainly in its spoken variety , it is very similar , to both serbian and croatian in its written and spoken form . '' lexical differences between the ethnic variants are extremely limited , even when compared with those between closely related slavic languages ( such as standard czech and slovak , bulgarian and macedonian ) , and grammatical differences are even less pronounced . more importantly , complete understanding between the ethnic variants of the standard language makes translation and second language teaching impossible . '' the bosnian language , as a new normative register of the shtokavian dialect , was officially introduced in 1996 with the publication of in sarajevo . according to that work , bosnian differed from serbian and croatian on some main linguistic characteristics , such as : sound formats in some words , especially '' h '' versus serbian ; substantial and deliberate usage of oriental ( '' turkish '' ) words ; spelling of future tense as in croatian but not serbian ( both forms have the same pronunciation ) . 2018 , in the new issue of , words without '' h '' are accepted due to their prevalence in language practice . ( 6-13 minute )