Hylomorphism

matter and form . aristotle defines x 's matter as '' that out of which '' x is made . physics 194b23-24 for example , letters are the matter of syllables . physics 195a16 thus , '' matter '' is a relative term : physics 194b9 an object counts as matter relative to something else . for example , clay is matter relative to a brick because a brick is made of clay , whereas bricks are matter relative to a brick house . change is analyzed as a material transformation : matter is what undergoes a change of form . robinson 18-19 for example , consider a lump of bronze that 's shaped into a statue . bronze is the matter , and this matter loses one form ( morphe ) ( that of a lump ) and gains a new form ( that of a statue ) . physics 195a6-8 metaphysics 1045a26-29 according to aristotle 's theory of perception , we perceive an object by receiving its form ( eidos ) with our sense organs . on the soul 424a19 thus , forms include complex qualia such as colors , textures , and flavors , not just shapes . on the soul 418a11–12 . substantial form , accidental form , and prime matter . medieval philosophers who used aristotelian concepts frequently distinguished between substantial forms and accidental forms . a substance necessarily possesses at least one substantial form . it may also possess a variety of accidental forms . for aristotle , a '' substance '' ( ousia ) is an individual thing—for example , an individual man or an individual horse . categories 2a12-14 the substantial form of substance s consists of s 's essential properties , cross 34 the properties that s 's matter needs in order to be the kind of substance that s is . kenny 24 in contrast , s 's accidental forms are s 's non-essential properties , cross 94 properties that s can lose or gain without changing into a different kind of substance . kenny 24 in some cases , a substance 's matter will itself be a substance . if substance a is made out of substance b , then substance b is the matter of substance a . however , what is the matter of a substance that is not made out of any other substance ? according to aristotelians , such a substance has only '' prime matter '' as its matter . prime matter is matter with no substantial form of its own . leftow 136-37 thus , it can change into various kinds of substances without remaining any kind of substance all the time . kenny 25 . body–soul hylomorphism . basic theory . aristotle applies his theory of hylomorphism to living things . he defines a soul as that which makes a living thing alive . on the soul 413a20-21 life is a property of living things , just as knowledge and health are . on the soul 414a3-9 therefore , a soul is a form—that is , a specifying principle or cause—of a living thing . on the soul 412a20 , 414a15-18 furthermore , aristotle says that a soul is related to its body as form to matter . on the soul 412b5-7 , 413a1-3 , 414a15-18 hence , aristotle argues , there is no problem in explaining the unity of body and soul , just as there is no problem in explaining the unity of wax and its shape . 412b5-6 just as a wax object consists of wax with a certain shape , so a living organism consists of a body with the property of life , which is its soul . on the basis of his hylomorphic theory , aristotle rejects the pythagorean doctrine of metempsychosis , ridiculing the notion that just any soul could inhabit just any body . on the soul 407b20-24 , 414a22-24 according to timothy robinson , it is unclear whether aristotle identifies the soul with the body 's structure . robinson 45-47 according to one interpretation of aristotle , a properly organized body is already alive simply by virtue of its structure . robinson 46 however , according to another interpretation , the property of life—that is , the soul—is something in addition to the body 's structure . robinson uses the analogy of a car to explain this second interpretation . a running car is running not only because of its structure but also because of the activity in its engine . robinson 46 likewise , according to this second interpretation , a living body is alive not only because of its structure but also because of an additional property : the soul , which a properly organized body needs in order to be alive . robinson 47 john vella uses frankenstein 's monster to illustrate the second interpretation : vella 92 the corpse lying on frankenstein 's table is already a fully organized human body , but it is not yet alive ; when frankenstein activates his machine , the corpse gains a new property , the property of life , which aristotle would call the soul . living bodies . some scholars have pointed out a problem facing aristotle 's theory of soul-body hylomorphism . shields , aristotle 290-93 according to aristotle , a living thing 's matter is its body , which needs a soul in order to be alive . similarly , a bronze sphere 's matter is bronze , which needs roundness in order to be a sphere . now , bronze remains the same bronze after ceasing to be a sphere . therefore , it seems that a body should remain the same body after death . shields , aristotle 291 however , aristotle implies that a body is no longer the same body after death . on the soul 412b19-24 moreover , aristotle says that a body that has lost its soul is no longer potentially alive . 412b15 but if a living thing 's matter is its body , then that body should be potentially alive by definition . one approach to resolving this problem shields , aristotle 293 relies on the fact that a living body is constantly replacing old matter with new . a five-year-old body consists of different matter than does the same person 's seventy-year-old body . if the five-year-old body and the seventy-year-old body consist of different matter , then what makes them the same body ? the answer is presumably the soul . because the five-year-old and the seventy-year-old bodies share a soul—that is , the person 's life—we can identify them both as the body . apart from the soul , we can not identify what collection of matter is the body . therefore , a person 's body is no longer that person 's body after it dies . another approach to resolving the problem shields , '' a fundamental problem '' relies on a distinction between '' proximate '' and '' non-proximate '' matter . when aristotle says that the body is matter for a living thing , he may be using the word '' body '' to refer to the matter that makes up the fully organized body , rather than the fully organized body itself . unlike the fully organized body , this '' body '' remains the same thing even after death . in contrast , when he says that the body is no longer the same after its death , he is using the word '' body '' to refer to the fully organized body . intellect . aristotle says that the intellect ( nous ) , the ability to think , has no bodily organ ( in contrast with other psychological abilities , such as sense-perception and imagination ) . on the soul 429a26-27 aristotle distinguishes between two types of intellect . on the soul 15-25 these are traditionally called the '' passive intellect '' and the '' active intellect '' . robinson 50 he says that the '' active intellect '' is not mixed with the body on the soul 429a24-25 and suggests that it can exist apart from it . on the soul 413b24-26 , 429b6 in his metaphysics book xll , he equates the active nous with the unmoved mover , of the universe , the cosmic nous , which is an idea already present in the texts of plato . the passive nous is like clay ; it can become anything and is subject to change . the function of the active nous is to give form to the passive nous . aristotle opposed plato 's idea that the soul carries memories of previous lives with it and attributed the faculty of memory to the passive nous , which , by the virtue of being subject to change , can die . according to one interpretation , a person 's ability to think ( unlike his other psychological abilities ) belongs to some incorporeal organ distinct from his body . caston , '' aristotle 's psychology '' 337 this would amount to a form of dualism . caston , '' aristotle 's psychology '' 337 however , according to some scholars , it would not be a full-fledged cartesian dualism . shields , '' some recent approaches '' 165 this interpretation creates what robert pasnau has called the '' mind-soul problem '' : if the intellect belongs to an entity distinct from the body , and the soul is the form of the body , then how is the intellect part of the soul ? pasnau 160 another interpretation rests on the distinction between the passive intellect and the agent intellect . according to this interpretation , the passive intellect is a property of the body , while the agent intellect is a substance distinct from the body . mcevilley 534 vella 110 some proponents of this interpretation think that each person has his own agent intellect , which presumably separates from the body at death . caston , '' aristotle 's two intellects '' 207 vella 110 others interpret the agent intellect as a single divine being , perhaps the unmoved mover , aristotle 's god . caston , '' aristotle 's psychology '' 339 caston , '' aristotle 's two intellects '' 199 a third interpretation shields , '' soul as subject '' relies on the theory that an individual form is capable of having properties of its own . shields , '' soul as subject '' 142 according to this interpretation , the soul is a property of the body , but the ability to think is a property of the soul itself , not of the body . if that is the case , then the soul is the body 's form and yet thinking need not involve any bodily organ . shields , '' soul as subject '' 145 . universal hylomorphism . the neoplatonic philosopher solomon ibn gabirol proposed a neoplatonic version of this aristotelian concept , according to which all things , including soul and intellect , are composed of matter and form . . medieval modifications . medieval theology , newly exposed to aristotle 's philosophy , applied hylomorphism to christian doctrines such as the transubstantiation of the eucharist 's bread and wine into the body and blood of jesus . theologians such as duns scotus and thomas aquinas developed christian applications of hylomorphism . plurality vs . unity of substantial form . many medieval theologians and philosophers followed aristotle in seeing a living being 's soul as that being 's form—specifically , its substantial form . however , they disagreed about whether x 's soul is x 's only substantial form . some medieval thinkers argued that x 's soul is x 's only substantial form , responsible for all of the features of x 's body . kenny 26 in contrast , other medieval thinkers argued that a living being contains at least two substantial forms— ( 1 ) the shape and structure of its body , and ( 2 ) its soul , which makes its body alive . cross 70 . thomistic hylomorphism . thomas aquinas claimed that x 's soul was x 's only substantial form , although x also had numerous accidental forms that accounted for x 's nonessential features . stump , '' resurrection , reassembly , and reconstitution : aquinas on the soul '' 161 aquinas defined a substantial form as that which makes x 's matter constitute x , which in the case of a human being is reason . leftow , '' soul , mind , and brain '' 397 he attributed all other features of a human being to accidental forms . stump , '' resurrection , reassembly , and reconstitution : aquinas on the soul '' 165 however , aquinas did not claim that the soul was identical to the person . eberl 340 he held that a proper human being is a composite of form and matter , specifically prime matter . form and matter taken separately may retain some of the attributes of a human being but are nonetheless not identical to that person . eberl 341 so a dead body is not actually or potentially a human being . stump , '' resurrection , reassembly , and reconstitution : aquinas on the soul '' 161 eleonore stump describes aquinas ' theory of the soul in terms of '' configuration '' . the body is matter that is '' configured '' , i.e . structured , while the soul is a '' configured configurer '' . in other words , the soul is itself a configured thing , but it also configures the body . stump , '' non-cartesian substance dualism and materialism without reductionism '' 514 a dead body is merely matter that was once configured by the soul . it does not possess the configuring capacity of a human being . aquinas believed that rational capacity was a property of the soul alone , not of any bodily organ . stump , '' non-cartesian substance dualism and materialism without reductionism '' 512 however , he did believe that the brain had some basic cognitive function . stump , '' non-cartesian substance dualism and materialism without reductionism '' 512 aquinas ’ attribution of rational capacity to the soul allowed him to claim that disembodied souls could retain their rational capacity , although he was adamant that such a state was unnatural . stump , '' non-cartesian substance dualism and materialism without reductionism '' 519 . teleology and ethics . aristotle holds a teleology worldview : he sees the universe as inherently purposeful . basically , aristotle claims that potentiality exists for the sake of actuality . irwin 237 thus , matter exists for the sake of receiving its form , metaphysics 1050a15 and an organism has sight for the sake of seeing . irwin 237 now , each thing has certain potentialities as a result of its form . because of its form , a snake has the potential to slither ; we can say that the snake ought to slither . the more a thing achieves its potential , the more it succeeds in achieving its purpose . aristotle bases his ethics theory on this teleological worldview . because of his form , a human being has certain abilities . hence , his purpose in life is to exercise those abilities as well and as fully as possible . nichomachean ethics 1098a16-18 now , the most characteristic human ability , which is not included in the form of any other organism , is the ability to think . nichomachean ethics 1098a1-5 therefore , the best human life is a life lived rationally . nichomachean ethics 1098a7-8 . modern physics . the idea of hylomorphism can be said to have been reintroduced to the world when werner heisenberg invented his duplex world of quantum mechanics . in his 1958 text physics and philosophy , heisenberg states : a hylomorphic interpretation of bohmian mechanics has been suggested , in which the cosmos is a single substance that is composed of both material particles and a substantial form . . see also . endurantism hyle hylozoism inherence materialism moderate realism substance theory substantial form tripartitism vitalism . notes . sources . aristotle . metaphysics nichomachean ethics on the soul . physics caston , victor . '' aristotle 's psychology '' . a companion to ancient philosophy . ed . mary gill and pierre pellegrin . hoboken : wiley-blackwell , 2006 . 316-46 . '' aristotle 's two intellects : a modest proposal '' . phronesis 44.3 ( 1999 ) : 199-227 . cross , richard . the physics of duns scotus . oxford : oxford up , 1998 . eberl , jason t . '' aquinas on the nature of human beings . '' the review of metaphysics 58.2 ( november 2004 ) : 333-65 . gilson , etienne . the philosophy of st . bonaventure . trans . f . j . sheed . ny : sheed & ward , 1938 . irwin , terence . aristotle 's first principles . oxford : oxford up , 1990 . keck , david . angels & angelology in the middle ages . ny : oxford up , 1998 . kenny , anthony . aquinas on mind . london : routledge , 1993 . leftow , brian . '' souls dipped in dust . '' soul , body , and survival : essays on the metaphysics of human persons . ed . kevin corcoran . ny : cornell up , 2001 . 120-38 . '' soul , mind , and brain . '' the waning of materialism . ed . robert c . koons and george bealer . oxford : oxford up , 2010 . 395-417 . mcevilley , thomas . the shape of ancient thought . ny : allworth , 2002 . mendell , henry . '' aristotle and mathematics '' . stanford encyclopedia of philosophy . 26 march 2004 . stanford university . 2 july 2009 < normore , calvin . '' the matter of thought '' . representation and objects of thought in medieval philosophy . ed . henrik lagerlund . hampshire : ashgate , 2007 . 117-133 . pasnau , robert . thomas aquinas on human nature . cambridge : cambridge up , 2001 . robinson , timothy . aristotle in outline . indianapolis : hackett , 1995 . simondon , gilbert ( 2003 ) . l ’ individuation à la lumière des notions de forme et d ’ information 1958 . paris : jérôme millon . shields , christopher . '' a fundamental problem about hylomorphism '' . stanford encyclopedia of philosophy . stanford university . 29 june 2009 < aristotle . london : routledge , 2007 . '' some recent approaches to aristotle 's de anima '' . de anima : books ii and iii ( with passages from book i ) . trans . w.d . hamlyn . oxford : clarendon , 1993 . 157-81 . '' soul as subject in aristotle 's de anima '' . classical quarterly 38.1 ( 1988 ) : 140-49 . stump , eleanore . '' non-cartesian substance dualism and materialism without reductionism . '' faith and philosophy 12.4 ( october 1995 ) : 505-31 . '' resurrection , reassembly , and reconstitution : aquinas on the soul . '' die menschliche seele : brauchen wir den dualismus . ed . b . niederbacher and e . runggaldier . frankfurt , 2006 . 151-72 . vella , john . aristotle : a guide for the perplexed . ny : continuum , 2008 . external links . hylomorphism ( philosophy ) -- encyclopædia britannica