Battle of White Mountain

prelude . in the early 17th century most of the bohemian estates , although under the dominion of the predominantly roman catholic holy roman empire , had large protestant populations , and had been granted rights and protections allowing them varying degrees of religious and political freedom . in 1617 , as the health of emperor matthias deteriorated , his cousin ferdinand – a fiercely devout roman catholic and proponent of the counter-reformation – was named his successor as holy roman emperor and king of bohemia . this led to deep consternation among many bohemian protestants , who feared not only the loss of their properties , but also of their traditional semi-autonomy , under which many of the estates had separate , individual constitutions governing their relationship with the empire , and where the king was elected by the local leaders . johnson , lonnie . central europe enemies , neighbours , friends . new york : oxford up , 1996 . print . ferdinand ( who would become emperor ferdinand ii following matthias ' death in 1619 ) saw protestantism as inimical to the empire , and wanted to impose absolutist rule on bohemia while encouraging conversion to the catholic faith . he also hoped to reclaim church properties which had been seized by protestants at the start of the reformation decades earlier , and to do away with the electorate - the body of princes who chose the holy roman emperor and who had considerable power over imperial policy . particularly galling to protestants were perceived violations of emperor rudolf ii 's 1609 letter of majesty , which had ensured religious freedom throughout bohemia . helfferich , tryntje . the thirty years war : a documentary history . indianapolis : hackett company , inc . , 2009 . print . in may , 1618 , wanting to air their grievances over this and other issues , a group of bohemian noblemen met representatives of the emperor at the prague castle ; the meeting ended with two of the representatives and their scribe being thrown out a high window and seriously injured . this incident , known as the second defenestration of prague , triggered the bohemian revolt . guthrie , william p . battles of the thirty years war from white mountain to nordlingen , 1618–1635 . westport , ct : greenwood , 2001 . print . in november 1619 , elector palatine frederick v , who like many of the rebels was a calvinist , was chosen as king of bohemia by the bohemian electorate . battle . in 1620 , now fully established as emperor , ferdinand ii set out to conquer bohemia and make an example of the rebels . king frederick and his military commander , prince christian of anhalt , had organized a protestant army of 30,000 men ; ferdinand countered with a force of 25,000 , many of them seasoned soldiers , under the capable leadership of field marshal tilly , a roman catholic spanish-flemish nobleman . tilly 's army enjoyed the advantage of including two successful military leaders - tilly himself and the future general wallenstein . tilly 's force was made up of two distinct groups : imperial troops commanded by charles bonaventure de longueval , count of bucquoy , and soldiers of the german catholic league , directly under tilly . all of the armies of the day employed numerous mercenaries , including , by some definitions , tilly himself . serving with the catholic league as an official observer was the future '' father of modern philosophy '' , rené descartes . after conquering most of western bohemia , the imperial army made for prague , the bohemian capital , then in rebel hands . the bohemians attempted to block them by setting up defensive positions , which the imperial army simply bypassed . force-marching his men , christian of anhalt managed to get ahead of the imperial army just before prague . he thus gained an advantageous position on the '' white mountain '' , actually a low plateau , but had little time to set up defensive works . enthusiasm for joining battle was low on both sides . after the reverses of the previous several weeks , christian of anhalt 's army had been reduced to about 15,000 men , with little prospect of victory ; the mercenaries on both sides had not been paid in months ; and with winter approaching , cold , wet , weather made for less than ideal combat conditions . on 8 november a small imperial force was sent to probe the protestant flank . to their surprise , the bohemians retreated at their advance . tilly quickly sent in reinforcements , and the bohemian flank began to crumble . anhalt tried to relieve the situation by sending forward infantry and cavalry led by his son christian ii . the cavalry charged into the imperial infantry , causing significant casualties , but tilly countered with his own cavalry , forcing the bohemian horsemen to retire . the bohemian infantry , who were only now approaching the imperial army , saw the cavalry retreating , at which they fired one volley at extreme range before retreating themselves . a small group of imperial cavalry began circling the protestant forces , driving them to the middle of the battlefield . with the bohemian army already demoralized , company after company began retreating , most without having actually entered the battle . tilly and his imperial cavalrymen advanced with 2,000 bavarian hussars , steadily pushing protestant forces back to the star palace ( just west of prague ) , where the rebels tried without success to establish a line of defense . the bohemian army was no match for the emperor ferdinand 's troops . the actual battle lasted only an hour and left the bohemian army in tatters . some 4,000 protestants were killed or captured , while imperial losses amounted to only about 700 . guthrie , william p . battles of the thirty years war from white mountain to nordlingen , 1618–1635 . westport , ct : greenwood , 2001 . print . file : white mountain plan.jpg plan of the battle from theatrum europaeum : bohemians above , imperial and bavarian forces below file : battle of white mountain ( 1620 ) -nl.svg battle of white mountain ( 1620 ) . aftermath . with the bohemian army destroyed , tilly entered prague and the revolt collapsed . king frederick fled the country with his wife elizabeth ( hence his nickname the winter king ) . forty-seven leaders of the insurrection were put on trial , and twenty-seven of them were executed in prague 's old town square on what came to be called the '' old town square execution '' . amongst those executed were kryštof harant and jan jesenius . today , 27 crosses have been laid into the cobblestones as a tribute to those victims . an estimated five-sixths of the bohemian nobility went into exile soon after the battle of white mountain , and their properties were confiscated . consequences of czech defeat , u.s . library of congress there remained a strong protestant army in silesia under the command of johann georg von brandenburg , duke of krnov , which continued fighting the imperial army in moravia and in what today is slovakia until 1623 . in 1621 , the emperor ordered all calvinists and other non-lutherans to leave the realm in three days or to convert to roman catholicism . in 1622 , he forbade practice of the lutheran faith . in 1626 , he ordered all lutherans ( most of whom had not been involved in the revolt ) to convert or else leave the country . by 1627 , archbishop harrach of prague and jaroslav borzita of martinice set out to convert the heretics , as they were termed , by peaceful means ; most bohemians converted , but a significant protestant minority remained . spanish troops , seeking to encircle their rebellious dutch provinces , seized the palatinate lands . with the prospect of protestantism being overrun in germany , denmark entered the struggle . sweden was to join the protestant forces in 1630 . before the war about 151,000 farmsteads existed in the lands of the bohemian crown , while by the year 1648 only 50,000 remained . at the same time the number of inhabitants decreased from three million to only 800,000 . the kingdom of bohemia during the thirty years´ war the result of the 1620 battle brought two centuries of recatholicization of the czech lands and the decline of the czech-speaking aristocracy and elite as well as the czech language ( accompanied with the growing influence of german-speaking elites ) , a process that was slowed by the czech national revival starting in the late 18th century . czech nationalist historians and writers such as alois jirásek have referred to the 17th and 18th century in the czech lands as the dark age . file : tribute to the 27 victims.jpg the 27 tributary crosses file : stevens p . maria vítězná.jpg painting celebrating the catholic victory , by anton stevens ( c . 1610–1675 ) . in the upper part there is our lady of victory surrounded by saints ; in the lower left-hand corner there is the victorious emperor ferdinand ii with his son ferdinand iii and the bohemian lion . . see also . letohrádek hvězda . references . sources . the history of the thirty years war by friedrich schiller luca cristini , 1618–1648 la guerra dei 30 anni . volume 1 da 1618 al 1632 2007 luca cristini , 1618–1648 la guerra dei 30 anni . volume 2 da 1632 al 1648 2007 bohemia in history . cambridge , u.k : cambridge up , 1998 . print . helfferich , tryntje . the thirty years war : a documentary history . indianapolis : hackett company , inc . , 2009 . print . josef v . polisensky , thirty years war , university of california press ( june 1971 ) ; la guerra dei trent'anni : da un conflitto locale a una guerra europea nella prima metà del seicento - torino : einaudi , 1982 . tomáš kleisner , giovanni pietro de pomis medal of the battle of the white mountain . external links . bellum.cz – '' battle of white mountain 8th november 1620 ''