Hookah

names and etymology . in the indian subcontinent , the hindustani word huqqa ( devanagari : हुक़्क़ा , nastaleeq : is used and is the origin of the english word '' hookah '' . the widespread use of the indian word '' hookah '' in the english language is a result of the colonization in british india ( 1858–1947 ) , when large numbers of expatriate britons first sampled the water pipe . william hickey , shortly after arriving in calcutta , india , in 1775 , wrote in his memoirs : : :the most highly-dressed and splendid hookah was prepared for me . i tried it , but did not like it . as after several trials i still found it disagreeable , i with much gravity requested to know whether it was indispensably necessary that i should become a smoker , which was answered with equal gravity , '' undoubtedly it is , for you might as well be out of the world as out of the fashion . here everybody uses a hookah , and it is impossible to get on without . i have frequently heard men declare they would much rather be deprived of their dinner than their hookah . '' , forvo - pronunciation in arabic is the name most commonly used in lebanon , syria , palestine , jordan , azerbaijan , uzbekistan , kuwait and iraq , while nargilah , is the name most commonly used in israel . it derives from nārgil , which in turn comes from the sanskrit word nārikela , meaning coconut , suggesting that early hookahs were hewn from coconut shells . in persian , it is known as qalyān . in serbia , bosnia and herzegovina , north macedonia , greece , turkey and bulgaria , ( наргиле ) or ( наргила ) is used to refer to the pipe , while šiša ( шиша ) refers to شیشه ( šiše ) meaning glass bottle in persian . the pipes there often have one or two mouth pieces . the flavored tobacco , created by marinating cuts of tobacco in a multitude of flavored molasses , is placed above the water and covered by pierced foil with hot coals placed on top , and the smoke is drawn through cold water to cool and filter it . in albania , the hookah is called '' lula '' or '' lulava '' . in romania , it is called narghilea . '' narguile '' is the common word in spain used to refer to the pipe , although '' cachimba '' is also used , along with '' shisha '' by moroccan immigrants in spain . the word '' narguilé '' is used in portuguese . , from the turkish word şişe meaning '' glass bottle , '' is the common term for the hookah in egypt , sudan and countries of the former ottoman empire such as arab peninsula ( including kuwait , bahrain , qatar , oman , uae , yemen and saudi arabia ) , and in algeria , morocco , tunisia and somalia . in yemen , the term is also used , but for pipes using pure tobacco . in persia , hookah is called '' qalyān '' ( ) . persian qalyan is included in the earliest european compendium on tobacco , the tobacologia written by johan neander and published in dutch in 1622 . it seems that over time water pipes acquired a persian connotation as in eighteenth-century egypt the most fashionable pipes were called karim khan after the persian ruler of the day . this is also the name used in ukraine , russia and belarus . in uzbekistan and afghanistan , a hookah is called . in kashmir , hookah is called '' jajeer '' . in maldives , hookah is called '' guduguda '' . in germany , austria and switzerland , hookah is called '' shisha '' . in the philippines , hookah is called '' hitboo '' and normally used in smoking flavored marijuana . the hookah pipe is also known as the '' marra pipe '' in the uk , especially in the north east , where it is used for recreational purposes . in sindhi , another language of south asia , it is called huqqo / . in vietnam , hookah is called hookah shisha ( bình shisha ) and shisha is called '' shisha tobacco '' ( thuốc shisha ) . . history . in the indian city of fatehpur sikri , roman catholic missionaries of the society of jesus arriving from the south india of the country introduced tobacco to the mughal emperor akbar the great ( 1542–1605 ad ) . louis rousselet writes that the physician of akbar , hakim aboul futteh ghilani , then invented the hookah in india . however , a quatrain of ahli shirazi ( d . 1535 ) , a persian poet , refers to the use of the ḡalyān ( falsafī , ii , p . & nbsp ; 277 ; semsār , 1963 , p . & nbsp ; 15 ) , thus dating its use at least as early as the time of the shah tahmasp i . it seems , therefore , that abu ’ l-fath gilani should be credited with the introduction of the ḡalyān , already in use in persia , into india . there is , however , no evidence of the existence of the water pipe until the 1560s . moreover , tobacco is believed to have arrived in india in the 17th century , until then cannabis was smoked in india , so that suggests another substance was probably smoked in ahlī shirazi 's quatrain , perhaps through some other method . following the european introduction of tobacco to persia and india , hakim abu ’ l-fath gilani , who came from gilan , a province in the north of persia , migrated to hamarastan . he later became a physician in the mughal court and raised health concerns after smoking tobacco became popular among indian noblemen . he subsequently envisaged a system that allowed smoke to be passed through water in order to be 'purified' . gilani introduced the ḡalyān after asad beg , the ambassador of bijapur , encouraged akbar i to take up smoking . following popularity among noblemen , this new device for smoking soon became a status symbol for the indian aristocracy and gentry . . modern development . instead of copper , brass , and low quality alloys , manufacturers increasingly use stainless steel and aluminium . silicone rubber compounds are used for hookah hoses instead of leather and wire . new materials make modern hookahs more durable , eliminate odors while smoking and allow washing without risks of corrosion or bacterial decay . new technologies and modern design trends are changing the appearance of hookahs . despite the obvious benefits of modern hookahs , because of high production cost and lack of modern equipment in traditional hookah manufacturing regions , most hookahs are still produced with older technologies . culture . south asia . . india . the concept of hookah is thought to have originated in medieval india . once the province of the wealthy , it was tremendously popular especially during mughal rule . the hookah has since become less popular ; however , it is once again garnering the attention of the masses , and cafés and restaurants that offer it as a consumable are popular . the use of hookahs from ancient times in india was not only a custom , but a matter of prestige . rich and landed classes would smoke hookahs . tobacco is smoked in hookahs in many villages as per traditional customs . smoking tobacco-molasses is now becoming popular among the youth in india . there are several chain clubs , bars and coffee shops in india offering a wider variety of , including non-tobacco versions . hookah was recently banned in bangalore . however , it can be bought or rented for personal usage or organized parties . koyilandy , a small fishing town on the west coast of india , once made and exported hookahs extensively . these are known as koyilandy koyilandy hookahs . today these intricate hookahs are difficult to find outside koyilandy and are becoming difficult even to find in koyilandy itself . as hookah resurges in india , there have been numerous raids and bans recently on hookah smoking , especially in gujarat . . pakistan . although it has been traditionally prevalent in rural areas for generations , smoking hookahs has become very popular in the cosmopolitan cities of pakistan . one can see many cafés in pakistan offering hookah smoking to its guests . many households even have hookahs for smoking or decoration purposes . in punjab , pakhtunkhwa , and in northern balochistan , the topmost part on which coals are placed is called chillum . in big cities like karachi and lahore , cafes and restaurants offered hookah and charged per hour . in 2013 , it was banned by the pakistan supreme court . the cafe owners started offering shisha to minors , which was the major reason for the ban . . bangladesh . the hookah has been a traditional smoking instrument in bangladesh , particularly among the old bengali muslim zamindar gentry . however , flavoured shisha was introduced in the early 2000s . hookah lounges spread quite quickly between 2008 and 2011 in urban areas and became popular among young people as well as middle-aged people as a relaxation method . there have been allegations of a government crack-down on hookah bars to prevent illicit drug usage . the hookah is also an electoral symbol for a candidate used first in the 1973 bangladeshi general election . in the biography of mountstuart elphinstone , it is mentioned that james achilles kirkpatrick had a hookah-bardar ( hookah servant/preparer ) during his time in the indian subcontinent . kirkpatrick 's hookah servant is said to have robbed and cheated kirkpatrick , making his way to england and stylising himself as the prince of sylhet . the man , presumably of sylheti origin , was waited upon by the prime minister of great britain william pitt the younger , and then dined with the duke of york before presenting himself in front of george iii . . nepal . hookahs ( हुक़्क़ा ) , especially wooden ones , are popular in nepal . use of hookahs has been usually considered to symbolize an elite family status in nepali history . nowadays , the cities of kathmandu , pokhara and dharan sport special 'hookah bars ' . although hookahs have started becoming popular among younger people and tourists , the overall number of 'hookah-smokers ' is likely dwindling owing to the widespread availability of cheaper cigarettes . . middle east . in the arab world and the middle east , people smoke waterpipes as part of their culture and traditions . local names of waterpipe in the middle east are , argila , čelam/čelīm , ḡalyān or ghalyan , ḥoqqa , nafas , nargile , and shisha . social smoking is done with a single or double hose hookah , and sometimes even triple or quadruple hose hookahs are used at parties or small get-togethers . when the smoker is finished , s/he either places the hose back on the table , signifying that it is available , or hands it from one user to the next , folded back on itself so that the mouthpiece is not pointing at the recipient . most cafés in the middle east offer shishas . cafés are widespread and are among the chief social gathering places in the arab world ( akin to public houses in britain ) . . persia . the exact date of the first use of ḡalyān in persia is not known . however , the earliest known literary evidence of the hookah , anywhere , comes in a quatrain by ahlī shirazi ( d . 1535 ) , a persian poet , referring to the use of the ḡalyān , falsafī , ii , p . & nbsp ; 277 ; semsār , 1963 , p . & nbsp ; 15 thus dating its use at least as early as the time of the shah tahmasp i . this suggests , the hookah was already in use in ancient persia , and it made its way into india soon afterward . although the safavid shah ʿabbās i strongly condemned tobacco use , towards the end of his reign smoking ḡalyān and čopoq ( q.v . ) had become common on every level of the society , women included . in schools , both teachers and students had ḡalyāns while lessons continued . falsafī , ii , pp . & nbsp ; 278–80 shah safi of persia ( r . 1629–42 ) declared a complete ban on tobacco , but the income received from its use persuaded him to soon revoke the ban . the use of ḡalyāns became so widespread that a group of poor people became professional tinkers of crystal water pipes . during the time of abbas ii of persia ( r . 1642–1666 ) , use of the water pipe had become a national addiction . chardin , tr . , ii , p . & nbsp ; 899 the shah ( king ) had his own private ḡalyān servants . evidently the position of water pipe tender ( ḡalyāndār ) dates from this time . also at this time , reservoirs were made of glass , pottery , or a type of gourd . because of the unsatisfactory quality of indigenous glass , glass reservoirs were sometimes imported from venice . chardin , tr . , ii , p . & nbsp ; 892 in the time of suleiman i of persia ( r . 1694–1722 ) , ḡalyāns became more elaborately embellished as their use increased . the wealthy owned gold and silver pipes . the masses spent more on ḡalyāns than they did on the necessities of life . tavernier apud semsār , 1963 , p . & nbsp ; 16 an emissary of sultan husayn ( r . 1722–32 ) to the court of louis xv of france , on his way to the royal audience at versailles , had in his retinue an officer holding his ḡalyān , which he used while his carriage was in motion . herbette , tr . p . & nbsp ; 7 ; kasrawī , pp . & nbsp ; 211–12 ; semsār , 1963 , pp . & nbsp ; 18–19 we have no record indicating the use of ḡalyān at the court of nader shah , although its use seems to have continued uninterrupted . there are portraits of karim khan of the zand dynasty of iran and fat′h-ali shah qajar that depict them smoking the ḡalyān . iranians have a special tobacco called khansar ( خانسار , presumably name of the origin city , khvansar ) . the charcoals would be put on the khansar without foil . . saudi arabia . saudi arabia is in the process of implementing general smoking bans in public places . this includes shishas . additionally , the city of riyadh has banned shisha cafes within city limits . syria . although perceived to be an important cultural feature of syria ( see smoking in syria ) , narghile had declined in popularity during most of the twentieth century and was used mostly by older men . similar to other middle eastern countries , its use increased dramatically during the 1990s , particularly among youth and young adults . as of 2004 , prior to the syrian civil war , 17 % of 18- to 29-year-olds , 10 % of 30- to 45-year-olds , and 6 % of 46- to 65-year-olds reported using narghile , and use was higher in men than women . more recent data is not available . turkey . nargile became part of turkish culture from the 17th century . back then , it became prominent in society and was used as a status symbol . nargile was such an important turkish custom that it even sparked a diplomatic crisis between france and the ottoman empire . western turkey is noted for its traditional pottery production where potters make earthenware objects , including nargile bowls . . southeast asia . in southeast asia , the hookah , where it is predominantly called shisha , was particularly used within the arab and indian communities . hookah was virtually unknown in southeast asia before the latter 20th century , yet the popularity among contemporary younger people is now vastly growing . southeast asia 's most cosmopolitan cities , makati , bangkok , singapore ( now banned ) , phnom penh , siem reap , hanoi and ho chi minh city , now have various bars and clubs that offer hookahs to patrons . although hookah use has been common for hundreds of years and enjoyed by people of all ages , it has recently started to become a youth peoples ' pastime in asia . hookahs are most popular with college students , and youth , who may be underage and thus unable to purchase cigarettes . . kenya . the hookah is called shisha in kenya . they are officially banned in the country . despite this , many clubs still continue to defy the law and hookah smoking goes on in urban areas . nairobians smoking shisha despite ban has the ban on shisha really worked . south africa . in south africa , hookah , colloquially known as a hubbly bubbly or an okka pipe , is popular among the cape malay and indian populations , wherein it is smoked as a social pastime . however , hookah is seeing increasing popularity with south africans , especially the youth . bars that additionally provide hookahs are becoming more prominent , although smoking is normally done at home or in public spaces such as beaches and picnic sites . in south africa , the terminology of the various hookah components also differ from other countries . the clay '' head/bowl '' is known as a '' clay pot '' . the hoses are called '' pipes '' and the air release valve is known as a '' clutch '' . the windcover ( which is considered optional for outside use is known as an '' as-jas '' , which directly translates from afrikaans to english as an '' ash-jacket '' . also , making/preparing the '' clay pot '' is commonly referred to as '' racking the hubbly '' . some scientists point to the marijuana pipe as an african origin of hookah . '' the mysterious origins of the hookah ( narghile ) '' the sacred narghile . united states and canada . during the 1960s and 1970s , hookahs were a popular tool for the consumption of various derivations of tobacco , among other things . at parties or small gatherings the hookah hose was passed around with users partaking as they saw fit . typically , though , open flames were used instead of burning coals . today , hookahs are readily available for sale at smoke shops and some gas stations across the united states , along with a variety of tobacco brands and accessories . in addition to private hookah smoking , hookah lounges or bars have opened in cities across the country . recently , certain cities , counties , and states have implemented indoor smoking bans . in some jurisdictions , hookah businesses can be exempted from the policies through special permits . some permits , however , have requirements such as the business earning a certain minimum percentage of their revenue from alcohol or tobacco . in cities with indoor smoking bans , hookah bars have been forced to close or switch to tobacco-free mixtures . in many cities though , hookah lounges have been growing in popularity . from the year 2000 to 2004 , over 200 new hookah cafés opened for business , most of them targeted at young adults lyon , lindsay '' the hazard in hookah smoke '' . ( 28 january 2008 ) and located near college campuses or cities with large middle-eastern communities . this activity continues to gain popularity within the post-secondary student demographic . hookah use among high school students declined from 9.4 % to 3.4 % from 2014 to 2019 while cigarette smoking decreased from 9.2 % to 5.8 % during this same time period , according to the us cdc . according to a 2018 study , 1.1 % of students with some college but no degree , an associate degree or an undergraduate degree reported waterpipe or pipe tobacco product use either every day or some days . as of november 2017 , at least 2,082 college or university campuses in the u.s . have adopted 100 % smokefree campus policies that attempt to eliminate smoking in indoor and outdoor areas across the entire campus , including residences . . structure and operation . components . excluding grommets , a hookah consists of a number of components , four of which are essential for its operation . bowl . also known as the head of the hookah , the bowl is a container , usually made out of clay , marble , or glass that holds the coal and tobacco during the smoking session . the bowl is loaded with tobacco then covered by a screen or perforated aluminum foil . lit coals are then placed on top , which allows the tobacco to heat to the proper temperature . hookah bowls can often be made out of various fruits . by cutting in half a pineapple for example . the fruit is hollowed out and perforated in order to achieve the same shape and system a clay bowl has , then it is loaded and used in the same manner . bowls have evolved in recent years to incorporate new designs that keep juices in the tobacco from running down the stem . the tangiers phunnel bowl and sahara smoke vortex bowl are two examples of such bowls . wind cover . a hookah wind cover is a cover that sits over the bowl area , with some form of air holes . this prevents wind from increasing the burn rate and temperature of the coal , and prevents ash and burning embers from being blown onto the surrounding environment . this may also offer some limited protection from fire as it may prevent the coal from being ejected if the hookah is bumped . hose . the hose ( one or more ) is a slender flexible tube that allows the smoke to be drawn for a distance , cooling down before inhalation . the end is typically fitted with a metal , wooden , or plastic mouthpiece of different shapes , size , color or material type . today , the hose proper is typically made from vinyl which allows it to be easily cleaned . according to j . s . gamble in a manual of indian timbers in 1902 ( p . & nbsp ; 668 ) , the bark of the white himalayan birch betula utilis ssp . jacquemontii was used to make early hookah tubes . purge valve . many hookahs are equipped with a purge valve connected to the airspace in the water jar to purge stale smoke that has been sitting unused in the jar for too long . this one-way valve is typically a simple ball bearing sitting over a port that seals the port by gravity alone and will open if positive pressure is created by blowing into the hose . the bearing is held captive with a screw-on cover . the cover should be opened and the bearing and seat cleaned of residue and corrosion regularly to ensure proper sealing . water base . the body of the hookah sits on top of the water base , or sometimes referred to as vase . the downstem hangs down below the level of the water in the jar . smoke passes through the body and out the downstem where it bubbles through the water . this cools and humidifies the smoke . liquids such as fruit juice may be added to the water or used in substitution . pieces of fruit , mint leaves , and crushed ice may be added . plate . a plate or ashtray sits just below the bowl to catch ashes falling off the coals . grommets . grommets in a hookah are usually placed between the bowl and the body , between the body 's gasket and the water jar , and between the body and the hose . the grommets , although not essential ( the use of paper or tape has become common ) , will help to seal the joints between the parts , therefore decreasing the amount of air coming in and maximizing the smoke breathed in . diffuser . a piece attached to the bottom of the stem , usually made of plastic and in a grid pattern , to make a smoother smoke and a subdued noise . by breaking the naturally larger bubbles coming up the water from the pipe into smaller bubbles , it lowers the amount of suction or '' pull '' needed to continue bringing smoke to the chamber . this also cools the smoke down more efficiently . it is used as a luxury item used for a better smoking experience and is not a required component . hmd an hmd ( known as a heat management device ) is generally a metal contraption placed on top of the foil or directly onto the shisha/tobacco , used to contain coals and heat the tobacco evenly . hmds can be used with or instead of foil and make the smoking process less variable on the heat distribution . consumable items . mu ‘ assel . tobacco or mu ‘ assel ( arabic : معسل , which means '' honeyed '' ) , also sometimes called shisha in places where it does not refer to the hookah itself , is a syrupy tobacco mix with molasses and vegetable glycerol as moisturizer and specific flavors added to it . typical flavors of mu ‘ assel include apple , grape , guava , lemon , mint , as well as many other fruit-based mixes . non-tobacco-based mu'assel is also available in certain areas where tobacco smoking is not allowed . charcoal . charcoal is the source of energy to produce heat that will be transferred to the tobacco inside the bowl . since the glycerol is used to moisturize the tobacco , then to produce smoke , the charcoal should be able to generate heat above the boiling point of glycerol that is 290 & nbsp ; °c . therefore , charcoal for hookah smoking must be hard , high density , easy to ignite , and burn longer with persistent heat . . operation . the jar at the bottom of the hookah is filled with water sufficient to submerge a few centimeters of the body tube , which is sealed tightly to it . deeper water will only increase the inhalation force needed to use it . tobacco or tobacco-free molasses are placed inside the bowl at the top of the hookah . often the bowl is covered with perforated tin foil or a metal screen and coal placed on top . the foil or screen separates the coal and the tobacco , with the foil and the tobacco reaching maximum temperatures of 450 and 130 degrees celsius respectively . these temperatures are too low to sustain combustion and considerably lower than the 900 degrees celsius found in cigarettes . a larger fraction of the smoke condensates of the hookah are produced by simple distillation rather than by pyrolysis and combustion , and as a result , would tend to carry considerably less of the pyrosynthesized compounds found in cigarette smoke . as a result of suction through the hose , a vacuum is created in the headspace of the water bowl sufficient to overcome the small static head of the water above the inlet pipe , causing the smoke to bubble into the bowl . at the same time , air is drawn over and heated by the coals . it then passes through the tobacco mixture where due to hot air convection and thermal conduction from the coal , the mainstream aerosol is produced . the vapor is passed down through the body tube that extends into the water in the jar . it bubbles up through the water , losing heat , and fills the top part of the jar , to which the hose is attached . when a user inhales from the hose , smoke passes into the lungs , and the change in pressure in the jar pulls more air through the charcoal , continuing the process . vapour that has collected in the bowl above the waterline may be exhausted through a purge valve , if present . this one-way valve is opened by the positive pressure created from gently blowing into the hose . health effects . exposure to toxic chemicals . hookah smoke contains toxic chemicals , including carcinogens ( chemicals that cause cancer ) . compared to smoking one cigarette , a single hookah session exposes users to more carbon monoxide and pahs , similar levels of nicotine , and lower levels of tobacco-specific nitrosamines . because of inhaling these chemicals , hookah smokers are at increased risk of many of the same health problems as cigarette smokers . . exposure to pathogens that cause infectious diseases . when people share a hookah , there is a risk of spreading infectious diseases such as oral herpes , tuberculosis , hepatitis , influenza , and h . pylori . using personal disposable mouthpieces may reduce this risk , but does not eliminate it . . addiction to and dependence on hookah . hookah smokers inhale nicotine , which is an addictive chemical . a typical hookah smoking session delivers 1.7 times the nicotine dose of one cigarette . short-term health effects . carbon monoxide ( co ) in hookah smoke binds to hemoglobin in the blood to form carboxyhemoglobin , which reduces the amount of oxygen that can be transported to organs including the brain . there are several case reports in the medical literature of hookah smokers needing treatment in hospital emergency rooms for symptoms of co poisoning including headache , nausea , lethargy , and fainting . . long-term health effects . current evidence indicates hookah may cause numerous health problems . hookah smoking appears to increase the risk of several cancers ( lung , esophageal , and gastric ) , pulmonary diseases ( impaired pulmonary function , chronic bronchitis , and emphysema ) , coronary artery disease , periodontal disease , obstetrical and perinatal problems ( low birth weight and pulmonary problems at birth ) , larynx and voice changes , and osteoporosis . many of the studies to date have methodological limitations , such as not measuring hookah use in a standardized way . larger , high quality studies are needed to learn more about the long-term health effects of hookah use and of exposure to hookah smoke . . effects of secondhand exposure to hookah smoke . second-hand smoke from hookahs contains significant amounts of carbon monoxide , aldehydes , pahs , ultrafine particles , and respirable particulate matter ( particles small enough to enter the lungs ) . study have found that concentrations of particulate matter in the air of hookah bars were in the unhealthy to hazardous range according to environmental protection agency standards . hookah bar employees , who often are exposed to toxic air for extended amounts of time , may be at especially high risk of health problems from secondhand smoke . see also . bong electronic hookah incense one-hitter ( smoking ) thuoc lao water pipe percolator . references . external links . who report on water pipe ( hookah ) , by who study group on tobacco product regulation ( tobreg ) . scientific evidence of the health risks of hookah smoking ( university of maryland , college park : 9 june 2008 , vol 17 , issue 23 )