Stamen

morphology and terminology . a stamen typically consists of a stalk called the filament and an anther which contains sporangium . most commonly anthers are two-lobed and are attached to the filament either at the base or in the middle area of the anther . the sterile tissue between the lobes is called the connective , an extension of the filament containing conducting strands . it can be seen as an extension on the dorsal side of the anther . a pollen grain develops from a microspore in the microsporangium and contains the male gametophyte . the stamens in a flower are collectively called the androecium . the androecium can consist of as few as one-half stamen ( i.e . a single locule ) as in canna species or as many as 3,482 stamens which have been counted in the saguaro ( carnegiea gigantea ) . charles e . bessey in science vol . 40 ( november 6 , 1914 ) p . 680 . the androecium in various species of plants forms a great variety of patterns , some of them highly complex . sattler , r . 1973 . organogenesis of flowers . a photographic text-atlas . university of toronto press . sattler , r . 1988 . a dynamic multidimensional approach to floral morphology . in : leins , p . , tucker , s . c . and endress , p . ( eds ) aspects of floral development . j . cramer , berlin , pp . 1-6 . greyson , r . i . 1994 . the development of flowers . oxford university press . leins , p . and erbar , c . 2010 . flower and fruit . schweizerbart science publishers , stuttgart . it generally surrounds the gynoecium and is surrounded by the perianth . a few members of the family triuridaceae , particularly lacandonia schismatica , are exceptional in that their gynoecia surround their androecia . etymology . stamen is the latin word meaning '' thread '' ( originally thread of the warp , in weaving ) . filament derives from classical latin filum , meaning '' thread '' lewis , c.t . & short , c . ( 1879 ) . a latin dictionary founded on andrews ' edition of freund 's latin dictionary . oxford : clarendon press . anther derives from french anthère , klein , e . ( 1971 ) . a comprehensive etymological dictionary of the english language . dealing with the origin of words and their sense development thus illustration the history of civilization and culture . amsterdam : elsevier science b.v . from classical latin anthera , meaning '' medicine extracted from the flower '' siebenhaar , f.j . ( 1850 ) . terminologisches wörterbuch der medicinischen wissenschaften . ( zweite auflage ) . leipzig : arnoldische buchhandlung . saalfeld , g.a.e.a . ( 1884 ) . tensaurus italograecus . ausführliches historisch-kritisches wörterbuch der griechischen lehn- und fremdwörter im lateinischen . wien : druck und verlag von carl gerold 's sohn , buchhändler der kaiserl . akademie der wissenschaften . in turn from ancient greek ἀνθηρά , feminine of ἀνθηρός meaning '' flowery '' , liddell , h.g . & scott , r . ( 1940 ) . a greek-english lexicon . revised and augmented throughout by sir henry stuart jones . with the assistance of . roderick mckenzie . oxford : clarendon press . from ἄνθος meaning '' flower '' androecium ( plural androecia ) derives from ancient greek ἀνήρ meaning '' man '' , and οἶκος meaning '' house '' or '' chamber/room '' . . variation in morphology . depending on the species of plant , some or all of the stamens in a flower may be attached to the petals or to the floral axis . they also may be free-standing or fused to one another in many different ways , including fusion of some but not all stamens . the filaments may be fused and the anthers free , or the filaments free and the anthers fused . rather than there being two locules , one locule of a stamen may fail to develop , or alternatively the two locules may merge late in development to give a single locule . pages 553–555 extreme cases of stamen fusion occur in some species of cyclanthera in the family cucurbitaceae and in section cyclanthera of genus phyllanthus ( family euphorbiaceae ) where the stamens form a ring around the gynoecium , with a single locule . . pollen production . a typical anther contains four microsporangia . the microsporangia form sacs or pockets ( locules ) in the anther ( anther sacs or pollen sacs ) . the two separate locules on each side of an anther may fuse into a single locule . each microsporangium is lined with a nutritive tissue layer called the tapetum and initially contains diploid pollen mother cells . these undergo meiosis to form haploid spores . the spores may remain attached to each other in a tetrad or separate after meiosis . each microspore then divides mitotically to form an immature gametophyte called a pollen . the pollen is eventually released when the anther forms openings ( dehisces ) . these may consist of longitudinal slits , pores , as in the erica family ( ericaceae ) , or by valves , as in the barberry family ( berberidaceae ) . in some plants , notably members of orchidaceae and asclepiadoideae , the pollen remains in masses called pollinia , which are adapted to attach to particular pollinating agents such as birds or insects . more commonly , mature pollen grains separate and are dispensed by wind or water , pollinating insects , birds or other pollination vectors . pollen of angiosperms must be transported to the stigma , the receptive surface of the carpel , of a compatible flower , for successful pollination to occur . after arriving , the pollen grain ( an immature microgametophyte ) typically completes its development . it may grow a pollen tube and undergoing mitosis to produce two sperm nuclei . sexual reproduction in plants . in the typical flower ( that is , in the majority of flowering plant species ) each flower has both carpels and stamens . in some species , however , the flowers are unisexual with only carpels or stamens . ( monoecious both types of flowers found on the same plant ; dioecious the two types of flower found only on different plants ) . a flower with only stamens is called androecious . a flower with only carpels is called gynoecious . a flower having only functional stamens and lacking functional carpels is called a staminate flower , or ( inaccurately ) male . encyclopædia britannica.com a plant with only functional carpels is called pistillate , or ( inaccurately ) female . an abortive or rudimentary stamen is called a staminodium or staminode , such as in scrophularia . the carpels and stamens of orchids are fused into a column . the top part of the column is formed by the anther , which is covered by an anther cap . descriptive terms . ; stamen stamens can also be adnate ( fused or joined from more than one whorl ) : epipetalous : adnate to the corolla epiphyllous : adnate to undifferentiated tepals ( as in many liliaceae ) they can have different lengths from each other : didymous : two equal pairs didynamous : occurring in two pairs , a long pair and a shorter pair tetradynamous : occurring as a set of six stamens with four long and two shorter ones or respective to the rest of the flower ( perianth ) : exserted : extending beyond the corolla included : not extending beyond the corolla they may be arranged in one of two different patterns : spiral ; or whorled : one or more discrete whorls ( series ) they may be arranged , with respect to the petals : diplostemonous : in two whorls , the outer alternating with the petals , while the inner is opposite the petals . haplostemenous : having a single series of stamens , equal in number to the proper number of petals and alternating with them obdiplostemonous : in two whorls , with twice the number of stamens as petals , the outer opposite the petals , inner opposite the sepals , e.g . simaroubaceae ( see diagram ) ; connective where the connective is very small , or imperceptible , the anther lobes are close together , and the connective is referred to as discrete , e.g . euphorbia pp . , adhatoda zeylanica . where the connective separates the anther lobes , it is called divaricate , e.g . tilia , justicia gendarussa . the connective may also be a long and stalk-like , crosswise on the filament , this is a distractile connective , e.g . salvia . the connective may also bear appendages , and is called appendiculate , e.g . nerium odorum and some other species of apocynaceae . in nerium , the appendages are united as a staminal corona . ; filament a column formed from the fusion of multiple filaments is known as an androphore . stamens can be connate ( fused or joined in the same whorl ) as follows : extrorse : anther dehiscence directed away from the centre of the flower . cf . introrse , directed inwards , and latrorse towards the side . william g . d'arcy , richard c . keating ( eds . ) the anther : form , function , and phylogeny . cambridge university press , 1996 monadelphous : fused into a single , compound structure declinate : curving downwards , then up at the tip ( also – declinate-descending ) diadelphous : joined partially into two androecial structures pentadelphous : joined partially into five androecial structures synandrous : only the anthers are connate ( such as in the asteraceae ) . the fused stamens are referred to as a synandrium . ; anther anther shapes are variously described by terms such as linear , rounded , sagittate , sinuous , or reniform . the anther can be attached to the filament 's connective in two ways : basifixed : attached at its base to the filament pseudobasifixed : a somewhat misnomer configuration where connective tissue extends in a tube around the filament tip dorsifixed : attached at its center to the filament , usually versatile ( able to move )