Skat (card game)

history . skat was developed by the members of the brommesche tarok-gesellschaft michael dummett , sylvia mann , the game of tarot : from ferrara to salt lake city , p . 487 , united states games systems ( 1980 ) , between 1810 and 1817 in altenburg , in what is now the state of thuringia , germany . it is based on the three-player game of tarock , also known as tarot , and the four-player game of schafkopf ( equivalent to the american game sheepshead ) . david parlett , oxford dictionary of card games , p . 254 , oxford university press ( 1996 ) , it has become the most loved and widely played german card game , especially in german-speaking regions . international skat order , international skat players assoc . , rev . 15apr2007 in the earliest known form of the game , the player in the first seat was dealt twelve cards and the other two players ten each . he then made two discards , constituting the skat , and announced a contract . david parlett , teach yourself card games , p . 191 , mcgraw-hill ( 2003 ) , but the main innovation of this new game was that of the bidding ( cards ) . the first book on the rules of skat was published in 1848 by a secondary school teacher j . f . l . hempel . r . f . foster , foster 's skat manual , pp . 7 , 8 , 162 , averill press ( 2008 ) , nevertheless , the rules continued to differ from one region to another until the first attempt to set them in order was made by a congress of skat players on 7 august 1886 in altenburg . these were the first official rules finally published in a book form in 1888 by theodor thomas of leipzig . the current rules , followed by both the ispa and the german skat federation , date from jan . 1 , 1999 . encyclopædia britannica skat the word skat is a tarok term robert machenry , philip w . goetz , encyclopædia britannica , vol . 1-30 p . 252 , encyclopædia britannica ( uk ) ltd . ( 1983 ) , derived from the latin word scarto , scartare , which means to discard or reject , and its derivative scatola , a box or a place for safe-keeping . robert frederick foster , foster 's complete hoyle : an encyclopedia of all the indoor games , p . 378 , ( 1897 ) the word scarto is still used in some other italian card games to this day , and is not to be confused with the american game called scat . rules . : note : because of the many variations in the rules of skat , the rules below are necessarily general , although rules not found in official german tournament play are marked as such . general principles . skat is a game for three players , who are known as forehand , middlehand and rearhand , rearhand also being the dealer ( see picture ) . at the beginning of each round , or '' deal '' , one player becomes declarer and the other two players become the defending team . the two defenders are not allowed to communicate in any way except by their choice of cards to play . the game can also be played by four players . in this case , the dealer will sit out the round that was dealt , while the player to his right will play the role taken by the dealer in the three-player variant . players may agree at the outset how many rounds/deals they will play for . a central aspect of the game is the three coexisting varieties called '' suit '' , '' grand '' and '' null '' games , that differ in suit order , scoring and even overall goal to achieve . each round of the game starts with a bidding phase to determine the declarer and the required minimum game value ( explained below ) . then , ten tricks are played , allowing players to take trick points . each card has a card value ( except in null games ) and is worth that number of points for the player winning the trick . the total value of all cards is 120 points . the declarer 's goal is to take at least 61 points in tricks in order to win that round of the game . otherwise , the defending team wins the round . points from tricks are not directly added to the players ' overall score , they are used only to determine the outcome of the game ( win or loss for declarer ) , although winning by certain margins may increase the score for that round . after each round a score is awarded in accordance with the game value . if the declarer wins they are awarded a positive score , if they lose the score is doubled and subtracted from the declarer 's tally ( i.e . a negative score ) . in tournaments a winning declarer gets an additional 50 points if they win , if the defending team wins however they receive 40 points each in addition to the declarer losing twice the game 's value in points . cards . the pack consists of 32 cards . many modern packs use the french pack consisting of an ace ( ass ) , king ( könig ) , queen ( dame ) , jack ( bube ) , pip cards in all four suits ( clubs , spades , hearts and diamonds . some players in eastern and southern germany and austria prefer traditional german packs with suits of acorns , leaves , hearts and bells , and card values of deuce ( daus ) , king ( könig ) , ober , unter , 10 , 9 , 8 , and 7 in all four suits . until recently in saxony and thuringia , for example , german-suited packs were used almost exclusively . by contrast , regions of the former west germany had adopted a french-suited pack . since german reunification , a compromise turnierbild ( '' tournament style '' ) pack is used in tournaments that uses the shapes of the french suits but with corresponding german suit colors , green spades imitating leaves and gold diamonds imitating bells . the choice of pack does not affect the rules . dealing . at the beginning of each round each player is dealt ten cards , with the two remaining cards ( the so-called skat ) being put face down in the middle of the table . dealing follows this pattern : deal three cards each , then deal the skat , then four cards each , then three cards again ( '' three–skat–four–three '' ) . in four-player rounds , the dealer does not receive any cards and skips actual play of the round . he or she may peek into the hand of one other player ( if allowed to do so ) but never into the skat . dealing rotates clockwise around the table , so that the player sitting to the left of the dealer will be dealer for the next round . bidding . after the cards have been dealt , and before the deal is played out , a bidding or auction is held to decide : who will be declarer for the round , and thus eligible for picking up the skat and choosing whether to have trumps and what the trump suit is the minimum game value needed for declarer to win the goal for each player during the bidding is to bid a game value as high as their card holding would allow , but never higher than necessary to win the bidding . how the actual game value is determined is explained in detail below and is necessary to understand in order to know how high one can safely bid . it is possible for a player to overbid , which leads to an automatic loss of the game in question . often this does not become obvious before the player picks up the skat , or even not before the end of the game in question ( in case of a hand game , when the skat is not picked up ) . players have therefore to exercise careful scrutiny during bidding , as not to incur an unnecessary loss . the bidding may also give away some information about what cards a player may or may not hold . experienced players will be able to use this to their advantage . game value . the game value ( also called hand value , is what the game will be worth after all tricks have been played . it is determined not only by the 10 cards held , but also by the two-card skat . the skat always belongs to the declarer , and if it contains certain high cards this may change the game value . it is therefore not possible in general to determine the exact game value before knowing the skat . the game value is determined by the type of the game and the game level as explained below for the suit , grand and null games . suit game . in a suit game , one of the four suits is the trump suit . each suit has a base value , as follows : : the highest-ranking cards for taking the tricks ( the jacks ) are not the highest scoring cards . the aces and 10s combined make up almost three quarters of the total points ; taking as many as possible of them is thus imperative for winning . on the other hand , taking 7s , 8s and 9s ( the luschen or blanks ) does n't help ( or hurt ) at all , unless schwarz was declared . to win a null game , declarer must not take a single trick . null games are often not played through to the end , either because declarer is forced to take a trick , ending the game prematurely , or because it becomes apparent to the defenders that they will be forced to take the rest of the tricks . there are no card points in a null game . overbid hands . even with the majority in card points , declarer may still lose if the game value is lower than the value he bid during the bidding . this is called overbidding . an overbid hand is automatically lost , leading to a negative score for declarer . an overbid hand is scored by determining the lowest possible game value that is a multiple of the base value of declarer 's suit ( or 24 in case of a grand ) which is at least as high as declarer 's bid . this value is then doubled and subtracted from declarer 's score ( negative score ) . example : declarer bids 30 , missing the two top trumps ( without 2 ) , intending to play a club suit game ( game value would be 12 × 3 36 ) . they then find the in the skat ( with 1 ) . their game value is now only 24 ( 12 × 2 ) — they have overbid . unless they manage to play at least schneider ( raising the game value to 36 ) , or make a game other than clubs with a game value of at least 30 , the game will be lost . they will receive a negative score of −72 ( 36 is the lowest multiple of 12 , the base value of clubs , greater than the 30 they bid ; 36 times two is 72 ) . they can try to minimize their loss by declaring a game in hearts instead of clubs ( base value 10 instead of 12 ) . this will be worth only −60 points , unless opponents score schneider against them . scoring . the score is always assigned to the declarer ( positive or negative ) in the classical scoring system . the score to be awarded is the actual game value . how high the player bid during the bidding is immaterial , as long as the game value is at least as high as declarer 's bid ( see overbid hands above ) . note that often the score will be higher than the bidding value , because players typically do not bid as high as their hand would allow . for a won game , that score is added to declarer 's tally . for a lost game , the score is doubled and subtracted from declarer 's tally ( negative score ) . until 1998 , lost hand games did not count double , but this rule was dropped in that year . the reason was that in tournament play nearly all games played were hand games . this increased the game level by one , but did not penalize as much as a normal game would have if lost . in league games , 50 points get added for each game that is won by the declarer and 40 points each get added to the tally of the defending team shall they win to lower the chance factor and to stress the skill factor . in that situation , it becomes far more important for each player to bid his hand as high as possible . example 1 : declarer bids 20 and declares a grand game . he then wins with 78 points in tricks . declarer held . the game value is 24 × ( 2 + 1 ) 72 points . these are awarded to the declarer . example 2 : declarer bids 30 and declares a null ouvert game . she , however , is forced to take the ninth trick , losing the game . the game value is 46 , it will be doubled and subtracted from her total score ( −92 points ) . game variants . ramsch . ramsch ( '' junk '' ) is not part of sanctioned skat rules , but is widely practiced in hobbyist rounds , and is the variant most often suggested to be officially sanctioned . it is played if all three players pass in the bidding . there is no declarer in ramsch ; every player plays for himself , and the goal is to achieve as low a score as possible . the idea behind ramsch is to punish players who underbid their hands . a . hertefeld , the game of skat in theory and practice , pg . 36 , bibliolife ( 2009 ) , to make ramsch more interesting , an additional rule is often played that adds a second winning condition : the ramsch is also won by a player if that player manages to take all tricks i.e . '' march '' ) . at first , this seems to be not too difficult , since the other players will initially try to take as few tricks as possible and to get rid of their high-ranking cards . once they get suspicious , however , they may thwart the effort simply by taking one trick from the player trying for the durchmarsch . suit ranks in ramsch are the same as in the grand game , with only the four jacks being trumps . hobby players often add the following rule : 10s are lower in trick taking power than queens and kings , but still count as ten points . sometimes , they only count one point . there are a couple of variants to the rules concerning 10s , so this should be sorted out before starting the game . often , the players are allowed to check and exchange cards with the skat , or decline to do so and pass the skat on to the next player , doubling the score ( known as schieberamsch ) . jacks are not allowed to be passed on in this variation . the two cards in the skat are usually added to the tricks of the player who takes the last trick . after all ten tricks are played , the player with the highest number of card points ( or alternatively , every player ) has their card points amount deducted from their score as negative game points . if one player takes no tricks at all ( jungfrau , , the points of the losing hand are doubled . some players also give a fixed value of 15 negative points to the loser and if there are two '' virgins '' , 20 . another variation used in smaller tournaments is the gewinner-ramsch ( winner-rubbish ) . if none of the players bid a ramsch is played . unlike the original negative game the winner is who achieves the lowest score and is awarded 23 points , the score of a won null . additionally they are awarded the won game . the skat is given to the player with the highest score . if two players achieve the same lowest score they will both be awarded the 23 points and the won game . while not very widely spread this variation is a nice addition as it rewards the player who most rightfully did not bid . two-player skat . it is possible to play a modified version of the game with only two players . the cards that would be dealt to a third player are simply laid down as a “ dummy ” hand instead and not used . a popular two-player variant is called strohmann ( strawman ) , in which the dummy hand is played by the player who loses bidding . after the game has been declared , the third hand is flipped and can be seen by the other players . thus , it is possible to predict what hand the opponent has and play much more strategically . it is sometimes used to teach new players the principles of skat . another variant is oma skat where the dummy hand is known as oma or '' grandma '' . officers ' skat . officers ' skat is a variant for two players . each player receives 16 cards on the table in front of him in two rows , 8 face down and 8 face up on top of them . bidding is replaced by the non-dealer declaring a game type and trump . when a face-up card is played , the hidden card is turned over . each deal results in a total of 16 tricks and players must agree whether a game lasts for a certain number of deals or until one player scores a certain number of game points . scoring is similar to normal skat . north american skat . skat in the united states and canada was played for many years as an older version of the game , also known as tournee skat , which shares most of its rules with its modern european counterpart with the addition of a few different games and an alternate system of scoring . tournee skat is declining in popularity . most tournament skat players in north america play the modern game described above . the games in north american ( tournée ) skat . ; tournée : to determine trump , declarer picks up one card of the skat and looks at it . if declarer wants this card 's suit as trump , the card is shown to the other players . otherwise the hand is played as passt mir nicht ( it does n't suit me ) and the other card in the skat is turned up to determine trump . a jack gives declarer the choice of either playing grand ( jacks only ) or the jack 's suit as trump . once trump has been determined , both the skat cards are added to declarer 's hand and then two are removed and placed face down to begin his or her pile of cards won . ; solo : the skat remains on the table and declarer names trump in any suit or grand . grand may also be played ouvert with declarer 's hand spread face up for all player to see . ; grand guckser : declarer picks up both of the skat cards , adds them to his or her hand and discards two . game is played with grand trumps . grand guckser is the only game in north american skat where declarer picks up both skat cards at once . ; null : the skat remains untouched and declarer wagers to take no tricks . in null , cards rank a-k-q-j-10-9-8-7 . if declarer takes a trick , then the hand is lost and a new deal commences . null may also be played ouvert . ; ramsch : if middlehand ( mittelhand ) and rearhand ( hinterhand ) both pass , forehand ( vorhand ) may not pass , but if he does not wish to bid may declare ramsch in which players each play for themselves in trying to take the fewest tricks with grand as trumps . the skat is not used . upon determining the game , declarer may also state that he or she intends to schneider or schwarz for extra game points or penalties . scoring in north american ( tournée ) skat . card points are the same as in german skat : a 11 , 10 10 , k 4 , q 3 . j 2 and all other cards have no value . the game points , however , are a bit different . base value for the different games are as follows : tournée : 5 , 6 , ♠ 7 , ♣ 8 , grand 12 . if a tournée is played paßt mir nicht and declarer does not make 61 card points , then the game point penalty is doubled . solo : 9 , 10 , ♠ 11 , ♣ 12 , grand 20 , grand ouvert 24 . grand guckser : 16 , 32 if lost . null : 20 , 40 if played ouvert . ramsch : player taking the fewest card points wins 10 game points , or 20 for taking zero tricks . a player taking every trick loses 30 and other players do not win any . as in german skat , game points in north american skat are tallied by multiplying base game value by : 1 for each top trump , either with or without , plus : 1 for game ( 61 or more card points ) . 2 for schneider ( 91 or more card points ) . 3 for schwarz ( winning every trick ) . if schneider was declared add 1 . if schwarz was declared add 2 . note that if schneider or schwarz are declared but not made , then the contract is not met and declarer loses the amount that he or she would have won if successful . the above multipliers do not figure into games played null or ramsch . organization of players . league games are organized worldwide : by the international skat players association in north america by ispa canada and ispa usa within germany by the german skat association . online by the german skat union local clubs may organise preisskat competitions in the event of disputes , players may appeal to the international skat court in altenburg .