Havel

course . the source of the havel is located in the mecklenburg lake district , between lake müritz and the city of neubrandenburg . there is no obvious visible source in the form of a spring , but the river originates in the lakes in the diekenbruch near ankershagen , close to and south-east of the watershed between the north and baltic seas . from there the river initially flows southward , eventually joining the elbe , which in turn flows into the north sea . every river north-east of it flows to the baltic sea . the river enters brandenburg near the town of fürstenberg . in its upper course and between berlin and brandenburg an der havel the river forms several lakes . the havel 's main tributary is the spree , which joins the havel in spandau , a western borough of berlin , and is longer and delivers more water than the havel itself above the confluence . the second largest tributary is the rhin , named in the middle ages by settlers from the lower rhine . at the southern end of the ruppiner see , weirs can distribute the waters of the rhin either east- or westwards , rejoining the havel in two places apart along a straight line , and more than apart along the course of the river . the region around and north of the middle havel is called the havelland . it consists of sandy hills , often called ländchen , and low marshes , called luche . a few kilometres of the river before its confluence with the elbe near havelberg are in the state of saxony-anhalt . due to its minimal gradient it is susceptible to high waters in the elbe . unless in extreme floods , if the dike of the elbe is submerged , the discharge of the havel is improved by the gnevsdorfer vorfluter ( something like '' gnevsdorfer outfall '' ) . by this canal , the mouth of the havel , that naturally would be near havelberg , is placed 11 & nbsp ; km downstream . as the course of the elbe has a higher gradient than the havel , the water level of the havel in havelberg can be kept 1.4 meters below the elbe ( at the junction of the traverse communicating canal , protected by a lock ) . towns along the river include : fürstenberg , zehdenick , oranienburg , berlin , potsdam , werder , ketzin , brandenburg , premnitz , rathenow and havelberg . history . in earlier greek or latin sources , such as tacitus ' germania , the name of the river was also written as habola , habula , havela . the river name havel is related to german haff , habe , hafen , mhg hafen meaning port , harbor ) . the slavic people who later moved into the havel area were referred to in german sources as heveller ( occasionally as havolane ) . navigation . the havel is navigable from the mecklenburg lake district to its confluence with the elbe . whilst its upper reaches carry little other than leisure traffic , further downstream it provides an important link in the german commercial waterway network , carrying traffic from the rhine and the north sea to berlin and poland . from a navigation perspective , the havel can be split into four sections with somewhat different characteristics and different administrative arrangements . head of navigation to liebenwalde . the havel is navigable to canoes and similar small craft from close to its source . motor craft are prohibited above the first lock at , which links the useriner see to the großer labussee . the stretch of the river between this lock and the junction with the oder–havel canal is administered as part of the obere–havel–wasserstraße , along with various connecting canals and waterways . from zwenzow downstream to liebenwalde is a distance of . in this distance the navigation passes through the lakes of großer labussee , woblitzsee , wangnitzsee , großer priepertsee , ellbogensee , ziernsee , röblinsee , baalensee , schwedtsee and stolpsee . it also descends through the locks at wesenberg , steinhavelmühle , fürstenberg , bredereiche , regow , zaaren , schorfheide , zehdenick , bischofswerder and liebenwalde . the woblitzsee also gives access to the kammer canal , which allows vessels to reach neustrelitz . the ellbogensee links to the müritz–havel–wasserstraße , which proceeds deeper into the mecklenburg lake district , eventually connecting with the müritz–elde–wasserstraße . other connected waterways are the , the and the wentow gewässer . . liebenwalde to spandau . the stretch of the river between the junction with the oder–havel canal near liebenwalde and the confluence with the spree at spandau is administered as part of the havel–oder–wasserstraße , which also includes the oder-havel canal . this stretch of the river forms part of the main inland waterway route from germany to poland and carries significant commercial traffic . this stretch of the river is long , and the river descends through two locks at and spandau . at hennigsdorf , downstream of liebenwalde , the havel canal joins the river on the west bank . this canal connects to paretz , on the havel downstream , and was built in the 1950s to allow east german vessels to avoid the stretch of the river under the political control of west berlin . some further downstream , the berlin-spandau ship canal joins the river on the east bank , providing a connection to central berlin without passing through the lock at spandau . a car ferry crosses the river between hakenfelde and konradshöhe , in the berlin boroughs of spandau and reinickendorf respectively . the last of this stretch of the river , from hennigsdorf , passes through a series of interconnected lakes , including the large tegeler see . the river enters berlin before spandau , having formed the boundary for the previous . during the partition of germany , this formed the border between east germany and west berlin , and border control points were established for vessels navigating the river . . spandau to plaue . the stretch of the river between the confluence with the spree at spandau and the junction with the elbe–havel canal at plaue is administered as part of the lower havel–waterway , which also includes the stretch of river downstream to the confluence with the elbe . between spandau and plaue , the river forms part of the main inland waterway route from the rhine and the west of germany , and from hamburg and the north sea ports , to both berlin and poland . it thus carries a considerable amount of commercial traffic . south of spandau , the river widens into a wide lake , including a large arm known as the großer wannsee , which due to its proximity to berlin can be very busy with leisure craft . the island of pfaueninsel is also a feature of this stretch of the river . several of berlin 's ferries cross these waters , carrying passengers and tourists . the teltow canal joins the river from the east via the griebnitzsee just before the city reaches the city of potsdam , providing an alternative route to the oder–spree canal avoiding central berlin . the griebnitz canal provides a short cut for smaller vessels from the griebnitzsee to the großer wannsee . at potsdam the navigation splits into two channels . the havel , here known as the potsdamer havel , takes a route south-west through potsdam and the templiner see to the schwielowsee , then north-west to paretz , whilst the sacrow–paretz canal takes a shorter route due east to paretz , saving some compared to the potsdamer havel . the potsdamer havel is crossed by the kiewitt ferry in potsdam itself , and by the caputh ferry at the entrance to the schweilowsee . at paretz the two channels join up again , as does the havel canal from further upstream . just downstream of paretz , the river is crossed by the ketzin cable ferry . at brandenburg an der havel , the navigation again splits into two routes . commercial shipping descends through a lock into the silo canal that passes to the north of the city centre . leisure craft pass through the centre of the city , using the short brandenburg city canal , a smaller lock , and a stretch of the river . both routes rejoin in the linked lakes of breitling see and plauer see , which leads up to plaue . . plaue to havelberg . like the preceding stretch of the river , the stretch from plaue to the confluence with the elbe at havelberg is administered as part of the lower havel–waterway . unlike the previous stretch , this stretch carries considerably less commercial traffic . vessels heading to or from the rhine and the west of germany take the elbe–havel canal at plaue . whilst the lower reaches of the havel provide the most direct route to hamburg and the north sea ports , variable water levels in the elbe affect those in the lower havel , and together these can restrict navigation . a less direct , but more reliable route is available via the elbe–havel canal , the magdeburg water bridge , the mittellandkanal and the elbe lateral canal . this stretch of the river descends through locks at bahnitz , rathenow , grütz , garz and havelberg . at rathenow there are two channels , each with a lock . north of plaue , the river is crossed by the pritzerbe ferry . . references . gallery . wentowkanal schleuse.jpg wentow channel in zehdenick bischofswerder vosskanal.jpg weir of voss channel in liebenwalde-bischofswerder lehnitzschleuse - jan 2013.jpg lehnitz lock in oranienburg potsdam-freundschaftsinsel-havel-alte-fahrt-08-vii-2007-121.jpg alte fahrt branch in potsdam werderhavel 04-2016 img07.jpg werder ( havel ) brandenburg ( havel ) , dom vom wasser aus.jpg brandenburg an der havel hafenpromenade.jpg old harbour in rathenow wehr gnevsdorf im gnevsdorfer vorfluter.jpg gnevsdorf outfall