Seven Bridges of Königsberg

euler 's analysis . first , euler pointed out that the choice of route inside each land mass is irrelevant . the only important feature of a route is the sequence of bridges crossed . this allowed him to reformulate the problem in abstract terms ( laying the foundations of graph theory ) , eliminating all features except the list of land masses and the bridges connecting them . in modern terms , one replaces each land mass with an abstract '' vertex '' or node , and each bridge with an abstract connection , an '' edge '' , which only serves to record which pair of vertices ( land masses ) is connected by that bridge . the resulting mathematical structure is a graph . → → since only the connection information is relevant , the shape of pictorial representations of a graph may be distorted in any way , without changing the graph itself . only the existence ( or absence ) of an edge between each pair of nodes is significant . for example , it does not matter whether the edges drawn are straight or curved , or whether one node is to the left or right of another . next , euler observed that ( except at the endpoints of the walk ) , whenever one enters a vertex by a bridge , one leaves the vertex by a bridge . in other words , during any walk in the graph , the number of times one enters a non-terminal vertex equals the number of times one leaves it . now , if every bridge has been traversed exactly once , it follows that , for each land mass ( except for the ones chosen for the start and finish ) , the number of bridges touching that land mass must be even ( half of them , in the particular traversal , will be traversed '' toward '' the landmass ; the other half , '' away '' from it ) . however , all four of the land masses in the original problem are touched by an odd number of bridges ( one is touched by 5 bridges , and each of the other three is touched by 3 ) . since , at most , two land masses can serve as the endpoints of a walk , the proposition of a walk traversing each bridge once leads to a contradiction . in modern language , euler shows that the possibility of a walk through a graph , traversing each edge exactly once , depends on the degrees of the nodes . the degree of a node is the number of edges touching it . euler 's argument shows that a necessary condition for the walk of the desired form is that the graph be connected and have exactly zero or two nodes of odd degree . this condition turns out also to be sufficient—a result stated by euler and later proved by carl hierholzer . such a walk is now called an eulerian path or euler walk in his honor . further , if there are nodes of odd degree , then any eulerian path will start at one of them and end at the other . since the graph corresponding to historical königsberg has four nodes of odd degree , it can not have an eulerian path . an alternative form of the problem asks for a path that traverses all bridges and also has the same starting and ending point . such a walk is called an eulerian circuit or an euler tour . such a circuit exists if , and only if , the graph is connected , and there are no nodes of odd degree at all . all eulerian circuits are also eulerian paths , but not all eulerian paths are eulerian circuits . euler 's work was presented to the st . petersburg academy on 26 august 1735 , and published as solutio problematis ad geometriam situs pertinentis ( the solution of a problem relating to the geometry of position ) in the journal commentarii academiae scientiarum petropolitanae in 1741 . the euler archive , commentary on publication , and original text , in latin . it is available in english translation in the world of mathematics by james r . newman . significance in the history and philosophy of mathematics . in the history of mathematics , euler 's solution of the königsberg bridge problem is considered to be the first theorem of graph theory and the first true proof in the theory of networks , a subject now generally regarded as a branch of combinatorics . combinatorial problems of other types had been considered since antiquity . in addition , euler 's recognition that the key information was the number of bridges and the list of their endpoints ( rather than their exact positions ) presaged the development of topology . the difference between the actual layout and the graph schematic is a good example of the idea that topology is not concerned with the rigid shape of objects . hence , as euler recognized , the '' geometry of position '' is not about '' measurements and calculations '' but about something more general . that called in question the traditional aristotelian view that mathematics is the '' science of quantity '' . though that view fits arithmetic and euclidean geometry , it did not fit topology and the more abstract structural features studied in modern mathematics . philosophers have noted that euler 's proof is not about an abstraction or a model of reality , but directly about the real arrangement of bridges . hence the certainty of mathematical proof can apply directly to reality . j . franklin , an aristotelian realist philosophy of mathematics , palgrave macmillan , basingstoke , 2014 , pp . & nbsp ; 48–9 , 96 , 215 , 225 ; j . franklin , the formal sciences discover the philosophers ' stone , studies in history and philosophy of science 25 ( 4 ) ( 1994 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 513–533 . . present state of the bridges . two of the seven original bridges did not survive the bombing of königsberg in world war ii . two others were later demolished and replaced by a modern highway . the three other bridges remain , although only two of them are from euler 's time ( one was rebuilt in 1935 ) . thus , , five bridges exist at the same sites that were involved in euler 's problem . in terms of graph theory , two of the nodes now have degree 2 , and the other two have degree 3 . therefore , an eulerian path is now possible , but it must begin on one island and end on the other . the university of canterbury in christchurch has incorporated a model of the bridges into a grass area between the old physical sciences library and the erskine building , housing the departments of mathematics , statistics and computer science . the rivers are replaced with short bushes and the central island sports a stone tōrō . rochester institute of technology has incorporated the puzzle into the pavement in front of the gene polisseni center , an ice hockey arena that opened in 2014 . . see also . eulerian path five room puzzle glossary of graph theory hamiltonian path icosian game water , gas , and electricity . references . external links . kaliningrad and the konigsberg bridge problem at convergence euler 's original publication ( in latin ) the bridges of königsberg how the bridges of königsberg help to understand the brain euler 's königsberg 's bridges problem at math dept . contra costa college pregel – a google graphing tool named after this problem present day graph problem