Thomas A. Dorsey

early life ( 1899–1918 ) . thomas a . dorsey was born in villa rica , georgia , the first of three children to thomas madison dorsey , a minister and farmer , and etta plant spencer . the dorseys sharecropped on a small farm , while the elder dorsey , a graduate of atlanta bible college ( now morehouse college ) , traveled to nearby churches to preach . he also taught black children at a one-room schoolhouse where his son accompanied him and listened to lessons . harris pp . 3–25 . religion and music were at the center of the dorseys ' lives , and young thomas was exposed to a variety of musical styles in his early childhood . while often living hand-to-mouth , the dorseys were able to own an organ , which was rare for black families , and dorsey 's mother played during his father 's church services . his uncle was also a musician , a traveling guitarist concentrating on country blues while it was in its infancy . villa rica 's rural location allowed dorsey to hear negro spiritual , and '' moaning '' – a style of singing marked by elongated notes and embellishments widespread among southern black people – alongside the protestant hymns his father favored . furthermore , when thomas ' father traveled to preach at other churches , thomas and his mother attended a church that practiced sacred harp ; their harmonizing in particular making a deep impression on him . the dorseys moved to atlanta to find better opportunities when thomas was eight years old . the adjustment for the entire family was difficult , culminating in thomas being isolated , held back at school , and eventually dropping out after the fourth grade when he was twelve years old . harris , pp . 26–46 . directionless , dorsey began attending shows at the nearby 81 theater , that featured blues musicians and live vaudeville acts . soon he began selling concessions there , and aspiring to join the theater band , honed his musical skills on his family 's organ and a relative 's piano , picking out melodies that he had heard and practicing long hours . he studied informally with musicians at the theater and local dance bands , always playing blues . despite being meagerly compensated , he played rent party , house parties , juke joint , and brothels , but enjoyed the social life of a musician . due to the spontaneous nature of the events dorsey worked , he became proficient at improvising , and along the way , learned to read musical notation . . blues career ( 1919–1925 ) . seeking a greater challenge , dorsey relocated to chicago in 1919 , where he learned that his style of playing was unfashionable compared to the newer uptempo styles of jazz . encountering more competition for jobs and with his concentration primarily on blues , dorsey turned to composing , copyrighting his first song in 1920 , titled '' if you do n't believe i 'm leaving , you can count the days i 'm gone '' . in doing so , he became one of the first musicians to copyright blues music . harris pp . 47–66 . dorsey seemed ambivalent about writing church music until 1921 when he was inspired by w . m . nix 's rendition of '' i do , do n't you ? '' after hearing him perform at the national baptist convention . nix elongated some notes to emphasize specific syllables and words and sped up others . dorsey found appeal in the freedom and potential that came with improvising within established hymns , allowing singers and musicians to infuse more emotion – particularly joy and elation – into their performances to move congregations . upon hearing nix sing , dorsey was overcome , later recalling that his '' heart was inspired to become a great singer and worker in the kingdom of the lord–and impress people just as this great singer did that sunday morning '' . harris p . 68 . the experience prompted him to copyright his first religious song in 1922 , '' if i do n't get there '' , a composition in the style of charles tindley , whom dorsey idolized . sacred music could not sustain him financially , however , so he continued to work in blues . heilbut , p . 23 . two of his secular songs were recorded by monette moore and another by king oliver , ensuring dorsey a place as one of chicago 's top blues composers . his reputation led him to become a music arranger for paramount records and the chicago music publishing company . in 1923 , he became the pianist and leader of the wild cats jazz band accompanying ma rainey , a charismatic and bawdy blues shouter who sang about lost love and hard times . rainey interacted with her audiences , who were often so enthralled they stood up and shouted back at her while she sang . the night rainey opened at chicago 's largest black theater dorsey remembered as '' the most exciting moment in my life '' . harris p . 89 . dorsey worked with rainey and her band for two years , wherein he composed and arranged her music in the blues style he was accustomed to , as well as vaudeville and jazz to please audiences ' tastes . in 1925 , he married nettie harper , who rainey hired as a wardrobe mistress despite her inexperience , so she could join dorsey on tour . harris pp . 67–90 . . transition to gospel music ( 1926–1930 ) . rainey enjoyed enormous popularity touring with a hectic schedule , but beginning in 1926 dorsey was plagued by a two-year period of deep depression , even contemplating suicide . he experienced a spiritual re-invigoration of sorts in 1928 . while attending a church service with his sister-in-law , dorsey claimed the minister who prayed over him pulled a live serpent from his throat , prompting his immediate recovery . thereafter , he vowed to concentrate all his efforts in gospel music . after the death of a close friend , dorsey was inspired to write his first religious song with a blues influence , '' if you see my savior , tell him that you saw me '' . harris pp . 91–116 . as the blues grew in popularity in the 1920s , black churches condemned it widely for being associated with sin and hedonism . music performed in established black churches in chicago and throughout the u.s . came from hymnals and was performed as written , usually as a way to showcase the musical abilities of the choirs rather than as a vehicle to deliver a specific spiritual message . many churches sought prestige in their musical offerings , which were often ornate and sophisticated liturgical compositions by classical period ( music ) , such as handel 's messiah ( 1742 ) and mozart 's alleluia ( 1773 ) . personal expressions such as clapping , stomping , and improvising with lyrics , rhythm , and melody were actively discouraged as being unrefined and degrading to the music and the singer . marovich , pp . 17–20 . dorsey tried to market his new sacred music by printing thousands of copies of his songs to sell directly to churches and publishers , even going door to door , but he was ultimately unsuccessful . he returned to blues , recording '' it 's tight like that '' with guitarist tampa red despite his misgivings over the suggestive lyrics . the record sold more than seven million copies . billed as '' tampa red and georgia tom '' and '' the famous hokum boys '' , the duo found great success together , eventually collaborating on 60 songs between 1928 and 1932 , and coining the term '' hokum '' to describe their guitar/piano combination with simple , racy lyrics . harris , pp . 117–150 . moore p . 32 . unsure if gospel music could sustain him , dorsey was nonetheless pleased to discover that he made an impression at the national baptist convention in 1930 when , unknown to him , willie mae ford smith sang '' if you see my savior '' during a morning meeting . she was asked to sing it twice more ; the response was so enthusiastic that dorsey sold 4,000 print copies of his song . harris pp . 151–179 . in between recording sessions with tampa red , and inspired by the compliments he received , he formed a choir at ebenezer baptist church at the request of the pastor , reverend james smith , who had an affinity for negro spirituals and indigenous singing styles . dorsey and ebenezer 's music director theodore frye trained the new chorus to deliver his songs with a gospel blues sound : lively , joyous theatrical performances with embellished and elongated notes accentuated with rhythmic clapping and shouts . at their debut , frye strutted up and down the aisles and sang back and forth with the chorus , and at one point dorsey jumped up from the piano stool in excitement and stood as he played . when the pastor at pilgrim baptist , chicago 's second largest black church , saw the way it moved the congregation , he hired dorsey as music director , allowing him to dedicate all his time to gospel music . harris , pp . 180–208 . . leader of a movement ( 1930–1933 ) . this new style began to catch on in chicago , and dorsey 's musical partners theodore frye , magnolia lewis butts , and henry carruthers urged him to organize a convention where musicians could learn gospel blues . in 1932 however , just as dorsey co-founded the gospel choral union of chicago – eventually renamed the national convention of gospel choirs and choruses ( ncgcc ) , his wife nettie died in childbirth , then 24 hours later , their son . his grief prompted him to write one of his most famous and enduring compositions , '' take my hand , precious lord '' . chapters of the ncgcc opened in st . louis and cleveland . now at the center of gospel music activity in chicago , dorsey countered his bereavement by immersing himself in marketing his songs . an unintended consequence of his sales strategy helped spread gospel blues , as he worked with numerous musicians who assisted in selling his sheet music traveling to churches in and around chicago . rehearsals for sales pitches took place in dorsey 's nearly bare room in his uncle 's house . norton , kay , '' 'yes , gospel is real ' : half a century with chicago 's martin and morris company '' , journal of the society for american music , ( 2017 ) , volume 11 , number 4 , pp . 420–451 . frye and sallie martin were two of the first and most effective singers dorsey took with him to market his work . dorsey and martin established a publishing company called dorsey house of music , the first black-owned gospel publishing house in the u.s . bernice johnson reagon , '' appreciation ; the precious legacy of thomas dorsey ; the man who brought gospel to the masses '' , the washington post , ( january 31 1993 ) , p . g04 . martin and morris music company papers , chicago public library , retrieved august 2020 . his sheet music sold so well , according to heilbut , it supplanted the first book of compiled songs for black churches , w . m . nix 's gospel pearls , and the family bible in black households . heilbut , p . xxvi . he also mentored many young musicians , including training a teenage mahalia jackson when she first arrived in chicago , although he said she did not entirely accept his instruction : '' she said i was trying to make a stereotyped singer out of her . '' marovich , pp . 80–81 . heilbut , p . 63 . in addition to the high spirited choir performances , dorsey began introducing uptempo negro spirituals , what he referred to as '' jubilees '' , alongside published hymns in worship services . harris pp . 241–271 . faced with rapid changes , old-line church members who preferred formal , more sedate music programs objected , leading to conflicts in and between chicago 's black churches . as a result , his sales pitches and chorus performances were not always well-received . he is often quoted saying that he had '' been kicked out of the best churches in the country '' . bennett , tom , '' obituary : thomas a dorsey , 93 , 'father '' of gospel music ' '' , the atlanta journal and constitution , ( january 25 , 1993 ) , section b ; p . 6 . he found resistance among ministers , musicians , and parishioners alike . some objected to the degradation of worship through blues shouting . reagon , pp . 23–24 . others took offense to such lively music overshadowing the minister 's spoken word , or women delivering spiritual messages through song , taking the place of the preacher who was typically male . harris , p . 269 . o'neal , jim , van singel , amy : '' georgia tom dorsey '' in the voice of the blues : classic interviews from living blues magazine , taylor and francis , ( 2013 ) . web ( pp . 39–115 . ) simultaneously , a shift in chicago 's black churches was taking place . hundreds of thousands of newly arrived migrants from the south , with an appreciation of blues , began to outnumber an older guard of ministers and parishioners who favored classical european music in services . harris pp 180–208 . ministers who would not have considered changing their music programs just a few years before became more open to new ideas . services were thus altered in multiple ways to welcome the influx of migrants , for spiritual and pragmatic reasons : attracting and keeping new members helped reconcile many churches ' debts . marovich , p . 98 . despite the objections , within months gospel blues had proven to be established in chicago 's black churches . in 1933 , dorsey directed a 600-person chorus at the second meeting of the ncgcc , now boasting 3,500 members in 24 states . black gospel choirs were asked to perform at several white churches in chicago . and dorsey 's own pilgrim baptist church choir performed at the 1933 world 's fair . harris , p . 268 . marovich , p . 107 . . later life ( 1934–1993 ) . dorsey lived a quiet life despite his influence . he did not seek publicity , preferring to remain at his position as music director at the 3,000-seat pilgrim baptist church and running his publishing company . as the head of the ncgcc , he traveled the '' gospel highway '' : a circuit of churches and similar venues throughout the u.s . where he trained singers and choirs . between 1932 and 1944 , he held '' evenings with dorsey '' on this circuit , teaching novices the best ways to deliver his songs . he also toured extensively with mahalia jackson in the 1940s , who was by this time the preeminent gospel singer in the world . heilbut , pp . 33–34 . lornell , kip , '' dorsey , thomas ( 1899–1993 ) blues and gospel musician and composer '' , the new encyclopedia of southern culture volume 12 : music , pp . 221–223 . never considering himself a strong singer , dorsey recorded gospel music sporadically up to 1934 , and two songs in 1953 were his last , though he continued to write . during his blues period , dorsey presented himself as dapper and dignified , which carried over into his gospel work . he is described as stately and often detached , one writer attesting that from a distance , '' dorsey is not presented as a happy man . fulfilled , perhaps . doing the lord 's work , absolutely . but he never smiles , rarely relaxes , and when he talks it 's with a brooding vigilance bordering on surliness . he is a truly mesmerizing figure , the stuff of which legends are made . '' however , once known , dorsey could offer a '' charming smile '' , according to heilbut , and his enthusiasm '' often lifts his voice to an irrepressible falsetto '' . heilbut , p . 22 . after writing to his sister that he was lonely and wanted to be around children , she sent dorsey 's niece lena mclin to live with him . mclin remembered that her uncle was '' soft-spoken , not loud at all , and very well dressed . he always had a shirt and a tie and a suit , and he was always elegant , very mannerly , very nice . and he would sit at the piano and play something and say , 'that 's good stuff ! ' '' marovich , p . 108 . he remarried in 1941 to katheryn mosley . they had two children , a son named thomas m . '' mickey '' and a daughter , doris . even with a family he remained active in music , attending multiple engagements each year . katheryn dorsey stated , '' i 'd have to catch him between trains because he was hardly ever at home . the only thing he cared about was saving souls through his music . '' '' dedication : thomas dorsey dedication day '' , the atlanta journal and constitution , ( june 26 , 1994 ) , sunday section m ; page 1 . to accomplish this , dorsey traveled beyond the u.s . , through mexico , the caribbean , europe , and the middle east . he recalled visiting damascus , syria , where he was approached in a bathroom by a man who recognized his name . a tour group of 150 demanded he sing '' take my hand , precious lord '' right there . obliging , dorsey began , but the multinational group took over : '' and they knew it in damascus , too . folk was wipin ' their eyes , and some cryin ' and bawlin ' on , and i told ‘ em , 'what is this happenin ' here ? i 'll never get out of this place alive . ' '' when he gave interviews later in his life , he never condemned blues music or his experiences in that period . he remained in contact with his friends and fellow blues musicians , saying , '' i 'm not ashamed of my blues . it 's all the same talent . a beat is a beat whatever it is . '' heilbut , p . 34 . dorsey began to slow down in the 1970s , eventually showing symptoms of alzheimer 's disease . he retired from pilgrim baptist church and the ncgcc soon after , though he continued to participate and perform when he was able . he and the ncgcc were featured in the critically acclaimed documentary say amen , somebody in 1982 . the 1981 meeting featured in the film was the last convention he was able to attend . dorsey died of alzheimer 's in 1993 , listening to music on a walkman . he is buried at oak woods cemetery in chicago . reich , howard , '' spirit of dorsey 's songs fills his funeral service '' , chicago tribune , ( january 29 , 1993 ) . retrieved august 2020 . . legacy . gospel historian horace boyer writes that gospel music '' has no more imposing figure '' than dorsey , and the cambridge companion to blues and gospel music states that he '' defined '' the genre . boyer , pp . 57–62 . moore , p . 52 . folklorist alan lomax claims that dorsey '' literally invented gospel '' . in living blues , jim o'neal compares dorsey in gospel to w . c . handy , who was the first and most influential blues composer , '' with the notable difference that dorsey developed his tradition from within , rather than 'discovering ' it from an outsider 's vantage point '' . although he was not the first to join elements of the blues to religious music , he earned the honorific '' father of gospel music '' , according to gospel singer and historian bernice johnson reagon , for his '' aggressive campaign for its use as worship songs in black protestant churches '' . throughout his career , dorsey composed more than 1,000 gospel and 2,000 blues songs , an achievement mahalia jackson considered equal to irving berlin 's body of work . the manager of a gospel quartet active in the 1930s stated that songs written by dorsey and other songwriters copying him spread so far in such a short time that they were called '' dorseys '' . reagon , p . 21 . horace boyer attributes this popularity to '' simple but beautiful melodies '' , unimposing harmonies , and room for improvisation within the music . lyrically , according to boyer , dorsey was '' skilled at writing songs that not only captured the hopes , fears , and aspirations of the poor and disenfranchised african americans but also spoke to all people '' . anthony heilbut further explains that '' the gospel of charles tindley and dorsey talks directly to the poor . in so many words , it 's about rising above poverty while still living humble deserting the ways of the world while retaining its best tunes . '' heilbut , pp . 28–29 . aside from his prodigious songwriting , dorsey 's influence in the gospel blues movement brought about change both for individuals in the black community and communities as a whole . he introduced rituals and standards among gospel choirs that are still in use . at the beginning of worship services , dorsey instructed choruses to march from the rear of the sanctuary to the choir-loft in a specific way , singing all the while . choir members were encouraged to be physically active while singing , rocking and swaying with the music . reagon , p . 24–25 . he insisted that songs be memorized rather than chorus members reading music or lyrics while performing . this freed the choir members ' hands to clap , and he knew anyway that most of the chorus singers in the early 1930s were unable to read music . moreover , dorsey refused to provide musical notation , or use it while directing , because he felt the music was only to be used as a guide , not strictly followed . including all the embellishments in gospel blues would make the notation prohibitively complicated . dorsey instead asked his singers to rely on feeling . marovich p . 95 . while presiding over rehearsals , dorsey was strict and businesslike . he demanded that members attend practice regularly and that they should live their lives by the same standards promoted in their songs . for women , that included not wearing make-up . marovich , pp 90–95 . choruses were stocked primarily with women , often untrained singers with whom dorsey worked personally , encouraging many women who had little to no participation in church before to become active . similarly , the ncgcc in 1933 is described by dorsey biographer michael w . harris as '' a women 's movement '' as nine of the thirteen presiding officer positions were held by women . harris , p . 266–269 . due to dorsey 's influence , the definition of gospel music shifted away from sacred song compositions to religious music that causes a physical release of pain and suffering , particularly in black churches . he infused joy and optimism in his written music as he directed his choirs to do perform with uplifting fervor as they sang . the cathartic nature of gospel music became integral to the black experience in the great migration , when hundreds of thousands of black southerners moved to northern cities like detroit , washington , d.c . , and especially chicago between 1919 and 1970 . these migrants were refugees from poverty and the systemic racism endemic throughout the jim crow laws . they created enclaves within neighborhoods through church choirs , which doubled as social clubs , offering a sense of purpose and belonging . marovich , pp . 2–4 , 96 . encountering a '' golden age '' between 1940 and 1960 , gospel music introduced recordings and radio broadcasts featuring singers who had all been trained by dorsey or one of his protégées . as dorsey is remembered as the father of gospel music , other honorifics came from his choirs : sallie martin , considered the mother of gospel ( although willie mae ford smith , also a dorsey associate , has also been called this ) , mahalia jackson , the queen of gospel , and james cleveland , often named the king of gospel . marovich , pp 1–2 . in 1936 , members of dorsey 's junior choir became the roberta martin singers , a successful recording group which set the standard for gospel ensembles , both for groups and individual voice type within vocal groups . reagon , pp . 26–27 . in dorsey 's wake , r & b artists dinah washington , who was a member of the sallie martin singers , sam cooke , originally in the gospel band the soul stirrers , ray charles , little richard , james brown , and the coasters recorded both r & b and gospel songs , moving effortlessly between the two , as dorsey did , and bringing elements of gospel to mainstream audiences . ferris , pp . 108–109 . white , armond , '' soul man '' the nation , ( july 31 , 2003 ) . retrieved august 2020 . despite racial segregation in churches and the music industry , dorsey 's music had widespread crossover appeal . prominent hymnal publishers began including his compositions in the late 1930s , ensuring his music would be sung in white churches . his song '' peace in the valley '' , written in 1937 originally for mahalia jackson , was recorded by , among others , red foley in 1951 , and elvis presley in 1957 , selling more than a million copies each . foley 's version has been entered into the national recording registry as a culturally significant recording worthy of preservation . notably , '' take my hand , precious lord '' was the favorite song of martin luther king jr . , who asked dorsey to play it for him on the eve of his assassination . mahalia jackson sang at his funeral when king did not get to hear it . anthony heilbut writes that '' the few days following his death , 'precious lord ' seemed the truest song in america , the last poignant cry of nonviolence before a night of storm that shows no sign of ending '' . heilbut , p . 31 . four years later , aretha franklin sang it at jackson 's funeral . since its debut it has been translated into 50 languages . chicago held its first gospel music festival as a tribute to dorsey in 1985 ; it has taken place each year since then . van matre , lynn , '' praises to be for 'father of gospel ' '' , the chicago tribune , ( june 13 , 1985 ) . p . 12.g . ben-arnots , zach , '' living legends of chicago gospel honor tradition , carry on family legacies '' , abc7chicago.com ( july 31 , 2019 ) . retrieved august 2020 . though he never returned to his hometown , efforts to honor dorsey in villa rica , georgia , began a week after his death . mount prospect baptist church , where his father preached and dorsey learned music at his mother 's organ , was declared a historic site by the city , and a historical marker was placed at the location where his family 's house once stood . the thomas a . dorsey birthplace and gospel heritage festival , established in 1994 , remains active . '' history of villa rica , georgia '' , city of villa , rica , georgia website , retrieved august 2020 . '' gospel and sacred music '' , explore georgia website , retrieved august 2020 . as of 2020 , the national convention of gospel choirs and choruses has 50 chapters around the world . '' history '' , national convention of gospel choirs and choruses website , retrieved august 2020 . . honors . nashville songwriters hall of fame , inducted 1979 nashville songwriters hall of fame inductee list , retrieved august 2020 . georgia music hall of fame , inducted 1981 georgia music hall of fame inductee list retrieved august 2020 . gospel hall of fame , inducted 1982 gospel hall of fame website ( search dorsey ) , retrieved august 2020 . governor 's award for the arts in chicago , given 1985 poe , janita , '' thomas a dorsey , gospel pioneer '' , the chicago tribune ( january 25 , 1993 ) . p . 6 . national trustees award from the national academy of recording arts and sciences , given 1992 '' trustee awards '' national academy of recording arts and sciences website , retrieved august 2020 . national recording registry : sound recordings considered '' culturally , historically or aesthetically significant '' by the library of congress frequently asked questions : national recording registry , retrieved august 2020 . complete national recording registry listing : national recording registry , retrieved august 2020 . '' if i could hear my mother pray again '' ( 1934 ) , added in 2007 – recorded by dorsey , written by john whitfield vaughan in 1922 darden , robert f . '' '' if i could hear my mother pray again–thomas dorsey ( 1934 ) '' pdf : library of congress , retrieved august 2020 . '' peace in the valley '' by red foley and the sunshine boys ( 1951 ) , added in 2006 rumble , john '' '' peace in the valley '' –red foley and the sunshine boys ( 1951 ) pdf : library of congress , retrieved august 2020 . precious lord : new recordings of the great songs of thomas a . dorsey by various artists ( 1973 ) , added 2002 heilbut , anthony '' '' precious lord : new recordings of the great gospel songs of thomas a . dorsey '' pdf : library of congress , retrieved august 2020 . blues hall of fame : performer , inducted 2018 '' georgia tom dorsey '' blues hall of fame website . retrieved august 2020 . '' it 's tight like that '' : classic of blues recording–single or album track , inducted 2014 '' 'it 's tight like that ' by tampa red and georgia tom '' blues hall of fame website . retrieved august 2020 . '' future blues '' by willie brown : classic of blues recording–single or album track , inducted 2020/2021 ( based on '' last minute blues '' , written by dorsey , recorded by ma rainey ) '' 'future blues ' – willie brown ( paramount 1930 ) '' blues hall of fame website . retrieved august 2020 . . see also . list of people considered a founder in a humanities field . notes .