Sonic boom

causes . when an aircraft passes through the air , it creates a series of p-wave in front of the aircraft and behind it , similar to the bow wave created by a boat . these waves travel at the speed of sound and , as the speed of the object increases , the waves are forced together , or compressed , because they can not get out of each other 's way quickly enough . eventually they merge into a single shock wave , which travels at the speed of sound , a critical speed known as mach 1 , and is approximately at sea level and . in smooth flight , the shock wave starts at the nose of the aircraft and ends at the tail . because the different radial directions around the aircraft 's direction of travel are equivalent ( given the '' smooth flight '' condition ) , the shock wave forms a mach cone , similar to a vapour cone , with the aircraft at its tip . the half-angle \alpha between the direction of flight and the shock wave is given by : : \sin ( \alpha ) \frac . abatement . in the late 1950s when supersonic transport ( sst ) designs were being actively pursued , it was thought that although the boom would be very large , the problems could be avoided by flying higher . this assumption was proven false when the north american xb-70 valkyrie first flew , and it was found that the boom was a problem even at 70,000 feet ( 21,000 & nbsp ; m ) . it was during these tests that the n-wave was first characterized . richard seebass and his colleague albert george at cornell university studied the problem extensively and eventually defined a '' figure of merit '' ( fm ) to characterize the sonic boom levels of different aircraft . fm is a function of the aircraft weight and the aircraft length . the lower this value , the less boom the aircraft generates , with figures of about 1 or lower being considered acceptable . using this calculation , they found fms of about 1.4 for concorde and 1.9 for the boeing 2707 . this eventually doomed most sst projects as public resentment , mixed with politics , eventually resulted in laws that made any such aircraft less useful ( flying supersonically only over water for instance ) . small aeroplane designs like business jets are favoured and tend to produce minimal to no audible booms . seebass and george also worked on the problem from a different angle , trying to spread out the n-wave laterally and temporally ( longitudinally ) , by producing a strong and downwards-focused ( sr-71 blackbird , boeing x-43 ) shock at a sharp , but wide angle nose cone , which will travel at slightly supersonic speed ( bow shock ) , and using a swept back flying wing or an oblique wing to smooth out this shock along the direction of flight ( the tail of the shock travels at sonic speed ) . to adapt this principle to existing planes , which generate a shock at their nose cone and an even stronger one at their wing leading edge , the fuselage below the wing is shaped according to the area rule . ideally this would raise the characteristic altitude from to 60,000 feet ( from 12,000 & nbsp ; m to 18,000 & nbsp ; m ) , which is where most sst aircraft were expected to fly . this remained untested for decades , until darpa started the quiet supersonic platform project and funded the shaped sonic boom demonstration ( ssbd ) aircraft to test it . ssbd used an f-5 freedom fighter . the f-5e was modified with a highly refined shape which lengthened the nose to that of the f-5f model . the fairing extended from the nose all the way back to the inlets on the underside of the aircraft . the ssbd was tested over a two-year period culminating in 21 flights and was an extensive study on sonic boom characteristics . after measuring the 1,300 recordings , some taken inside the shock wave by a chase plane , the ssbd demonstrated a reduction in boom by about one-third . although one-third is not a huge reduction , it could have reduced concorde 's boom to an acceptable level below fm 1 . as a follow-on to ssbd , in 2006 a nasa-gulfstream aerospace team tested the quiet spike on nasa-dryden 's f-15b aircraft 836 . the quiet spike is a telescoping boom fitted to the nose of an aircraft specifically designed to weaken the strength of the shock waves forming on the nose of the aircraft at supersonic speeds . over 50 test flights were performed . several flights included probing of the shockwaves by a second f-15b , nasa 's intelligent flight control system testbed , aircraft 837 . there are theoretical designs that do not appear to create sonic booms at all , such as the busemann biplane . however , creating a shockwave is inescapable if they generate aerodynamic lift . nasa and lockheed martin aeronautics co . are working together to build an experimental aircraft called the low boom flight demonstrator ( lbfd ) , which will reduce the sonic boom synonymous with high-speed flight to the sound of a car door closing . the agency has awarded a 247.5 million contract to construct a working version of the sleek , single-pilot plane by summer 2021 and should begin testing over the following years to determine whether the design could eventually be adapted to commercial aircraft . . perception , noise and other concerns . the sound of a sonic boom depends largely on the distance between the observer and the aircraft shape producing the sonic boom . a sonic boom is usually heard as a deep double '' boom '' as the aircraft is usually some distance away . the sound is much like that of mortar bombs , commonly used in firework displays . it is a common misconception that only one boom is generated during the subsonic to supersonic transition ; rather , the boom is continuous along the boom carpet for the entire supersonic flight . as a former concorde pilot puts it , '' you do n't actually hear anything on board . all we see is the pressure wave moving down the aeroplane – it gives an indication on the instruments . and that 's what we see around mach 1 . but we do n't hear the sonic boom or anything like that . that 's rather like the wake of a ship – it 's behind us . '' bbc news interview with former concorde pilot ( 2003 ) . in 1964 , nasa and the federal aviation administration began the oklahoma city sonic boom tests , which caused eight sonic booms per day over a period of six months . valuable data was gathered from the experiment , but 15,000 complaints were generated and ultimately entangled the government in a class action lawsuit , which it lost on appeal in 1969 . sonic booms were also a nuisance in north cornwall and north devon in the uk as these areas were underneath the flight path of concorde . windows would rattle and in some cases the '' torching '' ( pointing underneath roof slates ) would be dislodged with the vibration . there has been recent work in this area , notably under darpa 's quiet supersonic platform studies . research by acoustics experts under this program began looking more closely at the composition of sonic booms , including the frequency content . several characteristics of the traditional sonic boom '' n '' wave can influence how loud and irritating it can be perceived by listeners on the ground . even strong n-waves such as those generated by concorde or military aircraft can be far less objectionable if the rise time of the over-pressure is sufficiently long . a new metric has emerged , known as perceived loudness , measured in pldb . this takes into account the frequency content , rise time , etc . a well-known example is the finger snapping in which the '' perceived '' sound is nothing more than an annoyance . the energy range of sonic boom is concentrated in the 0.1–100 & nbsp ; hertz frequency range that is considerably below that of subsonic aircraft , gunshot and most industrial noise . duration of sonic boom is brief ; less than a second , 100 & nbsp ; milliseconds ( 0.1 & nbsp ; second ) for most fighter-sized aircraft and 500 & nbsp ; milliseconds for the space shuttle or concorde jetliner . the intensity and width of a sonic boom path depends on the physical characteristics of the aircraft and how it is operated . in general , the greater an aircraft 's altitude , the lower the over-pressure on the ground . greater altitude also increases the boom 's lateral spread , exposing a wider area to the boom . over-pressures in the sonic boom impact area , however , will not be uniform . boom intensity is greatest directly under the flight path , progressively weakening with greater horizontal distance away from the aircraft flight track . ground width of the boom exposure area is approximately for each of altitude ( the width is about five times the altitude ) ; that is , an aircraft flying supersonic at will create a lateral boom spread of about . for steady supersonic flight , the boom is described as a carpet boom since it moves with the aircraft as it maintains supersonic speed and altitude . some maneuvers , diving , acceleration or turning , can cause focusing of the boom . other maneuvers , such as deceleration and climbing , can reduce the strength of the shock . in some instances weather conditions can distort sonic booms . depending on the aircraft 's altitude , sonic booms reach the ground 2 to 60 & nbsp ; seconds after flyover . however , not all booms are heard at ground level . the speed of sound at any altitude is a function of air temperature . a decrease or increase in temperature results in a corresponding decrease or increase in sound speed . under standard atmospheric conditions , air temperature decreases with increased altitude . for example , when sea-level temperature is 59 degrees fahrenheit ( 15 & nbsp ; °c ) , the temperature at drops to minus 49 degrees fahrenheit ( −45 & nbsp ; °c ) . this temperature gradient helps bend the sound waves upward . therefore , for a boom to reach the ground , the aircraft speed relative to the ground must be greater than the speed of sound at the ground . for example , the speed of sound at is about , but an aircraft must travel at least ( mach 1.12 , where mach 1 equals the speed of sound ) for a boom to be heard on the ground . the composition of the atmosphere is also a factor . temperature variations , humidity , atmospheric pollution , and winds can all have an effect on how a sonic boom is perceived on the ground . even the ground itself can influence the sound of a sonic boom . hard surfaces such as concrete , pavement , and large buildings can cause reflections which may amplify the sound of a sonic boom . similarly , grassy fields and profuse foliage can help attenuate the strength of the over-pressure of a sonic boom . currently there are no industry-accepted standards for the acceptability of a sonic boom . however , work is underway to create metrics that will help in understanding how humans respond to the noise generated by sonic booms . until such metrics can be established , either through further study or supersonic overflight testing , it is doubtful that legislation will be enacted to remove the current prohibition on supersonic overflight in place in several countries , including the united states . bullwhip . the cracking sound a bullwhip makes when properly wielded is , in fact , a small sonic boom . the end of the whip , known as the '' cracker '' , moves faster than the speed of sound , thus creating a sonic boom . a bullwhip tapers down from the handle section to the cracker . the cracker has much less mass than the handle section . when the whip is sharply swung , the energy is transferred down the length of the tapering whip . goriely and mcmillen showed that the physical explanation is complex , involving the way that a loop travels down a tapered filament under tension . . see also . cherenkov radiation hypersonic supershear earthquake ground vibration boom . references . external links . boston globe profile of spike aerospace planned s-521 supersonic jet