Hare Krishna (mantra)

mantra . the hare krishna mantra is composed of sanskrit names in the singular vocative case : hare , krishna , and rama ( in anglicized spelling ) . it is a poetic stanza in anuṣṭubh meter ( a quatrain of four lines ( pāda ) of eight syllables with certain syllable lengths for some of the syllables ) . the actual mantra in the upanishad is as follows : when chaitanya mahaprabhu promulgated the mahamantra , it was rendered with krishna 's name 's first . pronunciation of mantra in ipa ( sanskrit ) : sanskrit is a polysemy language and as such , this mantra has multiple interpretations all of which may be considered as correct . '' hare '' can be interpreted as either the vocative form of hari , another name of vishnu meaning '' he who removes illusion '' . another interpretation is as the vocative of harā , meditations on the hare krishna mahamantra '' hare o hari ! . '' & '' because she steals krishna 's mind and because she is the embodiment of krishna 's divine joy , sri radha is known as harā . hare is the vocative form of that name '' . a name of radha , p.4 : it was preserved in the confidential sampradayas , or esoteric lineages , that were guardian to these truths from the beginning . p.244 : in a more esoteric sense , the word '' hare '' is a vocative form of '' harā , '' which refers to mother harā , or sri radha . krishna 's eternal consort or his energy ( krishna 's shakti ) . according to a . c . bhaktivedanta swami prabhupada , harā refers to '' the energy/shakti of supreme personality of godhead '' while krishna and rama refer to supreme godhead himself , meaning '' he who is all-attractive '' and '' he who is the source of all pleasure '' . '' the word harā is a form of addressing the energy of the lord , and the words krishna and rama ( which mean '' the highest pleasure eternal '' ) are forms of addressing the lord himself . '' – a . c . bhaktivedanta swami prabhupada . see krishna.com article . gaudiya.com – practice '' rama is another name for him krishna , meaning the one who brings delight to radha '' . in the hymn vishnu sahasranama spoken by bhishma in praise of krishna after the kurukshetra war , krishna is also called rama . it is sometimes believed that '' rama '' in '' hare rama '' means '' radharamana '' or the beloved of radha ( another name for kṛṣṇa ) . the more common interpretation is that rāma refers to rama of the ramayana , an earlier avatar of krishna . '' rama can also be a shortened form of balarama , krishna 's first expansion . '' chaitanya charitamrita adi-5.132 '' if someone says that the '' rama '' in '' hare rama '' is lord ramacandra and someone else says that the '' rama '' in '' hare rama '' is sri balarama , both are correct '' . the mantra is repeated , either sung out loud ( bhajan ) , congregationally ( kirtan ) , or to oneself aloud or mentally on japamala made of tulasi ( japa ) . a . c . bhaktivedanta swami describes the process of chanting the maha mantra as follows : . history . the mantra is first attested in the ( kali santarana upanishads ) , a vaishnava upanishad associated with the yajurveda . in this upanishad , narada is instructed by brahma ( in the translation of k . n . aiyar ) : narada asks to be told this name of narayana , and brahma replies : the mantra was popularized by chaitanya mahaprabhu roughly around 1500 c.e . when he began his mission to spread this mantra publicly to '' every town and village '' in the world , travelling throughout india , and especially within the areas of bengal and odisha . gaudiya.com . some versions of the kali santarana upanishad give the mantra with hare rama preceding hare krishna ( as quoted above ) , and others with hare krishna preceding hare rama , as in navadvipa version of the manuscript . the latter format is by far the more common within the vaishnava traditions . steven j . rosen , vaiṣṇavism : contemporary scholars discuss the gauḍīya tradition , p . 274 . it is a common belief that the mantra is equally potent when spoken in either order . no water in the desert bombay , 12 december 1974 : '' sometimes they first of all place '' hare rama , hare rama , rama rama , hare hare . '' and sometimes they place '' hare krsna , hare krsna , krsna krsna . '' there is no difference . sometimes they say , '' no , it should be hare rama first . '' sometimes they . , '' no , hare krsna . '' but that is not very important '' . a . c . bhaktivedanta swami prabhupada , a devotee of krishna in disciplic succession , on the order of his guru , srila bhaktisiddhanta sarasvati , brought the teachings of sri chaitanya from bharat ( india ) and single-handedly took the responsibility of spreading them around the western world . beginning in new york city 1965 , he encircled the globe fourteen times in the final eleven years of his life , thus making 'hare krishna ' a well-known phrase in many parts of the world . biography of srila prabhupada . . hippie culture . in the late 1960s and early 1970s , the hare krishnas became confused with the hippie counterculture . this was an erroneous association , as the ideals of these groups are quite different . although prabhupada was open to anyone becoming a member of the hare krishnas , they had to follow the four regulative principles , one of which is strict abstention from intoxicants , including marijuana . hare krishnas and iskcon '' these physical pleasures , the eating of fish , meat or eggs , the use of intoxicants , illicit sex , and gambling and frivoulous sports , are called the four regulative principles . because of the rejection of these pleasures , krishnas practice a strict vegetarian lifestyle . '' these four principles ( or '' four commandments '' as srila prabhupada once referred to them ) , are : no meat eating , including fish or eggs no gambling no intoxication or use of stimulants ( including caffeine ) no illicit sex spiritual elevation and joy are to be derived from chanting names of god . the broadway musical hair has a song , '' hare krishna '' , containing the mantra , along with some additional lyrics . popular culture . the hare krishna mantra appears in a number of famous songs , notably those of george harrison . his first solo single '' my sweet lord '' reached the no . 1 spot on the uk singles charts . harrison put a hare krishna sticker on the back of the headstock of eric clapton 's 1964 gibson es-335 ; the sticker also appears on gibson 's 2005 reproduction of the guitar . produced by harrison , radha krishna temple 's recording '' hare krishna mantra '' was issued as a single on the beatles ' apple record label in 1969 . the single was a commercial success , peaking at no . 12 in the uk , and led to the temple devotees appearing on the popular british music chart television programme top of the pops . the mantra also prominently appears in jesus loves you 's '' bow down mister '' ( 1990 ) and in the pretenders ' '' boots of chinese plastic '' from their 2008 album , break up the concrete . stevie wonder used the devotees chanting hare krishna in his song '' pastime paradise '' . less well-known recordings of the hare krishna mantra include versions by the fugs on their 1968 album tenderness junction ( featuring poet allen ginsberg ) , by nina hagen , in multiple songs by english psychedelic rock band quintessence ( produced by john barham , a frequent collaborator of george harrison ) and by hüsker dü on their 1984 album zen arcade . radha krsna temple . kula shaker , boy george , and members of the rubettes have recorded music tracks about krishna consciousness . in a 2010 experimental study involving both devotees and non-devotees , singing vowels like '' ah '' and '' eh '' was found to be more joyful than singing vowels like '' oh '' and '' uh '' , possibly due to a facial feedback effect . böttger , d . ( 2010 ) to say '' krishna '' is to smile – emotion psychology and the neurology of mantra singing . in '' the varieties of ritual experience '' ( ed . jan weinhold & geoffrey samuel ) in the series '' ritual dynamics and the science of ritual '' , volume ii : '' body , performance , agency and experience '' . wiesbaden , germany : harrassowitz . video summary . scriptural references . the practice of chanting the hare krishna mantra is recommended in the puranas , the pancharatra , and throughout vaishnava literature in general . references to the maha mantra ( pdf ) . for example : . see also . om namo bhagavate vasudevaya haridasa thakur kali-saṇṭāraṇa upaniṣad svayam bhagavan vaishnavism vrindavan . footnotes . sources . . external links . chanting the hare krishna mantra japa group – daily articles on all aspects of chanting hare krsna hare krishna belgium – antwerp bhaktivedanta vedabase network – information & books – mahamantra maha mantra kirtan 24/7 : chanting hare krishna 24 hours every day without stopping ( radio )