Embryology

comparative embryology . preformationism and epigenesis . : the idea that semen contains an embryo – a preformed , miniature infant , or homunculus – that simply becomes larger during development . the competing explanation of embryonic development was epigenesis , originally proposed 2,000 years earlier by aristotle . much early embryology came from the work of the italy anatomists aldrovandi , aranzio , leonardo da vinci , marcello malpighi , gabriele falloppio , girolamo cardano , emilio parisano , fortunio liceti , stefano lorenzini , spallanzani , enrico sertoli , and mauro ruscóni . according to epigenesis , the form of an animal emerges gradually from a relatively formless egg . as microscopy improved during the 19th century , biologists could see that embryos took shape in a series of progressive steps , and epigenesis displaced preformation as the favored explanation among embryologists . cleavage . cleavage is the very beginning steps of a developing embryo . cleavage refers to the many mitotic divisions that occur after the egg is fertilized by the sperm . the ways in which the cells divide is specific to certain types of animals and may have many forms . holoblastic . holoblastic is the complete division of cells . holoblastic cleavage can be radial ( see : radial cleavage ) , spiral ( see : spiral cleavage ) , bilateral ( see : bilateral cleavage ) , or rotational ( see : rotational cleavage ) . in holoblastic cleavage the entire egg will divide and become the embryo , whereas in meroblastic cleavage some cells will become the embryo and others will be the yolk sac . meroblastic . meroblastic is the incomplete division of cells . the division furrow does not protrude into the yolky region as those cells impede membrane formation and this causes the incomplete separation of cells . meroblastic cleavage can bilateral ( see : bilateral cleavage ) , discoidal ( see : discoidal cleavage ) , or centrolecithal ( see : centrolecithal ) . basal phyla . animals that belong to the basal phyla have holoblastic radial cleavage which results in radial symmetry ( see : symmetry in biology ) . during cleavage there is a central axis that all divisions rotate about . the basal phyla also has only one to two embryonic cell layers , compared to the three in bilateral animals ( endoderm , mesoderm , and ectoderm ) . bilaterians . in bilateria cleavage can be either holoblastic or meroblastic depending on the species . during gastrulation the blastula develops in one of two ways that divide the whole animal kingdom into two-halves ( see : embryological origins of the mouth and anus ) . if in the blastula the first pore , or blastopore , becomes the mouth of the animal , it is a protostome ; if the blastopore becomes the anus then it is a deuterostome . the protostomes include most invertebrate animals , such as insects , worms and molluscs , while the deuterostomes include the vertebrates . in due course , the blastula changes into a more differentiated structure called the gastrula . soon after the gastrula is formed , three distinct layers of cells ( the germ layers ) from which all the bodily organs and tissues then develop . germ layers . the innermost layer , or endoderm , give rise to the digestive organs , the gills , lungs or swim bladder if present , and kidneys or nephrites . the middle layer , or mesoderm , gives rise to the muscles , skeleton if any , and blood system . the outer layer of cells , or ectoderm , gives rise to the nervous system , including the brain , and skin or carapace and hair , bristles , or scales . drosophila melanogaster ( fruit fly ) . drosophila have been used as a developmental model for many years . the studies that have been conducted have discovered many useful aspects of development that not only apply to fruit flies but other species as well . outlined below is the process that leads to cell and tissue differentiation . maternal-effect genes help to define the anterior-posterior axis using bicoid ( gene ) and nanos ( gene ) . gap genes establish 3 broad segments of the embryo . pair-rule genes define 7 segments of the embryo within the confines of the second broad segment that was defined by the gap genes . segment-polarity genes define another 7 segments by dividing each of the pre-existing 7 segments into anterior and posterior halves using a gradient of hedgehog and wnt . hox gene use the 14 segments as pinpoints for specific types of cell differentiation and the histological developments that correspond to each cell type . humans . humans are bilateria that have holoblastic rotational cleavage . humans are also deuterostomes . in regard to humans , the term embryo refers to the ball of dividing cells from the moment the zygote implants itself in the uterus wall until the end of the eighth week after conception . beyond the eighth week after conception ( tenth week of pregnancy ) , the developing human is then called a fetus . evolutionary embryology . evolutionary embryology is the expansion of comparative embryology by the ideas of charles darwin . similarly to karl ernst von baer 's principles that explained why many species often appear similar to one another in early developmental stages , darwin argued that the relationship between groups can be determined based upon common embryonic and larval structures . von baer 's principles . the general features appear earlier in development than do the specialized features . more specialized characters develop from the more general ones . the embryo of a given species never resembles the adult form of a lower one . the embryo of a given species does resemble the embryonic form of a lower one . using darwin 's theory evolutionary embryologists have since been able to distinguish between homologous and analogous structures between varying species . homologous structures are those that the similarities between them are derived from a common ancestor , such as the human arm and bat wings . analogous structure are those that appear to be similar but have no common ancestral derivation . . origins of modern embryology . until the birth of modern embryology through observation of the mammalian ovum by karl ernst von baer in 1827 , there was no clear scientific understanding of embryology . only in the late 1950s when ultrasound was first used for uterine scanning , was the true developmental chronology of human fetus available . karl ernst von baer along with heinz christian pander , also proposed the germ layer theory of development which helped to explain how the embryo developed in progressive steps . part of this explanation explored why embryos in many species often appear similar to one another in early developmental stages using his four principles . modern embryology research . embryology is central to evolutionary developmental biology ( '' evo-devo '' ) , which studies the genetic control of the development process ( e.g . morphogens ) , its link to cell signalling , its roles in certain diseases and mutations , and its links to stem cell research . embryology is the key to gestational surrogacy , which is when the sperm of the intended father and egg of intended mother are fused in a lab forming an embryo . this embryo is then put into the surrogate who carries the child to term . medical embryology . medical embryology is used widely to detect abnormalities before birth . 2-5 % of babies are born with an observable abnormality and medical embryology explores the different ways and stages that these abnormalities appear in . genetically derived abnormalities are referred to as malformations . when there are multiple malformations , this is considered a syndrome . when abnormalities appear due to outside contributors , these are disruptions . the outside contributors causing disruptions are known as teratogens . common teratogens are alcohol , retinoic acid , ionizing radiation or hyperthermic stress . vertebrate and invertebrate embryology . many principles of embryology apply to invertebrates as well as to vertebrates . therefore , the study of invertebrate embryology has advanced the study of vertebrate embryology . however , there are many differences as well . for example , numerous invertebrate species release a larva before development is complete ; at the end of the larval period , an animal for the first time comes to resemble an adult similar to its parent or parents . although invertebrate embryology is similar in some ways for different invertebrate animals , there are also countless variations . for instance , while spiders proceed directly from egg to adult form , many insects develop through at least one larval stage . for decades , a number of so-called normal staging tables were produced for the embryology of particular species , mainly focussing on external developmental characters . as variation in developmental progress makes comparison among species difficult , a character-based standard event system was developed , which documents these differences and allows for phylogenetic comparisons among species . . birth of developmental biology . after the 1950s , with the dna helical structure being unraveled and the increasing knowledge in the field of molecular biology , developmental biology emerged as a field of study which attempts to correlate the genes with morphological change , and so tries to determine which genes are responsible for each morphological change that takes place in an embryo , and how these genes are regulated . file : leonardo da vinci - studies of the foetus in the womb.jpg human embryos by leonardo da vinci file:6 weeks pregnant.png human embryo at six weeks gestational age file:10daymouseemb.jpg histological film 10-day mouse embryo as of today , human embryology is taught as a cornerstone subject in medical schools , as well as in biology and zoology programs at both an undergraduate and graduate level . see also . abortion embryogenesis embryonic differentiation waves embryology of digestive system and the body cavities french flag model morphogen ontogeny recapitulation theory