Christianity and Islam

scriptures . the christian bible is made up of the old testament and the new testament . the old testament dates to centuries before the time of christ . the new testament dates from the time of christ , or centuries thereafter . the central books of the bible for christians are the gospels . christians consider the quran a non-divine false , later work . the quran dates from the early 7th century , or decades thereafter . the quran assumes familiarity with major narratives recounted in the books of the bible . it summarizes some , dwells at length on others and differs in others . name sanigosian muslims believe that jesus was given the injil ( greek evangel , or gospel ) from the abrahamic god and that parts of these teachings were eventually lost or distorted ( tahrif ) to produce what is now the hebrew bible and the christian new testament . muslims believe that the quran present today is the same ( unchanged/unedited ) as the one just at the time of death of their prophet . jesus . christianity and islam differ in their fundamental views in regard to the nature of their religion , their beliefs about the crucifixion and resurrection of jesus . christians believe that jesus is the son of god . most christians are trinity and believe that jesus is divine and god the son . christianity teaches that jesus was condemned to death by the sanhedrin and the roman prefect pontius pilate , crucified and resurrected , as per the gospel narratives . christians believe jesus was divine and sinless . muslims and christians both believe that jesus was born to mary , a virgin . they also both believe that jesus is the messiah . islam teaches that jesus was one of the most important prophets of god , but not the son of god , not divine , and not part of a god as part of a trinity . in islam , jesus was a human prophet who , like the other prophets , tried to bring the children of adam to the worship of the one god , termed tawhid . muslims believe the creation of jesus was similar to the creation of adam ( adem ) . muslims believe that jesus was condemned to crucifixion and then miraculously saved from execution . muslims contend that jesus argued against the division of god 's oneness . christians do not see the trinity as implying any division and that christianity follows god 's command to have no other gods from the old testament . christians argue that the new testament , particularly the gospel of john , contains or is centered on the trinity and that jesus made several implicit and explicit claims to be the son of god , and divine in nature . . muhammad . muslims believe that the quran was verbally revealed by god to muhammad through the angel gabriel ( jibril ) , gradually over a period of approximately 23 years , beginning on 22 december 609 , chronology of prophetic events , fazlur rehman shaikh ( 2001 ) p . 50 ta-ha publishers ltd . quran 17:105 when muhammad was 40 , and concluding in 632 , the year of his death . living religions : an encyclopaedia of the world 's faiths , mary pat fisher , 1997 , page 338 , i.b . tauris publishers . muslims regard the quran as the most important miracle of muhammad , a proof of his prophethood , and the culmination of a series of divine messages that started with the messages revealed to adam and ended with muhammad . they consider the quran to be the only revealed book that has been protected by god from tahrif . understanding the qurán - page xii , ahmad hussein sakr - 2000 muslims revere muhammad as the embodiment of the perfect believer and take his actions and sayings as a model of ideal conduct . unlike jesus , who christians believe was god 's son , muhammad was a mortal , albeit with extraordinary qualities . today many muslims believe that it is wrong to represent muhammad , but this was not always the case . at various times and places pious muslims represented muhammad although they never worshiped these images . the first recorded comment of a christian reaction to muhammad can be dated to only a few years after muhammad 's death . as stories of the arab prophet spread to christian syria , an old man who was asked about the '' prophet who has appeared with the saracens '' responded : '' he is false , for the prophets do not come armed with a sword . '' . the trinity . the doctrine of the trinity states that god is a single being who exists , simultaneously and eternally , as a communion of three distinct persons , the father , the son and the holy spirit . in islam such plurality in god is a denial of tawhid , and thus a sin of shirk , which is considered to be a major 'al-kaba'ir ' sin . . the holy spirit . christians and muslims have differing views on the holy spirit . christians believe that the holy spirit is god , and also the paraclete referred to in the gospel of john , who was manifested on the day of pentecost . international standard bible encyclopedia in islam the holy spirit is generally believed to be the angel gabriel , and the reference to the paraclete is a prophecy of the coming of muhammad . theophanes the confessor . theophanes the confessor ( died c.822 ) wrote a series of chronicles ( 284 onwards and 602-813 ad ) theophanes in english , on mohammed gives an excerpt with all pertinent text as translated by cyril mango the chronicle of theophanes confessor ( byzantine and near eastern history ad 284-813 ) . translated with introduction and commentary by cyril mango and geoffrey greatrex , oxford 1997 . an updated version of the roger-pearse.com citation . the chronicle of theophanes anni mundi 6095-6305 ( a.d . 602-813 ) a more popularised but less rigorously studied translation of theophanes chronicles based initially on those of the better known george syncellus . theophanes reports about muhammad thus : . nicetas . in the work a history of christian-muslim relations hugh goddard mentions both john of damascus and theophanes and goes on to consider the relevance of nicetas of byzantium who formulated replies to letters on behalf of emperor michael iii ( 842-867 ) . goddard sums up nicetas ' view : goddard further argues that nicetas demonstrates in his work a knowledge of the entire quran , including an extensive knowledge of suras 2-18 . nicetas account from behind the byzantine frontier apparently set a strong precedent for later writing both in tone and points of argument . song of roland . the author ( s ) of the 11th century song of roland evidently had little actual knowledge of islam . as depicted in this epic poem , muslims erect statues of mohammed and worship them , and mohammed is part of an '' unholy trinity '' together with the classical greek abaddon and termagant , a completely fictional deity made up by christians in the middle ages . this view , evidently confusing islam with the pre-christian graeco-roman religion , appears to reflect misconceptions prevalent in western christian society at the time . the divine comedy . in dante alighieri 's divine comedy , muhammad is in the ninth ditch of malebolge , the eighth realm , designed for those who have caused schism ; specifically , he was placed among the sowers of religious discord . muhammad is portrayed as split in half , with his entrails hanging out , representing his status as a heresiarch ( canto 28 ) . this scene is frequently shown in illustrations of the divine comedy . muhammad is represented in a 15th-century fresco last judgment by giovanni da modena and drawing on dante , in the san petronio basilica in bologna , as well as in artwork by salvador dalí , auguste rodin , william blake , and gustave doré . . catholic church and islam . second vatican council and nostra aetate . the question of islam was not on the agenda when nostra aetate was first drafted , or even at the opening of the second vatican council . however , as in the case of the question of judaism , several events came together again to prompt a consideration of islam . by the time of the second session of the council in 1963 reservations began to be raised by bishops of the middle east about the inclusion of this question . the position was taken that either the question will not be raised at all , or if it were raised , some mention of the muslims should be made . melkite patriarch maximos iv was among those pushing for this latter position . early in 1964 augustin bea notified cardinal cicognani , president of the council 's coordinating commission , that the council fathers wanted the council to say something about the great monotheistic religions , and in particular about islam . the subject , however , was deemed to be outside the competence of bea 's pontifical council for promoting christian unity . bea expressed willingness to '' select some competent people and with them to draw up a draft '' to be presented to the coordinating commission . at a meeting of the coordinating commission on 16–17 april cicognani acknowledged that it would be necessary to speak of the muslims . ( history of vatican ii , pp . 142-43 ) the period between the first and second sessions saw the change of pontiff from pope john xxiii to pope paul vi , who had been a member of the circle ( the badaliya ) of the islamologist louis massignon . pope paul vi chose to follow the path recommended by maximos iv and he therefore established commissions to introduce what would become paragraphs on the muslims in two different documents , one of them being nostra aetate , paragraph three , the other being lumen gentium , paragraph 16 . the text of the final draft bore traces of massignon 's influence . the reference to mary , for example , resulted from the intervention of monsignor descuffi , the latin archbishop of smyrna with whom massignon collaborated in reviving the cult of mary at smyrna . the commendation of muslim prayer may reflect the influence of the badaliya . ( robinson , p . 195 ) in lumen gentium , the second vatican council declares that the plan of salvation also includes muslims , due to their professed monotheism . lumen gentium , 16 . recent catholic-islamic controversies . for the controversy surrounding muslim prayer in spain , see muslim campaign at córdoba cathedral for criticism of interfaith dialogue with muslims , see pierre claverie relations with islam for the controversy over whether islam is a religion or a political system , see raymond leo burke islam and immigration for the controversy over advice not to marry a muslim and move to an islamic country , see josé policarpo marriages with muslim men for the controversy over whether catholics may call god '' allah '' if they want to , see titular roman catholic archbishop of kuala lumpur v menteri dalam negeri for the controversy over remarks by pope benedict xvi , see regensburg lecture and pope benedict xvi and islam . protestantism and islam . protestantism and islam entered into contact during the 16th century , at a time when protestant movements in northern europe coincided with the expansion of the ottoman empire in southern europe . as both were in conflict with the catholic holy roman empire , numerous exchanges occurred , exploring religious similarities and the possibility of trade and military alliances . relations became more conflictual in the early modern and modern periods , although recent attempts have been made at rapprochement . . mormonism and islam . mormonism and islam have been compared to one another ever since the earliest origins of the former in the nineteenth century , often by detractors of one religion or the other—or both . thomas marsh and orson hyde affidavit , for example ; see also pbs 's american prophet : prologue and todd j . harris , a comparison of muhammad and joseph smith in the prophetic pattern , a thesis submitted for a master of arts degree at brigham young university in 2007 , footnotes on pages 1 and 2 . for instance , joseph smith , the founding prophet of mormonism , was referred to as '' the modern mahomet '' by the new york herald , pbs 's american prophet : prologue . shortly after his murder in june 1844 . this epithet repeated a comparison that had been made from smith 's earliest career , thomas marsh and orson hyde affidavit , also todd j . harris , a comparison of muhammad and joseph smith in the prophetic pattern , a thesis submitted for a master of arts degree at brigham young university in 2007 , footnotes on pages 1 and 2 . one that was not intended at the time to be complimentary . comparison of the mormon and muslim prophets still occurs today , sometimes for derogatory or polemical reasons see , for example : joseph smith and muhammad : the similarities , and eric johnson , joseph smith and muhammad , a book published by the '' mormonism research ministry '' and offered for sale by the anti-mormon '' utah lighthouse ministries '' . but also for more scholarly and neutral purposes . see , for instance , todd j . harris , a comparison of muhammad and joseph smith in the prophetic pattern , a thesis submitted for a master of arts degree at brigham young university in 2007 . while mormonism and islam certainly have many similarities , there are also significant , fundamental differences between the two religions . mormon–muslim relations have historically been cordial ; recent years have seen increasing dialogue between adherents of the two faiths , and cooperation in charity ( practice ) , especially in the middle and far east . world muslim congress : mormons and muslims ; mormon-muslim interfaith ramadan dinner . . christianity and druze . christianity and druze are abrahamic religions that share a historical traditional connection with some major theological differences . the two faiths share a common place of origin in the middle east , and consider themselves to be monotheistic . even though the faith originally developed out of ismaili islam , druze do not identify as muslim . the relationship between the druze and christians has been characterized by harmony and coexistence , with amicable relations between the two groups prevailing throughout history , with the exception of some periods , including 1860 mount lebanon civil war . over the centuries a number of the druze embraced christianity , such as some of shihab dynasty members , mishaqa , p . 23 . as well as the abi-lamma clan . contact between christians ( members of the maronite , eastern orthodox , melkite and other churches ) and the unitarian druze led to the presence of mixed villages and towns in mount lebanon , jabal al-druze , the druze and assad : strategic bedfellows galilee , and mount carmel . the maronites and the druze founded modern lebanon in the early eighteenth century , through the ruling and social system known as the '' maronite-druze dualism '' in mount lebanon mutasarrifate . christianity does not include belief in reincarnation or the transmigration of the soul , unlike the druze . christians engage in evangelism , often through the establishment of missions , unlike the druze who do not accept converts ; even marriage outside the druze faith is rare and strongly discouraged . similarities between the druze and christians include commonalities in their view of views on marriage and divorce , as well as belief in the oneness of god and theophany . the druze faith incorporates some elements of christianity , and other religious beliefs . both faiths give a prominent place to jesus : jesus is the central figure of christianity , and in the druze faith , jesus is considered an important prophet of god , being among the seven prophets who appeared in different periods of history . both religions venerated john the baptist , saint george , elijah , and other common figures . artistic influences . islamic art and culture have both influenced and been influenced by christian art and culture . some arts have received such influence strongly , particularly religious architecture in the byzantine and medieval eras . see also . ashtiname of muhammad chrislam ( yoruba ) , a syncretism christian influences in islam christian philosophy christianity and other religions christianity and war crusades constantinople divisions of the world in islam islam and other religions islamic philosophy islam and war muhammad 's views on christians . references . further reading . abdiyah akbar abdul-haqq , sharing your christian faith with a muslim , minneapolis : bethany house publishers , 1980 . giulio basetti-sani , the koran in the light of christ : a christian interpretation of the sacred book of islam , trans . by w . russell-carroll and bede dauphinee , chicago , ill . : franciscan herald press , 1977 . roger arnaldez , jésus : fils de marie , prophète de l'islam , coll . jésus et jésus-christ , no 13 , paris : desclée , 1980 . kenneth cragg , the call of the minaret , third ed . , oxford : oneworld sic publications , 2000 , xv , 358 p . maria jaoudi , christian & islamic spirituality : sharing a journey , mahwah , n.j . : paulist press , 1992 . iii , 103 p . jane dammen mcauliffe , qur'anic christians : an analysis of classical and modern exegesis , cambridge : cambridge university press , 1991 . frithjof schuon , christianity/islam : essays on esoteric ecumenicism , in series , the library of traditional wisdom , bloomington , ind . : world wisdom books , cop . 1985 . vii , 270 p . n.b . : trans . from french . ; the isbn on the verso of the t.p . surely is erroneous . mark d . siljander and john david mann , a deadly misunderstanding : a congressman 's quest to bridge the muslim-christian divide , new york : harper one , 2008 . robert spencer , not peace but a sword : the great chasm between christianity and islam . catholic answers . march 25 , 2013 . thomas , david , muhammad in medieval christian-muslim relations ( medieval islam ) , in muhammad in history , thought , and culture : an encyclopedia of the prophet of god ( 2 vols . ) , edited by c . fitzpatrick and a . walker , santa barbara , abc-clio , 2014 , vol . i , pp . & nbsp ; 392–400 . 1610691776 . external links . hasib sabbagh : a legacy of understanding from the dean peter krogh foreign affairs digital archives '' i 'm right , you 're wrong , go to hell '' – religions and the meeting of civilization by bernard lewis islam & christianity ( iran & georgia ) news photos