Hungarian cuisine

general features . hungarian cuisine is mostly continental central european , with some elements from eastern europe such as the use of poppy , and the popularity of kefir and quark . paprika is often associated with hungary and is used prominently in several dishes . typical hungarian food is heavy on dairy , cheese and meats , similar to that of neighboring czech , polish , and slovak cuisines . chicken , pork and beef are common , while turkey , duck , lamb , fish and game meats are mostly eaten on special occasions . hungary is also known for relatively inexpensive salamis and sausages it produces primarily from pork , but also poultry , beef and others . bread is perhaps the most important and basic part of the hungarian diet . it is eaten at all meals , accompanying main dishes . before the fall of communism in 1990 , white bread was a staple food . numerous other types of baked goods , such as buns and pastries both salty and sweet , often creatively filled , have proliferated in recent years . main dishes may '' require '' a side dish ( köret ) or not . it is unusual to violate this convention . the side dish is most commonly potato in various styles , but rice or steamed vegetables are also popular . some foods have a customary side dish ( e.g . , csirkepaprikás 'paprika chicken ' is almost always eaten with noodles ( nokedli ) , while others may take any side dish ( e.g . , rántott sajt 'fried cheese ' ) . some dishes also have toppings or bread on the side considered almost mandatory , for example the sour cream and bread with töltött káposzta 'stuffed cabbage ' . recently , hungarian chefs have become more creative , so hungarian dishes prepared for tourists may seem unusual to hungarians who familiar with more traditional preparations . goulash , often imagined as the quintessential hungarian dish , is not eaten very frequently . other famous hungarian meat stews include paprikás , a thicker stew with meat simmered in thick , creamy , paprika-flavored gravy , and pörkölt , a stew with boneless meat ( usually beef or pork ) , onion , and sweet paprika powder , both served with spätzle or galuska ( small dumplings ) . in some old-fashioned dishes , fruits such as plums and apricots are cooked with meat or in piquant sauces/stuffings for game , roasts and other cuts . various kinds of noodles , dumplings , potatoes , and rice are commonly served as a side dish . hungarian dry sausages ( kolbász ) and winter salami are also widely eaten . other characteristics of hungarian cuisine are the soups , casseroles , desserts , and pastry and stuffed crêpes ( palacsinta ) , with fierce rivalries between regional variations on the same dish ( such as the hungarian hot fish soup called fisherman 's soup or halászlé , cooked differently on the banks of hungary 's two main rivers : the danube and the tisza ) , palacsinta ( pancakes served flambéed in dark chocolate sauce filled with ground walnuts ) and dobos cake ( layered sponge cake , with chocolate buttercream filling and topped with a thin layer of crunchy caramel ) . two elements of hungarian cuisine that impress foreigners are the various vegetable stews called főzelék june meyers authentic hungarian heirloom recipes cookbook as well as cold fruit soups , such as cold sour cherry soup . hungarian cuisine uses a large variety of cheeses , but the most common are túró ( a type of crumbly quark ) , cream cheeses , picante ewe-cheese ( juhtúró ) , the most common hungarian cheeses like karaván , , pálpusztai , emmentaler , edam and trappista . there are many smoked pork products . many dishes get their character from the smoky taste of one or more of these ingredients . a variety of hungarian smoked sausages , smoked ham , and smoked lard are also consumed without further preparation . these are accompanied with bread and fresh vegetables , are often called 'cold dish ' , and mainly consumed for breakfast or dinner , but sometimes offered as starter in restaurants . pickled ( fermented ) vegetables are often used . the most common is savanyú káposzta ( lit : sour-cabbage , sauerkraut ) and soured peppers , gherkins , but a mix of cauliflower , green tomatoes , baby water melon , and other vegetables is also frequent . these are traditionally consumed in the winter and often were the main source of vitamin-c throughout the cold months of winter . some seasonal , hearty dishes such as töltött káposzta , húsos káposzta and korhelyleves are based on savanyú káposzta . classic hungarian restaurants often offer some variations as side dish , a refreshing complement to heavy dishes . spices . hungarian food uses selected spices judiciously to add flavor , and despite the association of hot paprika with hungary , most hungarian dishes do not feature hot chili peppers intrinsically , and one may request not to include them in the dishes that use it . hot chilis are only sometimes given as a garnish in traditional hungarian cuisine , although dried hot chilis or hot chili paste may be given on the side for added , optional spiciness . this is in stark contrast to other nations associated with the chili pepper , like mexico or thailand , which use the hot variety much more frequently and typically also serve it as a garnish . in hungary , the sweet ( mild ) paprika is much more common and is featured prominently in most dishes . the use of a thick sour cream called tejföl as a topping is another common feature in many dishes . in addition to various kinds of paprika and onions ( raw , sweated , seared , browned or caramelized ) , other common flavor components include : dill , bay leaf , black peppercorn , caraway , coriander , cinnamon , garlic , horseradish , lemon and peel , marjoram , mustard ( prepared ) , tarragon , oregano , parsley , vinegar , poppy seeds , and vanilla . less used spices are anise , basil , chervil , chives , cloves , juniper , lovage , nutmeg , rosemary , savory , thyme , creeping thyme , and white peppercorn . history . hungarian cuisine has influenced the history of the magyar people , and vice versa . the importance of livestock and the nomadic lifestyle of the magyar people , as well as a hearkening to their steppe past , is apparent in the prominence of meat in hungarian food and may be reflected in traditional meat dishes cooked over the fire like goulash ( in hungarian '' gulyás '' , lit . '' cattleman 's ( meal ) '' ) , gundel 's hungarian cookbook , karoly gundel . pörkölt stew and the spicy fisherman 's soup called halászlé are all traditionally cooked over the open fire in a bogrács ( or cauldron ) . in the 15th century , king matthias corvinus a magyar konyha története and his naples wife beatrice , influenced by renaissance culture , introduced new ingredients such as sweet chestnut and spices such as garlic , ginger , mace , saffron and nutmeg , onion and the use of fruits in stuffings or cooked with meat . some of these spices such as ginger and saffron are no longer used in modern hungarian cuisine . at that time and later , considerable numbers of saxons ( a german ethnic group ) , armenians , italians , jews , poles , czechs and slovaks settled in the hungarian basin and in transylvania , also contributing with different new dishes . hungarian cuisine was influenced by austrian cuisine under the austro-hungarian empire ; dishes and methods of food preparation have often been borrowed from austrian cuisine , and vice versa . some cakes and sweets in hungary show a strong german-austrian influence . all told , modern hungarian cuisine is a synthesis of ancient uralic components mixed with west slavs , balkan , austrian , and german . the food of hungary can be considered a melting pot of the continent , with a culinary base formed from its own , original magyar cuisine . hungarian meals . in hungary , people usually have a large breakfast . hungarian breakfast generally is an open sandwich with bread or toast , butter , cheese or different cream cheeses , túró cheese or liptauer ( liptauer cheese spread ) , cold cuts such as ham , liver pâté ( called májkrém or kenőmájas ) , bacon , salami , mortadella , sausages such as kabanos , beerwurst or different hungarian sausages or kolbász . gundel 's hungarian cookbook , karoly gundel , page34 traditionally fresh tomatoes and green peppers ( sometimes scallion , radish and cucumber ) are served with these when they are in season . eggs ( fried , scrambled or boiled ) may also be part of breakfast . some types of meat that were commonly eaten in the past ( such as beef tongue , disznósajt ( head cheese ) or véres hurka ( similar to black pudding ) are now more associated with the countryside as people turn to healthier diets . modern day hungarians do not always eat this typical breakfast . for many , breakfast is a cup of milk , tea or coffee with pastries , a bun , a kifli or a strudel with jam or honey , or cereal , such as muesli and perhaps fruit . children can have rice pudding ( tejberizs ) or semolina cream ( tejbegríz ) for breakfast topped with cocoa powder and sugar or with fruit syrup . hot drinks are preferred for breakfast . villásreggeli or brunch , ( literally breakfast with fork ) is a more luxurious big breakfast given on special occasions or holidays . often guests are invited . deviled eggs , cold steak , cold salads , salmon-omelet , pancakes , a spicy cheese spread made with sheep milk cheese called liptauer , caviar , foie gras , fruit salads , compote , fruit yogurts , fruit juices , champagne and pastries , cakes and cookies may be served . lunch is the major meal of the day , traditionally with several courses , but often just one course in modern times . cold or hot appetizers gundel 's hungarian cookbook , karoly gundel may be served sometimes ( for example fish , egg or liver ) , then soup . soup is followed by a main dish . the main dish is a dish including meat , side dishes and salad ( or pickled vegetables - paprika , cucumber , sauerkraut , etc . ) , which precedes the dessert . fruit may follow . in hungary , pancakes ( or rather , crepes ) may be served as a main dish or as a dessert but not for breakfast . salad is typically served with meat dishes , made of lettuce with tomatoes , cucumbers and onions , or some pickled variant of them . a simple thin sliced cucumber or tomato salad in vinaigrette is also typical . salads such as salade olivier or potato salad are made of boiled potatoes , vegetables , hard-boiled eggs , mushrooms , fried or boiled meat or fish , in vinaigrette , aspic or mayonnaise . these salads are eaten as appetizers or even as a main course . some people and children eat a light meal in the afternoon , called uzsonna , usually an open sandwich , pastry , slice of cake or fruit . dinner is typically less important than lunch , and there is no typical hungarian dinner . it may either be a lunch-type meal , with multiple courses and the same foods one would serve for lunch , or it could be the same as a traditional hungarian breakfast , with bread , cold cuts , cheeses , tomatoes and peppers as described above . when dinner is an important occasion it will be prepared the same way and with the same courses a full lunch would be . when it 's not an important occasion , it 's a good time to eat leftovers . hungarian meal times are somewhat flexible . typical times are as follows : breakfast 6-9 am ; lunch 12 noon-2 pm ; dinner 6-9 pm . special occasions . for christmas , hungarians have a fish soup called halászlé . other dishes may be served , such as roast goose , roast turkey or roast duck , hungarian cuisine , józsef venesz : corvina press 1977 cabbage rolls ( töltött káposzta ) . pastry roll filled with walnut or poppy seed called ( bejgli ) is a usual christmas food , and candies and sweets used to decorate the christmas tree , such as szaloncukor are eaten during all christmas , when everybody picks them and eats them directly from the tree . in some households , banana soup , also known as 'banán leves ' , is consumed to bring good luck and health in the upcoming years . on new year 's eve ( szilveszter ) , hungarians traditionally celebrate with virsli ( vienna sausage ) and lentil soup . on new year 's day , it is common to eat either lentil soup or korhelyleves , a meaty sauerkraut soup said to cure hangovers . korhelyleves , chew.hu easter ( húsvét ) meals have few specialties , though some hungarians ( especially in szabolcs county ) make a special sweet yellow cheese , sárgatúró , made with quark ( túró ) and eggs . . typical hungarian dishes . soups . . sausage and cold cuts . image : sausages of csabai.jpg right thumb various hungarian sausages at the csaba sausage festival in békéscsaba , hungary . hurka ( boiled sausage , three main types : liver sausage called májas hurka , made of pork liver , meat and rice ; a liverless variant of the májas hurka called húsos hurka and black sausage called véres hurka , which is equivalent to the black pudding ) téliszalámi ( or winter salami , salami made of spiced meat , cold smoked , and dry ripened , the most famous brand made by pick szeged ) herz szalámi kolbász and kolbász ( spicy salami and smoked sausage , made in the town of békéscsaba ) kolbász ( spicy sausage , made in the town of gyula ) debrecener ( debrecener sausage ) pig cheese ( pig cheese , cooked meat , for example from the pig 's head , coarsely chopped , stuffed into a pig 's stomach ) szalonna ( hungarian bacon , fatback , back bacon rind , has more fat than usual breakfast bacon ) virsli ( a sausage-like long and thin sausage , consumed boiled with bread and mustard ) lókolbász ( horse sausage ) . sweets and cakes . dobos cake ( sponge cake layered with chocolate paste and glazed with caramel and nuts ) linzer torte ( a tart with crisscross design of pastry strips on top ) rigó jancsi ( cube-shaped sponge cake with dark chocolate glaze ) gesztenyepüré ( cooked and mashed sweet chestnuts with sugar and rum , topped with whipped cream ) bejgli ( cake roll eaten at christmas and easter ) kürtőskalács stove cake or chimney cake , cooked over an open fire — a transylvanian specialty , famous as hungary 's oldest pastry ( crispy , light hungarian angel wing fry cookies , a twisted thin fried cookie made of yeast dough , dusted with powdered sugar ) vanillekipferl ( vanilla croissant , small , crescent shaped biscuits ) piskóta ( thin , light , sweet delicate , crispy cookie ) rétes ( layered pastry with a filling that is usually sweet ) csiga ( literally snail - a rolled pastry that comes in many different coatings and flavors , usually walnut , poppy seed , chocolate , and vanilla pudding ) ( cake with four different fillings , which are poppy seed , walnut , apple , and plum jam ) képviselő fánk ( hungarian cream puff made from choux paste and filled with vanilla cream . literal translation - 'ambassador doughnut ' ) kuglóf ( kuglóf cake , a traditional austro-hungarian coffee party cake ) buchteln ( a baked dessert filled with jam , túró or ground walnuts ) swiss roll ( rolled up soft sponge cake filled with jam ) lekvar ( thick hungarian jam ) quince cheese quince-cheese ( quince cheese , or quince jelly made of quince fruits ) nougat törökméz ( a sweet sticky white nougat paste cooked with sugar , eggwhites , honey , bits of walnuts , spread between two wafer sheets ) halva ( a transylvanian sweet confection , made with sunflower seeds , of turkish origin ) madártej ( floating island , a dessert made of milk custard with eggwhite dumplings floating on top ) túró rudi ( sweet quark cheese - called túró - filled chocolate bar ) szaloncukor ( flavoured candies that hang on the christmas tree , eaten at christmas ) arany galuska ( dumplings , or dough balls rolled in butter , sugar , and nuts and packed together to make a pull-apart cake , with vanilla custard ) vargabéles ( hungarian strudel or noodle pie ) eszterházy torta ( consists of buttercream spiced with cognac or vanilla and walnuts ) ( somló-style sponge cake ) palacsinta ( crêpe-like variety of pancake ) makówki ( a poppy seed-based dessert found throughout central europe ; consists of slices of sweet ( ened ) kifli and poppy seeds boiled in milk with butter , often with various nuts and dried fruits as toppings ) túrós lepény or túrós pite ( dessert bars made from sweetened túró . a variant called kapros-túrós lepény also exists , which has dill added ) . others . left lángos ( fried bread dough ) pogácsa ( a type of bun , round puffed pastry with bacon , traditionally cooked on the fire ) zsemle ( round small breads , eaten cut in half , with butter , cold cuts or jam , often for breakfast ) fánk or berliner ( pastry ) kifli ( crescent-shaped bread . it can be made plain , salted , or sweet ; see picture ) perec ( pretzel , salty crispy pasty ) spätzle ( small liver dumplings used in different soups , for example liverball soup ) klöße ( hungarian boiled semolina dumplings used in soup ) tarhonya ( a kind of large hungarian '' couscous '' , big pasta grain , served as a side dish ; also an ingredient of tarhonyás hús , meat with egg barley ) rizi-bizi ( white rice cooked with green peas , served as a side dish ) vinetta or padlizsán krém ( transylvanian mashed eggplant salad made of grilled , peeled and finely chopped eggplants ) liptauer or liptai túró ( cheese spread with ground sweet paprika and onions ) foie gras ( hungarian delicacy : foie gras - goose liver pâté ) ( literally '' bread with a fur '' , a savoury french toast or gypsy toast or bread fritter , a breakfast food or sometimes as a side dish ) - ( hungarian bread that is baked fresh every morning in the bakeries . the traditional form called cipó is big , round and with a hard thick crust . the other bread type is vekni : long loaves with crispy crust , thicker or thinner , like the baguette . ) kenyérlángos ( smaller piece of bread dough baked in a flat form , often topped with sour cream , bacon and onions ; traditionally a snack for children on the day bread was baked at home , now sold mostly on festivals and markets ) . drinks . hungarian wine dates back to at least roman times , and that history reflects the country 's position between the west slavs and the germanic peoples . the best-known wines are the white dessert wine called tokaji aszú ( after the north-eastern region of hungary , tokaj ) and the red wines from villány ( southern part of hungary ) . famous is also the wine called bull 's blood ( egri bikavér ) , a dark , full-bodied red wine . hungarian fruit wines , such as red-currant wine , are mild and soft in taste and texture . hungary 's most notable liquors are unicum , a herbal bitters , and pálinka , a range of fruit brandy ( plum and pear are popular ) . also notable are the 21 brands of hungarian mineral waters ( for example apenta and kékkúti ) . some of them have therapeutic value , such as mira . traubi or traubisoda , is a soft drink based on an austrian license produced in balatonvilágos since 1971 . before soft drinks became widely available , hungarians made their own soft drinks called szörp , which is a concentrate created from sugar and fruits such as the raspberry , currant or elderberry . this concentrate is diluted in either fresh or carbonated water . see also . hungarian festival hungarian food safety office list of hungarian dishes list of restaurants in hungary national symbols of hungary . references . external links . . recipes .