Council on American–Islamic Relations

hamas . critics of cair have accused it of having ties to the palestinian sunni-islamic fundamentalist organization hamas . federal judge jorge a . solis said that there was evidence to show that cair has an association with the holy land foundation , islamic association for palestine , and hamas . however , judge solis acknowledged that this evidence predates the official designation of these groups as terrorist organizations . on appeal , judge solis was rebuked for making these comments and for not paying enough attention to cair 's rights under the fifth amendment . cair acknowledges that cofounder nihad awad declared support for hamas in 1994 , before it was designated a specially designated terrorist by the united states in january 1995 , a legal category established at that time . since then cair has denounced violence by hamas , and in 2006 , nihad awad said , '' i do n't support hamas today & nbsp ; . we condemn suicide bombings . '' six republican members of the u.s . house of representatives and senate have alleged ties between the cair founders and hamas . both cofounder omar ahmad and awad were involved previously with the islamic association of palestine ( iap ) , a group described by the fbi , in 1993 , as '' intimately tied to the most senior hamas leadership . '' , and participated in a meeting held in philadelphia on october 3 , 1993 , with hamas sympathizers and officials of the holy land foundation ( which was designated in 1995 by executive order and later designated in a 2008 court case , as an organization that had raised millions of dollars for hamas ) . based on electronic surveillance of the meeting , the fbi reported that '' these participants took great pains to disguise their association with hamas.referring to it simply as 'the movement ' . '' '' the new muslim brotherhood in the west '' , lorenzo g . vidino , pp . 177 –182 in 2004 , an fbi agent said '' false claims originate from one or two biased sources , '' and that a senior fbi official said cair would just have to live with them . in early 2007 , the new york times wrote that '' more than one u.s . government official described the standards used by critics to link cair to terrorism as akin to mccarthyism , essentially guilt by association . '' at that time ( prior to the holy land trial ) , the times called efforts to link the organization to hamas and hezbollah '' unsuccessful '' , citing a retired fbi official who was active through 2005 and who suggested that while '' of all the groups , there is probably more suspicion about cair '' , you do n't get '' cold hard facts '' . the times and the washington post also noted that even though a handful of its former members had faced prosecution , cair has never faced criminal charges . as of 2007 , fbi officials attended cair events . in 2009 , fox news said that the fbi broke off formal outreach contacts with cair , and shunned all of its local chapters , concerned about cair 's ties to hamas . in 2011 , the new york times said that while the fbi and cair had no '' formal relationship '' , cair officials and chapters worked regularly with fbi officials . foreign policy scholar lorenzo g . vidino notes that there are reasons for the fbi 's continued work with cair , as some believe they are a necessary ally in counter-terrorism operations , regardless of their controversial status , history , and association with the muslim brotherhood . . muslim brotherhood . several academics and conservative leaning politicians have accused cair of being a muslim brotherhood affiliate or front organization in the united states . republican calls cair a hamas-linked 'terrorist group ' , aljazeera , february 10 , 2017 , creede newton ben carson calls for investigation of prominent muslim civil rights group , time , maya rhodan , december 15 , 2015 the denationalization of american muslims , the atlantic , peter beinart , march 19 , 2017 cair has rejected such associations as a smear campaign . trump designating the muslim brotherhood as terrorists would be a massive victory for extremists , the intercept , zaid jilani , march 15 , 2017 according to lorenzo g . vidino , while cair is not a '' muslim brotherhood organisation , '' cair has significant ties to the muslim brotherhood . the new muslim brotherhood in the west , lorenzo g . vidino , pp 177-198 the muslim brotherhood in the west : characteristics , aims and policy considerations , lorenzo g . vidino , april 2011 . reception . criticism . the anti-defamation league ( adl ) has criticized cair 's work , saying its position as the '' go to american-muslim civil rights organization '' is '' undermined by its anti-israel agenda which . dates back to its founding by leaders of the islamic association for palestine ( iap ) , a hamas affiliated anti-semitic propaganda organization '' . profile : the council on american islamic relations , adl , 2015 the adl also accused the group of hypocrisy in its condemnation of hezbollah , noting that cair '' for many years . refused to unequivocally condemn palestinian terror organizations and hezbollah by name '' and that cair began to do so '' only when the terrorist organization stopped focusing solely on israel and began engaging in military operations against sunni muslim fighters in syria and iraq '' . the adl has also called on cair to '' denounce anti-semitism at rallies in the u.s . '' cair responded with a statement saying that in 2005 they coordinated a fatwa condemning all acts of terrorism as haraam . cair also quoted , in the same statement , rabbi arthur waskow 's speech at a cair dinner , where he stated , '' far from showing irreparable conflict between the jewish community and cair , in fact the dinner shows that a seriously peace-committed part of the jewish community can work with a seriously peace-committed part of the muslim community , despite the existence of some violence-supportive people in both communities . that is the truthful and the important story . '' some muslims criticize cair for taking a conservative religious approach on many issues . these critics claim that statements by the organization ( for example , that all muslim women are required to veil ) often follow conservative saudi religious doctrine and do not capture diverse religious perspectives . steven emerson has accused cair of having a long record of propagating anti-semitic propaganda . in 2001 journalist jake tapper criticized the communication director of cair , ibrahim hooper , for saying about the september 11 attacks , '' if osama bin laden was behind it , we condemn him by name , '' questioning why there should be any qualification before the statement . zuhdi jasser has argued that cair 's agenda is focused on '' victimization '' . best-selling author and prominent critic of islamism , sam harris , criticized cair by saying the organization is '' an islamist public relations firm posing as a civil-rights lobby '' . sam harris : losing our spines to save our necks . huffingtonpost.com . retrieved on march 19 , 2011 . . praise . u.s . senator barbara boxer 's 2006 decision to withdraw a '' certificate of accomplishment '' originally given to former cair official basim elkarra on grounds of suspicions about the organization 's background '' provoked an outcry from organizations that vouch for the group 's advocacy , including the aclu and the california council of churches . '' they have been a leading organization that has advocated for civil rights and civil liberties in the face of fear and intolerance , in the face of religious and ethnic profiling , '' said maya harris , executive director of the aclu of northern california . pulitzer prize-winning journalist nicholas kristof advocated for people to support and sign up as members of cair in response to the 2016 united states presidential election . in 2013 , the governor of illinois pat quinn , chicago mayor rahm emanuel , superintendent of the chicago police department garry mccarthy , and a wide range of other public officials in illinois praised the chicago branch of cair for its advocacy work , civil rights work , and for its involvement in the communities it serves . in 2016 , the university of saint thomas named the minnesota branch of cair as the winner of its winds of change award at its forum on workplace inclusion . the seattle chapter of the league of women voters awarded the washington branch of cair one of its 2015 champion of voting and civil rights awards , praising '' their work encouraging voting and community involvement by members of the muslim american community '' . . funding . cair has an annual budget of around 3 million ( as of 2007 ) . it states that while the majority of its funding comes from american muslims , it accepts donations from individuals of any faith and also foreigners . in the past cair has accepted donations from individuals and foundations close to arab governments . within cair there is debate regarding foreign funding , and several cair branches have criticized the national office for accepting foreign donations . in april 2011 , rep . frank wolf , r-va . cited a 2009 letter sent from cair 's executive director , nihad awad , to muammar gaddafi asking gaddafi for funding for a project called the muslim peace foundation at a u.s . house of representatives appropriations sub-committee hearing . steven emerson called the funding request '' hypocritical '' , while cair spokesman , ibrahim hooper , said that the muslim peace foundation was awad 's personal initiative '' unrelated to cair '' , that cair did n't receive any money from the libyan government , and also that cair was one of the first american organizations to call for a no-fly zone to protect libyan citizens from gaddafi during the 2011 libyan civil war .