Yeshua

etymology . yeshua in hebrew is a verbal derivative from '' to rescue '' , '' to deliver '' . brown driver briggs brown-driver-briggs hebrew and english lexicon ; hendrickson publishers 1996 among the jews of the second temple period , the biblical aramaic/hebrew name yeshua ‘ was common : the hebrew bible mentions several individuals with this name – while also using their full name joshua . this name is a feature of biblical books written in the post-exilic period ( ezra , nehemiah , and chronicles ) and was found in the dead sea scrolls , though haggai and zechariah prefer the spelling joshua . strong 's concordance connects the name yeshua ` , in the english form jeshua ( as used in multiple instances in ezra , nehemiah , and 1 and 2 chronicles ) , with the verb '' to deliver '' ( or , '' to rescue '' ) . it is often translated as '' he saves , '' to conform with : '' she will bear a son ; and you shall call his name jesus , for he will save his people from their sins '' ( nasb ) . '' the new strong 's exhaustive concordance of the bible ( nashville : thomas nelson publishers 1990 ) the name '' yeshua '' ( transliterated in the english old testament as jeshua ) is a late form of the biblical hebrew name yehoshua ( joshua ) , and spelled with a waw in the second syllable . the late biblical hebrew spellings for earlier names often contracted the theophoric element yeho- to yo- . thus yehochanan contracted to yochanan . david talmshir , '' rabbinic hebrew as reflected in personal names '' in scripta hierosolymitana : publications of the hebrew university of jerusalem , vol . 37 ( jerusalem : magnes press : hebrew university of jerusalem 1998 ) the name ישוע occurs in the hebrew of the old testament at verses ezra 2:2 , 2:6 , 2:36 , 2:40 , 3:2 , 3:8 , 3:9 , 3:10 , 3:18 , 4:3 , 8:33 ; nehemiah 3:19 , 7:7 , 7:11 , 7:39 , 7:43 , 8:7 , 8:17 , 9:4 , 9:5 , 11:26 , 12:1 , 12:7 , 12:8 , 12:10 , 12:24 , 12:26 ; 1 chronicles 24:11 ; and 2 chronicles 31:15 , and also in aramaic at ezra 5:2 . in nehemiah 8:17 this name refers to joshua son of nun , the successor of moses , as leader of the israelites . note that in earlier english ( where adaptations of names of biblical figures were generally based on the latin vulgate forms ) , yeshua was generally transcribed identically to '' jesus '' in english . the name yehoshua has the form of a compound of '' yeho- '' and '' shua '' : yeho- is another form of yahu , a theophoric element standing for the name of god יהוה ( the tetragrammaton yhwh , sometimes transcribed into english as yahweh ) , and shua ‘ is a noun meaning '' a cry for help '' , '' a saving cry '' , '' '' , ernest klein , a comprehensive etymological dictionary of the hebrew language ( new york : macmillan publishing company 1987 ) , where it means '' a cry for help '' . '' '' , william l . holladay , a concise hebrew and aramaic lexicon of the old testament ( michigan : william b . eerdmans publishing 1971 ) , where it means '' a cry for help '' . '' '' , m . jastrow , dictionary of the talmud reprinted ( jerusalem : khorev 1990 ) , where is explained by the verb '' to cry for help '' , that is to say , a shout given when in need of rescue . another explanation for the name yehoshua is that it comes from the root yod-shin- ‘ ayin , meaning '' to deliver , save , or rescue '' . according to the book of numbers verse 13:16 , the name of joshua , the son of nun was originally hoshea ` , and the name '' yehoshua ` '' is usually spelled the same but with a yod added at the beginning . '' hoshea ` '' certainly comes from the root , '' yasha '' , yod-shin- ` ayin ( in the hif'il form the yod becomes a waw ) , and not from the word shúaʻ ( jewish encyclopedia . ) in the 1st century , philo of alexandria , in a greek exposition , offered this understanding of moses ’ s reason for the name change of the biblical hero jehoshua/joshua son of nun from hoshea similar to hoshia ` meaning '' he rescued '' to yehoshua in commemoration of his salvation : '' and ιησους refers to salvation of the lord '' ιησους or iesous being the greek form of the name ( on the change of names 21.121 ) . similarly , the septuagint renders ben sira as saying ( in the greek form of the name ) : '' ιησους the son of naue yehoshua ben nun who according to his name became great unto the salvation/deliverance of his chosen ones '' ( ben sira 46:1–2 ) . however , ben sira originally wrote in hebrew in the 2nd century bc , and the only extant hebrew manuscript for this passage has '' in his days '' , not '' according to his name '' ( which would be in hebrew ) , and thus does not comment on the name yehoshua as connoting '' deliverance '' : '' yehoshua ben nun , who was formed to be in his days a great deliverer for his chosen ones '' . the name yeshua is a shortened version of the name yehoshua or joshua and is the literal hebrew word for salvation . . archaeological evidence . tal ilan 's lexicon of jewish names in late antiquity ( 2002 ) includes for '' joshua '' 85 examples of hebrew yeshua , 15 of yehoshua , and 48 examples of iesous in greek inscriptions , '' with only one greek variant as iesoua . buried hope or risen savior : the search for the jesus tomb 2008 p81 charles quarles – 2008 '' the distinction between the longer and shorter forms does not exist in greek . the greek iesous ( ineous ) was used to represent both yehoshua ' and yeshua ' . there are 48 instances of iesous ( iesous and several eccentric spellings ) , '' one ossuary of the around twenty known with the name yeshua , rahmani no.9 , discovered by ezra sukenik in 1931 , has '' yeshu . yeshua ben yosef . '' the '' yeshu . '' may have been scratched out . photo in witherington & schanks pp & nbsp ; 59–60 two jewish magical papyri have been discovered both bearing variant spellings of yeshua . incantation bowls in montgomery and moussaief/levene 2002 . see transcription in bauckham essay in quarles . apart from the '' yeshua . yeshua ben yosef '' ossuary , the only other known evidence for the existence of a yeshua form prior to the material related to jesus in the talmud , is a graffito which joachim jeremias identified in bethesda in 1966 , but which is now filled in . new testament theology joachim jeremias – 1977 '' . 1965 , 284–93 : 285 ; a graffito which i found in the south wall of the southern pool at bethesda , now covered in , also read [ y\fw ' , see my : the rediscovery of bethesda , new testament archaeology monograph no i , louisville , ky . , 1966 , . '' . pronunciation . in , the hebrew letter yod י is vocalized with the hebrew vowel tsere ( a 'long ' e like the first syllable of '' neighbor '' but not diphthongized ) rather than with a shva ( as y'shua ) or segol ( yesh-shua ) . the final letter ayin ע is ( a rough , guttural sound not found in greek or english ) , sometimes transcribed '' ` '' ( yeshua ` ) . the final represents the '' patach genuvah '' ( '' furtive '' patach ) , indicating that the consonant ` ayin is pronounced after the a vowel , and the word 's stress is moved to the middle syllable ( the characteristics of the furtive patach can be seen in other words , such as רוח 'spirit ' ) . thus it is pronounced in modern hebrew . the hebrew name of jesus of nazareth is probably pronounced 'yeshua ' , although this is uncertain and depends on the reconstruction of several ancient hebrew dialects . talshir suggests , even though galileans tended to keep the traditional spelling for 'yehoshua ' יהושוע with the letter vav for , they still pronounced the name similarly to the judeans , as 'yeshua ' , who tended to spell the name phonetically as ישוע , perhaps reducing the name thus : > > , with the palatizing ( via 'dissimilation ' ) before the . talshir 1998:374,376 . qimron describes the general linguistic environment of hebrew dialects by the time of the dead sea scrolls . the articulation of the ( along with other guttural phonemes , , and , as well as approximants and lenition significantly . elisha qimron , the hebrew of the dead sea scrolls , scholars press , harvard semitic studies vol . 29 , 1986:25 . thus hebrew pronunciations became less stable when two successive vowels were no longer separated by a consonant . the speakers optionally either reduced the two vowels to a single vowel or oppositely expanded them to emphasize each vowel separately , sometimes forming a furtive glide in between , or . qimron:26 , 31–35 . for example , the dead sea scrolls spell the hebrew word ראוי ( 'seen ' ) variously , recording both pronunciations : reduced ראו and expanded ראואי . qimron:35 . the hebrew name 'yehoshua ' generally reduced to 'yeshua ' , but an expanded 'yehoshua ' is possible , especially in galilee whose traditional orthography possibly reflects this . original name for jesus . the english name jesus derives from the late latin name , which transliterates the koine greek name . in the septuagint and other greek-language jewish texts , such as the writings of josephus and philo of alexandria , is the standard koine greek form used to translate both of the hebrew names : yehoshua and yeshua . greek or iēsoûs is also used to represent the name of joshua son of nun in the new testament passages acts 7:45 and hebrews 4:8 . ( it was even used in the septuagint to translate the name hoshea in one of the three verses where this referred to joshua the son of nun—deut . 32:44 . ) during the second temple period ( beginning 538 bc – 70 ad ) , yeshua first became a known form of the name yehoshua . all occurrences of yeshua in the hebrew bible are in i chron . 24:11 , ii chron . 31:15 , ezra , and nehemiah where it is transliterated into english as jeshua . two of these men ( joshua the son of nun and joshua the high priest ) are mentioned in other books of the hebrew bible where they are instead called yehoshua price , james d . yehoshua , yeshua or yeshu ; which one is the name of jesus in hebrew ? , accessed march 6 , 2006 . ( transliterated into english as joshua ) . the earlier form yehoshua did not disappear , however , and remained in use as well . in the post-exilic books , joshua the son of nun is called both yeshua bin-nun ( nehemiah 8:17 ) and yehoshua ( i chronicles 7:27 ) . the short form yeshua was used for jesus ben sirach in hebrew fragments of the wisdom of sirach . ( some concern remains over whether these fragments faithfully represent the original hebrew text or are instead a later translation back into hebrew . william chomsky , hebrew : the eternal language , jewish publication society of america , 1957 p.140 ) the earlier form yehoshua saw revived usage from the hasmonean period onwards , although the name yeshua is still found in letters from the time of the bar kokhba revolt ( 132–135 ad ) . in the documentary the lost tomb of jesus , archeologist amos kloner stated that the name yeshua was then a popular form of the name yehoshua and was '' one of the common names in the time of the second temple . '' in discussing whether it was remarkable to find a tomb with the name of jesus ( the particular ossuary in question bears the inscription '' yehuda bar yeshua '' ) , he pointed out that the name had been found 71 times in burial caves from that time period . thus , both the full form yehoshua and the abbreviated form yeshua were in use during the gospel period – and in relation to the same person , as in the hebrew bible references to yehoshua/yeshua son of nun , and yehoshua/yeshua the high priest in the days of ezra . an argument in favor of the hebrew reduced form yeshua , as opposed to yehoshua , is the west syriac dialect in which the pronunciation is yeshu ` . east syriac ishoʕ . aramaic and classical syriac render the pronunciation of the same letters as and . the aramaic bibles and the peshitta syriac preserve these same spellings . current scholarly consensus posits that the nt texts were translated from the greek , but this theory is not supported directly at least by the name for jesus , which is not a simple transliteration of the greek form as would otherwise be expected , as greek did not have an '' sh '' sound , and substituted ; and likewise lacked and therefore omitted the final ‘ ayin sound . moreover , eusebius ( early fourth century ) reports that papius ( early second century ) reports that jesus 's disciple matthew wrote a gospel '' in the hebrew language '' . ( note : scholars typically argue the word '' hebrew '' in the new testament refers to aramaic ; however , others have attempted to refute this view . buth , randall , and pierce , chad . '' ebraisti in ancient texts : does ἐβραϊστί ever mean '' aramaic '' ? '' buth and notley , ed . , the language environment in first century judea . brill , 2014 . ) the aramaic of the peshitta does not distinguish between joshua and jesus , and the lexicon of william jennings gives the same form for both names . the hebrew final letter ayin is equivalent to final in classical syriac and east syriac and west syriac . it can be argued that the aramaic speakers who used this name had a continual connection to the aramaic-speakers in communities founded by the apostles and other students of jesus , thus independently preserved his historical name yeshuuʕ and the eastern dialectical ishoʕ . those churches following the east syriac rite still preserve the name ishoʕ . yeshua , yehoshua , and yeshu in the talmud . in the talmud , only one reference is made to the spelling yeshua , in verbatim quotation from the hebrew bible regarding jeshua son of jozadak ( elsewhere called joshua son of josedech ) . the talmud does refer to several people named yehoshua from before ( e.g . joshua ben perachyah ) and after jesus ( e.g . , joshua ben hananiah ) . in references to jesus in the talmud , however , where the name occurs , it is rendered yeshu , which is a name reserved in aramaic and hebrew literature from the early medieval period until today , solely for jesus of nazareth , not for other joshuas . some scholars , such as maier ( 1978 ) , regard the two named '' yeshu '' texts in the talmud ( sanhedrin 43a and 107b ) to be later amendments , and not original . j . maier jesus von nazareth 1978 . g . theissen , historical jesus . 1998 . r . voorst jesus outside the new testament 2000 . rabbinical commentary on the difference yeshu/yeshua . in general rabbinical sources use yeshu , and this is the form to which some named references to jesus in the talmud as yeshu occur in some manuscripts of the babylonian talmud , though some scholars , such as maier ( 1978 ) have argued that the presence of the name yeshu in these texts is a late interpolation . some of the hebrew sources referencing yeshu include the toledot yeshu , sefer nestor ha-komer , jacob ben reuben 's milhamoth ha-shem , sefer nizzahon yashan , sefer joseph hamekane , the works of ibn shaprut , moses ha-kohen de tordesillas , and hasdai crescas . the name yeshu is unknown in archeological sources and inscriptions , except for one ossuary found in israel which has an inscription where someone has started to write first yeshu . and then written yeshua bar yehosef beneath it . brother of jesus hershel shanks , ben witherington photo of the '' yeshu . yeshua bar yehosef '' ossuary and dual inscription there are 24 other ossuaries to various yeshuas and yehoshuas . none of the others have yeshu . all other '' joshuas '' in the talmud , rabbinical writings , modern hebrew , are always yeshua or yehoshua . there are no undisputed examples of any aramaic or hebrew text where yeshu refers to anyone else than jesus . jesus outside the new testament p124 robert e . van voorst – 2000 '' this is likely an inference from the talmud and other jewish usage , where jesus is called yeshu , and other jews with the same name are called by the fuller name yehoshua , '' joshua '' ( e.g . , b sanh . 107b on p . '' some of rabbinical sources comment on the reasons for the missing ayin from yeshu , as opposed to the hebrew bible yeshua and yehoshuah . leon modena argues that it was jesus himself who made his disciples remove the ayin , and that therefore they can not now restore it . ( modena was a 17th-century polemicist and does not have reliable linguistic evidence for the claim . ) a tradition states that the shortening to yeshu relates to the y-sh-u of the yimach shemo '' may his name be obliterated . '' michael h . cohen a friend of all faiths – page 42 – 2004 '' in hebrew school , one of my teachers had explained that yeshu ( hebrew for jesus ) , rather than meaning '' saviour , '' in fact was an acronym that stood for yimach shemo ve-zichrono : '' may his name and memory be erased '' proceedings : volume 4 aḳademyah ha-leʼumit ha-yiśreʼelit le-madaʻim – 1969 '' perhaps the most significant of these is the passage where instead of the printed 'that certain man ' we find 'jesus the nazarene — may his name be obliterated ' ( thus also in a genizah ms , british museum , or . 91842 ) . '' against this david flusser suggested that the name yeshu itself was '' in no way abusive , '' but '' almost certainly '' a galilean dialect form of yeshua . new testament theology joachim jeremias – 1977 '' . deliberate truncation made for anti-christian motives ; rather , it is 'almost certainly ' ( flusser , jesus , 13 ) the galilean pronunciation of the name ; the swallowing of the 'ayin was typical of the galilean dialect ( billerbeck i 156f . but e.y . kutscher showed that the ` ayin was still pronounced in galilee , refuting a thesis by paul kahle . e.y . kutscher , studies in galilean aramaic , 1976 . . see also . aramaic of jesus isa ( name ) joseph ( name ) josiah tikkun olam yahshua yahshuah . references .